
      
         
            
            
            SACRAE HEPTADES, OR SEAVEN PROBLEMS concerning ANTICHRIST.
            
               1. Of his Place.
               2. Of his State.
               3. Of his Names.
               4. Of his Riſing.
               5. Of his Raigne.
               6. Of his words and actions.
               7. Of his times.
            
            Neceſſarie to be read and knowne of all men, who profeſſe Chriſt Ieſus, and hope to be ſaved by no other Name.
            
               By G. S.
            
            
               Mal. 4, 5, 6.
               Behold I will ſend you Elias the Prophet, before the comming of the great and dreadfull day of the Lord. And he ſhall turne the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, leaſt I come and ſmite the earth with a curſe.
            
            
               2 Theſ. 2, 3, 4.
               Let no man deceiue you by any meanes, for that day ſhall not come, except there come a falling away firſt, and that man of ſinne be revealed, the ſonne of perdition. Who oppoſeth and exalteth himſelfe aboue all that is called God, & that is worſhiped: ſo that he as God, ſitteth in the Temple of God, ſhewing himſelfe that he is God.
            
            Printed in the yeare M.D C. XXV.
         
         
            
            
            To all Kings, Princes, and Potentates, eſpecially to King Charles Defendor of the Fayth, and to the King and Queene of Bohemia profeſsing the Fayth, and therefore perſecuted. Alſo to all other Chriſtians, whether Reformed, or Romiſh.
            
               AMongſt all thoſe controverſies, which like cloudes overcaſt the Church of Chriſt at this preſent, ſo that many ſtumble at noone day as at night, and but a few are truely reſolved of their owne aright walking with God, according to knowledge, there is none more neceſſarie to be generally underſtood, then that of Antichriſt: both becauſe this Egiptian darkneſſe, which is in the land of Goſhen, proceeds from his inchantments, to hold Pharoh ſtill in the hardneſſe of heart: and alſo becauſe the externall ſplendor and glorie of his ſeate, ſupported with the countenance of Magicall ſcience, belliſh unitie, carnall ſucceſſion, corrupt cuſtome, ragged antiquitie, Idolatrous univerſalitie. Counterfeit miracles, hypocriticall ſanctitie, ſtupenduous amplitude, blinde devotion, formidable tyrannie, Catholique power, and worldly felicitie (as Salomons throne was with lyons cunningly carved) doe much dazle vulgar judgments,1 Kings 10, 19, 20. and amaze the ſillie Lambes of Chriſt. But if this Magitian were fully diſcovered to be but an Impoſtor, and onely to bumbaſt his reputation with lyes, forgeries and uſurpations (like a ſpirituall Quack-ſalver) then the more that Princes and people had doted upon him, and deified him, the more they would hate him,
                  Rev. 17, 16, 17. as thoſe Kings ſhall, who out of godly indignation, hate, ſtrip, eate the fleſh of the whore, and burne her with fire.
            
            
               This the learned Limbs of Antichriſt underſtand verie well, and therefore eyther terrifie all men from looking into the booke of God, where Antichriſt is deſcribed (at leaſt from looking into the Revelation, where he is ſet out to the life) or elſe, as the Scribes and Phariſes did with their corrupt gloſſes and Comments made upon the Prophets, darken the comming of Chriſt, and denye him being come, putting off the time of their Meſſias hitherto, deferring, and dallying, as the Turkes doe with their Mahomet, yea fayning his perſon to be humaine onely, and his Office temporall, thereby to hold the Iewes ſtill in ſpirituall Captivitie, by cauſing them to deny the Sonne of God their Saviour: ſo doe theſe waue the comming of Antichriſt, and with their corrupt gloſſes, and miſapplications turne the truth of God into a lye, cauſing the world to embrace the Sonne of perdition; by telling them of an Antichriſt, that muſt be a ſingular perſon, and not a ſucceſſion (as if we deſigned ſuch a ſucceſſion,
                  This they would proue, by the names giuen him in the ſingular number, 2 Theſ. 2, 3. As alſo by the article 
                        •
                     , or ille, being demonſtratiue particles. But Gramarians ſay that not onely proper names, and words that ſignifie individuall things, but names that ſignifie a multitude or ſucceſſion, nownes appellatiue, collectiue, and ſucceſſiue, are both in Greeke and Latin expreſſed in the ſingular number, and joyned with that demonstratiue particle. As hic populus, ille rex, in aggregation, ſucceſſion, or collection. 1 Pet. 2, 17. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  Philoſopher; ſay that 
                        
                           •
                        num one, may be taken not onely ſingulatim, but congregatim, and ſummatim. And that a thing may be idem numero, not onely as the ſunne, but as a heape of corne, a flock of ſheepe, a river, whoſe parts it may be may increaſe or diminiſh, and be in continuall motion and alteration, ſome going away, and others comming in place, and yet continue one and the ſame ſingular, heape, flock, river, to which both the ſingular number, and demonstratiue particle are joyned.
                  Divinitie ſayth, that Antichriſt is not onely oppoſed to Chriſt the Head, who is one, but to Chriſtians, the bodie, the members, who are a ſucceſſion of kings & priests annointed, or a royall priesthood. 1 Pet.2, 9. And for the uſe of a demonstratiue particle, or the ſingular number or name they referr us to 1 Pet. 2, 17. Dan. 2, 38. Thou, O King, art this head of gould. Thou & thy predeceſſors, thou and thy ſucceſsors; though per excellentiam, thou aboue all before or after. So 1 Pet. 5, 8. ho Antidicos, not one adverſarie or one divell onely, but all. Rev. 13, 2. and 2 Theſ. 2, 7. with divers other places.
                  Thus neither Grammer, Philoſophie, nor Divinitie will teach me, what theſe new Roman Pithagorians wou'd force me to beleeue. But ipſe dixit is ſufficient in the ſchole of Antichriſt, to ſilence not onely his ſchollers, but Grammer rules, & the Logicall rules of reaſon, & the Scripture, yea Christ himſelf. But he that will not heare Christ, Christ will not heare him, though he crie Lord, Lord never ſo loud.
                as did not admitte and containe ſingulars) a Iewe, and perhaps, of the Tribe of Dan, the ſonne of a Divell, or of an Incubus, of a virgin or of a Whore, or of ſome bodie: that he ſhall raigne three yeares and an halfe, ſitte in the Temple of God in Ieruſalem, kill Enoch and Elias, with much other ſtrange legionarie ſtuffe, concerning Antichriſt, his perſon, office, Raigne, warre, and overthrow.
            
            
               And leaſt men ſhould examine, and ſo finde their falſehood, they obtrude theſe opinions aforehand upon the Church, to be beleeved as Articles of Fayth, by all their members, viz. That the Church is for the Head, or principall part, Romiſh, and ſo particular: for the bodie, Catholique. That the Pope is the Head of the Church, and ſo as Head of the Church, Judge of the Scripture: and the onely true expounder of it: having that infallible and univerſall spirit, which directs the whole in all truth. That his ſeate is the Rock immoueable, to which in all ſtormes the ſhipwrackt ſoule ſhould reſort for ſafeguard. That Salvation is no where elſe to be found. And that his Decrees are to be believed, and obeyed, not to be queſtioned, or examined in the leaſt.
            
            Loe, thus he hath made ſure not to be diſcovered, except, out of good nature, he will confeſſe himſelfe to be the thiefe, and reſtore the ſtollen goods to the right owner. But as the acknowledgement of error, and of injurie, is not to be expected from him or his, who loue the world, the pompe, glorie, and power thereof, a little too well, to reſigne their Soveraigntie: So in all theſe courſes, whilſt he thinkes cunningly to hide himſelfe, he bewrayes himſelfe the more to be ANTICHRIST unto ſuch as haue ſpirituall eyes, illuminated by grace from aboue, to diſcerne trueth from falſehood.
            Thus you ſee their Egiptian wiſedome, and what paines they take with thoſe Magicall Iuglers, Iannes and Iambres,
               2 Tim. 3, 8. to conceale themſelues, and how much it concerns them ſo to doe.
            On the other ſide, it concernes us, with Moſes to relye upon the Hebrew ſimplicitie and ſinceritie for our ſalvation, but withall to be learned in all the Egiptian wiſedome,
               
                  Act. 7, 22. the better to diſcover Antichriſt his clowdie walking, that ſo diverſe Controverſies may be at an end. For were he fully diſcovered, then all that belieue in Chriſt, and loue him, and deſire his glorious comming, would hate this Monſter, who is like Iudas amongſt the twelue a counterfeit Apoſtle, carrying the bagge, an Hypocrite, playing the parte of a Vicar, a Deputie, a Subſtitute; but from the ſtage appearing a naked, ragged, beggerly vacabond. And doubtleſſe, his perſon being thus diſcovered, his lawes and decrees would be rejected, and Kings, Princes and people, would caſt the Egiptian yoake from

their overgalled neckes: Yea ſuch as thinke, they doe now God good ſervice, in murthering the poore Lambs of Chriſt in all places for him, would leaue him, come out of his Babyloniſh profeſſion, and not ſo much as trade or trucke with him in the leaſt exchange of thoſe doubtfull commodities, or touch any of thoſe garments spotted with the fleſh.
            
            It cannot be denyed, but Ieſabell was once young, and Chaſt and faire: But this proues not, that ſhe is ſo now. It cannot now be denyed, but that ſhe is full of wrinckles, and a royall whore; the Mother of fornication;
                  Rev. 2, 20. fitte for all commers; and withall painted, to uphold her rotten reputation. And we doubt not, but God will ſtirre up ſome Iehu (zealous perhaps for his owne intereſt, if not for Gods) to cauſe her owne Eunuchs, thoſe Fryars, Monks, and other Votaries,2 King. 9, 30 to throw her out of the windowe, that he may treade her under his horſes feete. And doubtleſſe, as this ſhall in time come to paſſe by the powerfull preaching of the word, which ſhall waſt him by degrees;2 Theſ. 2. ſo, as an effect of the word preached, firſt, the uſurped authoritie of the Papacie, and Roman Cleargie over Kings and Princes, ſhall be broken, and reformation ſhall begin, where deformation came firſt into the Church. So that Antichriſt ſhall ſay, as Hanniball once did: Eadem arte qua prius cepimus, Tarentum amiſimus. And this is with Iehu to treade Ieſabel under foote.
            Bellarmine confeſſeth, that Conſtantine the Greate gaue the Pallace of Laterane,Bellarm. li. 2, cap. 17. de Rom. Pontif. 
               & multa alia temporalia, to the Pope, Ditionem tamen spiritualem neque dedit ullam, neque dare potuit.
            
            So the ſpirituall dition, made way for the temporall donation, and then was poyſon powred into the Church, when the bountie of Princes ſought to ſatiſfie the ambition of Prieſts. The Prieſts then grew downwards towards the earth, and Princes then began to climbe upwards, towards heauen: And the coveteous Clergie finding the fayth of fewe (for the faythfull are but fewe, a verie little flock, and oftentimes not very rich in wooll) not to be ſo fruitfull as the ſuperſtition of many, they nouriſhed that profitable and liberall humour by their uttermoſt arte, and from hence got S. Peter a rich patrimonie being dead, who when he lived, had ſcarſe a houſe, wherein to hide his head. This temporall patrimonie graced with

ſo holy a patronage, as the reverenced name of S. Peter, did ſpeedily and mightily increaſe in all places, eſpecially where ſuperstition was interteyned in the name and ſtead of true Religion, and where Clergie men knew how cunningly to raiſe queſtions and quarrels under hand, and then to intrude themſelues as equall arbitrators, and impartiall umpires; but ever to manage and determine all for the advantage of the Catholike cauſe, as they called it, and for the ruine of particulars: as it is reported of that Lawyer, who decided the difference betwixte the lame man and the blinde, concerning their oyſter, that each of them ſhould haue a ſhell, and he the meat. Thus dealing for the Church by pretence (themſelues being moſtly ſingle and unmarried, and ſo unſuſpected to trade for the world, and poſteritie) they had oportunitie to inrich themſelues, and their particular fraternities, and to performe ſuch actes with commendation, becauſe they pretended S. Peter, and the Church, not themſelues, as would haue been counted couſenage, treacherie, exaction, oppreſſion, injuſtice, and perhaps forgerie and Robberie, if perpetrated by any other perſons, or to any other ends. But the generall opinion of their Cauſe and Perſons (ſuppoſed and ſtiled ſacred) made all paſſe currant without queſtion or controule. Thus in a ſhort time, where they were lately glad to be graced by Kings; Kings were now glad to be graced by them: And where Kings had perſecuted their predeceſſors for the trueth, they now perſecuted Kings for falſehood; and chalenged the inveſtiture of ſuch Princes by right, upon whom their predeceſſors, out of the opinion of their pietie, and the ſuperſtitious deſire to be inaugurated by ſo bleſſed an omen, had been ſometimes formerly invited or admitted, to lay their holy hands. Now therefore they began to cutte out large cantles of the earth for their owne ſhare, and made ſo manie ſanctuaries, and Citties of refuge, that they incouraged malefactors, who ought to haue repreſt them, and gotte well by the bargaine too. For they ſo mightily grew by this meanes, that the world, and the wealth of it was found with Priests; and pietie was onely found with the poore: the ſecular was onely regular according to Chriſt, and the Regular was maſter of miſrule in all ſecular affaires: Marchandize, forraigne negotiations, and the Government civill and eccleſiasticall, firſt, by the civill and imperiall lawes,

after by the Cannon Law, a Law of their owne) was wholly moderated, and managed by them: Kings were made their wardes, and depoſed for Hereticks, as ſoone as they once thought themſelues of age to rule themſelues and their people aright, without their helpe: Yea Mars himſelfe was interteyned into their ſervice, and the Croſſe of tribulation, fayth and patience, which was at firſt but a ſtaffe in the hand of the Cleargie, to ſupport them in their conſtant ſufferings, was now perverted in the uſe, and turned upwards, in proſperitie and ſpirituall pride, and ſo became a ſword in everie Cleargie mans hand, to invade and diſturbe the peace of Chriſtendome: and Confeſſion ſerved, as a ſecret racke or torture of Conſcience, a kinde of holy inquiſition, to finde out that ſweete ſinne, and to pardon it, which might be moſt profitable to the Church, as having command over the purſe of the partie peccant. Thus it grew in time to be rightly called the Sacrament of pennance indeede: for if it had not contrition at the firſt, yet it ever ended in repentance, though ever a little too late, and therefore to ſmall purpoſe for the pennileſſe penitent.
            
            The Cleargie having by theſe artes and infinite others (as Idolatrie is full of invention, for he that can once make his Creator can make all other things) ingroſt almoſt all into their owne hands, they made diviſions of Kingdomes, and cutte them out into Biſhopricks, as all Countries, eſpecially Germanie can well witneſſe. Where the Emperor was ſhackled with Eccleſiasticall Officers of the Sea of Rome, as with fetters of gold; till the neceſſitie of the papacie, about the riſing up of Luther, forced the Pope, to permit the houſe of Auſtria to grow a little too great, to the leſſening of Antichriſts immediate authoritie. In ſo much, as now the Papacie is made a ſervant to the Houſe of Auſtria, under a Catholike title: as the Papacie before made both that Houſe, and all others ſervants, to increaſe and ſupport the exceſſiue greatneſſe of that Sea, under the like Catholike title and pretence. But this was then, and is now a violent motion, and therefore not perpetuall: then permitted and practiſed, to prevent the loſſe of all, which was juſtly feared upon probable grounds; and now to hold what that Sea ſtill poſſeſſeth, but feareth to looſe: and to regaine (if it be poſſible) what ſhe hath loſt alreadie. Which if ever ſhe could regaine by

this meanes, ſhe could then be content to burne the rodde of her wrath, or to weare it out in her worke, with whipping others. In the meane time ſhe is content to make the Spaniſh kingdome the Catholique ſword: ſo that the Roman Church may ſtill be the Catholique ſcabberd to that ſword, and draw it, or ſheath it at the Popes pleaſure. But I beleeue, that as by theſe arts that Antichriſtian Sea hath aſcended up to that ſuperlatiue height, wherein it now ſitts; ſo it ſhall looſe all, by the ſame or the like meanes. For whenſoever the world ſhall be ſo happie, as to haue an underſtanding Emperour, who knowes his owne, and is able to diſcover, and recover Antichristian uſurpations, that ſuch a man, taking Henry the VIII. of England for a patterne, ſhall and may eaſily doe that in Germanie, and ſo conſequently in other places, which that Reſolute King, by the advice of the Lord Cromwell, and the example of Cardinall Wolſey, did in his owne dominions. viz.
            That King intending to diſſolue all Monaſteries, made a diviſion of part to the Nobles and Commons, from whence it firſt came, and ſo mette no oppoſition; The patterne was the Popes owne, who made Church-men Princes, and changed the title and name of thoſe Lands, which were often by them acquired, and poſſeſſed by ill arts, as if he could haue changed the nature thereof, and made them, what he called them spirituall. The King therefore did but reduce things backe to their right and former order. Here onely was the error of that worke; that the King did not reſtore the Tenths to the conſtant maintenance of the miniſterie; which portion, whether it now belong to the Church or no, jure divino, I intend not to diſpute pro or con: But I dare ſay, Gods owne order hath manifeſted it to be both competent and convenient for that purpoſe, beyond all old exceptions or new inventions, and ſo proues it to agree with the law of nature, if not to flow immediately from thence, deſerving therefore to liue after the honourable buriall of the ceremoniall Law, as it breathed long before it.
            Had theſe things been better ordered, and ſome Biſhopricks broken into leſſer pieces, ſo that they might haue been ſitte for honorable burthens, but not too greate for the portage of one perſon, who laden with too much temporall honour and revenue, as men overgrowne with fleſh and fatte, become unwealdie and diſhonourable

burthens themſelues to the Church; then the undertaking had been abſolute. For whether it be fitt, that one who will not preach the Gospell, ſhould haue power to ſilence ſuch as would; that one ſhould haue power to ſilence a whole Dioceſſe of learned miniſters, and a whole Dioceſſe of theſe, ſhould not haue power to open the mouth of one? That one ſhould haue double honour for the ſingle worke; Nay for his wilfull idlenes, and obſtinate hindering the conſcionable worke of others: and others no honour, but conzumelie, and ſcorne for doing the double worke diligently? That one ſhould haue the provender belonging to manie labouring oxen for lying in the manger, and hindering the poore aſſes from meate: whileſt divers oxen that would tread out the corne, want come to eate, or corne to treade out, or are muzzeled whileſt they treade? That one ſhould rule a place manie miles from his perſon, as if he had both an infallible, and infinite ſpirit: and manie ſhould not be able to rule a pettie pariſh, or to catechiſe a houſehold without helpe? whether this thing be according to the patterne of the Apoſtolicall Hierarchie, are problemes, which ſome thinke fitt to be publiſhed amongſt thoſe of Antichriſt. becauſe it may be doubted, that he who would doe thus, would not perhaps ſtartle at a Cardinals cappe, or the triple Crowne, it they were profered, or could be compaſſed eaſily: and therefore ſuch a man is no fitte inſtrument to be uſed againſt Antichriſt, in the pulling downe of Babylon, or to ſit for Chriſt and rule,Obiect. upon the top of Sion. Object. But kinges and Princes governe by ſubſtitutes farre off. Anſw. True: But it ſhall not be ſo amongst you.
               Anſ. Mat, 20, 26.
                Matth. 20, 25, 26. Take theſe words of Chriſt as a Precept to ſhewe Biſhops what they ſhould doe; or as a propheſie, to ſhew all men the eſtate of the true Church what it ſhall be, it is all one. And doubtleſſe ſuch Princes as ſhall hereafter reforme, will learne to mend what is amiſſe, by the ſight of other mens errors: and ſo whenſoever God ſhall bleſſe Germanie with an able and religious Emperour, and ſhall put it in his heart to reforme the Church, it is but changing thoſe greate Biſhopricks of Mentz, Tryers, Collen, Munſter, and the reſt into abſolute Principallities, and making them Hereditarie, where now they are Electiue, and the worke is at an end; they will joyne to uphold their owne intereſtes, and ſoone exclude the Papacie, and mince the Prelacie

ſomewhat finer.
            A ſpeedie and certaine preparation for this, is the diſcoverie of Antichriſt: and it is the duetie of all men therefore that can, to doe their beſt, according to their talents, in this ſubject; and amongſt others, this learned Author hath done much, and deſerues much in this reſpect of the Church. The Courſe he takes by Problemes to handle this controverſie, is not as if he doubted, or any other man neede to doubt of the trueth; but as it ſhould ſeeme, being no profeſt Churchman, he modeſtly diſputes the point, as a man that would learne himſelfe and others, by aſking queſtions wiſely; and withall inquiring, whether it can be imagined, that any man can be more like Antichriſt then the Pope is; he concludes negatiuely, that none can; and plainely layes downe in everie Probleme the obſtinate abſurdities of ſuch, as looke for Antichriſt, and beleeue he ſhall come, yet cannot now ſee him to be come; becauſe either he ſtands too neare them, as a beame in their eyes, and they are parte of him; bone of his bone, and fleſh of his fleſh; or, they expect him, when he comes, to be ſo qualified for publique obſervation, as the Church of Rome hath cunningly, and poetically deſcribed him: But ſuch an Antichriſt they ſhall never ſee; for the church of Rome did ſo paint him in policie; not for the diſcloſing, but for the concealing, and clowding of his proper and perſonall appearance, and diverting the eyes of all men from beholding the right object. For my parte, meeting with this Booke in a manuſcript, and ſeeing the profit it may bring to all, I could doe no leſſe, then be a midwife for the edition of this, ſince I am not able to be parent, for procreation of the like. And I haue taken the boldnes upon me, to dedicate it to no leſſe perſons, then to the Kings and Potentates of the Earth, for it concernes them all eſpecially, aboue and more then others, to reade, and to underſtand this Controverſie, leaſt they ſhould be made drunke, or kept drunke; with the dregges of that abhominable cuppe of Inchantments, wherewith diverſe of their forefathers haue been intoxicated, and ſlept to death; and leaſt they ſhould under the appearance of Christianitse, countenance and ſupport Antichriſtianiſme, and ſo thinking to doe Chriſt good ſervice, perſecute his poore members ignorantly. Beſides many of them haue ſuffred much from the hand of Antichriſt, and

his members. The Kings of France haue beene butchered by their inſtruments, and the kingdome put in Combuſtion, by their incendiaries of the Roman Catholique league or partie. Our Queenes Father Henrie IIII. of renowmed memorie, muſt not be forgotten: his blood is yet too freſh upon their fingers, to be hidden from her Majeſties eyes; except they force her weake ſexe (as they haue done manie of the maſculine gender) to winke; by threatning to dippe their fingers, as deepe in her bloud, (which the Lord forefend) if ſhe caſt an eye towards her Fathers Funerall, or ſo much as inquire whether or no, he dyed by age, or by ſome injurious and traiterous hand. Our Kings haue beene, and are ſtill, excommunicated, curſed, expoſed to ſlaughter, and depoſition by them. The King and Queene of Bohemia, haue beene purſued from place to place; and all Chriſtendome imbroyled with bloodie warres for the upholding of Papall uſurpation, againſt regall Iuriſdiction. Other Princes haue formerly felt, and may hereafter feele the ſtrength of his Imperiall and Catholique Armes; and therefore it concernes theſe alſo, to knowe the man of ſinne, for their owne comfort, that they may the better beare their Croſſes, conſidering from what head, and hand they come; and that they may with more courage and aſſurance, looke up towards deliverance,
               
                  Luke 21, 28. as Chriſt hath willed them, who at the length will be too hard for Antichriſt, and giue a happie yſſue to all their afflictions.
            And as it concerns Princes eſpecially, ſo it concerns others alſo, as much as their ſalvation may concerne them, to know Chriſt their Saviour, and Antichriſt the chiefe enimie of their Saviour, and of their Salvation, from each other; and therefore I haue dedicated it to all Chriſtians. But if any wonder, why in the Title of the Dedication, I uſe theſe words: To all Chriſtians Reformed and Romiſh, as if I contradicted my ſelfe, in calling the Romiſh profeſſors Chriſtians, which in other places I terme Antichriſtians: I anſwer that the Pope himſelfe could not be the Antichrist, except he were a Christian, and tooke upon him alſo to be the chiefe Chriſtian, in externall profeſſion. A man may in diverſe reſpects be a Chriſtian, and an Antichriſtian at once. The Pope is baptized, profeſſeth the fayth in generall termes, as Peter did; and thus he is a Christian, and one of S. Peters ſucceſſors, as all other Biſhops are; but

as he chalengeth to be head of the Church, univerſall Biſhop, of an infallible spirit, Iudge of the Scripture, &c, he is Antichriſt, that is,Rev. 18. Rome, as head of the church is Babylon, & ſuch as ſo dwell in it, mystically by adhering to it, are in Babylō whether they be in Rome or no, & ſuch as renounce this Babyloniſh doctrine of Romiſh ſupremacie & ſuprelacie, holding the true head, which is Chriſt Ieſus alone, thoſe are with out Babylon, though they dwel in Rome▪
                
               for Christ▪ in ſhew, but againſt him in trueth. So thoſe of the church of Rome, are Chriſtians in outward profeſſion, but as they adhere to the Pope, as to the Ʋicar of Christ, and head of the Church, they are Antichriſtians: and ſuch of them as belong to Gods election, are called out of Babylon by the holy ſpirit, and may come out from thence, by renouncing the Babyloniſh doctrine of the Church of Rome, though for their perſons and dwellings they continue in the ſame place and cittie ſtill. And that theſe Romiſh Chriſtians may be informed, and all other Reformed Chriſtians eſtabliſhed in the trueth, is the end which the Author propoſed to himſelfe in the collection and compoſition, and I in the publication of this treatiſe.
            All that I feare is, that both this worke, and my owne indeavour ſhall meete the greateſt diſcouragements from ſome of thoſe, that ſhould protect and countenance us: who eyther from error of judgment, deny the Pope to be Antichriſt, and yet ſeparate from him (at which I wonder) or elſe out of humane wiſedome and policie, ſeeme ſtill to be in doubt, and will not be reſolved, as fearing a diminution of their worldly greatneſſe and glorie, if this truth ſhould be generally acknowledged. Becauſe they ſuppoſe much of their authoritie would be found to be built upon the ſandie foundation of Antichriſtian uſurpations. But ſhall we looſe heauen for earth? or looke ſo low, as to bring temporall reſpects into the ballance with eternall? Can there be no proviſion for upholding the honour and countenance of the Clergie, from common contempt, and for the incouraging and rewarding of learning, but what Antichriſt invents to uphold himſelfe withall? Then let me rather be ſtill poore and despiſed with Chriſt, and accounted ignorant with his Apoſtles, then rich and respected & learned with thoſe of Rome: Truth and ſimplicitie are the chiefe ornaments of Church-men, and ſhould be inſeparable. Their ſerpentine wiſedome ſhould not be uſed for this world: for that naturall ſubtiltie, which hath no mixture of doue-like ſimplicitie infuſed by grace, Chriſt did not teach to his Apoſtles: but Adam and Evah learned it of the old ſerpent, and having therewith loſt Paradiſe, left it then, with the wide world to

boote, as a Legacie for all their poſteritie. I would faine therefore finde that ſimple Chriſtian Policie, which lookes directly forward, to the price of the high calling,
               
                  Phi. 3, 13, 14 and contents it ſelfe with that reſpect, which followes the worke,
               
                  Rom. 2, 29. 
               whoſe praiſe is of God and not of men. If the worldes wages comes with it, I ſhall take it as the faithfull performance of his gracious promiſe, who hath wild us, firſt to ſeeke the kingdome of God;
               
                  Matth. 6.32. 
               and his righteouſnes, and all needfull things for this life, ſhall be added unto us.
            
            This is my reſolution, and I am reſolved beſides, that he, who upon thoſe earthly reſpects, before mentioned, or any the like humane grounds, and motiues, oppoſeth this booke, or the like, doeth therein ſufficiently declare himſelfe to be Antichriſtian, and ſhall neede no further eviction or confutation, then the evidence of his owne actions. Kings and Princes therefore muſt caſt an eye upon ſuch, and they ſhall ſoone ſee all their Councell is to uphold their owne earthly commaunds, for perſonall reſpects: a watchword ſufficient for him that is wiſe, to beware of ſuch, for they are wolues in ſheeps cloathing.
            
            And now to conclude, how much are we to magnifie the Lord for our King, Nobles, Cleargie, and Commons, mette together lately in the high Court of Parliament, and there ſo well according, for matter of Religion, that the Subiect no ſooner ſhewed his grievance with complaint, but the Soveraigne applied the remedie with compaſſion. Such a Head ſhewes it ſelfe ſenſible of the ſuffering of the feete: and ſuch members will never forget (as they haue proteſted) thankfulneſſe to ſuch a Head. Thus they are happie in knowing each other; So that the king having any attempt againſt Antichriſt, neede not doubt the bodie: And the people fearing the incroachments of Antichriſt, neede not doubt to acquaint the Head with their feares. How happie a thing is it to heare that eccleſiaſticall corruptions had no backs in eyther houſe, nor no ſonne of Belial there to pleade for Baal. It is the bellie, and not the conſcience, that ſpeakes in ſuch caſes;Whether they be greater friēds to ſchollers and learning, who provide for a few covetous and ambitious perſons; or they that provide for the generall number of carefull and con
                     •
                  cionable perſons, blinde men may ſee and judge: what portion had Fulke, Fox, Whitaker, Reynolds, Perkins, with many others in the Church. Or were not theſe men learned? Or who was more learned, painfull, and profitable to the Church of Christ, then theſe? He that thinkes me an enimie to the Biſhops for this, is deceived. Nay rather I wiſh, that where there is but one Biſhop now, there were twentie, ſo farre am I from ſchiſme, or from being Antiepiſcopall. and howſoever of old, ſuch penny-wiſe Fathers haue been applauded, as the onely pillars of the Church, and friends (forſooth) to ſchollers: yet now the world knowes better,

that, as a man cannot fill his mouth, and ſpeake, both at one time; ſo they who are moſt greedie and unſatiable in ſeeking after offices, haue leaſt leaſure and deſire to performe the Dueties of them. And that both the Parliament that deſired, and his Majeſtie who graunted, and the Cleargie who never oppoſed the reimployment of ſilenced Miniſters, (who were not turbulent) did well underſtand. For theſe men will be contented with litle, and yet withall will labour to giue much contentment in the workes of their vocation: ſo that if they may haue free and peaceable paſſage, we ſhall ſee Superstition and Idolatrie haue a greater blowe in a few yeares by their labours, then in manie yeares before by the unfruitfull & unprofitable warre ſtird up againſt them, as betwixt Fathers and their children, which gaue way to the contrarie humour to increaſe. And were ſome of theſe men well provided for, and protected in Ireland, I doubt not to ſay, we ſhould ſoone ſee the happie effect thereof, and that an Armie of Priests would do more perhaps, then an armie of ſecular ſouldiers; and ſo ſettle that kingdome in obedience to Christ, that we ſhould not fear any invaſion or inward motion by Antichrist, or his inſtruments in thoſe parts. He that doubts this may looke into Scotland, a place ſixt
                  •
               e yeares ſince, as obſtinately averſe from the fayth, as Ireland is now; where in a few yeares Poperie was wholly rooted up, and ſcarce a man to be found, that would profeſſe himſelfe to be a Papiſt; till theſe late dayes, when the unhappie diviſion betwixt the Cleargie gaue them oportunitie and incouragement to increaſe and multiplie. It is our charge to conquer the Iriſh ſoules to Chriſt, as well as the Iriſh lands and bodies to our ſelues; and I am perſwaded, God hath not proſpered our worke for our parte, becauſe we haue had no greater care to compaſſe his parte: If they were Christs, they would be ours too, in ſpite of Rome and Spaine: but being Antichrists in affection, their able bodies are imployed as inſtruments againſt us in all places, and their Countrie uſed now by Spaine, as Scotland of old by France, to divert and distract our warlike attempts, and to hold us buſied at home. Their converſion would haue beene the glorie of our church government, ſhewing

that our Cleargie did not ſeeke themſelues, but Chriſt; as now it is our ſhame, that whileſt the Romiſh Cleargie haue conquered many Countries for Antichriſt, in the Eaſt and Weſt Indies, we ſhould neglect a neighbour countrie, long in our poſſeſſion, ſuffering them ſtill to liue in ſpirituall captivitie, under the hands of ignorance, Idolatrie, darkneſſe, and death. But now we haue better hope, ſeeing the reconcilement of the Fathers to their brethren, and doubt not, but that will be effected there, which hath been performed in England and Scotland heretofore, by the conſcionable, plaine, painfull, and powerfull preaching of the Goſpell; whileſt men are not diſtracted, nor their hearts alienated from each other, by domeſtick controverſies. For theſe Church quarrels about Ceremonies, beſides the distraction, do by the ſcandall hinder the progreſſe of Religion, cauſing the enemie to inſult in their unitie, againſt our truth, becauſe they ſee us divided, and in our diviſions purſuing each other more bitterly, for thoſe things, which we profeſſe to be circumſtanciall and indifferent; then we doe them in fundamentall controverſies: And ſo they ſay truely, we ſhew little charitie, and therefore can haue no true fayth.
            The Lord therefore joyne the hearts of our King, Peeres, Clergie, and Commons in one, to finiſh this good worke which they haue begun, to the overthrow of Antichriſt: and bleſſe this worke to his full diſcoverie; that Kings, Princes, Prieſts and People, may learne to leaue him. And ſo craving pardon for that capitall crime of plaine-speaking, which I haue herein uſed, I ende with the Authors owne Epiſtle, or Preface to the Reader.
            
               Quod à ſuis olim Lectoribus, petiit, pater doctiſsimus, id te oratum volo (pie Lector) ut ſicubi me erraſse animadvertes, me corrigas: ſiteipſum, mecum redeas; ubi pariter cerius es, pergas mecum; ubi pariter haeſitas, ores mecum; ut ſic Chriſtianae unitatis & pietatis leges inviolatas teneamus.
            
         
         
            
            THE SVMME OF THE FOLLOWING Diſcourſe: conteyning Seuen Problems concerning Antichriſt, everie one reſolved into ſeuen Queſtions, neceſſarie in theſe times to be conſidered.
            
               
                  I. Probleme. Concerning the Place of Antichrist, whether it be Rome Chriſtian.
               1. Whether Rome be that great cittie deſcribed in the 17. ch. Apoc.
               2. Whether it be the great cittie where the beaſt ſhall make warre againſt the witneſſes of God: which cittie is ſpiritually called Sodome and Egipt &c. Apoc. 11.
               3. Whether Rome be Babylon the great, which is mentioned Apoc. 14.
               4. Whether it be the great cittie ſpoken of Apoc. 18.
               5. Whether it may be underſtood to be the place called Armageddon. Apoc. 16.
               6. Whether it be the place. noted by the Apoſtle to be the Temple of God. 2 Theſſ. 2.
               7. Whether it be the mountain of holynes between the ſeas. Dan. 11
               
                  Summa. If theſe prophecies do all concurre in Rome Chriſtian, and cannot be underſtood of any other place. then is Rome Chriſtian the ſeate of Antichriſt.
            
            
               
                  II. Probleme. Of the State or bodie Politike of Antichriſt whether it be the ſtate or dominion of Rome.
               1. Of the prophecies of Daniel concerning the fourth Beaſt, and the Prophecies in the Revelation how they differ, and how they may be reconciled.
               2. Whether the fourth Beaſt in Daniel do ſignifie the Roman ſtate under Conſuls, Decemvirs, &c. or what elſe.
               3. Whether the firſt Beaſt riſing out of the Sea Apoc. 13. do ſignifie the Roman ſtate under Caeſars, or what elſe.
               4. Whether the Beaſt in the 17 of the Apoc. doe ſignifie the Roman ſtate under Antichriſt. or what elſe.
               5. Whether the little Horne in Daniel do ſignifie Antichriſt, or what elſe.
               6. Whether the ſecond Beaſt in the 13 of the Apoc. do ſignifie Antichriſt.
               7. Whether the woman in the 17 Apoc. do ſignifie Antichriſt.
               
                  
                  Summa. If theſe prophecies do concurr and be all fulfilled in the Roman ſtate, and the Governours thereof, and cannot be fulfilled in any other, then is that the ſtate of Antichriſt.
            
            
               
                  III. Probleme. Of the Names of Antichriſt.
               1. Whether the name of Pontifex Maximus do agree to Antichriſt.
               2. Whether the name of Servue ſervorum do agree to Antichriſt.
               3. Whether the name of that Antichriſt may be giuen to the Pope, & to all the ſucceſſion of Popes, ſince the yeare of our L. 700.
               4. Whether the name of Anomos .i. the Lawleſſe, or the man of ſinne, may be applied to that ſucceſſion.
               5. Whether the name of the Sonne of Perdition may be giuen to that ſucceſſion.
               6. Whether the name Abaddon may be giuen to that ſucceſſion.
               7. Of the numerall names of 666. and how they are applied to the Pope. Summa. If theſe names and prophecies do all concurre in the Popes and their ſucceſſion, & can be truly verified of none other, then is the Pope (collective, as it is ſayd, Nomen ſucceſſionis) That Antichriſt.
            
            
               
                  IIII. Problem. Of the Riſing of Antichriſt.
               1. How the Monarchie of Antichriſt muſt beginne to riſe, whether all at once, or by degrees in tract of time.
               2. When it muſt beginne, & whether it muſt not beginne, before the power of the Emperor be fully removed out of Rome.
               3. When the power of the Emperor began to be removed, & how long it was in removing.
               4. Whether it may ſtand with the ſcripture to ſay, that Antich. muſt be a ſingular perſon, or whether he muſt be a monarch ſucceſſiue.
               5. By what means the Popes did riſe to their height of power & ſupremacie, whether it was not by ſedition and ſchiſme.
               6. Whether they did not contend and warr againſt the holy Biſhops and Saints of God to get their ſupremacie.
               7. Whether they did obtein their dominions and ſupremacie by rebellion and perjurie. Summa. If all the prophecies concerning the Riſing of Antich. be fulfilled in the Pope ſucceſſive, & cānot be fulfilled in any other, then is the Pope ſucceſſive Antich. & none elſe can be.
            
            
               
                  V. Probl. Of the Raigne of Antichriſt.
               1. Whether the Great Whoore deſcribed Apoc. 17. doe ſignifie the

ſtate of the Antichriſt regnant.
               2. Whether al parts of that deſcription may be applyed to the popes ſucceſſiue ſince the yeare of our Lord 700.
               3. Whether the Beaſt that was, and is not, and yet is, Apoc. 17. doe ſignifie the Pontifex Max. that is, the Pope of Rome.
               4. whether any Iew, Turke, or other perſon whatſoever hath been ſupported by ſo many Nations, Peoples and tongues as the Pope hath been during his ſupremacie ſince the ſaid yeare.
               5. whether it be poſſible, or likely, that any Iew Turke or other perſon whatſoever ſhould obteyne ſuch greate and ineſtimable riches, as the Popes haue gotten in that time.
               6. whether any Iew, Turke or Pagan ever had or claymed ſuch abſolute and ſupereminent power to depriue and depoſe kings and princes by their ſentences, to abſolue their ſubjects from their alledgeance, & to diſpence with oathes, as the Popes haue done, & whether it be poſſible that any Iew, Turke, or Pagan can obteine ſuch power.
               7. whether ever any Turk or Iew pretended or claymed ſuch abſolute ſupremacie & authoritie, that if he lead multitudes of ſoules caetervatim into hell, yet he was not to be reproved, nor called to account for it, as the Popes haue arrogated: and whether it be probable that any ſhall be able to attain to ſuch power hereafter.
               
                  Summa. If all the prophecies concerning the Raigne of Antich. be fulfilled in the Pope, and cannot be otherwiſe, then he is Antich.
            
            
               
                  VI. Probl. Of the words and actions of Antichriſt.
               1. Whether any Iew or Turke, or other whatſoever haue ſo much & in ſo high degree, blaſpheamed God, and our Lord Chriſt Ieſus, as the Pope and his Church haue done ſince the ſaid year 700: namely, in affirming, that the old and new Teſtament haue their authoritie from the Popes decree, and ſuch like. &c.
               2. whether any haue cauſed or procured ſo many rebellions, Treaſons and murders to be committed, as they haue done: and whether it be poſſible for any in time to come to doe the like.
               3. whether any haue changed lawes ſo much as the Pope hath done, by his decrees, decretals, pardons, dispenſations, Faculties, Indulgences, &c. and whether any Iew, Turke, or Infidell ever tooke upon him ſuch authoritie, to diſpenſe with ſinnes before hand, and to

giue indulgence for ſinnes to be committed, as the Popes haue done more then God himſelfe.
               4. whether any haue changed times ſo much as the Popes haue done & whether it be poſſible for any in time to come to make ſuch changes. viz. by feaſts & faſts, Lents and Iubilees, decretals, diſpenſations and Calenders.
               5. whether any Iew, Turke or Infidell hath erected, or maintained ſuch open and notorious Fornication, adulterie, and Sodomie as the pope hath done, and whether it be poſſible for any in time to come to do the like.
               6. whether any Iew, Turke or Infidell haue ſo wilfully & obſtinately erected and mainteyned ſo manifold Idolatrie, & ſo many ſeverall Idols as the popes haue done: and whether it be poſſible for any in time to come to do the like.
               7. whether any Iew or Turke did ever ſitte in the Temple of God, boaſting himſelfe to be God, as the Popes hath done: and whether it be poſſible for any to do the like, & to be believed therein, as the Pope hath ben.
               
                  Summa. If all the prophecies concerning the words & actions of Antich. be fulfilled in the Pope, and cannot be fulfilled in any other, then he is Antichriſt.
            
            
               
                  VII. Probl. Of the times of Antich. how they be fulfilled, and to what Period they are come.
               1. Of the firſt working of the Myſterie of iniquitie, how long it continued.
               2. Of the time of the riſing of Antich. & when it was fulfilled.
               3. Of the Revelation of Antichrist, and how that is fulfilled.
               4. Of the ſignes of the times of Antich. & how they are fulfilled.
               5. Of the times of the raigne of Antich. how long it continued.
               6. Of the Conſumption of Antich. & to what point that is come.
               7. Of the end & abolition of Antich. which muſt be by the brightnes of the coming of our L. Chriſt, who is God bleſſed for ever.
               
                  Summa tot. Si probatur propoſitum, & non probatur contrarium, quid amplius deſideramus? If all the prophecies of Antich. be fulfilled in the pope, and cannot be fulfilled otherwiſe, then the Pope is Antichrist.
               
            
            
               Caeli faciem noſtis diſcernere: ſigna temporum non noviſtis?
               Matt. 16.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            SACRAE HEPTADES, OR SEVEN PROBLEMS concerning ANTICHRIST.
            
               That the Apocalyps is to be ſearched.
               
                  THoſe that are taken to be maſters of learning, teach us in everie ſubject and matter propoſed, firſt to aske the queſtion An ſit? whether it be, & whether it be poſſible to be known, and attained unto; leaſt ſpending our time in things impoſſible or imperceptible, we both looſe our labour, & become ridiculous. The ſame is taught us by our greateſt maſter, in the parables of the man intending to build, and the king going to warre.
               Deſiring therefore to finde out and diſcover that great enemie of the Church of Chriſt, Antichriſt, who it is,
                     Luke 14. and whether he be come or not, (after the grace and mercie of our Lord and maſter Chriſt Ieſus moſt humbly & devoutly implored, without whom we can do nothing) I think it not amiſſe to conſider firſt of the difficultie & obſcuritie of the Book of the Apocalyps or Revelation, wherein by the conſent of all learned Chriſtians, Antichriſt is underſtood to be moſt ſpoken of, and his Place, State, Actions, and other circumſtances moſt largely deſcribed and diſcovered unto us:

Seeing there can be no doubt made, but there muſt be ſuch a perſon, as the Scripture ſpeaketh of by that name, and he muſt be ſuch a one as is there intimated, & howſoever obſcurely, yet by him that knoweth all things truly and ſufficiently deſcribed: not intending nevertheleſſe to make any expoſition of the ſaid book, which being but a ſimple Laick I dare not enterpriſe of anie part of Scripture, but onely to examine ſome parts thereof, which may ſeem pertinent to the matter in hand, thereupon to propoſe ſome queſtions wherein I deſire to be reſolved.
               And firſt to ſpeake ſomewhat of this booke of the Apocalyps in generall:Iunius. which is by all men confeſſed to be full of myſteries, and that it is by reaſon thereof verie darke and obſcure, is by manie affirmed: yet I ſee this hath neither diſſwaded the mindes, nor diſcouraged the induſtrie of godly men in all ages from ſearching to find out the true ſence and meaning thereof, amongſt which Iuſtinus Philoſophus and Irenaeus godly Martyrs, S. Ierom & S. Auſtin excellent Fathers, Haimo, Iohannes de Rupeſciſſa, Ioachimus Abbas, and others of the former age, Luther, Balaeus, Fox & Iunius, in our fathers time, the learned Abbat biſhop of Salesburie, Paraeus, Napier, and others of our own time, Alcaſir & Ribera Romaniſts, and aboue all, our moſt Gracious & learned Soveraign King Iames, deſerveth to be remembred. Vpon great reaſon and judgment ſurely haue all theſe entred into this waightie work, well knowing, that being ſent unto us by God and our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, we as duetifull ſervants ought to ſearch out the underſtanding thereof,
                     Deut. 6, 7. and to talke of them, as of a meſſage ſent unto us from our chief Lord & maſter, who hath given it to be ſhewed to his ſervants, and hath annexed a bleſſing unto it: For bleſſed is he that readeth, and heareth,
                  
                     Apoc. 1, 3. 
                  & keepeth the words of this Prophecie. That therefore which God will haue to be opened,
                     Math. 25. no man ought to

ſhut: that which he will haue to be ſhewed forth, no man ought to conceale: that which he will haue to be knowne, none ought to neglect. For he giveth not his gifts to be buried in the earth, nor his talents to be tied up in a napkin,
                     Luke 8. neither do men (ſaith he) light a candle, and put it under a bedde or a buſſhell. Wherefore neither I (howſoever unworthie) durſt altogether ſuppreſſe theſe my poore meditations concerning Antichriſt, much ſpoken of in this book: but having obteyned grace of God, adventured to put them in writing, thereby to giue occaſion (the queſtions being thus opened) to the learned that ſhall vouchſafe to read them, the better to conſider of them, and inſtruct others, & to the unlearned the better to inquire and learn; beſeeching the great Biſhop of our ſoules, & Illuminator of all men, Chriſt Ieſus, to inſtruct & inlighten us all. And for the ſame cauſe I thought it beſt to propoſe them under the name & forme of Problems, or Queſtions; reduced to the number of ſeven, in a due obſervation of that myſticall number, ſo manie times obſerved in this heavenly booke: which by the opinion of ſome learned men, ought to be uſed as the key to open theſe divine myſteries. But before I come to the main queſtion, I think it neceſſarie to ſay ſomewhat, touching the difficultie of this booke, and of the end and ſubject of it, for a further declaration whereof I haue conceived theſe ſeven Problems enſuing, upon the two firſt verſes of that Book, which are as followeth: The Revelation of Ieſus Chriſt, &c.
               
               1. Vpon theſe two verſes, ſtanding like the two-leaved gates of the Temple, which muſt be opened before we can goe any further, with fear and reverence,1 Reg. 6. as at the gates of Gods owne houſe,
                     Ez
                           •
                        ch. 41. I demand whether they do not preſent ſeven things to our conſideration? 1. firſt the name given to this book by the Author, Apocalypſis, A Revelation, or Diſcoverie,
                  
not Apocrypſis, a Concealment, or covering. 2. The firſt originall Author, God, who gaue both the booke it ſelfe to be ſhewed to the Church, and the name to the booke.
               3. The moſt true, immediate & rightfull owner by the gift of his Father, Chriſt Ieſus, who ſent & ſhewed it to his ſervants.
               
               4. The end wherefore it was given, to be ſhewed.
               
               5. The perſons to whom it muſt be ſhewed, his ſervants.
               
               6. A touch of the ſubject, Things which muſt ſhortly come to paſſe.
               
               7. The meanes & Inſtruments imployed by our Saviour in this ſervice of Revelation, an Angell, and an Apoſtle, euen that Apoſtle who before had ben tried and found faithfull, in bearing witnes of the word of God, and of Chriſt Ieſus, and of all things that he ſaw: his ſervant Iohn: the ſame who by the H. Ghoſt was authoriſed aboue all others, to intitle himſelf,
                     Ioh. 21, 24. & 19, 35. 
                  A witnes of the things which he ſaw, and therefore of credit aboue all exception, and that aſwell in his Goſpell and Epiſtles,1 Ioh. 1, 1. as in this Revelation.
               Now upon theſe ſeven grounds touched in the entrance, I propoſe this Queſtion: How this booke can be reputed darke and obſcure, which God himſelf hath intitled a Revelation,
                     Epheſ. 5. E
                           •
                        ai. 5. or Manifeſtation? Light maketh all things manifeſt ſayth the Apoſtle. And doth the ſpirit of Trueth call darknes light, or light darknes?
               2. God the Author is light and in him is no darknes.
                  1 Ioh. 1. He maketh light to ſhine out of darknes,2 Cor. 4. not darknes to come of light,2 The. 2, 10. unleſſe it be to the children of darknes that loue not the light. Alſo our Saviour Chriſt is the true light, that lighteneth everie one, yea the Brightnes of Light. He is the Trueth,
                     Ioh. 1. Hebr. 1. & proteſteth of himſelf in theſe words, whatſoever I have heard of my father, I have made known unto you. How then can it be ſaid,
                     Ioh. 15. that he hath not made this alſo known, which God gaue him to be ſhewed?
               
                  3. Our Saviour Chriſt the true and rightfull owner,1 Cor. 12. as in his myſticall body is one with his Church,
                     Epheſ. 5. and we are all members of that bodie, how then can that be ſaid to be concealed from the bodie, that is revealed to the head?
               4. The ſame inference will follow upon all the other four points aboue noted; as upon the 4, Seeing God gaue it to be ſhewed; upon the 5,
                     Pſ. 119, 125 ſeeing it is directed to be ſhewed to his ſervants, who muſt labour to know their Maſters will. Vpon the 6,
                     Luke 12. ſeeing it concerneth things that muſt ſhortly come to paſſe, and therefore inconvenient to be hid and kept ſecret. And upon the 7, ſeeing it was committed to two moſt faithfull miniſters of purpoſe to be ſignified to the church, and thereupon moſt godly men haue laboured from time to time to ſearch it out and expound it: why ſhould we deſpair to ſpeake of it, as the Heathen man doth in Minutius, that neither it is given to us to know it, nor permitted to ſearch it, nor lawfull to require it? And not raither ſay, as it is there by the Chriſtian Oratour replyed, that to us, whoſe faces God hath lifted up to Heaven, and whom he hath indued with ſpeach and reaſon, whereby to know and ſpeake of him, yea more to whom he hath directed it to be ſhewed; It is not lawfull to reject this heavenly brightnes, which not onely offreth, but intrudeth itſelf into our eyes and ſenſes. The obſcuritie of this Booke is not to terrifie us from it,Aug. de civ. d
                        •
                     i. l, 20, 17
                   but to exerciſe our mindes in it, ſayth the learned Father. Let this therefore ſuffice cōcerning the obſcuritie, that it is not invincible, but we ought to ſearch it out.
               2. Let us now therefore (Chriſto Duce) for a ſecond Problem inquire of the meanes whereby we may attain to the underſtanding of this booke. For it cannot be denied, but there are in it manie myſteries, which it is not giuen to all men to underſtand, but it is giuen to ſome, of whom our Saviour ſayth, vobis datum eſt, it is giuen to you,
                     Marc. 4. and for

them he hath ordeyned meanes. I demand then, what are the meanes? And whether are not thoſe the beſt m
                     •••
                  es, which God himſelfe and our Lord Ieſus Chriſt hath ſhewed us in the Scriptures.Aug. de civ. dei li. 10, 23. Phocyll. Nazianz. Aut. nin. in ſum. p. 4.1.4 Prov. 8, 13. Wiſd 1.
                   viz. 1. True and ſerious repentance, which is (as it were) the true purgation of the ſoule, ſo much inquired for by Philoſophers, and onely revealed to Chriſtians, to make us fit to behold heavenly myſ
                     ••
                  ies. For wiſdome (ſayth he) entreth not into a malicious minde, nor dwelleth in a ſinfull bodie.
               
               
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .2. Conſtant obedience and care to ſerue and pleaſe God according to our knowledge. If any will do his will, he ſhall know the doctrine: And if ye continue in my words, ye ſhall know the trueth.
               
               
                  
                     Naz. Ioh. 7, 17. & 8, 31. Rev. 5, 4. & 10, 9.3. Earneſt prayer and invocation of God in Chriſt Ieſus, which our Apoſtle uſed, and thereby obteyned to ſee the opening of this booke and to haue it delivered unto him according to the manifold promiſes of our Saviour Aske & ye ſhall receiue,
                  
                     Mat. 7. 
                  ſeeke and ye ſhall finde, knock and it ſhall be opened. For whoſoever asketh, receiveth, and he that ſeeketh findeth, and to him that knocketh it ſhall be opened. Whereupon, Aſke, (ſaith venerable Beda) by prayer, ſeeke by reading and hearing, and knock by doing and practiſe.
               4. Diligent reading and meditation upon this booke, often recommended unto us by this our Apoſtle in the Text. Bleſsed is he that readeth,
                  
                     Rev. 1, 3. 
                  and heareth, and keepeth the words of the prophcie of this booke.
               
               5, Diligent reading and peruſing other bookes and propheſies of the Holy Scripture, and conferring one with the other a ſpeciall means to underſtand the ſenſe and meaning of Propheticall words and Phraſes much uſed in this booke,
                     Dan. 9, 2. by which means alſo Daniel confeſſeth that he underſtood the end of the Captivitie. And ſome learned men do make no doubt, but the literall ſence of everie place of Scripture

taken with the conſent of other places, and repugnant to none is the true meaning of the H. Ghoſt: Conſent being the moſt certain badge and cogniſance of truth. For in the mouth of two or three witneſſes ſhall everie word be confirmed.
               
               6. Methodicall proceeding by the rule of learning, à notioribus ad minus nota: from things once cleared to that which is more obſcure and difficult, or to uſe the Apoſtles Phraſe from milke to ſtrong meat.
                  ▪
                  
                     Hebr. 5. We muſt not be alwaies children in underſtanding, and ſtick in the rudiments or principles; nor call that into queſtion, which is once made clear. And here by the way I would craue a litle leave to aſke a queſtion or two concerning the writings of the Fathers and other good Authors: what account we are to make of them, and whether it be not neceſſarie for us to ſearch and looke into them to the end we may know what is now, or hath heretofore ben revealed or made cleare. For the Fathers, it may ſeem that their conſenting teſtimonies in the expoſition of the Scriptures ought to be held of ſo great authoritie as we do eſteeme the Cōmunion of Saints, profeſſed in our Creede. For if we hold not a Communion of faith with the Saints that are now in Heauen, it may proue a queſtion whether we ſhall come whither they are gone before us. And therefore not without cauſe doth the godly and learned Vincentius ſo earneſtly exhort us to hold faſt quod ubi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſemper, & ab omnibus creditum eſt, not that which ſome few or perhaps ſome particular Church hath conceited, but that which hath been everie where and at all times and of all Chriſtians beleeved, that is (if I underſtand him aright) the common Creed & profeſſion of our faith left unto us by the Fathers. And he maketh the conſent of the Fathers, though not a rule of faith equall to the Scriptures, yet a ſingular good help to the underſtanding of them.
               Concerning the writings of Heathen men alſo, I

aſke how we may ſafely neglect them, where they teach us any point of truth or goodnes? ſeeing there is no truth can be uttered by any man, or Angel but it muſt proceed from that Eternall and incommunicable Truth our Lord Chriſt Ieſus, nor any good can be done or ſpoken, but it muſt come frō the higheſt & ſoveraign Good, which is God himſelf. And therefore moſt truely and divinely ſpeaketh that godly Father.Augustin. 
                  Bonus veruſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Christianus Domini ſui intelligat eſſe, ubicun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      invenerit veritatem. A good and true Chriſtian muſt underſtand that truteh whereſoever he findeth it is, the word of his maſter Chriſt Ieſus. And though Abana and Pharphar the rivers of Damaſcus were not ſo ſanctified as Iordan to cleanſe Naamans leproſie: yet they were made of God to waſh our hands and quench our thirſt. Though common bread be not equall to the ſacrament: yet it muſt be received with prayer and thankſgiveing, as the gift of God, to ſatiſfie our hunger. Yea let us well conſider whether it be not neceſſarie for us to looke into them: ſeeing we may be ſure that the vertues, moralities, and doctrines of the Heathen, ſhall be no leſſe objected unto us at the day of judgement then the examples of the Queene of Sheba, the King of Nineveh, Tyrus and Sidon, Sodom and Gomorrha. Is it not needfull then to know, what ſhall be laid to our charge, and prepare our ſelves to anſwere it? God nath provided & preſerved for our uſe the learned writings of the Heathens, ſhall we not uſe them? may we not in refuſing them ſeeme to abridge God of ſome part of his glorie? for let us a litle better conſider it. The excellent vertues, wiſdom, temperance, juſtice and fortitude, & the illuſtrious examples of theſe vertues ſhining in them, their invincible patience, fidelitie inviolable, juſtice inflexible,

unwearied induſtrie, their profound learning, mellifluous eloquence in perſwadeing men to vertue and temperance, Their heroicall magnanimitie, readie to undertake all dangers, to ſave, ſuccour, and defend thoſe that were unjuſtly oppreſſed, and other ſuch divine vertues: what think you, were they of God? or of men? If you ſay of God acknowledg it. If of men; why doe not you the like, that have greater helps? How can the weake and corrupt nature of man inthralled to ſin and Satan bring forth ſuch fruits? But I know what a ſchooleman may ſay: ſplendida peccata, becauſe not ordinate to Gods glorie. True as in men, but are they not therefore to be acknowledged for a part of Gods adminiſtration and providence, who holdeth the beginnings ends & middeſſes of all things, & without whom no man can do any thing, as the Philoſophers alſo,Plato, Arist. Cic. Heſiod. Theog. Virgil. Phocyll. &c. and Poets with open mouths confeſſe? What then ſhall we ſay to their excellent ſciences of Geometrie, Coſmography, and Arithmetick, which we have received wholly from them? What to their Hiſtoryes and computations of Times? Shall we not accompt theſe a part of Gods diſpenſation, and therefore good in the Fountaine, from whence they flowed, howſoever corrupt in the veſſels, wherein they were received & conveied? Doubtleſſe if we will be good Chriſtians, that is of the holy prieſthood, we muſt learn to ſeperate the precious from the vile, the cleane from the vnclean, and not caſt away the wheat becauſe of the chaff;1 Cor. 15. S. Paul vſeth the words of Heathen Poets, in a point of manners to the beleeving Corinthians, yea to Titus a Biſhop:
                     Tit. 1. Act. 17. and in a point of faith to the vnbeleeving Athenians which S. Luke maketh a part of Scripture to the beleeving Chriſtians. So ſaith our Prophet,
                     Revel. 21. 
                  They ſhall bring the Glory and

Honour of the Nations unto it.
                  
                     Eſai 60. 
                  And the riches of the Gentiles ſhall come unto thee ſaith the Lord. Let us therefore give to God his due, and reſtore the holy veſſells to the Temple, notwithſtanding Belſhazzars drunken prophanation. Let us I ſay hold faſt that we have received, and uſe that to Gods glory, which they abuſed to their owne. And this have I debated ſomwhat the more at large, to ſatiſfy the niceneſſe of ſome, which in this point ſeeme to be more ſcrupulous, then is convenient.
               To return to our purpoſe, the ſeuenth meane to attain to the underſtanding of prophecies is to exerciſe our ſelvs in diſcerning the times, by diligent comparing of the events with the prophecies, which we may the better doe by the help of the godly and learned writings of former times, whereof I have ſpoken, eſpecially Hiſtories and Chronologies,
                     Rom. 15. which the Allforeſeeing providence of God (for our learning doubtleſſe) hath cauſed both to be written and preſerved. This help the Fathers of the Primitive Church had not, and therefore it is no marvell if they could not ſo well expound theſe prophecies, which are beſt underſtood by their accompliſhment. This is that which Salomon commendeth ſaying,
                     Eccleſ. 8. 
                  that the wiſeman diſcerneth the time and judgment. The men of Iſſachar,1 Chron. 12. and the great Princes of Media, and Perſia are commended for the ſame,
                     Esther 1. and the Scribes and Phariſes ſharply reprehended for neglecting it.
                     Matth. 16. And ſo I conclude this Problem that God hath given ſufficient means to attain to the underſtanding of this booke.
               
                  III.My third Problem or Queſtion is of the perſons to whom it is ordeyned to be ſhewed, which may eaſily be conceived aſwell by the meanes, as by the Text. For it muſt be ſuch as uſe theſe meanes and they are

here noted by the name of the Servants of Ieſus Chriſt.
                  
                     Ioh. 15. For it were abſurd to thinke that he would ſhew his ſecrets to his enemies, and not to his ſervants and freinds. Concerning whom I deſire to be reſolved in 7. points.
               1 Vpon the words long before ſpoken by our Saviour vobis datum eſt.
                  
                     Matth. 13. 
                  To you it is given to know the myſteries of the kingdome of heaven; whether by theſe words he meant to ſignifie onely his Apoſtles, or all his diſciples, and them alſo which (as he ſpeaketh in another place) ſhould beleeve in him through their words?
                  
                     Iohn 17.
               
               2 Why in theſe words he made no ſpeciall mention of Peter or his ſucceſſours, which do now vindicate to themſelvs the ſole authoritie of the keyes, aſwell of ſcience, as of power and juriſdiction.
               3 whether thoſe, who by our Saviour are there ſignified by a vobis datum, be not the ſame, which are here called the ſervants of Ieſus Chriſt, and why here alſo there was no mention of Peter or his ſucceſſours, or of the Roman Church, which was then in the Imperiall Cittie, and doubtleſſe had many godly men in it,
                     Rom. 16. and ſome of great dignitie?
               4 When our divine Evangeliſt writeth theſe things to the ſeven Churches of Aſia, whether he did not in this according to his direction? and whether he doe not hereby ſhew, who were meant by the name of the ſervants of God and Chriſt?
               5 what reaſon the Apoſtle had to ſend it to thoſe Churches, and not to the Roman church either as chief, or as one of the reſt; was it perhaps for the reaſon of S. Hillarie. Anne ambiguum est Antichristum in his tectis eſſe ſeſſurum? Or was he not an Apoſtle and Prophet to the Romans, as well as to them of Aſia? or for what other reaſon?
               
                  6 Whether in writing to thoſe ſeven, he did not intend to write to the whole univerſall Church of God as well to come as preſent: as S. Auguſtine expoundeth Numero ſeptenario vniverſae Eccleſiae ſignificata eſt perfectio.
                  
                     De Civ, 17, 4. And onely to the Church, and whether all others be not excluded by a vobis non est datum?
               
               7. And laſtly whether in writing to the ſeven Churches and their Angels equally and indifferently, he do not ſufficiently ſhew that the ſtate of the Church upon earth is neither in the nature of a Monarchie, nor of a Democratie, but of an Ariſtocratie, where the ſeveral Angels preſide in their ſeverall Territories, precincts, and congregations, agreeing in the unity of one faith under one eternall head, the God of Truth, Chriſt Ieſus? Let us not deceive our ſelvs. Babilonians uſe to liſp. They cannot ſpeak the language of Canaan with a true ſpirit. Neither onely this booke but all the Scripture is dark and obſcure to them, whoſe minde the God of this world hath blinded,2 Cor. 4. Hoſh. 8, 12. and ſo much for the Perſons.
               
                  IV.My fourth Problem is concerning the finall ende & ſcope of this book in the verſes above briefly touched, to ſhew to his ſervants things which muſt ſhortly come to paſſe. And here I muſt neceſſarily ſpeak of the Subject which is ſo joyned with the end, that the conſideration of the one cannot be ſevered from the other. I demand therefore, what things muſt be ſhewed to the Church of God? Surely takeing a generall view of this divine prophecy, for my part I conceive that the moſt here ſpoken of, is of the enemies & of their perſecutions, & malicious practiſes againſt the Church, and of the defence and deliverance of the Church, and the puniſhment of her enemies. and ſo I finde S. Hieroms opinion,In prologo. 
                  Revelat quanta Eccleſia Christi paſſa et paſſura ſit. And

to what end muſt theſe things be ſhewed unto them: if not to the ſame for which our Euangeliſt in his Euangile reciteth many excellent ſermons of our Saviour Chriſt, namely to comfort and incourage the faithfull, and to excite them to repentance, vigilance, patience, and perſeverance againſt the troubles to come? Repent ſaith he to the Churches of Epheſus and Pergamus. Fear not to Pergamus, Hold faſt to Thyatira. &c. So in the Goſpell. Theſe things haue I ſpoken unto you that ye ſhould not be offended. So in his Epiſtle, Let that abide in you,
                  
                     Iohn 16. 1 Iohn 2. 
                  which ye have heard from the begining. Take heed I haue foretold you.
                  
                     Marke 13. Now if this be the end, namely to arme the faythfull with thoſe vertues againſt the troubles to come: then what is or can be the ſubject of this book, or what matter can it ſpeak of, but 1. it muſt deſcribe the ſtate of the Church in her ſeverall times. 2. The Head of the Church, who is alſo her Saviour & Protector in all her troubles. 3 The enemies of the Church, and their perſecutions and practiſes. 4. The Confuſion of thoſe Enemies and the puniſhments inflicted upon them in this world. 5 Their Everlaſting Damnation. 6 The Deliverance of the Church. And laſtly her Everlaſting Glory and felicity. Whether this be not ſo, I deſire to know upon the three Problems enſuing.
               My fift Problem therefore is concerning the Church,V. whether it be not with ſufficient plaineneſſe ſet forth unto us in theſe ſeven places.
               1 In the viſion of the ſeuen golden Candleſticks,
                     Revel. 1. in the middeſt whereof Chriſt Ieſus walketh.
               2 In the viſion of the Beaſts, and Elders in the midſt of whom is the Throne of God and of the Lamb.
                     Revel. 4.
               
               3 In the viſion of the Temple of God,
                     Revel. 12. ſet forth to be meaſured and opened.
               
                  4 In the viſion of the woman travelling with Child, which bringeth forth Chriſt Ieſus,
                     Revel. 12. and then is forced to flye into the wildernes, where ſhe muſt continue for a long time after.
               5 As Mount Sion whereupon the Lamb ſtandeth with all his Army.
                     chap. 14.
               
               6 As a Bride trimmed for her huſband.
                     chap. 19.
               
               7 As the City of God the new Ieruſalem whoſe wals are founded upon the Twelve Apoſtles.
                     chap. 21.
               
               
                  VI.My ſixth Problem is concerning our Saviour Chriſt, the great and mighty Lord Protectour, Prince, and Saviour of his Church, whether he alſo be not as many waies deſcribed unto us. viz.
               1 As the great Biſhop and Teacher of his Church, in the mideſt of the ſeuen golden Candleſticks.
                     R
                           •
                        vel. 1.
               
               2 As the Sacrifice for his Church,
                     chap. 4. and yet the Defender & Protectour in the middeſt of the Throne. a Lamb & a Lyon.
               
               
                  
                     chap. 10.3 As the great Lord of Heaven and Earth, Land & Sea,
                     D
                           •
                        u 32, 40 determining the end of Times, which is not revealed to any Angell.
                     Matth. 24.
               
               4 As the ſeede of the woman, and yet the Sonne of God.
                     Revel. 12.
               
               
                  
                     Revel. 14.5 As the Lamb ſtanding on mount Sion.
               6. As a moſt mightie & valiant captain,
                     chap. 19. or invincible Prince going forth to warre againſt his enemies, himſelf in the forefront, readie to charge them in the face.
               7 And laſtly as an inevitable Iudge both of quick & dead ſitting on his Throne of majeſty.
                     chap. 20.
               
               
                  VII.The ſeventh and laſt Problem therefore muſt needs be concerning the Enemies of the Church, whether we may not underſtand that of them, alſo in this booke there be named Seven. viz.
               
                  1 The Divel that old Serpent, the great Red Dragon with ſeven heads, and ten horns,
                     Rev. 2, 10. & 12, 9. and ſeven crowns upon his heads.
               2 Falſe Apoſtles, Hypocrites.
                     Rev. 2, 2.
               
               3 Nicholaitans. Hereticks.
                     chap. 2, 15.
               
               4 The followers of Iezabel and Balaam.
                     chap. 2, 20. Licentious and Idolatrous Teachers.
               5 The firſt beaſt riſing out of the Sea.
                     chap. 13. The old heatheniſh Roman Empire.
               6 The ſecond Beaſt riſing out of the Earth, which ſeemeth peculiarly to ſignifie Antichriſt unto us,
                     chap. 13. the proper and principall ſubject of this our Inveſtigation.
               7 Gog and Magog heatheniſh and open Perſecutors joyned with ſecret and inteſtine enemies, whereof wee have not here to ſpeake
               Theſe things ſeeme to me not altogether improper nor inconvenient. yet ſeeing I am no Prophet nor the ſonne of a Prophet, I dare not determine of them but leave them to Theologians to conſider. And with favorable permiſſion going forwards to ſearch and find out this great enemie of the Church of God: I demaund whether he be not fully deſcribed unto us in this book of the Revelation and other parts of Holy Scriptures, by ſeven notable and notorious Attributes.
               1 His place.
               2 His ſtate, or body politick, which muſt be ſubject vnto him and ſupport him.
               3 His Names.
               4 His Riſing.
               5 His Raigning.
               6 His words and actions.
               7 His Times. Of which Chriſt Ieſus aſſiſting I meane to ſpeak in order.
            
            
               
               J. Of the place of Antichrist.
               BY the rules of methode we ar taught to proceed à notioribus ad minus nota, frō things better known to infer & proue things not ſo well known: & of things knowen, they ſay thoſe are beſt knowen, which are viſible or ſenſible, and that the outward viſible & ſenſible adjuncts & accidents do very much conduce to finde out and diſcover the nature and eſſence of everie thing. Euen our divine Euangeliſt & Prophet, being taught by the ſpirit of God, ſeemeth to approue of theſe obſervations, where he beginneth his Epiſtle with this proteſtation. That which was from the beginning,
                  1 Iohn 1. 
                  which we haue heard, which we haue ſeene with theſe our eyes, &c. making the ſenſes a ſufficient proofe of the humanitie conjoyned with eternitie. This is the cauſe wherfore I thought beſt to begin my enquirie at the Place of Antichriſt. For what is more cleare and evident then that everie thing which hath an exiſtence, muſt haue a place, & he that ſeeketh for a thing out of his proper place, or element, as they now ſpeak, doth as if he ſhould ſeeke for a fiſh in the fire, or a ſwallow in the Sea. The learned Grecian,Aristotle. (the riches of whoſe learning I ſee no cauſe but it may be brought into the Holy citie according to the Prophecies) referreth place to the Predicament ubi, which importeth a Relation, & defineth it verie acutely, & I thinke truly to be 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Which I know not how well; but thus I think it may be rendred, The unmoueable and neareſt confine of that which compaſſeth any thing about. He calleth it unmoueable; becauſe in all motions it is not the place that removeth from the thing, nor with the thing, but the thing it ſelf is removed from one place to another. It muſt be neareſt, & indeed contiguous for els it can not be the place of one thing, but may

contein another; & it muſt compaſſe it about: for if it do but touch it in part, it is to be called adjacent, or contiguous, but not a place. The moſt learned Roman maketh place one of his four principia.
                  Varro. August. And the learned alſo of later age number it among thoſe things which neceſſarily concurre to the conſtitution of things Exiſtent.Cajc
                        •
                     an. By all agreed to be a Relatiue, which therefore muſt haue a Correlatiue. Everie place is ſo called, in reſpect of the bodie placed in it: Everie Continent in reſpect of the thing conteyned: everie Principle in reſpect of the thing proceeding from it: as a Father cannot be ſo called without a ſonne, nor a maſter without a ſervant, nor a cauſe without his effect. Herehence are derived thoſe rules and obſervations of the learned: Poſito corpore neceſſe eſ
                        •
                      poni locum; poſito loco, locatum poni neceſſe eſt. That Places muſt haue a due proportion of quantitie and magnitude, great things muſt haue greate places, for elſe they could not be compaſſed or comprehended in them. Litle things litle places, for els there would be vacuum. Things of long continuance, muſt haue places of equall duration, and places of long continuance are not appropriated to things that muſt ſoone periſh or paſſe away. Alſo Places muſt haue a due temperament of qualitie, agreeable to the things placed, and the things placed to the places, for elſe the one would deſtroy the other, and contraries can no more be and continue in one place, then in one ſubject. Theſe Obſervations being diſcovered unto us by the ordinarie light of nature, it hath pleaſed the God of nature whoſe majeſtie is terrible, his wiſdome incomprehenſible, and his waies paſt finding out; who numbereth the droppes of the Sea, and the ſand of the ſhore, who calleth the ſtarres by their names, and filleth heaven and earth, to deſcend into the narrow and poore capacitie of humane intelligence,

and by theſe outward viſible & ſenſible things to teach us (& who is a Teacher like to him?) to finde out things moſt obſcure and difficult. Let us ſee therefore what place, of what capacitie, quantitie and quality the great Governour and Diſpoſer of all things hath appointed for Antichriſt.
               And firſt I demand, whether it be not plainly deſcribed to be Rome, and that Chriſtian, upon the conſideration of theſe ſeven places of Scripture that follow? The firſt in the ſeventeenth chapter of the Revel. where it is ſet forth to be 1. That great citie.
                  
                     Revel. 17. 2, which was ſet upon ſeven hills. 3. which had ſeven heads or governours. 4. And ruled over the kings of the earth. 5, which in a myſterie is called Babylon. And 6. Moſt aboundant in riches & glory. 7, Yet moſt filthy in all fornication and uncleannes. Let us examine theſe words every one by it ſelf. It is firſt a great Citie. A city is by ſome conſidered as it conſiſteth of howſes and buildings neare joyning together: ſo Ninivie, Tyrus the old,
                     Gen. 10. Babylon, and others in the Scripture are called great citties: So Tully calleth Pergamus and Smirna cities,pro Flacco li. 1, de bell. li. and Caeſar alſo calleth Rome, Civitatem. taking that for a principall cauſe of his Parricidial warrs, ut Trib. plebis ex civitate expulſos reſtitueret, that he might reſtore the Tribunes of the people that were driven out of the city, who (as he ſaid before) were fled ex urbe:i. polit. others, as Ariſtotle &c. take a city which they call Polis, the word uſed here by the Apoſtle, to conſiſt of a multitude of men gathered together under the ſame lawes and government; which is alſo called univerſitas or reſpub.
                  de civ. dei. Cic. in ſomn. Iusta
                        •
                     . l. 2.
                   and ſo S. Auguſtin in ſome places. Some others alſo meaſure a city by the extent of her dominion, liberties, and franchiſes. Now theſe and other circumſtances being conſidered, I ſeek for a city wherein

all concurre to make it great, & for the firſt, I aske whether ever anie citie haue had a téſtimonie of greatnes, like to that which Lucan thus deſcribeth?

                     Vrbem populis victiſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         frequentem
                     Gentibus, & generis coeat ſi turba capacem
                     Humani.
                           Lucan. 1, 1, —
                  
A Citie populous, full of conquered nations, and able to receaue all mankinde, if they ſhould come together. I thinke it cannot be denyed, but this was a verie great citie,v
                        •
                     bis appellatio muris, Romae contineutibus aedificiis. finitur. LL. de verb. Sig. that was able to receaue humanum genus, all mankind. And yet that we may ſee plainly, that he meant it of the citie, as it conſiſted of walles and buildings, he nameth it, firſt urbem, and then goeth forward,
               
                  — Cum preſsus ab hoſte
                  Clauditur externis Romanus miles in oris.
                  Effugit exiguo nocturna pericula vallo:
                  Tu tantum audito bellorum nomine Roma
                  Deſereris; nox una tuis non credita muris.
               
               What cittie in the world, was like to this great cittie?
                     Rev. 18, 18. truly therefore ſayth our divine Apoſtle. But this was poeticall and hiperbolicall, may ſome ſay, let us heare a teſtimonie hiſtoricall: Although I thinke, that learned poet would never haue beene ſo bold, or impudent, to giue ſuch an attribute of greatnes to Rome, if it had not been a verie great cittie, and doubtleſſe the greateſt then known in the world; yet let us heare Hiſtorians. Truly Lipſius (out of Martinus Polonus and Pliny) ſayth, the walles of Rome were firſt xlij. miles in compaſſe, and out of Vopiſcus,
                  de magnitud. Rom. Blondus in Romanist. that they were afterwards enlarged to 50 miles compaſſe, but of the ſuburbes, ſi quis intuens, magnitudinem Romae velit exquirere, fruſtra eum fore, & haeſurum ubi deſinat urbs, ubi incipiat. ex Dionis. So it was a great cittie within the walles,Herodot. l. 1.
                   and a greater without. It ſeemeth indeed by Herodotus that

the walles of old Babylon were 160 ſtadia on everie ſide ſquare: but note, that Babylon was all within the walles, and ſo Rome in reſpect of her ſuburbs & buildings adjoyning, was much greater, as by this teſtimonie of Lipſius out of Dioniſ. appeareth. Might not this then well be called Babylon the great, in reſpect of the other?
               But heare what Pliny ſaith both of Babylon and Rome. Of Babylon firſt he ſayth,Plin. lib. 3.
                   
                  Babylon ſexaginta millia paſſuum, amplexa muris. Of Rome; Effecit paſſuum per directum xxx. millia DCC. LXV. which xxx miles and three quarters being taken for the diameter, muſt make the circumference to be at the leaſt 92 miles. which is farre aboue the reckning of Lipſius. And yet ſaith Pliny farther: Ad extrema verò tectorum cum castris praetoriis a Milliario in Capite Rom. fori ſtatuto per vicos omnium viarum menſura colligit, paulò amplius ſeptuaginta millia paſſ. And if that be taken for the Diameter of Rome and the ſuburbs, then muſt the compaſſe be almoſt 200 miles. Quo ſi quis (ſaith he againe) altitudinem tectorum addat, dignam profecto aestimationem concipiat, fateatur
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      nullius urbis magnitudinē in toto orbe potuiſſe comparari.
               
               And it is alſo to be obſerved what the ſame Pliny writes of Babylon,Plin. lib. 6.
                   in the time of Veſpatian, that it was then brought to ſolitude being exhauſted by the vicinitie of Seleucia, which was built for that purpoſe. And this was before the exile of Iohn in Pathmos, where he ſaw the Revelation, and therefore this great cittie could not be literall Babylon, or Babylon in Chaldea, which then was not great; but myſticall Babylon, that cittie Rome, which was then at the greateſt.
               Let us goe to the next conſideration, where a cittie is ſaid to conſiſt of a multitude or ſocietie of men, gathered together, and we ſhall finde a far greater cauſe to aske the

queſtion of our Prophet, what cittie was ever like it? for what cittie in the world can we finde ſo famous, for number of Tribes, and multitude of citizens, as Rome?Livy. Alex. ab Alex. l. 1, c. 17.
                   The Tribes of Rome were at the leaſt fiue and thirtie, everie one conſiſting of many thouſand citizens, whereas the two kingdomes of Iudah and Iſrael had but twelue; yea the mightie kingdome of Perſia, which afterwards grewe ſo great, had but twelue in the beginning.Herod. 1. Xenoph. Grop. l. 1. Liv. l. 10, in fiue 1. belli Punici lustro undeuiceſimo. Tacit. An. 11 Faſc. Temp. The number of Roman Citizens in their weake eſtate was found to be aboue two hundred and fiftie thouſand: but in the Emperor Claudius his time, it is ſaid to haue been aboue threeſcore & eight hundred thouſand, and ſo in Auguſtus time, in which number women, children, ſervants and forriners not infranchiſed (though inhabiting) were not conteyned. What cittie therefore was ever like to this great cittie? Againe if we conſider the extent of her franchiſes, and liberties, not onely the Volſci, Hernici, Lucani, Appuli, Campani,
                  Cic. offi. 1.
                   
                  Hetruſei and other nations of Italy, but the Tranſpadani and Tranſalpini the Gawles and Spaniards were receaved into the freedome: nor the Europeans onely, but thoſe of Aſia; S. Paul borne at Tarſus in Cilicia averreth himſelf before a Roman Iudge to be a citizen of Rome free borne.
                     Act. 22. And for her dominion it ſeemeth to be true, that the Poet ſayth, that the cittie of Rome was as great as the world:
               
                  Gentibus est aliis Tellus data limite certo;
                  Romana ſpatium eſt urbis & orbis idem.
                  
                     So againe:
                  
                  Roma armis terras, ratibus
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſubegerat undas:
                  At
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      iidem fines urbis & orbis erant.
               
               So Dioniſius Halicarnaſſeus calleth it, Vrbem terrae, mariſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      dominam. Claudianus Cuncti gens omnia ſumus. & many like other ſentences do we meet with in their bookes. Neither was this the opinion of the poets, or vulgar onely,

but their learned lawiers in the end grew to be of the ſame judgment,Panorm. 
                  Vbi Caeſar, ibi Roma, whereſoever Ceſar is, there is alſo Rome. What cittie therefore was ever in the world in greatnes like to this? The uſe that is commonly made of this conſideration is none other, but to admire and extoll, the majeſtie of Rome, as Lipſius doth in admirandis de magnit. Romana. but the true and worthie uſe thereof, is to acknowledge the truth of Gods word, revealed in this and other prophecies, which (we ſee) are confirmed by the teſtimonies of Heathen men, that never heard of them.
               
                  Theſe certaine Typographies plain'y alſo refell the idle opinions of thoſe that take Babylon or Antichrist for the whole multitude of the ungodly.2. The ſecond note is that it is ſeated upon ſeven hilles, & what cittie was ever ſo famous or renowmed for ſeven hilles, as Rome hath been.
               
                  Quae nunc de ſeptem totum circumſpicit orbem
                  Montibus, imperii Roma deum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      locus. ſaith Ovid.
                  
               
               and Propert. ſeptem urbs alta jugis.
               
               And the names of theſe hilles are common in their hiſtories, Palatinus, Caelius, Tarpeius which is alſo called Capitolinus, Aventinus, Eſquilinus, Viminalis, and Quirinalis.
               
               3. Thirdly, what cittie was ever ſo noted for ſeven kinds of ſupream governours, whereof every one had the power of a king, ſummum imperium, power of life and death, from which there was no provocation, or appeale? All of them are expreſly named, both by Livy and Tacitus, their principall Hiſtorians; Kings, Conſuls, Dictators, Decemvirs, Tribunes, Caeſars, and Pontif. Max.
               
               4. Fourthly, what cittie did ever ſo powerfully rule & command over the kings of the earth, as this hath done? All other Empires, and Imperiall citties had their ſeverall Emperors, kings or princes, and were ſubject to them, and ruled by them; as the Aſsirian, Perſian, Grecian, Tartarian, Turkiſh, Cathaian, Abiſsine, Empires; the Sirian, Egyptian, Ethiopian, Parthian, Median, Indian and Macedonian kingdomes

and all their citties; the great citties of Ninive, Perſepolis, Ecbatana, Constantinople, Traperus, Mexico, Quinzay, Memphis, Ocmus, & all other citties, that we read of, even Babylon it ſelf was ruled by kings and Emperors,Dion. Hal. onely Rome was called Terrae mariſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      domina.Cic. pro prodom
                           •
                        . Et illa populus est dominus regum, victor at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Imperator omnium gentium, ſayth Tully. — Illa inclita Roma
               
               
                  Imperium terris, animos aequavit Olimpo, ſaith Virgil. But what need I ſeek or cite forrein teſtimonies,1 Mach. 8, 13 chap. 15. The book of Machabees giveth us ample proofes of the high and predominant power of Rome,See alſo Brightm. in Dan. c. 11.
                   ſhewing how they commanded the great Kings of Egypt and Aſia, Ptolomee, Demetrius, Arſaces, Attalus, and others, to abſtain from warre againſt the Iewes, and that command was obayed. what City ever in the world did the like?
               Fiftly for the myſticall name of Babilon,See theſe authors cited by Riberain Apo. & recited by Paraeus. Aug de civit. dei. lib. 18. Roma velut altera Babylon. Idem. Occidentalis Babylon, & paſsim. See M. Downam his treat. of Antichrist lib. 1, ca 2. Pſal. 137.
                   I think it needleſſe to diſpute to whom it belongeth, ſeeing S. Auguſtin, S. Ierom, Tertul. Theophilact. Oroſius, Oecumenius, Euſebius and many others, both old and new haue expreſly applyed it to Rome, and ſo cleared that point alſo, and that upon great reaſons: Firſt in regard of the greatneſſe and largenes of dominion, wherein Rome and Babylon excelled the other two Monarchies. Secondly for continuance, for theſe two continued longer, and immediately upon the decay of Babylon, Rome began to growe. Velut prioris filia, ſaith Auguſtine. Thirdly for cruelty againſt the ſaincts, for of Babylon the firſt, the Prophets teſtifie ſufficiently. So Rome is by Tertullian called Babylon, Quia ſanctorum debellatrix. Fourthly for promiſcuous filthines beyond others. Fiftly for Idolatry.Lipſius in Epist. Sixtly for confuſion morum aeris—linguae ſaith Lipſius. Seuenthly for power &

riches, whereof I haue now to ſpeak. For her power riches and glory mentioned in the text, I appeale to them that haue recorded, that the wealth of all the world was in Rome, and called it Mundi compendium, & in this Inventorie of riches & glorie, is to be caſt alſo the account of their innumerable victories, the greatnes of their Empire; their prudence and policie in government; their providence, fortitude & induſtry in war, their learning and eloquence, the juſtice, temperance and other morall vertues which appeared in ſome of them, the riches of their minds, aſwell as of their outward eſtate,De doct. chr. l. 2. cir. ſinē. wherein they excelled all the world: and ſo doth S. Auguſtin call the excellent learning, morality &c. of the heathen,Viri pati mulichria mu
                        •
                     ieres pudicitiam in propatu'o habere. Salust. much more in Tacit. Annal. Sueton. in vita Virgil. in priap. Ovid. Inv ſat 6. Tibul. Catul. Propert. Mar. Hor. ſ
                        •
                     r. l. 2, 3 & 
                        •
                     . 1, ſat. 2. de civ. l. 3.
                   the gold and ſilver of Egipt. And laſtly for their fornication and beaſtlines, I deſire them to ſpeake that haue read their beſt authours▪ Salust, Tacitus, Sueton, virgil, Ovid, Iuvenal, and others, Horace confeſſeth of himſelf Mille puella
                        •
                     ū, puero
                        •
                     ū mille furores. Caeſar was called omnium virorum mulier, et omnium mulierum vir, And who hath not heard of the beaſtlines of Tiberius and Caligula, Claudius and Nero; in a word, it is almoſt incredible, and moſt abhominable, what they write in this kinde, either of themſelves, or one of another, But if we take fornication in this place for the ſpirituall adulterie, which is Idolatry. They that read S. Auguſtine de Civ. Dei, Livy, and others of their own authours doe know, that (beſides their Majores deos, and four hundred and four and twenty Temples, amongſt which was the Pantheon or Temple of all Devils (as Tertullian well calleth it) and the Temple of the city it ſelf,
                     1 ipſ.
                        •
                     x 
                        ••
                     tit. Imperij. See more i
                        •
                      Chenu
                        •
                     i exam c
                        •
                     nc. Trident. de magin. which they worſhipped as a Goddeſſe) beſides all theſe, and their Princes whom they deified after their death, every houſe had Penates and Minores

deos, ſo that their Idols were innumerable.Hereupon as ſome called Rome Epitomen 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . ſo ſome christians called it Epitomen 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 2 Chron. 28, 23.
                   
                  Religione (ſaith Tully truly, who knew no religion but Idolatry) omnes gentes nationeſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſuperavimus. And with this kinde of fornication they made all nations drunk, for every one ſeeing them ſo proſperous and victorious would have their gods, and worſhip them in hope like Achaz to proſper and overcome as they did. Now therefore laying all theſe things together, I aſk whether they can be applyed to any other Place in the world, but onely to Rome? To this alſo may be added conſuetudo loquendi interpres optima, which amongſt the auncient Iewes of the Sanhedrin was,Buxter
                        •
                     . ex cod. Sauhedr. by the name of the city to underſtand Rome, as accounting none elſe worthy or fit to carry that name, note alſo that the Holy ghoſt in the laſt verſe of the 17 ch. of the Apoc. addeth an article of emphaſis and diſtinction to every word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
&c. Alſo Magister in princip. gloſſae epiſtolae ad Romanos telleth us that, cum dicitur Apoſtolus intelligitur Paulus, cum dicitur urbs intelligitur Roma: which common notice may be the cauſe why our Prophet did ſo much ingeminate that article, to ſhew that he ſpake of a city well inough knowen to be ſuch viz. Great and Imperiall. And if this be cleare and evident, that by the name of the Great cittie, and of Babylon in this Revelation, Rome, and onely Rome is meant this I hope will ſerue to illuſtrate other places; As for example, the ſecond place,
                     Rev. 11. where it is ſaid that the beaſt ſhall make warre against the two witneſſes of God, and ſhall overcome them and kill them. And their dead bodies ſhall ly in the ſtreets of the great City, which ſpiritually is called Sodom and Egipt where alſo our Lord was crucified; Although ſome doubt might be conceived of the names of Egypt and Sodom in this place, and

where our Lord was crucified, yet the name of the Great cittie, ought by the reaſons & authorities aforeſaid, to hold us faſt to Rome. For none elſe was then great, nor worthie to be ſo called, as I haue ſhewed before. Let us ſee then how theſe names Sodome and Egypt may be applied to Rome, and therein firſt what it is to be ſpiritually called. There be many ſpirits mentioned in the ſcriptures, but here I think that ſpirit is meant, which is ſpoken of by our Lord in the Goſpell,
                     Ioh. 14, 17. & 16, 13. euen the ſpirit of truth, which ſhall lead us into all truth, and ſo to be ſpiritually called, is to be truly ſo called, according to their works, effects, and fruits, as the ſpirit of truth teacheth us to call things. Whether doth not the Prophet Ieremie explain this, in altering the name of Paſhur;
                     Ier. 20, 3. whether doth not our Saviour explain it,
                     Matth. 7. when he ſayth, Ye ſhall know them by their fruits, do men gather grapes of thornes, or figs of thiſtles? as if he ſhould ſay, men do not call that a thorne, of which they gather grapes, nor that a thiſtle, of which they gather figges: but that is called a vine, and this a fig-tree. For it is not an evill tree that bringeth forth good fruits, nor a good tree that bringeth forth evill fruits.
                     Luc. 6, 46. And why do ye call me Maſter, and do not the things that I ſpeak: if I be a maſter, where is my fear,
                     Mal. 1, 6. ſayth the Lord? If a father, where is my loue? And who art thou,
                     Iohn 1. ſay the Phariſes to Iohn Baptiſt, The voice of him that cryeth in the wildernes, Make ſtraite the wayes of the Lord ſayth S. Iohn;
                     Matth. 11. as if he ſhould ſay, I am the preacher of repentance againſt the coming of the Meſſiah; Art thou he that ſhould come? ſaith he again: go tell him (ſaith our Saviour) The deaf heare, the blinde receaue ſight, the lame walk, the leapers are cleanſed, &c. if I do the works of the Meſsiah, I am he: and if ye were Abrahams children,
                     Iohn 8. ye would do the works of Abraham. Whereupon I aſke, what is the meaning of all theſe places, but to

teach us to judge and ſpeak of men by their works, as we doe of trees by their fruits? So then, where we finde the works of Sodom and Egypt, that muſt be called Sodom & Egypt ſpiritually, that is, truly,
                     Eſa. 1, 10. as the ſpirit of truth hath taught us to ſpeak,
                     Ezech 16. and as the Prophets uſe to ſpeak. Now the workes of Sodom, and Egypt were beaſtly filthines,
                  
                     Gen. 19. & 12, 15. & 39, 13. and bloudie crueltie, as we read in the ſcripture, and beſides,
                     Exod. 1.14. in Egypt alſo we finde, infinite Idolatrie, whereof there are ſufficient teſtimonies in the ſcripture,
                     Num. 3, 3. beſides that which heathen men do write to the ſame purpoſe,
                     Ier. 43. namely Herodotus, Iuvenal. Diod. Sic. Anaxandrid. and Plutarch.
                  
                     Eſa. 30. And were not theſe the works of Rome in S. Iohns time? Read their own Authors, Tacitus, Sueton, Virgil. and he reſt that I cited before, concerning their horrible filthines and Idolatrie. Read the Eccleſiaſtick Hiſtories of their perſecutions, and their beſt Hiſtorians, Tacitus & Suetonius of their tyrannies & crueltie. Are they not ſtill the works of Rome in theſe later times? Read Petrach, Mantuan, Platina, Bleſenſis. Roma est jam tota lupanar, ſayth one; It is notorious that almoſt all the Cardinals of Rome haue their Manfrones Cinaedos, ſayth another, who by authorities and arguments drawn out of Iacobatius, & other authors of the Romaniſts, without exception, fully proveth, that there is not now, nor hath beene for many yeares paſt any true Pope, nor lawfull Cardinall, but that they are all Intruders, Simoniakes, Sodomites, &c. and ſo haue been of long time, and therefore by the ſentence of the Pope himſelf,
                     Dist. 23. in the Decree, declared to be Antichrist. The abhominable acts of Iulius the III, that made his Ganymede a Cardinall, & created Iohannes Caſa, Archb. of Beneventum, & Legate à Latere, who ſet forth a book in commendation of that crying ſin, are not yet forgotten, and that booke alſo paſſed currant a long time amongſt them without controule. The bloudy

actions of Aluiſius, Borgia, Diazius, Minerius, Gardner, Bonner, the murdering Dominican in France, and the Poudertraitors in England, and many others, were not onely not diſallowed by them, but praiſed and commended, yet Qui non vetat peccare, cum p
                        •
                     ſsit, jubet, ſaith the Pagan, & I deſire to know, whether any man ever ſaw, read or heard of any nation, Chriſtian, Iew, or Turke, Saracen or Savage, wherein Sodomie hath been ſo publiquely practiſed & allowed, as in Rome? Their Idols and images alſo, are knowen to be innumerable, whereof we ſhall ſpeake more hereafter. What ſhall we ſay then of the fourth note of this place, where alſo our Lord was crucified? In Ieruſalem, ſayth the Babylonian: but Ieruſalem at the time of the writing of this Apocalyps, was ſo far from being a great cittie, that it was no cittie at all, for it was utterly deſtroyed before by Titus. And if it had been then a cittie, yet was it far from being great, or bearing rule over kings, and although Ieruſalem be ſome time called the holy cittie, yet is it never called the great cittie,Hierom. 
                  Hieruſalem ſanctior locus rupe tarpeìa, &c. See more in the Epiſtle of S. Hierom to Marcella, inviting her to come to Bethleem, and likewiſe in his Epiſtle written in the name of Paula and Euſtochia to the ſame Marcella, to the ſame purpoſe, wherein he proveth, that this name of the great cittie could not be giuen to Hieruſalem; &c. but rather to Rome, or to the world &c. the chief cittie whereof, is Rome. Neyther yet are we directed to the name of Hieruſalem, but to that place, wherein it is ſpiritually ſayd, that our Lord was crucified. Ieruſalem is not ſpoken of in the text, neither indeed was our Lord crucified in Hieruſalem, but extra portas, without the gates, as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh.
                     Hebr. 13, 12. Let them anſwer then, who haue read the Goſpell,
                     Iohn 19. by whom was our Saviour accuſed? who condemned him? what kinde of capitall puniſhment did

he ſuffer? who crucifyed him? in what place? for what crime or offence? or upon what accuſatiō was he brought in queſtion? was he not accuſed by them that cryed, we haue no king but Caeſar the Roman Emperor? was not Pilate the Roman he that condemned him? was not the cauſe pretended, for that he ſpake againſt Caeſar, in making himſelf a king? was it not by that kinde of puniſhment & execution,Vide Scalig in notis ad Ioh. 18, 31.
                   which by learned men is obſerved to haue been properly uſed by the Romans? were they not Roman ſouldiers by whom he was crucifyed? was it not extra portas Ieruſalem? & was it not all done by the power of Caeſar? and what followeth of all this, Vbi Caeſar, ibi Roma, where Caeſar is there is Rome, ſayd the old Lawiers, as the new ſay now a dayes, Vbi Papa, ibi Roma,
                  Panorm. where the Pope is there is Rome. To this adde, that all voide places, and places appointed for publique execution of juſtice were by Roman civill Law, Iuris publici, the proper demeanes of the Empire of Rome. Now it is manifeſt that Golgatha was the common place of execution, and therefore de Iure publico of right belonging to Rome. We muſt therefore confeſſe, that our Lord was crucifyed in Ròme, unleſſe we ſhall thinke, that S. Iohn, yea the ſpirit of God, do not ſpeak properly; And if he had meant the old Ieruſalem, what needed ſo many words, or circumſtances to deſcribe it?
               Theſe four points therefore being cleared, it is not hard to apply three others unto it, which are mentioned in the ſame place of ſcripture, to make up the number of ſeuen, viz. 5. That this is the ſame great cittie, where the beaſt ſhould make warre againſt the ſaincts: and 6, where he ſhould kill the witneſſes of God: and 7, where their dead bodies ſhould lye in the ſtreets, and therefore the place of Antichriſt.
               A third ſcripture ſpeaking of the place of Antichriſt,
                     Rev. 4. is

that where her deſtruction is briefly denounced, and there it is called Babylon that great cittie, the ſpirit of God giving us thereby to underſtand, that he would haue that cittie ſeuen times at leaſt in this booke called Babylon the great, to be ſufficiently known unto us, to be Rome, the ſecond Babylon, which then was great, & not the old Babylon, which neither in her beſt eſtate was able to compare with the greatnes of Rome, and in the time of S. Iohn was in great decay, having beene twiſe or thriſe before taken, ſacked and ſpoyled; namely firſt by Cyrus,
                     Dan. 5. drawing & diverting Euphrates, while Belſhazzar ſate feaſting and drinking. Secondly by Darius with the help of Zopirus,Herod. lib 3. Iustin. who reduced it to an abſolute ſubjection under the Perſians, and with the reſt of that Empire, it was conquered by Alexander the Great,Diod. Sic. l. 19.
                   and after his time, it was ſpoyled againe by Demetrius, and thereupon forſaken by her inhabitants, and never roſe afterward to any greatnes, authoritie or power. Whereupon S. Auguſtine obſerveth, that as the Aſſyrian monarchie decayed, ſo Rome the ſecond Babylon, and as it were the daughter of the firſt grew, and ſo it was in S. Iohns time, the great cittie, Ladie of the world, and governed onely by Caeſars, one of her ſeuen Heads, which ruled over the kings of the earth.
               A fourth ſcripture is that,
                     Rev. 18. wherein her deſtruction is much more largely and particularly deſcribed by ſeuen notable attributes, moſt agreeable to Rome. 1, She is called againe Babylon. 2, That great cittie. 3, With whom the kings and nations of the earth haue committed fornication. 4, Moſt proud and vaine-glorious, for ſhe ſayth: I ſit as a queen, and am no widow. And ſo Tully calleth her,Vide Lip
                        •
                     . de magn
                        ••
                      Rom. 
                  Princeps omnium terrarum: and Frontinus, regina & domina orbis: and beyond all theſe Martial, Terrarum

Dea Gentium
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Roma. 5, Therefore in the text ſhe is truly called mightie. 6, Abounding in all riches and Treaſures, Non auro tectiſve modus. And 7,Lucan. lib. 1.
                   abounding in all delicates and pleaſures, abundantes voluptates.
                  Livy in prol. Of which points I haue ſaid ſomewhat before, and for the two laſt notes of the ſuper-aboundance of their riches, and wantonnes in pleaſures and delicates, I will cite but two examples more out of Horace. whereof the firſt ſhall not be of any of their Princes, Senators, or Patritii, no nor yet of their Equites or Gentlemen but of the meaneſt ſort:
               
                  Quinti progenies Arri, par nobile fratrum
                  Nequitia & nugis. — A couple of knaues:
                     Horat. Serm.▪ lib. 2, ſat. 3.
                     
                  
                  Luſcinias ſoliti impenſo prandere coemptas.
               
               They were wont to dine upon Nightingales though verie deerely bought. A diſh that I thinke no Prince in Chriſtendome would deſire for any good taſte, nor theſe men, but for their luxurious prodigalitie. And yet ſee another not of Antonius, or Cleopatra, but of a ſtage players ſonne:
               
                  Filius Aeſopi detractam ex aure Metellae
                  (Scilicet ut decies ſolidum exorberet) aceto
                  Diluit in ſignem baccam. —
               
               O braue drinker that diſſolved in vinegar a pearle worth fiue and twentie thouſand Crownes (as the Interpreters expound it▪
                  in Eng. coine about 6250 pound, if you take theſe crownes to be Engliſh. taken from the eare of the Ladie Metella, that he might drinke it of at a draught. I would faine knowe whether theſe men did more abound in riches or in Luxurie, in wealth or in wantonnes, that were ſo coſtly luxurious in their meats and drinks.Ioſeph, antiq. lb. 18.
                   Neither do I now marvail at the ſumme which another Roman gentleman offred to expugne the chaſtitie of the Ladie Paulina being 25 Myriades drachmarum everie 100

drachmae, being accounted worth 58 ſhil. 4 pence, and conſequently, amounting in our Engliſh coin to aboue 7290 pounds. what cittie was ever like to this in treaſures or filthie pleaſures?
               But I haſt to a fift place of ſcripture which will deſerv both longer ſtay and better conſideration. And becauſe I ſhall herein differ not a little from all other interpreters that I have read, I have the greater reaſon to continue my courſe in Problems.
                     Rev. 16 The text of Scripture is the Prophecy of Armageddon or Armagedon, noted for a place where the Kings of the earth are gathered together to the battell of the great day of God almighty. The word is Hebrew, and becauſe the Hebrew names by reaſon of the difference of the points are ſubject to diverſe manner of readings I would firſt learn whether it may not be taken for Harmegeddon which ſignifieth the mountain of pleaſant and precious fruites? For ſo the word Meged importeth,
                     Cant. 4, 13. as it is expounded in other parts of the Scripture,
                     Gen. 24, 53. to which is added the Hebrew letter Nun,
                  
                     Ezr. 1, 6. Buxtorf.
                   a termination aſwell of the Feminine as of the Maſculine and common gender, to note that thoſe precious and pleaſant fruites belong to women aſwell as to men. Now this doth plainely agree with that which in the former place hath beene obſerved of Rome the ſecond Babylon, viz. that ſhe abóundeth in riches delicates and wantonnes, and it hath an Antitheſis to the deſcription of mount Sion, as it is expreſſed unto us both in the 14. chap. of this Revelation and in the ſecond Pſalm.
                     Pſal. 2. For there ſaith God I haue ſet my King upon Sion Har-codſhi, the mountain of my holynes. But here the Kings and Princes of the earth are gathered to Har-megeddon the mountain of the precious and pleaſant fruits of the earth. The companie

of the Lamb upon Mount Sion,
                     Rev. 14. are ſuch as haue not defiled themſelues with women. But theſe pleaſant and precious fruits belong to women as well as men. And the like Antitheſis may be noted in other places of the ſcripture, as where the Prophet prayeth to be delivered from men of this world, which haue their portion in this life,
                     Pſalm. 17. & whoſe bellies God filleth with his ſecret treaſure: But I (ſayth he) will behould thy face in righteouſnes. So the Apoſtle deſcribeth certain men, whoſe God is their belly,
                     Phil. 3. and who minde earthly things. But our converſation (ſayth he)is in heauen: ſo the true church of Chriſt is ſet forth, to be adorned with all heauenly graces. Fayth, hope and charitie;
                     Rev 12. namely, the Sun of righteouſnes to cloth her in fayth, the ſtarres to crowne her with light of truth, and hope of immortalitie, preached by the twelue Apoſtles; & the moone and all mutable earthly things to ſuppor
                     •
                   her in works of charitie, or to be deſpiſed and troden under foot in reſpect of eternitie. But the Antichriſtian Church ſitteth like a Queene of earthly felicities, clothed with purple, ſkarlet,
                     Rev. 17. pearles, gold, and precious ſtones, abounding in all pleaſures & delights, & ſupported by the nations of the world. Neither is the other circumſtance to be neglected, namely the meeting and congregation of Princes & Rulers of the earth, noted as well in the ſecond Pſalme, as here in the Revelation, in regard whereof,Livy, du
                        •
                     in, Pla
                        •
                     ma in ſal. 2.
                   Rome was in ancient time called Regum urbs, for the multitude and magnificent ſtate of their Senators: ſo did the Emperor Conſtance alſo call it in the latter time, & ſo it may be ſtill called, for the number, pompe, and glorie of their Cardinals, who will be honoured, and accounted princes. Another queſtion would I aske, whether this word may not thus be diſtinguiſhed, Arma-geddon, with the firſt Alpha radicall, to ſignifie the pallace, or caſtle of the Troupes of women, as well as men.

Now, where that pallace or caſtle is, where women abounding in treaſures and pleaſures, are beſt mainteyned and defended. I would haue them to anſwer, that haue ſeene Rome of late, or that haue read theſe verſes made for her commendation:
               
                  Q
                        •
                     ot cae
                        ••
                     m ſi elias,Vide Abbat. dem. Anti
                           •
                        h. cap. 11.
                      tot habet tua Roma puellas:
                  Paſcua quot
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      haedos, tot habet tua Roma Cynaedos.
               
               And many ſuch like, or the faculties diſpenſations pardons and decrees, flowing from the caſtle of S. Angelo, and the pallace of Lateran in their favour. And laſtly, upon the ſame word I would aske, whether that the Hebrew word, which in the Greek writing is Armageddon, may not by an eaſie tranſpoſition,So Mo
                        •
                     ines maketh it Ha. Romagedah to ſignifie the destruction of Rome. onely of one letter and a prick in the Hebrew, be read and taken for Romageddon; & ſo by name lead us to Rome, that high cittie; for ſo the word Rom, alſo in Hebrew ſignifieth: and their own Authors call it ſeptem urbs alta jugis,
                  Hieron. 
                  at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      altae maenia Romae, where princely men as the Cardinals and women abounding in treaſures and pleaſures, as the Corteſanaes are gathered together. Which tranſpoſition of a letter is verie uſuall in the Hebrew, and warranted by many examples of the holy Scripture. And upon all theſe precedent places & circumſtances I demand,Dan. 7, 1. & paſſim alibi. whether it be poſſible to apply theſe prophecies to any cittie or place in the world beſides Rome? True ſayth the Babylonian, it is to be underſtood of Rome, (for ſo they confeſſe of late,1 Pet. 5. upon the word of S. Peter) but Heathen not Chriſtian. To omit that anſwer, which is obvious, that the old Ethnick Empire of Rome was the impediment, & therefore could not be the ſeat of Antichriſt, and that another Ethnick Empire ſhould be erected there towards the end of the world is incredible; and if it ſhould, yet it could not fulfill the Prophecies, for many reaſons which may be produced, and to inſtance, becauſe Antichrist muſt be one

of the ſeauen heads of Rome, whereof fiue were fallen in S. Iohns time, and the Empire was one, and the ſeuenth muſt be reveled, after the impediment removed: yet to paſſe by all theſe, conſider of two textes more, which ſhall not come ſingle, but eyther of them fortified with an Authenticall conteſtis.
               
               The ſixth ſcripture then, ſpeaking of the Place of Antichriſt, telleth us plainly,
                     
                        2 Theſ. 2. August. de civ. dei. l. 20 cap. 19. Nulli dubliim est cum de Antichristo ista dixiſ
                           ••
                        , &c.
                     Antichristus in domo domini in ſede Christi ſedebit. Ambroſ. in locum. Male Ecc'eſiam Dei in tectis aedificiiſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         veneramini, Anne ambiguum est Antichristum in his eſſe ſeſsurum. Hilar. contra Aux.
                   that it muſt be the Temple of God. It is the word of S. Paul, which would never haue called the Ethnike ſtate of Rome, the Temple of God. It muſt therefore be underſtood of the church of God, & ſo the Fathers take it without all doubt or queſtion, & that in Rome, for out of Rome it is in vain to ſeeke, as by the former places may fully appear.
               And yet this text goeth not ſingle, but ſeemes to be drawn out of an ancient prophecie of the Euangelicall Prophet, where he bringeth in the prince of the firſt Babylon, a tipe of the ſecond, uſing theſe words: I will aſcend into heauen,
                  
                     Eſa. 14. 
                  and exalt my throne aboue, beſide the ſtarres of God. I will ſit alſo upon the mount of the Church or Congregation. ſo farr the Prophet. Now lay the words of the Apoſtle to them. That man of ſinne exalteth himſelfe aboue all that is called God▪ or that is worſhiped, ſo that he doth ſit in the Temple of God, ſhewing himſelf, that he is God. On the mount of the Church, ſayth the one. In the Temple of God, ſayth the other. The Temple of God was in Ieruſalem ſaith the Babylonian.Object. Anſw. But that is excluded by all the former places of Scripture, moſt ſignall and ſignificant. I demande then, how this place can be underſtood, but of the Church of God in Rome? and who can be ſaid, or ever could be ſaid, to ſit in that Church as God, but the Pope?
               
                  But marke the ſeauenth, and ſee whether yet againe Rome, and the Church of God in Rome, be not preciſely deſcribed. It is in the Prophecie of Daniel, that beloved Prophet, as our Euangeliſt was the beloved diſciple. He ſhall plant (ſaith he) the Tabernacles of his Pallace betweene the ſeas,
                  
                     Dan. 11, 45. 
                  In the Glorious mountaine of Holynes; Neither goeth this place alone, but commeth with a witnes; For the like is ſaid of the King of Tyrus, a tipe alſo of Antichriſt, in that ſevere Prieſt and Prophet Ezechiel. Thou hast ſayd, I am a God,
                  
                     Ezek. 28. 
                  I ſit in the ſeat of God, in the midest of the ſeas. That which Daniel ſignifyed by ſetting his Pallace betweene the ſeas, in the glorious holy Mountain; that Ezekiel expreſſeth, by ſitting in the ſeat of God, in the middeſt of the ſeas, and whether both theſe do not prefigure unto us the Church of Rome: I deſire the Learned to judge. It muſt be a mountaine of Holynes,
                  
                     Eſa. 11, 9. and the ſeate of God, which are the proper Titles of the Church in the old Prophets. And this church muſt not be an obſcure,
                  
                     Pſa. 2 & 48. Zach 8, 3. or litle, but a glorious church; and this Glorious church muſt be betweene two ſeas; How this can be applyed to Tyrus, Babylon, Ieruſalem, Conſtantinople, or to any other cittie in the world beſide Rome, I ask of all that know the two famous ſeas that imbrace Italie, whereof the one is called MarC ſuperum, Adriaticum, or the Gulfe of Venice: the other is Mare Inferum, Tirihenum, or the Straights? both mentioned by Vergil in one verſe, for the glorie of Italie.
               An mare quod ſupera memorem, quod
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   alluit infra?
               Betweene theſe two ſeas Rome was, and is ſeated, which was in the beginning a church truly glorious, both for the Martyrdome of many godly men, & for their conſtant profeſſion of the truth againſt Heretikes (for I will not detract the leaſt thing from them) and for that it was the Imperiall cittie. For which cauſe it was called Prima ſedes, which

was the greateſt title that it had for 400 yeares.Proſper was first Pope Leo his ſecretarie. But after that, Pope Leo the eloquent Orator, and Proſper his familiar friend, or Secretarie, an excellent Poet, began to aſcribe higher titles unto it:
               
                  — Peſlem ſubeuntem prima recidit.Archb. of Canterb. in his anſwer to D. Hill. Proſper in lib. de ingratis. Marke the ſtatelines of theſe verſes, with the reſonans of his letters S. P. Q. R.
                     
                  
                  Sedes Roma Petri, quae Pastoralis honoris
                  Facta caput mundo, quiCquid non poſsidet armis.
                  Religione tenet.
               
               After this (I ſay) and ſuch like,Tacitus li. 1.
                   by little and litle taking upon her (as Auguſtus did in taking of the Empire) of a church truly Glorious, ſhe began to be vain glorious, but ſtill glorious, for none elſe could be the ſeat of Antichrist. And it ſeemes, they followed the wit and pollicie of their founder Romulus, of whom it is ſaid, that he was,Livy lib. 1.
                   
                  Tum f
                        •
                     
                     ctis vir magnificus; tum factorum ostentator haud minor. He would looſe nothing for lack of ſeting forth. And the like is ſaid of Scipio, and other Romans. But if any will apply this text to Antiochus, and ſay, that he placed the Tabernacles of his Pallace in Ieruſalem; I will not deny, but Antiochus might be ſignified in Daniell, to be the type of Antichriſt: but if they will ſay, that this place is meant onely of Ieruſalem and Antiochus, I would deſire them to anſwer me well to theſe three queſtions: Firſt, how the church of God in Ieruſalem could be called a glorious church, or the temple, a glorious temple in thoſe times, when it appeareth by the Prophets,
                     Hag. 2. that the ſecond temple then ſtanding was as nothing to the former, & the church was not onely oppreſſed, and perſecuted by Antiochus and others:Vid. Aug de civ. dei. l. 18. cap. 45.
                   but devided into ſects in it ſelfe, namely the Sadducces, Phariſees, Eſſees and others? Secondly between what ſeas is Ieruſalem ſeated? True it is the great Midland ſea is of the one ſide, but of the other, there is none, but either Aſph
                        •
                     ltis,
                  
or Tiberius, or Euphrates, which are but pettie flouds to make a ſea. But granting they might be called ſeas (as they are ſome times) yet where do we read, or can we finde that ever Antiochus planted his ſeat in Ieruſalem? If they will needs haue a litterall expoſition; let them ſhew how and when this was fulfilled? But in Rome all theſe things concurre, a glorious church, between two ſeas, and a place noted by other prophecies, to be that great, that ſeptimountaine, that Imperiall cittie, whereupon Antichrist ſhould ſit. The ſame argument will ſerue to proue, that it cannot be meant of Babylon, Conſtantinople, or any other cittie. For it cannot ſtand with the Prophecies. Yet another objection is made;Object. If the temple of God, and a mountaine of holynes, then how Idolatrous? Sodom? Egypt? &c. as the place of Antichriſt muſt be? if idolatrous, how chriſtian? This I ſhall declare more at large, when I come to ſpeak of the times of Antichriſt,Distinguo tempora. and there it ſhall appear, how it was Chriſtian, and how it fell to idolatrie, and other ſinnes, ſtill reteyning the name, and outward profeſſion of chriſtianitie.Anſ. But in the meane ſpace the godly, and reverend Biſhop Salvianus ſhall anſwer for me, who ſheweth that Rome in his time, in the times of her beſt biſhops and under Chriſtian Emperors continued ſtill in her heatheniſh idolatrie and abhominable filthines. It would be too long to recite all his words, although moſt worthy, but amongſt the reſt, after that he had verie grauely & ſeriouſly inveyed againſt the intollerable exactions and oppreſſions of thoſe times, he addeth theſe words, which I think fit to recite ſomewhat the more at large for the full clearing of this point, and becauſe the booke is not common. At
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      hoc videlicet Laici tantummodo, non quidam etiam Clericorum; ſaeculares tantummodo, non mulit etiam religioſi. Imo ſub ſpecie Religionis, vitiis ſaeculatibus mancipati, qui ſcilicet poſt veterum

flagitiorum probra, & crimina, titulo ſanctitatis ſibimet inſcripto, non converſatione aliis ſed profeſsione,
                  Whom doth he mean by this title of ho
                        •
                     ynes? 
                  nomen tantum denotavere non vitam: & ſummam divini cultus habitum magis quam actum exiſtimantes, veſtem tantummodo exuere, non mentem▪
                   and a litle after, Quomodo igitur tales isti paenitentiam ſe egiſſe non penitentes ſicut etiam illi de converſione, ac Deo aliquid cogitaſſe, qui à conjugibus propriis abſtinentes, à rerum alienarum pervaſione non abſtinent: & cum profiteantur continentiam corporum, incontinentia debacchantur animorum. Novum prorſus converſionis genus. Licita non faciunt: & illicita committunt. Temperant a conjugio, & non temperant à Rapina. Quid agis ſtulta perſuaſio? Peccata interdixit, Deus, non matrimonia. and a little after. Quid ergo ſimile apud barbaros Gothos? quis ecrum amantibus nocet? tu amantes perſequeris: tu offerentibus munera, manus amputas; tu diligentes proximos necas. Non metuis? non expaveſcis? with ſuch and many other like words in his firſt booke, with great authoritie and ſeveritie (like a worthie Biſhop) he reprehendeth their greivious ſinnes of oppreſſion, which in the Scripture is accounted a kinde of murder, a crying ſinn according to the verſe:
               
                  Voces clamorum, vox ſanguinis, & Sod
                        •
                     morum;
                  Vox oppreſſorum, & merces detenta laborum.
               
               To which we may adde,
               Turba idolorum, & blaſphemia ſacrilegorum.
               For ſo he goeth forward in his ſixth booke to ſhew the ſinnes, not onely of murther filthines, and Sodomy, but of moſt abhominable and Hetheniſh idolatrie, uſed and continued in Rome, euen in thoſe her beſt times: whereof he proveth, not onely particular perſons, but the whole cittie euen the Chriſtians in it, to be guiltie. Firſt for murder he prooveth them to be guiltie, by their common ſhewes in theaters, where men were caſt to be devoured of beaſts,

for the pleaſures of the ſpectators: then for their idolatrie in their playes: & for their filthie beaſtlines everie where. his words be theſe. Nihil ferme vel criminum, vel flagitiorum eſt, quod in ſpectaculis non ſit: ubi ſummum delitiarum genus eſt mori homines, aut quod eſt morte gravius acerbiuſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      lacerari: expleri ferarum alvos humanis carnibus: comedi homines cum circumſtantium laetitia; conſpicientium voluptate; hoc eſt non minus penè hominum aſpectibus, quàm beſtiarum dentibus devorari. And a little after: Sed haec (inquis) non ſemper ſiunt: Certum est, & praeclara erroris est excuſatio; quia non ſemper ſiunt: quaſi verò unquam fieri debeant, quae Deum laedunt; aut ideo quae mala ſunt bene fiant, quia non jugiter fiant. Nam & homicidae homines non ſemper occidunt, & tamen homicidae ſunt, etiam quando non occidunt. Et latrones omnes, non ſemper latrotinantur: ſed latrenes tamen eſse non deſinunt. ſic uti
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      omnes hi qui ſpectaculis iſtiuſmodi delectantur, etiam quando non ſpectant innoxii tamen à ſpectaculorum maculis mente non ſunt, quia ſemper vellent ſpectare, ſi poſſent. So much for murder, now for Idolatrie and ſacriledge. It followeth, Nec ſolum hoc, ſed ſunt alia majora. Quid enim? nunquid non conſulibus & pulli adhuc Gentilium ſacrilegiorum more paſcuntur? & volantis pennae auguria quaeruntur? ac pene omnia fiunt, quae etiam illi quondom Pagani veteres frivola, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      irridenda duxerunt? Et cum haec omnia ipſi agant▪ qui annis nomina tribuunt, & a quibus anni ipſi exordium ſumunt, credimus nobis bene annos poſſe procedere, qui a rebus talibus ordiantur?
                  vel ordinantur. 
                  At
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      utinam ſicut haec, propter conſules tantum fiunt: ita illos tantum incestarent, propter quos fiunt. Illud eſt feraliſsimum & graviſsimum, quod dùm conſenſu publico aguntur, honor pauciſsimorum fit crimen omnium. And againe ſpeaking of their playes and ſpectacles, he ſayth: Per turpitudines criminoſas aeterna illic ſalus Chriſtianae plebis extinguitur, & per ſacrilegas ſuperſtitiones maieſtas divina violatur.

Dubium enim non eſt quod ledunt Deum, u
                        •
                     pote Idolis conſecratae. Colitur nam que & honoratur Minerva in gymnaſiis, Venus in theatris, Neptunus in cercis, Mars in arenis, Mercurius in paleſtris, & ideo pro qualitate auctorum, cultus est ſuperſtitionum. So much for their Idolatrie. Now for their deteſtable and Sodomiticall filthines. De quotidianis impuritatibus loquamur (ſayth he) Equidem quia longum eſt dicere de omnibus, Amphitheatris, ſcilicet odaeis luſoriis pompis athletis, petaminariis, pantomimis caeteriſque portentis (quae piget dicere, quia piget malum tale vel noſſe) de ſolis circorum & theatrorum impuritatibus dico. Talia enim ſunt quae illic ſiunt, ut ea non ſolum dicere, ſedetiam recordari aliquis ſine pollutione non poſſit. With many words to that effect, & concludeth the place with an Ecce qualia aut omnes aut pene omnes Romani agunt. and againe, Ecce in numera Chriſtianorum millia in ſpectaculis rerum turpium commorantur. And againe, Christo ergo (o amen ta monstroſa) Chriſto Circenſes offerimus & mimos: Christo, pro beneficiis ſuis theatrorum obſcaena reddimus. Christo ludicrorum turpiſſimorum hoſtias immolamus. And again, Vbi chriſtianitas noſtra, qui ad hoc tantummodo ſacramentū ſalutis accepimus? ut maiora poſtea praevaricationis ſcelere peccemus? Nos eccleſiis Dei ludiera anteponimus. Nos altaria ſpernimus & theatra honoramus. Si quando enim venerit quod ſcit; ſaepe evenit, ut eodem die & feſtivitas eccleſiastica, & ludi public
                        •
                      agantur, quaero, ab omnium conſcientia quis locus maiores christianorū virorum cepias habeat, caveane ludi publici an atrium dei & templum omnes ſectentur magis an theatrum. Where ſhall we finde greater armies of chriſtians in the church or theater? And again, Vitioſitas & impuritas quaſi germanitas quaedam eſt Romanorum hominum, & quaſi mens at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      natura.
               
               And in the ſeuenth booke, of their Sodomitrie he ſayth, Quid fieri prodigioſius potuit? in urbe christiana, in

urbe eccleſiaſtica, quam quondam doctrinis ſuis Apoſtoli instituerant, quam paſsionibus ſuis Martyres coronarant, viri in ſemetipſis foeminas profitebantur, & hoc ſine pudoris umbraculo, ſine ullo verecundiae amictu: ac quaſi parum piaculi eſſet, ſi malo illo malorum tantum inquinarentur authores, per publicam ſceleris profeſsionem, fiebat etiam ſcelus integrae civitatis. Videbat quippe hoc univerſa urbs, & patiebatur: videbant judices, & acquieſcebant: populus videbat, & applaudebat: ac ſic diffuſo per totam urbem dedecoris ſceleriſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      conſortio, etſi hoc commune omnibus non faciebat actus, commune omnibus faciebat aſſenſus. And a little after: Vniverſa Romani nominis dignitas facinoris prodigioſi inurebatur infamia. Is not this ſufficient to prove Rome, even chriſtian to be full of Sodomie and Idolatrie? A great deale more hath he. His whole booke is moſt worthy to be read over. And this was in his time, which was about the yeare of our Lord 460, when there had been at leaſt ten chriſtian Emperors, and aboue twentie Martyrs and Saints Biſhops in Rome, where then was the excellent puritie of the Roman Church, or golden Commonwealth, which ſome do ſo much boaſt & admire? where was their chriſtianitie, as Salvianus himſelf demandeth? Doth not the holy Ghoſt teach us to ſpeak much more truely,Marke well the Prophecie of Ezec. 7. where he ſpeaketh of the worst of the heathen, & cō
                     ſider by the circumstances whether it can be understood of any but the Romans. when it repreſenteth that Empire unto us, under the name of I
                        •
                     on mixt with dyrt? as the Emperor Tiberius was called Lutum ſanguine maceratum, dyrt mixt with bloud? unles you will therefore call it golden, becauſe in filthines and Idolatrie it was like the old Babylon, which was figured by the head of Gold? or becauſe it is the ſeat of the golden Harlot? But of this elſe-where. In the mean ſpace I demand again, where was the zeale of their Biſhops to reforme or correct theſe enormities, euen of the Chriſtians? where were their decrees or

decretals to reſtrain them? where was the courage of the Prieſts or Clergie to reprehend or cenſure them? was there none amongſt them all, but that Tertullian of Carthage and Salvianus of Maſſilia muſt riſe up to ſpeak of it? Videbat hoc univerſa urbs & patiebatur, videbant Iudices, & acquieſcebant: ſayth he: So here was Babylon, and yet I confeſſe there was Sion alſo, But Sion dwelling in Babylon. Whereof the Prophet Zacharie, after the returne from the firſt captivitie ſeemeth to ſpeak ſaying:
                     Zach. 2. 
                  Deliver thy ſelf o Sion,
                  
                     Rev. 18. 
                  that dwellest with the daughter of Babylon. And our Evangeliſt repeateth: Come out of her my people; ſhewing that the prophecie of Eſay and Ieremie concerning her deſtruction are not yet fulfilled. I demand then upon all theſe premiſſes, whether any place can be found in the world qualified for to be the ſeat of Antichriſt, according to theſe Propheſies, beſides the Septimontane Rome, and that Chriſtian: the mountain of holynes, and yet Sodome; the Temple of God and yet Egypt, Sion and yet Babylon? which euen in her beſt Chriſtianitie retained the Barbarous crueltie, the abhominable filthines, and horrible idolatrie of Egypt, Sodom and Babylon in their publike ſights and ſhewes, Theaters, ſolemnities, ceremonies & common practiſe. And no ſooner did they ſuppreſſe thoſe old Pagan Idolatries, but they fell to this new Idolatrie of worſhiping of Images, which they ſtill practiſe & defend, together with their ever accuſtomed filthines & crueltie; whereupon I muſt propoſe this Problem: whether by any poſsibilitie or imagination of man, theſe things can be applied to any other place, but Rome?
               
            
            
               
               II. Of the state of Antichriſt.
               THE next thing after the place, which offereth it ſelf to our ſenſes and conſideration, ſeemeth to be the ſubject, or bodie without which no Accident can conſiſt, and therefore uſed in the definition of Accidents, eſpecially Relatiues, which cannot be without their Correlatiues: as a father cannot be ſo called, but in reſpect of his ſonne, nor a Monarch or king, but in reſpect of his monarchie, kingdome, or ſtate Politike ſubject unto him And this alſo muſt be proportionable, as we ſaid before of Relatiues. For as great things muſt haue great places; ſo a great and mightie Monarch, muſt haue a great ſtate under him: And as by the greatnes of the place we may meaſure the body: ſo by the greatnes of the ſtate ſubject to any Prince, we judge of the greatnes & power of the Prince himſelf. We haue ſeene alreadie a great place appointed for Antichriſt; Let us now ſee the greatnes of the ſtate and bodie politike that muſt be ſubject unto him and ſupport him. And this alſo hath not been neglected in the H. Scriptures; but is ſet forth, and deſcribed in divers places, eſpecially three, as the beſt Interpreters do obſerue, which alſo do concurre, and haue good correſpondence with the prophecies concerning his place aboue ſpecified. Firſt in the ſeuenth chap. of the prophet Daniel. Secondly the 13 ch. of the Rev. And thirdly, the 17 ch. of the Rev. which places agree in ſome things, and differ in others, and that agreement and thoſe differences, together with the reaſons thereof deſerue to be narrowly ſifted.
               Firſt in Daniell we finde a great and terrible Beaſt with ten hornes, and amongſt the reſt a litle horne riſing up, &c. In the 13 of the Rev. we fynd two beaſts, one riſing è mari out of the Sea, as all the beaſts in Daniel, with tenne

hornes &c. the other riſing e Terra. In the 17 chap. of the Rev. we fynde a great beaſt with ten hornes, and a whore ſitting on his back. Let us firſt conſider of the deſcription of this great beaſt riſing out of the ſea, in the 13 ch. of the Rev. where he ſeemeth to be moſt fully ſet forth poſitiuely, and after comparatiuely. Here therefore the great beaſt riſing out of the ſea is deſcribed firſt, in his exiſtence or parts. Secondly, in his power & actions. For his exiſtence and parts, it is firſt ſaid to be a beaſt, riſing out of the ſea. Secondly, having ſeauen heads. Thirdly, ten hornes crowned. Fourthly, upon his heads were names of blaſphemie. Fiftly, his bodie like a Leopard. Sixtly, his feet like a beare. And ſeuenthly, his mouth like a Lion. For his power and actions it is ſaid. 1, that the dragon gaue him his power, and his throne, and great authoritie. 2, That one of his heads was wounded, as it were to death, but his deadly wound was cured. 3, All the world wondered after the beaſt, and worſhiped the Dragon, which gaue power to the beaſt, and worſhiped the beaſt, ſaying, Who is like to the beaſt? Who is able to make warre with him? 4, There was giuen him a mouth to ſpeak great things and blaſphemies. 5, Power was given to him to doe and continue two and fortie months. 6, He opened his mouth in blaſphemie againſt God, to blaſpheame his name and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in heauen. 7, And it was giuen to him, to make warre with the ſaints, and to overcome them, and power was giuen him over all kindreds tongues and nations. And all that dwell upon earth ſhall worſhip him whoſe names are not written in the Book of Life, and Loe here a ſtrange and mightie beaſt. Now what is meant by the name of a beaſt riſing out of the ſea, the prophet Daniell telleth us. For he ſaith plainly,
                     Dan. 7, 23. that it ſignifyeth a kingdome riſing upon the earth. And the fourth

Beaſt (ſaith he) is the fourth kingdome. Which ſeemeth to be the ſame that is here ſpoken of. The prophet Ezechiel uſeth the ſame phraſe,
                     Ezce. 19, & 17. ſaying. Wherefore laye thy mother as a Lyoneſſe among the Lyons? &c. And againe, the great Eagle, &c. Now if this be a kingdome, which is ſpoken of by our Euangeliſt, of neceſſitie it muſt be ſome verie great and mightie kingdome, for ſo it appeareth by all parts of the deſcription, eſpecially where it is ſaid, that all the world wo
                        •
                     ſhipeth it. And in the queſtion that is aſked: Who is able to warre with him? paralel to that queſtion aſked in another place, What cittie is like to this great cittie? As the deſcription alſo of this beaſt here, is almoſt the ſame with that which is expreſſed in the 17 chap. of this Book. I aſk then, what kingdome or Empire can be underſtood in this place? Surely he that will ſay that this beaſt here, and the beaſt in the 17 chap. do ſignifie any other kingdom beſide Rome, muſt produce ſome other great Empire, to whom the ſeaven heads, and the other attributes there given unto it, may be applied, aſwell as to the Roman, which no man yet could ever do. Let us therefore ſee the deſcription of this mightie Empire comparatiue, and wherein it doth agree or differ from that which is deſcribed by the Prophet Daniel, and by this our Euangeliſt in the 17 ch. The fourth Beaſt (ſaith the Prophet) comming out of the ſea, was fearfull and terrible, and verie ſtrong. It had great Iron teeth, it devoured and brake in peeces, and ſtamped the reſidue under his feet, it was unlike the other beaſts, for it had ten horns, & there came up among them another little horne, before whom three of the firſt hornes were plucked away, and in this horne were eyes like a man, and a mouth ſpeaking preſumptuous things. And this fourth beaſt ſhall be the fourth kingdome, and ſhall be unlike to all kingdomes, and ſhall devour the whole earth, and tread it downe, and breake it in peeces, and the teene hornes out of this

kingdome are ten kings, and another ſhall ariſe after them, and he ſhall be unlike the firſt, and ſhall ſubdue three kings. And ſhall ſpeak words against the Moſt High, and think that he may change times and lawes, and they ſhall be given into his hands untill a time, times, and half a time. But the judgment ſhal ſit, and they ſhall take away his dominion, to conſume and deſtroy it unto the end.
               
               This is Daniels deſcription of the fourth Monarchie. Let us heare again how the Euangeliſt deſcribeth it in the 13 chap. I ſaw a beaſt riſing out of the ſea having ſeuen heads,
                  
                     Rev. 13. 
                  and ten hornes (ſo Daniell) and upon his hornes ten crownes, & upon his heads the names of blaſphemie. And the Beaſt which I ſaw was like a Leopard, and his feete were as the feete of a Bear, & his mouth as the mouth of a lyon, and the dragon gaue him his throne and great authoritie: and I ſaw one of his heads as wounded to death, but the deadly wound was healed, and all the world wondred and followed the beaſt, and they worſhiped the dragon, which gaue power to the beaſt, ſaying, Who is like to the beaſt, who is able to make warre with him? (ſo Daniell) it ſhall devour the whole earth, &c. And there was giuen unto him a mouth that ſpake great things & blaſphemies, & power was giuen him to continue 42 months. And he opened his mouth in blaſphemie againſt God, to blaſpheme his name, & his Tabernacle, and them that dwelt in heauen. And it was giuen unto him to make warre with the Saints, and to overcome them, and power was giuen him over everie kindred, tongue and nation. Therefore all that dwell upon the earth ſhall worſhip him, whoſe names are not written in the booke of life, of the lambe which was ſlayn from the beginning of the world.
               
               In the 17 chap. of the Revelation it is thus: The woman ſate upon a ſcarlet beaſt, full of names of blaſphemie,
                  
                     Rev. 17. 
                  which had seuen heads and ten hornes. (ſo in the former prophecies) And the beaſt which thou hast ſeene, was, and is not, and ſhall

aſcend out of the bottomleſſe pitte, and ſhall goe into perdition. And they that dwell on the earth ſhall wonder, whoſe names are not written in the book of life from the foundation of the world, when they behold the beast that was, and is not, and yet is. Here is the minde that hath wiſdome: The ſeuen heads are ſeuen mountains, they are alſo ſeuen kings, fiue are fallen, one is, another is not yet come, and when he cometh he must continue a ſhort ſpace. And the beaſt that was and is not, is the eight, & is of the ſeuen, and ſhall go into deſtruction. And the ten hornes which thou ſaweſt are ten kings, which yet haue not receaved a kingdome, but ſhall receaue power as kings at one houre with the beaſt. Theſe ſhall haue one minde; and ſhall giue their power & athoritie to the beaſt. Theſe ſhall fight with the Lamb, and the Lambe ſhall overcome them, & the ten hornes ſhall hate the whore, and ſhall make her deſolate, and naked, and ſhall eat her fleſh and ſhall burne her with fire. They that be of indifferent Iudgment may ſee in that Prophecie of Daniell many things that cannot be applyed to Antiochus, or to the kingdome of the Seleucidae.Vide Brightm
                        •
                     . in Dan. 11.
                   As firſt the great power of this fourth kingdome, which the Prophet ſetteth forth in more terrible, & dreadfull manner, then any of the former. But was the kingdome of the Seleucidae more terrible or more powerfull then the Aſſirian, and Caldean, the Median and Perſian? or the Grecian Monarchie? was Antiochus any way comparable to Nabuchadnezzar, Cyrus or Alexander? Did he devour the whole earth? Alſo this fourth kingdom ſhall think to make changes of times or lawes,
                     Dan. 7. &c. did Antiochus ſo? Beſides by the words of Daniel, it may ſeem that the fourth kingdom ſhall continue untill the finall judgment, which cannot agree to the Seleucidans. Letting therefore that opinion paſſe as a Iewiſh conceit approved by none of the ancient, that I can finde,Hieron. in Da
                        •
                     . but Porphyry, & ſome few of late, that are too much

addicted to the Rabbins, I thinke there is litle doubt to be made (but although ſome things may be applyed to Antiochus:Hieron. in Dan 2 & 4. Quartum regu. perſpic ue pertinet ad Rom. August. Nich de Lyra. Antoninus, Marſil. Fic. Sleidan. Napier in Apoc. Abbat. demonstr. Ant
                        •
                     chr. P
                        •
                     
                     raeus Not. Geneven. &c▪
                   yet) this beaſt here ſignifieth the Roman Monarchie, and the little horne ſignifieth Antichriſt, ſhadowed in ſome things by Antiochus. And ſo I finde the opinion of the ancient and beſt interpreters. Then to goe forward, and ſee what points theſe two excellent and divine Prophets apply to the Roman Empire; and wherein they agree or differ. And truly to my underſtanding they ſeeme to agree in ſeuen points, verie materiall.
               1. In the riſing of this beaſt, which both affirm to be out of the ſea.
               
               2. In the name, a Beaſt, that is, a Kingdom, as the Angel expoundeth it, not one King individuall: although if he did ſay a King, we may underſtand well enough the whole ſucceſſion: as where he ſaith, Thou (o King) art that head of Gold.
               
               3. In the attribute which they give unto him. Great strength and power unmatchable, and unreſistable.
               
               4. In his diſpoſition moſt cruell and bloudy.
               
               5. In the inſtruments of his power, Ten horns, that is, ten Kings.
               6. In his Warre againſt the ſaincts, & prevailing against them.
               
               7. In his Blaſphemie againſt God. Vpon which 7. conſiderations I demaund whether we may not ſafely cōclude with S. Hierom S. Auguſtine, and the other excellent expoſitors above cited, that this Kingdom perſpicuè, manifeſtly doth belong to the Romans. which is alſo here proved by theſe ſeven Attributes.
               1. His riſing out of the ſea of great commotions in the world, like others.
               
                  2. A politick ſtate or kingdom like the others.
               3. More powerfull then any other, for none overcame the whole earth like the Romans; none had power over all kinreds tongues and nations like to them.
               4. None ſo cruell and bloudy.
               5. None had ſo many great Kings at command.
               6. None raiſed ſo great perſecutions againſt the ſaincts, and true Church of God.
               7. None have beene ſo blaſphemous againſt God as they, whereof hereafter.
               Theſe Attributes therefore ſeeme to be applyed to the Roman Empire, as one body.
               Now let us ſee the ſingularityes wherein every one of theſe three propheſies differeth from the other, and conſider whether they alſo do not properly belong to Rome. The ſingularities in Daniel are ſuch, as being well conſidered ſeeme to declare unto us▪ that it was the intention of the Holy Ghoſt not onely to repreſent unto us the Roman Empire and therein Antichriſt afarre of: But to ſhew us alſo a Type of Antichriſtian impiety in Antiochus, that was then to come neare at hand (both being enemies to the Church, it could not be, but that one ſhould be like the other in ſomewhat.) And in the Roman Empire alſo: to note that State wherein it ſtood before the Caeſars, and therefore tempereth his words ſomtimes more ſignificantly to expreſſe the truth, ſometimes more properly to ſhadow the Type. A thing not unuſuall in ſacred prophecies:Aug. de civ. dei lib 17.
                   For ſo David ſpeaking of our Saviour in his owne perſon: I have ſworn once by my Holynes that I will not faile David,
                  
                     Pſal 89. 
                  his ſeed ſhall indure for ever &c. which properly belongeth to Chriſt, yet addeth theſe words more proper to himſelf. Thou haſt broken the Covenaunt

of thy Servant,
                  Let Theologians cōſider the p
                        •
                     aces, where David pr
                        •
                     y
                        •
                     th God to confound o
                        •
                      deſtroy his enemies. 
                  thou haſt broken down all his wals &c. So God in pronouncing his judgment upon the Serpent uſeth theſe words moſt ſignificantly, to foreſhew that our Saviour ſhould overcom the Divel. The Seed of the woman ſhall breake the Serpents head. yet theſe words in the ſame place, upon thy belly ſhalt thou goe, and duſt ſhalt thou eate, ſeeme more proper to the materiall ſerpent.
               So it ſeemes in this propheſy, Daniel though he ſpeak principally of the fourth great kingdom more powerfull than any of the reſt, which was the Roman; yet he inter-laceth ſomewhat concerning Antiochus the Type being though not a Roman, yet an enemie of the ſaincts: but more applyable to Antichriſt the great enemie, as may appeare by theſe ſeven particulars or ſingularities.
               1. In that he doth not reſemble this fourth kingdom to any beaſt as he did the firſt to a Lyon. The ſecond to a Beare. The third to a Leopard. but of this he doth not ſhew of what certaine form or ſhape it was, but onely that it was unlike to the fo
                        •
                     mer, & moſt ſtrong & terrible, whereupon I aſk how this can poſſibly be applyed to Antiochus who had but a peece of Alexanders Empire; and whether it do not lively expreſſe unto us the Roman ſtate, before it was ſetled in the Caeſars: when it had gott the Monarchie of the world, as Polyb affirmeth, & yet had no certain form of government, but was ſometimes ruled by Conſuls, ſometimes by Dictators, ſometimes by the Senate; ſomtimes by the People; ſometimes by the Opimates & Patritii, & ſometimes by the turbulent Tribunes and ſeditious multitude? But in the time of S. Iohn this Empire was grown to a certain, though a monſterous form under the Caeſars: & therefore we ſee it by him more certainly deſcribed.
               
                  The ſecond ſingularitie in Daniel is, that it is ſayd to haue ten hornes, which are not here ſaid to be crowned, as they in the Revelations. And this much more properly ſignifieth the kings ſubject to the Roman ſtate, who made kings their miniſters and ſervants, then to the Selucidan Princes, which were abſolute kings, crowned, & acknowledging no Superiour. But in the Revelation, theſe things ſignifyed by the name of hornes, are ſaid to haue crownes, & by certaine notes diſtinguiſhed from the other. Whereof hereafter.
               The third ſingularitie in Daniel is that among theſe kings there aroſe another unlike the first. And this ſeemeth to prefigure Antichriſt, whoſe kingdome is indeed moſt unlike to any of the other kings, & can not be applied to Antiochus.
               The fourth note in Daniel is, that before this litle Horne or king three other kings were plucked away, which by ſome Interpreters is very hardly drawen to Antiochus, but if we conſider the Roman Antichriſt, it will appear to be eaſily applied, and truly fulfilled. For it is manifeſt that the Romans draue firſt the Grecian Empires, ſecondly the French, and thirdly the Germans out of Rome, and Italy, as ſhall be ſhewed hereafter. So thoſe three kings were plucked away, to make roome for this little horne. As for the Exarch of Ravenna, which was but the Emperors Vice-Roy, I cannot afford him the qualitie or title of a king; and for the Lombards they never ſetled their ſtate in Rome.
               The fifth ſingularitie in Daniel is, that this king coming up laſt, ſpake preſumptuous words and blaſphemies. And this I call a ſingularitie in Daniel. For although blaſphemie is attributed to this beaſt by S. Iohn alſo, yet here it is ſayd onely to be in his words, but by S. Iohn in his names. Now this was fulfilled in Antiochus, & much more it is in Antichriſt, as it is noted in the Revelation.
               
                  The ſixt ſingularitie is, that this little horne ſhall deſtroy the ſaints, and faithfull ſervants of God, and this was partly done by Antiochus, but much more prophecied and performed by Antichriſt: of whom it is ſaid,
                     Rev. 13. that he ſhall make warre with the Saints, and overcome them.
               
               The ſeuenth is, that this little horne ſhall thinke to change times and lawes, things which God hath ſpecially reſerved to himſelf. Litle of this doe we read to be done by Antiochus, and indeed in ſuch things what could one man doe? Lawes can verie hardly be changed in a ſhort time: but to alter times in a ſhort time is impoſſible. But this is verified fully in the Roman Antichriſt, as ſhal be ſhewed hereafter.
                     Probl. 6. Having therefore thus obſerved the ſingularities of the prophet Daniell, in deſcribing the Roman beaſt, eſpecially before the Caeſars. Let us now ſee the ſingularities obſerved by our Apoſtle, deſcribing it in the 13 chap. under the Caeſars, and in the 17 under Antichriſt. Firſt in this 13 ch. this Empire is repreſented under a certain form, like a Leopard, which Daniel doth not ſay.
               2, It hath ſeauen heads, expounded to be ſeauen hils, and ſeauen kings. Cap. 17.
               3, It hath his ten hornes crowned.
               
               4, Here is no mention of any little horne ariſing up after 
                        •
                     he reſt, nor of any of thoſe things, which Daniel ſpeaketh of him: but there is a ſecond beaſt riſing up after the firſt. Conſider now whether the little horne be not now become this ſecond beaſt.
               5, It is ſaid, that upon his heads were names of blaſphemie.
               
               6, One of his heads was wounded to death.
               
               7, His deadly wound was cured.
               
               Let us come to the deſcription of this beaſt, in the 17 chap. which I mean but onely to touch, leaving the further examination thereof, to a place more convenient.
                     Probl. 
                     
                        •
                     .
               
               
                  1, In Daniel, there was a 
                     
                        •
                     ittle horn. In the 13 of the Revelation, a ſecond Beaſt, whereof in the 17 chap. there is little or no mention.
               2, In this chap there is a woman ſitting upon the ſeuen-headed beast, whereof in Daniel, or in the 13 chap. there is nothing, what is become of the horne, or ſecond beast, if it be not this woman?
               3, In the 13 ch. the beaſt is not ſaid to be of any colour, but in the ſeuenteenth of a ſkarlet, or Crimſon colour.
               
               4, Power is giuen to the beaſt over everie kindred, tongue and nation, in the 13 ch. but in the 17, the woman is ſupported by peoples, multitudes, and nations.
               
               5, Here in the 13 ch. the beaſt maketh war with the ſaints, but there the woman is druncken with the bloud of the ſaints, and Martyrs of Chriſt Ieſus.
               
               6, Here the names of blaſphemie are onely upon the heads of the beaſt: but there the whole beast is full 
                        •
                     f 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     f 
                        •••
                     ſphemie.
               
               7, Here all the world wondreth at the beast & worſh
                        •
                     p
                        •
                     th the dragon and the beast. But there the kings of the earth 
                        ••
                     mmit fornication with the woman, and the Inhabitants 
                        •
                     f the earth are druncken with the wine of her fornication. ſo both are drunke, ſhe with bloud, and they with fornication, and there is no more ſpeach of worſh
                     •
                  ping the beaſt. Very notable and remarkable differences. If I be not much deceaved; whereof to ſpeak ſhortly my opinion under correction. I am perſuaded to collect, that the ſtate of Rome in Daniel is ſignifyed by the fourth beast, ſpecially before the Caeſars: in the 13 of the Rev by the firſt beaſtè Mari, under the Ceſars, and in the 17 by the ſkarlet coloured beaſt under the whore. Antichriſt in Daniel is the little horne; in the 13 of the Apoc. the ſecond beastè terra in the 17 the whore. Which being well obſerved the reaſon of all the

Concordances and differences between theſe prophecies will eaſily appear. For the proofe whereof, le
                     •
                   us caſt our eye back again, & conſider the ſeverall parts of the deſcription of this beaſt, and therein ſee, whether it do not fully agree to the Roman ſtate, in theſe ſeverall times, and whether it can be applyed to any other. And firſt why it is called a beaſt, amongſt other things, for which the Romaniſts of theſe dayes do calumniate the profeſſors of true and ſincere religion. One is this, that we ſay ſome places of ſcripture are to be taken figuratiuely. This a late Ieſuit objecteth againſt us, calling it a ſh
                     •
                  ft: but whether it be a ſhift or not, it is none other then the ancient and beſt interpreters adviſe us to looke unto,Aug. de doct. C
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     ſt lb, 2, & 3.
                   namely S. Auguſtin in his books de doct
                        •
                     ina Chriſit
                        •
                     na where he ſheweth, that not onely proper but tranſlated words are uſed in the ſcripture, and of ſome figures, not onely the examples, but the names are there to be found, whereof one (ſayth he) is allegoria,
                  Con
                        •
                     eſ l. 11.
                   which is nothing els but a Met
                        •
                     phore continued. Pauca ſunt quae proprie l
                        •
                     quimur, p
                        •
                     ura non proprie, ſayth he in another place, whereupon learned divines,Tb. Aquin. in 1 ſentent. both Hebrew and Chriſtian haue alwayes confeſſed, that there is not onely a litterall ſence to be admitted in the expoſition of the ſcripture, but an Allegor
                        ••
                     all and Anag
                        •
                     gicall,
                  
                     10. Picu
                        •
                      Mi
                        •
                     . in Apolog. ſo it be with conſent of other places. So our Saviour when his Apoſtles doubted what he meant, by the leaven of the Phar
                        •
                     ſees,
                  
                     Mat. 16. and of the hypocriſie of the Phariſee. And when his diſciples murmured, for that he ſayd, Except ye eat my fleſh, ye haue no life,
                  
                     Luke 12. 
                  &c. He anſwereth, What if ye ſhould ſee me aſcend into heauen.
                  
                     Ioh. 6. It is the ſpirit that giveth life, the fl
                        •
                     ſh profiteth nothing. So whereſoever any abſurditie, or (as S. Augustin ſpeaketh) facinus or fl
                        •
                     gitium, wickednes or miſchief will follow upon the proper expoſition, there it muſt be underſtood to be ſpoken figuratiuely, for there is nothing taught in the

ſcripture (ſayth he) but the loue of God and our neighbour, ſo here not onely by the conſent of all interpreters, but by the warrant of the ſpirit of God expounding it to Daniel, by his Angel, we are taught to underſtand, that the name of a beaſt in propheticall ſcriptures. Concurrentibus his, quae requiruntur, other places either concurring, or not repugning, doth ſignifie a kingdome going in ſucceſsion from man to man, and we haue no warrant to take it for one particular, or individuall perſon, or in any other ſenſe, then the Angel hath expounded it. And this is no new or uncouth manner of ſpeach, to call great kingdomes by the names of great beaſts, as I haue touched before: but why and for what reaſon, or upon what ground they are ſo called, is a conſideration, not unworthie to be ſearched out, ſo far forth as the mercie and grace of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, ſhall illuminate our underſtanding, and direct our mindes; wherein, if I be ſomewhat long, I hope the value of the matter may countervayl our pains: Aſsiſt us therefore in this investigation,
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        eſ. 4. 
                  O Lord, who art aſcended up on high, and giveſt gifts unto men. Firſt then I demand, whether we may not hold it for a certaine and infallible veritie, that the later Prophets did converſe and exerciſe themſelues in reading and meditateing upon the law,
                     Deut 6, 6. and the writings of the Prophets, that were before them,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      18, 15. as all are commanded to doe by Moſes, exhorted by David,
                     
                        
                           ••
                        l. 1. and taught by the example of Daniel? Secondly,
                     Dan. 9. I demand, whether we may not beleeue, that they did thereby obtaine an habit, or grace of God to uſe the words and phraſes of the former Prophets, & to make uſe of them by a kinde of progreſſion. As when the prophet David had recorded that excellent prophecie of our Saviour Chriſt, I haue ſet my King upon Sion, the Hill of my holynes.
                  
                     Pſal. 2. Pſal. 69. He himſelf goeth forward ſaying, An high hill is Gods hill, in which it pleaſeth him to dwell, he will dwell in it

for ever. And in another place, He will heare me from his holy hill. The prophet Micah goeth yet farther,
                     Pſal. 50. ſaying that the Mountaine of Gods houſe ſhal be ſet in the tops of the mountains,
                  
                     Mich. 3. 
                  and manie nations ſhall flow to it. Which the Prophet Eſay turneth to exhortation. O houſe of Iacob,
                  
                     Eſay 2. 
                  come ye alſo and let us walk in the light of the Lord. And the prophet Daniel uſeth it by way of progreſſion to a farther prophecie, calling it firſt, a ſtone, cut out without hands,
                  
                     Dan. 2. 
                  which daſheth the kingdoms of the world in peeces, and grew to a mountain filling the whole earth. Doubtles this Propheticall progreſſion is moſt excellent and obſervable. But I know not whether in all thoſe heauenly writings any be ſo uſefull, or worthie of contemplation, as that of our Saviour Chriſt, whom when Moſes by the dictate of the H. Ghoſt, had firſt ſtyled, the ſeed of the woman, & afterward the ſeed of Abraham. The Prophet Eſay goeth forward, and calleth him the roote,
                  
                     Gen, 3. Eſay 11. and then the ſtem, & then the branch. Hereupon again the prophet Hoſea goeth forward, and with moſt ſweet & loving words, to comfort the people of God in their afflictions, applyeth this to the myſticall bodie of our Saviour.
                     Hoſh 14. 
                  I will heale their rebellion (ſaith he) I will l
                        •
                     ue them freely, I will be as the dew to Iſrael, and he ſhall grow as the lilly, and faſten his rootes, as the Caedars of Lebanon, his braunches ſhall ſpread, and his beutie ſhall be as the oliue, &c. Lo firſt, a ſeed, then a root, then a stem, then a braunch, and now a tree bearing and ſpreading his braunches. Yet no word is all this while of fruit, it comes anon: but by the way theſe heauenly Prophets make many excellent uſes of theſe propheticall metaphors. Eſay thus: He ſhall grow before him as a braunch,
                  
                     Eſa. 53. 
                  & as a root out of a drye ground, noting his humiliation. Ieremie thus: I will raiſe to David a righteous braunch,
                  
                     Ier. 23. 
                  and a king ſhall raigne and proſper, to note his kingdome and exaltation. Zacharie thus:
                     Zach. 6. 
                  behould the man whoſe name is the

braunch, he ſhall build the temple of the Lord. to ſignify his prieſthood, interceſſion and mediation. Our moſt gratious and bleſſed Lord being come in the fleſh, to ſhew the fulfilling of all theſe prophecies, calleth himſelf now no longer a roote, or a braunch, but I (ſayth he) am the true generous and fruitfull vine.
                  
                     Ioh. 15. Yea ſayth S. Paul, not onely a vine bearing fruit of it ſelf,
                  
                     Rom. 11. but an oliue receaving grafts of others. Whereupon he inferreth a moſt loving and graue admonition to all Chriſtians, Be not high minded. Thou bearest not the roote but the roote, thee. This example of propheticall progreſſion ſo ſweet, ſo excellent, ſo comfortable and ſo well followed, I could not, I would not, I durſt not conceal or omit. To returne to our purpoſe. Why ſhould I not think that the prophet Daniel and our propheticall Euangeliſt S. Iohn in the deſcription of theſe four Monarchies obſerved ſome ſuch thing? The prophet David ſaith, that a man without underſtanding is like a beaſt. He ſaith alſo, that he that maketh an Image,
                  
                     Pſal. 49. Pſal, 115. 
                  and he that truſteth in it, is without ſenſe like the Image it ſelf. Ieremy goeth forward, Everie man is a beaſt by his ſkill,
                  
                     Ier. 10, & 51 
                  everie founder is confounded by the graven image.
                  
                     Dan. 7. Lo, now an Idolater is a beaſt. The prophet Daniel taketh up that, and reſembleth great Monarchies unto great beaſts. It cannot I think be ſuppoſed, but he doth it, upon the ſame reaſon, namely becauſe they erected or mainteined Idolatries. For which cauſe they were all repreſented before, in one Image of divers mettals; to ſhew that they all agreed in the worſhiping of Idols, though in divers manners. Now the Prophet Daniel reſteth not here, but by the illumination of Gods ſpirit goeth forward to ſhew the properties of theſe four kingdomes under the figures of ſeverall beaſts, and therefore calleth the firſt a Lyon, the ſecond a Beare, the third a Leopard, and the fourth he ſaith, it was moſt ſtrong, terrible, cruell, and powerfull, yet he

findeth no name for it, nor beaſt whereunto it is like, but where he leaveth, S. Iohn goeth forward, ſaying that it was like to divers beaſts in his ſeverall parts.
                     Rev. 13. For it hath the bodie of a Leopard, the mouth of a Lion, the feete of a Beare &c. Thus then haue we ſeene (as I ſuppoſe) a probable reaſon, why theſe great Monarchies were reſembled to beaſtes: out of which this conſideration may reſult, that the laſt of them all, which muſt of neceſſitie be that of Antichriſt, muſt exceed all the reſt in Idolatrie & tyrannous maintenance of Idolatrie. Let us now conſider the ſeverall parts of this laſt kingdome.
                     Rev. 17. And firſt of the heads. Theſe are ſaid to be ſeauen, expounded by the Angel to ſignifie ſeuen kings, and ſeauen mountains, and whereſoever we finde the ſeuen Mountains, there we muſt finde alſo the ſeauen kings. But (ſayth the Angell) it is the great cittie that ruleth over the kings of the earth, an inſeparable and individuall propertie of Rome. No cittie but that, was ever called Septicollis or Septimontium. No mountains better known by their ſeverall and diſtinct names, then thoſe ſeauen of Rome. None did ever boaſt of ſeauen Mountaines in one cittie but the Romans. Here therefore we muſt looke for the ſeauen kings. and yet we need not to ſeek far, for Livy & Tacitus haue expreſſely named everie one of them, as I ſhewed before, namely their Kings, Conſuls, Dictators, Decemvirs, Tribunes, Caeſars, and Pontifices Max. But here by the way, there is a ſingularitie to be obſerved,
                     Rev. 13. which is not mentioned in any other place, but in this 13 cha. namely that one of theſe ſeauen heads was wounded to death,
                  Napier. 
                  but his deadly wound was healed. This moſt aptly agreeth to the Romans, as it hath been well expounded by others,There be ſome who (becauſe it is ſaid that this was the wound of a ſword, & there is no ſword in the ſcripture ſo well noted, as that of the word, Ephe. 6. do interpret this of the wound given to the Caeſarean idolatrie, by the preaching of the goſpell, which is healed and restored by the Pont. max. Let Divines judge. to ſignifie either the wound that was giuen to the Caeſarean

head by the murder of Iulius, which was healed by Auguſtus, or the wound of the ſame head in Nero, & the healing of it by Veſpaſian,
                  Sueton. in vita Veſp. of whoſe reſtoring the Cōmon wealth, Suetonius profeſſedly maketh two whole chapters. But a moſt ſignall ſingularitie of theſe Heads is noted in the 17 ch. Fiue (ſayth he) are fallen, one is, and another is not yet come. This bringeth us by the hand into Rome. For it is manifeſt, that of the ſeauen governments of Rome, fiue were fallen before the Revelation: namely, the fiue firſt named by Livy,Livy l. 6.
                   
                  Kings, Conſuls, Dictators, Decemvirs and Tribunes: One was then in being, namely the Caeſars: and this not obſcure.
                     Rev. 17. But who that one was, that was to come, and to continue but a ſhort ſpace, and how the beast is called the eight, & yet one of the ſeauen, ſeemeth ſomewhat intricate and difficult to explain. But I demand here, what is the word in the text?I am not ignorant that this differeth from ſome others, whom I reverence: but, Sit liber judex. 
                  Another is not yet come. What other? Not another Head, but another King or Caeſar. For it is not 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , but 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                  ▪ and ſo the beaſt is called, not the eight head, but Ogdoos, the eight king. This in my opinion directeth us to Conſtantine the Chriſtian Emperor, as to him that continued but a ſhort time,He that will apply this to the eccleſ. ſtate of the B B. under the Greciā Caeſars, must conſider how it can be proved, that thoſe B B. had regall power, and if they had, then how their power can be distinguiſhed frō their ſucceſſors. For he altereth the forme of the Empire, reducing it from Heatheniſh to Chriſtian, and tranſlated the ſea of the Empire from Rome to Conſtantinople, and therefore may well be called an other, but another Caeſar, not another Head. For he continued Caeſar still. But God would not ſuffer that godly Chriſtian Emperor, long to continue Head of the Antichriſtian beast; and therefore moved him to remoue his Emperiall ſeat, that the Impediment might be removed, according to the Prophecy. 2 Theſ. 2.
               Then to the ſecond queſtion, who is the beaſt, that is the eight king, and yet the ſeauenth head, & one of the ſeauen; who elſe can it be, but thoſe that immediately ſucceeded

the Caeſars in the government of Rome? And who were they, but the Pontifices maximi,
                  
                     diſt. 96. as both by their lawes and hiſtories appeareth, For (ſayth the decree) Conſtantine gaue to Silveſter, who then was Summus Pontifex, his pallace of Lateran and his Imperiall ornaments with power and principallitie &c. I know it is objected, that this is under the title of Palea. And much adoe there hath ben about it to little purpoſe. For looke in another part of the decree,
                     Cauſ. 12. q. 1. and there it is regiſtred for authenticall, that Conſtantine left to Silveſter imperialem ſedem his Imperiall ſea. If it be objected that the donation of Conſtantine is held by many to be forged, that is nothing to the purpoſe.Angelus R
                        •
                     ccha de Bibliot vat. bringeth divers authors to proue that Co
                        •
                     st. ceſſit Pontiſici. For it is not here ſaid, that he gaue it, but that he left it, neither is it here in queſtion, what Conſtantine truly gaue, but what the Biſhop of Rome truly had. Now their Hiſtories do plentifully teſtifie, that whether by the gift, or ceſſion of Conſtantine, or by what other means,See Probl. 4.
                   pretence or colour ſoever it was, their power after the departure of Conſtantine grew dayly more and more abſolute, untill they had by little and little wrought the Emperors not onely out of Rome, but out of all Italie, and in the end brought them under their feet. Platina ſeemeth to affirme the donation, ſaying that he gaue to Silveſter his Diadem, and for his ſake built the pallace of Lateran. Howſoever if we belieue their owne Authors, there is no Empire now to be found in Rome,in epi. ad Theſ. & vide Tho. Aquin. & Lyr. in 2 Theſ. 2. & al. as Stapulenſis confeſſeth. Vbi nunc eſt Romana Monarchia? ubi qui in ea mundum regat habemus? But of the Pope or Pont. Max. it is no leſſe evident, that he now hath, and for theſe many hundred yeares hath had,Sū. Pon. Dictator perpetuus quē principes orb
                        •
                     s adora
                        •
                     t. And again, Totū orbē terrarū Ro▪
                   the abſolute government of that great cittie, and the ſtate, Territorie and Tribunes, thereto belonging, as witneſſeth Blondus. Which whoſoever hath after the removing of the Empire, muſt be confeſſed to be Antichriſt, in beeing the ſeauenth head of

Rome.curia ſibi ſubjectum habet. Blondus in Roma inſtaurata. Vbi plura. Vid. Adrian. 4. apud Aventi
                        •
                      & Tho. Aquin. &c. I referre me to thine owne judgment Chriſtian Reader, whether hereby all the difficulties of the Text be not cleerly diſcuſſed. Firſt where it ſayth: The beaſt which was and is not, is the eight, and is of the ſeauen. And againe, The beaſt, which was, is not, and yet is. Whether theſe words can be underſtood, but of this Roman Pontifex. For the Pon. Max. was inſtituted by Numa Pompilius the ſecond king of Rome, to be the cheef Iudge & decider of all matters concerning Religion, & this continued ſtill in Rome, in great honor,Livy lib. 1.
                   untill the time of Iulius Caeſar, diſtinct from the Dictator: but he tooke that, as an high dignitie upon himſelf. And ſo did Auguſtus and other Emperors. And amongſt the reſt,Sueton. it is thus reported of Titus. Pontificatum max. ideo ſe profeſſus accipere, ut puras ſervaret manus, fidem praeſtitit, nec author poſthaec cuiuſquam necis nec conſcius. Whereby we may ſee that the law of that ſupreame Pontificate, was that they might not be Iudges of capitall crimes, nor ſentence any man to death. But I haue not yet found it written of Domitian, in whoſe time our Euangeliſt receiued this Revelation, that he tooke upon him this Pontificall dignitie. And it ſeemeth he did not. For elſe why doth not Sueton. ſpeak of it, as well in him, as in others, and he is not onely noted by the Chriſtians for a bloudy Perſecutor, but for a cruell Tyrant amongſt the Heathen. From which, if he had taken upon him the high Pontificate (if nothing els, yet) this their owne law, & the ſhame of the world, I thinke, would ſomewhat haue reſtrained him. I doe not read it I ſay. Therefore I thinke he was not Pon. Max. And ſo the words of our Prophet are exactly fulfilled, that the Beaſt, the Pont. was formerly in Rome inſtituted by Numa, exerciſed by Naſica, Scipio, Iulius, Auguſtus, Titus, and many others: and it is not in Domitian, and yet is, though not in him de facto: yet in the ſtate of

Rome in potentia, when they liſt to ſet it up. And it is the eight king of that ſtate, reckoning Conſtantine the Chriſtian to be the ſeauenth, yet it is but the ſeauenth head, and of the ſeauen, becauſe Conſtantine had no diſtinct forme of Regall authoritie from the other Caeſars, and therefore could not be reckoned to be another head from the Caeſars: And this Pont. Max. who in the time of the Conſuls and Pagan Ceſars, was but like a little horne growing, in time of the Chriſtian Emperours like a Beaſt of power aſcending, now ſitteth like a queen upon the back of the Roman ſtate commanding. And it ſhall aſcend (ſayth the Angell, out of the bottomleſſe pit. It ſhall aſcend to his high exaltation of power and dignitie, out of the ſame place, from whence the Seauen headed Beaſt was rayſed, or to ſpeak plainly, it ſhall be exalted to the higheſt by the divell, who gaue to the firſt Beaſt his power. For this cannot be meant of his firſt riſing: becauſe it is expreſſely ſayd in the text, that this beaſt was before. And ſo it ſeemeth that all the difficulties may be cleared touching this ſeuenth Head, which as it is evident in the Text, is ſometimes called the Beaſt. And now for a breathing I deſire to know, whether any perſon, monarchie or kingdome can be found in the world, or whether any can be imagined to come hereafter, to whom all theſe Propheſies can be ſo fitly applyed? I come to the next remarkeable circumſtance: which is, the ten crowned hornes. That the Roman Empire, as well in the time of their Conſuls, as of their Ceſars, had many kings at their commaund is evident by their Hiſtories, and I haue partly proved before. But in this Revelation,
                     Probl. 
                     
                        •
                     . and ſpecially in the 17 chap. there are divers ſingularities to be obſerved, in the deſcription of theſe hornes, whereof in Daniell there is no mention. Firſt, becauſe it is ſaid, that at the time of this Revelation they had not received a a kingdome. 2, But they ſhall

                  receaue power, at one hour with the beaſt. 3. They are crowned. 4. They haue one minde to giue their power, and authoritie to the Beaſt. 5. They ſhall fight againſt Chriſt. 6. They ſhall be overcome by him. 7. And then they ſhall hate the whore, and make her deſolate and naked, & ſhall eate her fleſh, and burne her with fire. Not one of theſe things can be truly applyed to the kings that were under the ancient Roman Empire, which are indeede ſpoken of by Daniel. For they had receaved their kingdoms before, and were not to expect it in time to come. 2. They are not ſayd to be crowned, becauſe perhaps they held their crowns, but as tenants at ſufferance. 3. They did not giue their power to the Romans, but were conquered and ſubdued. We do not read, that they did profeſſedly fight against Chriſt, although they were Pagans, or that they were overcome by him, neither can it be ſaid, that they did hate the whore, or burne her with fire. Maſsiniſſa, Pruſias and Ptolomee gaue their kingdoms to Rome, but they had receaved them long before S. Iohns time, and did never hate the whore, nor make her deſolate, or burne her with fire. The Goths & Vandales did burn Rome, but they never gaue their power & authoritie to the Romans. The like differences may be ſhewed of all other kings that were in the time of the Roman Empire or before. Theſe ten hornes therefore ſpoken of in the 17 chap. of the Revelation cannot be underſtood of thoſe ten, which were ſpoken of by Daniel, although they may haue ſomewhat in common with them. But where now ſhall we finde theſe kings? Look over all the world, and ſee where they may be found. When ſhall they receaue their kingdome, and how long ſhall we looke for them? The impediment of the Roman Empire is long ſince removed, by the teſtimonies,See Probl. 7.
                   as well of Divines as Chronologers. If the beaſt or theſe kings be not yet come, when will they come? Out

of Rome, I ſay again, as it is ſaid, or the Roman Empire,Vide Abb. demonſt. Antic. c. 4. & there note the words of the Synod▪ cited out of Aventin. ann. 7
                   it is in vain to ſeeke. And if theſe kings which ſhall giue their power and Authoritie to Rome, haue not yet receaved their kingdome, nor given it to the beaſt, when ſhall they receaue it, or giue it to him? or when ſhall we ſee the accompliſhment of this Prophecie? ſhall we looke for it as the Iewes looke for their Meſſias? But it is the opinion of the beſt & ſoundeſt Interpreters,Our most excellent learned Soverain king Iames holdeth this opinion in Ep. Admonit. So Napier in Apo. Renſuer. in Iſag. &c. that theſe ten hornes do ſignifie the ten chief Provinces ſubject to the Roman Empire, which at one time with the beaſt, namely upon removing the power of the Empire, receaved their power, and by degrees grew up into kingdoms about the ſame time, when alſo the Pope began to take upon him the title of Pontifex Max. namely about the yeare of our Lord 700, or within an hundred yeares after. As it may be theſe Graecia, Germania, Gallia, Brittania, Aſturia or Leon. Whereunto now is joyned Spaine, Pannonia or Hungaria, Polonia, Suetia, Dania, and Norvegia. Greece, you may ſay, was before. True, as a Roman Province, but upon the tranſlation of the ſtate it became a Monarchie in it ſelf, which was not abſolute as long as the chief title was giuen to Rome. Now if this be ſo, when ſhall we ſee this performed, if it be not alreadie? When we ſee that all theſe great Princes of Chriſtendome heretofore did yeeld their authoritie & power to the Roman Pontifex. And now, many of them haue forſaken him, as England, Scotland, Denmark, Sweden, and others of Germanie, A great parte of the Dutch, Swiſſes, and divers other, which are fallen away from Rome: France and Venice wavering, is it to be imagined that they will againe, giue their power & authoritie to Rome, or ever come againe to giue their power and authoritie to any other? Therefore I ſay, that this prophecie

is now fulfilled, or never to be expected. For if we conſider well the times forepaſt, we may ſee, that all the great kingdoms of Europe, which were before ſubject to the Roman Empire, did ariſe and begin to take upon them abſolute ſoveranitie, and power of the ſword, upon the remoue and decay of the Roman Empire, which was the time foreſhewed for the revealing of Antichriſt. And did all giue their power and authoritie to the Roman Pontifex, they did all fight againſt Chriſt Ieſus in perſecuting the profeſſors of his word and Scriptures, by the incitement and inſtigation of the Pope.
               And all thoſe which are fallen from the Pope, haue been overcome by the ſcripture & word of God, which is called the ſword of Chriſt Ieſus. If theſe things be ſo, then why ſhould we looke for any other accompliſhment of theſe Prophecies? or how ſhould we underſtand, that they can be fulfilled, if not alreadie? Can it be denied, but all Chriſtian kings gaue their power and authoritie, and ſome gaue their lands and territories alſo to Rome? Conſtantine, they ſay, gaue to the Pope his diadem, with the pallace of Lateran, and imperiall ſeat. Arithpertus, otherwiſe called Herebertus the Lombard gaue the Cottia Alpes, wherein ſtandeth Genua. Pipin, and Charles of France, gaue the principallitie of Ravenna, with the Duchie of Beneventum, and Spoletium. Henry the IIII Emperour of Germanie, and Iohn king of England gaue up their crownes, to whom, but to the Pope of Rome? Can it be denied? All the Chriſtian kings of that part of Europe, which was ſubject heretofore to Rome, gaue him authoritie, and power to do what he lift in their kingdoms. Was ever the like done to any Monark, Prince, Potentate or Man heretofore? or may we expect, or looke for the like to

be done to any in time to come? True it is, we ſee not yet the Whore made naked and deſolate, nor burnt with fire,
                     Pſal. 31. the time is in Gods hands, and he that beleeveth will not be too hastie. Leaving therefore that which is to come,
                     Hab. 2, 3. unto the diſpoſition of the great diſpoſer of times. Let us goe as far as men may in the deſcription of this mightie Empire, to ſee what is fulfilled alreadie. The next note or circumſtance here obſerved is that upon his heads were the names of blaſphemie: but in the 17 ch. it is ſaid that the Beaſt is full of names of Blaſphemie: A difference not to be neglected. For the underſtanding whereof, it is neceſſarie for us, to ſee how the word Blaſphemie is taken in ſcripture, and thereby we ſhall see, how this alſo agreeth to Rome the Pontifical. Firſt I demand, whether it be not blaſphemie,Vide Thom. 2, 2. q. 13.
                   when infinite power, or infinite knowledge, or other inſeperable & incommunicable properties of God,Antonin, ſum. par. 2. t. 8, c. 7.
                   are attributed unto men? In which reſpect the Iewes hearing our Saviour ſay,Sum. Angel. t. blaſphem. Marc 14.
                   
                  Deſtroy this temple, and I will raiſe it againe in three dayes; accuſed him of Blaſphemie, as claiming infinite and divine power to himſelf, whom they thought to be but a man. Him they accuſed falſely: but ſuch in truth was the Blaſphemie of Sennacharib and Rabſake. Who are they among all Gods, that haue delivered their Lands?
                  2 Reg. 1
                        •
                     . 
                  that the Lord ſhould deliver Ieruſalem out of my hands? So that of Holofernes.
                     Iudit. 6. But the Blaſphemie of Nebuchadnezzar king of the firſt Babel, ſeemeth to goe a ſtep farther,
                     Dan. 3. who not onely aſked the ſame Queſtion, Who is the God that can deliver you from me? But upon the wicked perſwaſion of his own power, preſumed to make an Image, & commanded it to be worſhiped as a God. And ſhall a man make Gods (ſayth the Prophet) is not this a blaſphemie beyond all blaſphemies?
                     Ier. 16. in aſmuch as he that ſaith he can make a God, doth not onely make himſelf equall to God, but greater, better, more

powerfull and mightie, as the efficient cauſe is alwaies better, and more powerfull then the effect. Now in this kinde of Blaſphemie, I demand, who ever went beyond the Romans? who not onely made many Gods, and commanded them to be worſhiped, but onely ſuch as were made by them, or received by the publike authoritie of their common wealth or Senate, by pretence of which Law, they refuſed our Saviour Chriſt, although recommended to the Senate by Tiberius,Rival in Hiſt. Iud. Euſebius Tertull. with a prerogatiue of his own voice, as ſome report. So then by the Lawes of the Romans they would haue ſuch Gods, as they made themſelues, & would haue none other to be worſhiped. And whether this were not moſt horrible & abhominable blaſphemie, I deſire to be anſwered. If it were, let us ſee how it was uſed in the old time, when Rome was Ethnick, and how it hath ben uſed ſince. In the Ethnike Rome none were made Gods, but by the Senate, as appeareth by the Law aforeſaid, and none were worſhiped as Gods, but publicè aſciti, ſuch as were publikely accepted. And the Senate made no Gods but their king Romulus, the murtherer of his brother, and the Caeſars, which were the heads of that fourth beaſt or Monarchie. But now in the time of Chriſtianitie, all degrees are Canoniſed, and worſhiped by the Popes authoritie, namely, Munkes and Friers, Nunnes and Prieſts, as well as kings or princes, popes or patriarkes. So that now we may ſee the whole bodie of this Popiſh Empire full of names of blaſphemy. Again, do they not hold & affirm, that everie prieſt and frier in celebrating the Maſſe, doth make God, and that a God to be worſhiped, as not onely the reall but the carnall body of our Lord, and the verie ſame that was borne of the virgin Marie?See more of their blaſpemies in D. Willet, of the 4 Pillets. I aſk whether this be not Blaſphemie? and whether theſe names of Blaſphemy are not now ſpread over all the bodie of the beaſt? If they be,

then whether this difference betweene the Beaſt in the 13 chap. and in the 17 of the Revelation be not herein moſt preciſely and plainly fulfilled? Having obſerved this difference, let us returne againe to the deſcription of this great beaſt, repreſenting the old Roman Empire. It is ſaid, it hath the bodie of a Leopard, the feet of a Beare, and the mouth of a Lyon. This hath been verie well expounded by the learned Napier, and others, to ſignifie, that it hath all the Inſtruments of tyrannie of all the former Monarchies: viz. the Leopard in ſwiftnes and eagernes of the Macedonians.Polyb. lib. 3.
                   For within three and fiftie yeares, as Polib. noteth, from verie ſmall beginnings it got the Monarchie of the world. The Bearelike pawes of the Perſians, that is, innumerable armies, apt to march everie where, & to take hold of everie thing, as the Beare doth with the pawes. And the Lion-like mouth of the Babylonian, not onely to devour men, but to roare out blaſphemies againſt God: as by the inſtance aforeſaid may appear: Who is that God that can deliver you out of my hands? ſaid the Babylonian; ſo the Aſſirian before him, and ſo the Roman after him, by reaſon whereof, they did not onely reject our Saviour Chriſt (as I ſaid before) but ſtirred up, nine or ten horrible perſecutions, againſt Chriſtians,Onuph. in Plat. in vit, Silvest. Vid. Aug. de civ. dei. l. 8,
                   the firſt by Nero. 2, by Domitian. 3, by Trajan. 4, by Antoninus. the 5, by Severus. the 6, by Maximinus. the 7, by Decius. the 8, by Valerianus. and the 9, by Diocleſian. to which they adde, the 10 by the Arrians, which was alſo by the power of the Roman Empire. No leſſe cruelties haue they exerciſed, ſince Rome was Pontifical. but of theſe elſwhere. And thus haue we ſeene this beaſt in his eſſence & parts. Whereupon for a pauſe, let us demaund againe the queſtion: whether theſe things can be verified, of any other perſon, Monarchie, or ſtate in the world, but onely of the Roman? And ſo let us proceed, and conſider of the ſame beaſt, in his

power, and actions, and ſee, whether they alſo do not moſt aptly agree to the ſame ſtate. And here again, we finde ſeuen things noted in this Beaſt. 1, That the Dragon gaue to this beaſt,
                  
                     Rev. 1. 
                  his power, and his throne, and great authoritie, doth not Tully ſay the ſame in effect of Rome, though in other words? Omnis Deorum immortalium poteſtas aut tranſlata est ad vos, aut communicata vobiſcum. Doth not Virgil ſay as much:

                     Diviſum imperium cum Iove Caeſar habet. And again,
                     
                     Iupiter in Caelis, Caeſar regit omnia terris.
                  
               
               2, All the world worſhiped the dragon and the beaſt. Is there any man ignorant of the generall idolatrie & worſhip, that all the world offered aſwell to the Divell, as to the ſtate of Rome in thoſe times?
               
                  All the world wondred and followed after the beast, ſaying who is able to warre with him? Is not the ſame queſtion moved by Livie. Where he propoſeth it as doubtfull. If Alexander the great had come into Italie, whether he could haue conquered it? yea he concludeth it, upon many reaſons, to be without doubt, that he could not. Polyb. alſo ſeemeth to affirm the ſame. Againe was it not verified in the time of Diocleſian, whoſe victories were ſo great, that the Roman Empire was ſaid to haue no bounds, but where their ſoldiers could not march.
               4, There was given to him a mouth ſpeaking great things & blaſphemies, as that which was recorded of Auguſtus, that he would haue himſelf be honoured in Temples by Prieſts, & Flamines,Tacit. 
                        ••
                     n. 1.
                   with all the Ornaments belonging to the Gods, and although he ſeemed at the firſt to refuſe it, (if we beleeue Sueton) yet it appeareth, he was afterward well enough content with it,Suetoni
                        •
                     s. as the ſame Sueton witneſſeth, that divers Provinces made temples, altars, and playes to his honour, as they did to other of their Idols. ſo Virgil.
               
                  
                  Hic illum vidi juvenem Melibaee quotannis
                  Biſſenos cui noſtra dies altaria fumant.Virgil. Argl. 1
                     
                  
               
               And againe — Illius aram
                  Saepe tener nostris ab ovilibus imbuet agnus.
which was followed by his ſucceſſors,Petr. Crinit. de honesta diſcip. l. 17.
                   
                  Ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      illud ignoratur more fuiſſe Rom. Imperatoribus ſuas quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      imagines in templis adorandas apponere, quod a Tertulliano magnis convitiis accuſatur. Such alſo are the ſpeeches, which they were content to hear from others, and to allow and reward them.
               
                  En huius (nate) auſpiciis illa inclyta Roma,
                  Imperium terris animos aequavit olympo.
               
               5, Power was giuen him to do, or to continue two and fortie moneths. Which reckoning according to propheticall computations everie moneth for 30 dayes, make 1260. This may be underſtood eyther of the continuance of the power of the Roman idolatrie from the beginning, or of their perſecutions of the Chriſtians. For the firſt, reckon 1260 yeares from the firſt ſetling of the Roman ſtate;Livy lib. 1.
                   after the death of Tatius the Sabin, when Romulus alone held the government peaceablie, and enlarged the cittie, by taking in the Caelian and Quirinal hilles, and eſtabliſhed the diveliſh worſhip of Iupiter in the firſt temple, that was made in Rome, which was the 25 yeare of his raigne (before which time it was in continuall wars and troubles) reckon I ſay 1260 yeeres from that 25 yeer, and we ſhall come to the yeer 1285 ab urbe condita, which was the yeere from the nativitie of our Lord 533, the verie next yeer after which, (that is to ſay) in the yeere 534 à Chriſto nato, the Chriſtian Emperor Iuſtinian the firſt perfected his learned and excellent bookes of the civill lawes,In co
                        •
                     . wherein beginning with a moſt chriſtian and pious confeſſion of his fayth and confidence in our Lord & Saviour Chriſt Ieſus, he firſt purgeth and ſuppreſſeth all the ancient Idolatrous and ſuperſtitious

lawes, and then enacteth ſpeciall lawes for the confirmation of the true Chriſtian fayth, as appeareth in the beginning of the Code. And this was in the year of our Lord 534. as the beſt Chronologers do agree,Marianus, 
                        •
                     ibhander, Helvins, Onuphr. Renſuer. and in this booke reciting the former godly conſtitutions of Conſtantius, Gratianus, Arcadius, and other chriſtian Emperors for the ſhutting up of Idolatrous Temples, and aboliſhing of diveliſh ſacrifices and auguries, he gaue ſuch vigour and force thereunto by his authoritie and confirmation that ſhortly after the Roman Conſuls, which (as Salvianus teſtifieth, euen in Chriſtian times were wont to be inaugured with heatheniſh and idolatrous rites) utterly ceaſed, and were left off, and ſo may you ſee the 1260 yeares of the continuance of this Roman beaſt, or Monarchie of idolatrie in Rome fulfilled to a day. Although if any man think better to follow the computation of the Godly learned M. Fox, I will not ſpeak againſt it. He maketh of this two & fortie moneths the number of 294 yeres, by taking everie moneth for a ſabboth of yeares: and ſo interpreteth this prophecie, to ſignifie the continuance and determination of the great perſecutions of the primitiue Church, beginning the account of thoſe yeares, from the firſt perſecution of our Saviour Chriſt, under the Iewes and Herod, unto the end of the laſt perſecution under Licinius. I will not (I ſay) ſpeak againſt it. For I muſt needs with open armes accept and imbrace the judgment of that Godly Father. Who ſayth,de civ. dei. li. 11.
                   that the obſcuritie of the word of God is profitable in this reſpect, that it bringeth forth often times in one word, many ſentences of truth, and ſheweth them to the light of our underſtanding, whiles that one man apprehendeth it in one ſence, another in another: ſo that alwayes (ſayth he) that which is collected in one obſcure place, be confirmed eyther by the atteſtation of other manifeſt

things, or by other places not doubtfull; for the ſame Author (ſaith he in another place) in the ſame words which we labour to underſtand peradventure did ſee,de doctr. chri. lib. 3.
                   and thinke upon this ſame other ſentence, and without all peradventure, the ſpirit of God, which uſed the Author for a pen-man, did foreſee that ſuch a ſence or ſentence, alſo ſhould offer it ſelf to the Readers underſtanding. Yea, and did provide & prepare this ſentence alſo to meet with his intelligence, becauſe this ſentence alſo is true, aſwell as the other. For out of whoſe mouth ſoever a truth doth proceed, it is not to be aſcribed to a mutable and mortall man that ſpake it, but to the immutable and eternall God that gaue it,Vide August. in confeſ. l. 12
                   and therefore here I will not be afraid moſt humblie to confeſſe my great darknes and ignorance in all divine knowledge unto thee, O light of my ſoule, and ſoule of my life. But what hurt is it to me, if I thinke the meaning of the Prophet is not as another man thinketh it to be: ſo long as I make no other ſence of his words, then that which thou, the light of all true ſpeaking mindes hast approved to be true. But if any be contentious, then O life of the poore, my God, in whoſe light,
                  Aug. in conf. 
                  there is no contradiction, & in whoſe goodnes, there is no ſhadow of change, raine downe meeknes into my hart, that I may patiently beare with ſuch, as do not ſo much underſtand the ſence of thy Prophet, as they loue their own prejudicate opinion, not becauſe it is truer, but becauſe it is their own. For otherwiſe they would in like manner and meaſure loue and approue the true ſentence of another, as I alſo loue that which they ſay, when they ſpeak truth▪ not becauſe it is their ſentence, but becauſe it is truth. Therefore to returne to our purpoſe: whichſoever of theſe two interpretations we take, or if we take a third more unlikely then eyther, (conſidering whereof we ſpeak, namely of the continuance of the power of the Ethnike Roman Monarchie) that theſe 42 moneths, making 1260 dayes, are to be taken

for ſo many yeares from the incarnation of our Lord, it muſt needs be, that they are long ſince expired, and conſequently, that the power and time of that firſt beaſt and Monarchie is long ſince ended. For to take them literally for three yeeres and an half, (as that godly Father, from whom I do not willingly diſſent) doth in another place limit the continuance of Antichriſt, upon the words, a time, two times, and a half: To take them I ſay literally, that is, for three yeeres and an half, I thinke to all that haue eyther read or heard of their actions, will ſeem to favour of much miſtaking, I might ſay of much ignorance, but that reverence to that good Father, who had not then the help and light, which we now haue, makes me forbeare other mens affected, and obſtinate, and wilfull blindnes in this point, which deſerveth the whipping poſt. But of this more hereafter.
               Let us come therefore to the ſixth note, which is of his Blaſphemie againſt God and his Church. But of this I neede not ſpeak any more, having ſaid ſo much alreadie.
               The ſeuenth is of his warres againſt the Saints, whereof alſo I need ſpeak but little, ſeeing the ſaid ten horrible perſecutions, and many others, ſtirred up by the Roman Emperors againſt the godly chriſtians of the primitiue church, are notorious and known to all men, and never the like to be found in any kingdome or nation whatſoever, no not under the Turkes. But I proceed, this Beaſt or Empire had power over all nations. As to giue inſtance, but in one, we may read of Diocleſian, that within a verie ſhort time, he obteyned mightie and great victories in all parts of the world then known, namely in Africk over Egypt, in Aſia over Perſia, in Europe over France and Brittanie. Vpon all which premiſes, I conclude with this Problem, Whether theſe things can be applyed to any perſon, kingdome, ſtate or monarchie

beſides Rome. And whether any other can be the Antichrist, according to theſe prophecies, but onely he that is the ſeauenth Head, king, or Commander, of the Roman ſtate? And thus we ſee the place of Antichriſt, and the ſtate or bodie politique which he muſt haue. Let us now come a little nearer to conſider of his names.
            
            
               III. The Names.
               
                  No men eſt per quod, quid
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      noſcitur: The name of everie thing is that, whereby it is known, or as it were not a men, it is that, whereby everie thing is noted or diſtinguiſhed. The authoritie to giue names belongeth primarily to God, as Gen. 1,
                     Gen 1. Secondarily to princes and ſuperiours, as Adam Gen. 2.
                     Gen. 2, 19. Thirdly, to the people, by conſent, as Ioh. 13, 13.
                     Ioh. 13.13. The conditions required in the impoſition of names, to make them anſwerable to the definition and notation aforeſaid, are veritie, congruitie, & certaintie.
                  Vide Platon. in Cratyl. Thus being impoſed and approved, they are not to be changed. For they are notes of our notions, notions of things, limits of diſtinctions and dignities, ſignes of truth, and meaſures of certaintie, which being violated or neglected, all knowledg turneth to error and confuſion, all juſtice to injurie, all vertue to villanie, as Cato in Saluſt well noteth;In Con. Cat. 
                  I am pridem nos vera rerum vocabula amiſsimus. And Seneca complayning of the wickednes of times; Proſperum & faelix ſcelus virtus vocatur. And hereby may we ſee the force of the Apoſtles argument Heb. 1.
                     Hebr. 1, 4. and the ignorance and preſumption of Heretikes & Schiſmatikes, who dare take to themſelues new names, and leaue the common name of Chriſtians, giuen by oracle from God, & moſt certainly approved by God. Now if in names giuen by men,
                     Acts 11, 26. certaintie

ought to be obſerved, ſhall we think that the Spirit of God giveth uncertaine names, or will call darknes light, or light darknes?
                     Eſa. 5. Queſtionleſſe he doth not giue idle or uncertain names:
                     Hebr. 4, 12. but in this, as in all things els, uſeth words liuely and ſignificant. And herein is to be noted a difference betweene the names giuen by God, & the names inſtituted by men. For men giue names a posteriori, becauſe things are ſo, and men conceiue them to be ſo, therefore they call them ſo. But the names giuen by God are a priori, becauſe God the Almightie, maker of all things, hath ordeyned that they ſhall be ſo, therefore he calleth them ſo, and becauſe he calleth them ſo, therefore they muſt be ſo. Let us ſee therefore what names are giuen to this great enemie of Chriſt and his Church, and how theſe names are uſed and applied in the Scripture. And firſt of the name Antichriſt. This name (as all men, though but meanely learned in the Greeke tongue do know) is a word compoſed of the prepoſition Anti, and the word Christ: Anti is uſed in Greeke, ſometimes to ſignifie an adverſarie, ſometime a Deputie, or Vicar, as many learned men haue heretofore obſerved and proved. That it ſignifieth an adverſarie is confeſſed by all, that it ſignifieth a deputie, ſubſtitute or vicar appeareth by the word Anthupatos, which is expounded by ſome Proconſull,
                  
                     Act. 19, 38. & 18, 12. by others Deputie. Now the names of Chriſt,So AntiStrategos ſignifieth either a lieutenant, or the adverſe capteyns. which in Hebrue is Meſſiah, and in Engliſh ſignifieth anointed, is diverſly taken in the holy Scripture. Firſt properly, perſonally, and Individually, for our Lord and Saviour Ieſus Chriſt, who is God bleſſed for evermore.
               Secondly,Aug. de civ. dei l. 17, c. 4.
                   
                  appellatiuely, for all that haue a ſimilitude with him by their unction, as Kings, Prieſts and Prophets, in which ſence it is uſed in the Pſalme;
                     Pſal, 105, 15 
                  Touch not mine

annointed, and doe my Prophets no harme: and David of king Saul ſayth, The Lord keep me from doing that unto my maſter,
                  1 Sam. 24, 
                  the Lords annointed, to lay mine hand upon him, for he is the annointed of the Lord. Thirdly, the name of Chriſt is uſed myſtically, for the myſticall bodie of our Saviour Chriſt,1 Cor. 6. which is his church. In which ſence the Apoſtle ſpeaketh Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ?
                  1 Cor. 11. And again,Chriſt is the head of everie man. for as the bodie is one,
                  1 Cor. 12. 
                  and hath many members, and all members of one bodie, ſo is Chriſt▪ for by one ſpirit we are all baptiſed into one bodie. &c. And this that divine Apoſtle himſelf learned of the words of our Saviour Chriſt from heauen: Saul, Saul,
                  
                     Act. 9. 
                  why perſecutest thou me? Now according to theſe different acceptions of theſe two words, let us conſider of the word Antichriſt, and to whom it may be applied. And firſt for the name of Vicarſhip. The Pontifex max. of Rome who is the ſeauenth head or king of the Roman ſtate, and confeſſeth and profeſſeth himſelf to be head & Governour of Rome, he alſo confeſſeth, and profeſſeth himſelf to be the Vicar of Chriſt, and of God, and in this ſenſe the name agreeth unto him; and ſo his advocates and followers affirme him to be. But as the word Antichriſt ſignifieth an enimie to Chriſt, it is by them all ſtoutly denied, that the Pope is that Antichriſt. Let us come therefore to the touch, that is the text where Antichriſt is named, and thereby learne, how the word is to be underſtood. The firſt place where it is expreſly named, is in this our Apoſtle S. Iohn: Who is a lyer (ſayth he) but he that denyeth that Ieſus is the Chriſt,
                  1 Iohn 2, 22 
                  The ſame is the Antichrist. And againe,1 Iohn 4. 
                  Everie ſpirit that confeſſeth not that Ieſus Chriſt is come in the fleſh is not of God,
                  2 Iohn 7. 
                  but this is the ſpirit of the Antichrist. Theſe be all the places where I can finde the verie name uſed in the New Teſtament. It may percaſe ſeeme ſtrange to finde it in the old, and yet

there it is to be found, and that in a moſt excellent prophecie, though not the ſame in letters, yet the ſame in ſence and ſignification,
                     Pſal. 2. 
                  The kings of the earth ſet themſelues (ſayth the Prophet) and the princes aſſembled againſt the Lord, and againſt his Anoynted. This Pſalme (if we marke it well) conteyneth in brief words the ſumme and effect of all the Prophecies of Daniel, and the Revelation, concerning the enemies of the Church, and namely Antichrist; and that appeareth in ſeauen particulars. Firſt, the rage and furie of the enemies. 2, their joyning together againſt God and Chriſt, and their intention to ſhake off the yoke of Chriſt Ieſus. 3, the providence of God for his church, ſitting in heauen, as in a watch-tower, watching over his enemies, & laughing them to ſcorne. 4, the meanes which God uſeth to defend them, by ſetting Chriſt to raigne in his church. 5, the anoynting of our Saviour in his eternall generation, and arming him with regall and ſoveraigne power to ſuppreſſe all his enemies. 6, a loving and ſerious adviſe to all Princes and Rulers of the earth, to beware to whom they cleaue and adhere, either to Chriſt, or to his enimies. And laſtly, an aſſured promiſe of happines to all thoſe that truſt in him. Behold then an excellent Prophecie, and the ſame is touched againe in the 89 Pſalme and other places.
                     Pſal. 89, 51. But to our purpoſe.
                     Pſal. 2, 2. The word in this Pſalme is Al-Meſhico, againſt his Anoynted, wherein Meſſhiah, as it is commonly known ſignifieth Annointed or Chriſt. And the prepoſition Al, or Gnal, in Hebrue, is taken as 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   in Greeke, not onely for adverſus, but for juxta, or ſecundum, and ſometimes ſuper. In the ſecond ſignification, that is, juxta or ſecundum it is accepted by the Pope, neither is it denyed by him or his followers in the third ſignification, which is ſuper, if we take the name of Chriſt, either for his myſticall bodie, (for therein he affirmeth himſelf, to be aboue the

Church, & to be head thereof) of if we take the name Chriſt, for all that are anoynted, namely, kings, prophets and prieſts, he affirmeth himſelf to be ſuperiour and aboue them alſo: which is a ſpeciall note of Antichriſt, as S. Paul ſayth, He ſhall exalt himſelf aboue all that is called God, or that is worſhiped. Neither do I finde,2 Theſ. 2. that ever any Emperor, Prince, Prelate, or Potentate, but onely the Pope tooke upon him the names, either of Vicarius Dei, or Christi Generalis, or Caput eccleſiae catholicae, or to be ſuper eccleſiam catholicam, not the Emperors of Rome, not the Turke, nor any other. But the onely thing that they ſtand upon is, as I ſaid before, that he is not adverſarius Christi, perſonally, and therefore not Antichriſt. But how can this be? For Chriſt is in heauen, and Antichriſt for all his malice & power cannot touch him there. Let us therefore examine the places of Scripture aforeſaid, where the name of Antichriſt is uſed, and we ſhall eaſily perceiue that the name of Chriſt cannot, neither ought to be taken for his perſon. For Chriſt cannot be found perſonally preſent upon earth: but either ſpiritually according to his graces, or ſacramentally in the Sacrament, or appellatiuely, as the name is communicated to others, or myſtically, as to the Church. So therefore muſt the name of Antichriſt be taken for an enimie to the graces, Sacraments or miniſters of Chriſt, and that not individually in one perſon, but ſpiritually in his works, or appellatiuely in ſucceſſion. For otherwiſe it can not expreſſe the true intention, or effect of the thing, for the Emphaſis, or principall force of the ſentence in all the places aforeſaid, reſteth upon the word Chriſt, that is Anointed: as in the firſt place, He that denyeth our Saviour is the Anointed, he is Antichriſt:1 Ioh. 2, ſo in the ſecond and third places:1 Ioh. 4, He that denyeth that the

Anointed Saviour is come into the world, is Antichrist. So in the Pſalme, The kings and princes ſet themſelues againſt the Lords Anointed. Now the ointment wherewith our Saviour was anointed, was the fulnes of the graces of the H. Ghoſt, as the ſcripture teſtifieth. 1, that he was full of grace.
                     Iohn. 1. Hebr. 1. 2, that he was full of truth. 3, that by himſelf he purged our ſinnes. 4, that he is made to us wiſedome.1 Cor. 1. 5, Iuſtification. 6, ſanctification. And 7, redemption. & ſuch like. Now he that denieth theſe graces in our Saviour, and fighteth againſt thoſe that aſcribe theſe graces unto him, he or none muſt be the Antichriſt, for other warres againſt Chriſt, who ſitteth in heauen at the right hand of God cannot be made. Who then are thoſe, that ſend us to other Mediators and Interceſſors, namely to the virgin Marie, the Apoſtles, and Saints, to ſpeak and pray for us? if it be the Pope & his followers, then I aske them, why or for what reaſon they will haue us ſo to do? if they do acknowledg our Saviour to be full of grace, why do they ſend us to others, if our ſinnes make us unworthie to goe to him, that calleth us to himſelf, how many we go to the virgin Marie, or the H. Apoſtles who do not call us? Is he not as full of grace that calleth us, as they that call us not? Is he not as eaſie to be intreated now in heauen, as he was upon earth, when he did not reject Marie Magdalen, that had ſeauen divels, the woman of Canaan, whom he rebuked by the name of a dog, nor the man poſſeſſed with a legion. Secondly, how do they acknowledg him to be full of truth, when they ſay, that his H. word doth not contain all truth, but it muſt be pieced out with the traditions, Canons and expoſitions of their Church? 3. How do they acknowledg him to be our wiſdome,Scriptura ſeipſam exponit. Chriſ. & Aug 2 Tim. 3.
                   when they will not haue his word to be ſufficient to interpret it ſelf, and to inſtruct us, & make us perfect in all good works, but we muſt

reſort to the Church and receiue her judgment from the mouth of their Pope? 4, How do they acknowledge our Saviour Chriſt, by himſelf, to haue purged all our ſinnes, when they ſay, that we muſt ſatiſfie by good works in our life, and after our death we muſt go to Purgatorie? 5, How do they acknowledg him to be our juſtification, when they ſay, that we are juſtified before God by our good works, and not onely by faith in his death and paſſion, although it be written, if thou confeſse with thy mouth the Lord Ieſus, and belieue in thy heart,
                  
                     Rom. 10. Hebr. 10. 
                  that God rayſed him from the dead, thou ſhalt be ſaved. 6, How do they confeſſe him to be our ſanctification, or that by one ſacrifice, he hath conſecrated for ever them that are ſanctified, when as they teach, that there muſt be offered up dayly ſacrifices for us in the Maſſe? And laſtly, how do they accept him for their Redeemer, which affirm that our poenarie works,Concil Trid. ſeſ 14. Bellarm. de paenitent. l. 4.
                   truly & properly do ſatiſfie God for the guilt of our puniſhment, which after the fault forgiuen, remaineth to be expiated? But theſe points, with many others which may be produced, to proue that the Pope and his Church, if not expreſly, yet by conſequence (which is equivalent) doth deny the fulnes of all graces to be in our Saviour Chriſt, I leaue to our learned Divines, of whom ſome haue urged theſe things alreadie, and others I doubt not, will proſecute them more at large hereafter. The ſumme of all this may be reduced to this Problem: Whether any may more properly be called Antichriſt, or may be called an adverſarie to Chriſt, then he that thus denieth the graces of our Saviour?
               Let us come to that which is not onely eaſie to our underſtanding, but evident to our ſenſes, which may be ſeen with our eyes, and felt with our hands. For if we take the name of Chriſt here, as he is in the ſacrament, who hath been a greater enimie to Chriſt, thē the Popes, one of them

poyſoning it, another caſting it into the fire, all changing, adding or diminiſhing it? But take the name as it is communicated to Kings, Prieſts, and Prophets, and ſo Antichriſt to be an enimie to them, I demand, who hath in ſecret, (as Antichriſt muſt be deceiueable) been a greater enimie to all chriſtian kings and Princes, then the Popes, ſometimes incenſing them to fight with Pagans and Saracens abroad, as de did Godfry of Bulleyn, & many Princes with him, in the meane ſpace neglecting their Chriſtian ſubjects at home: our king Richard the firſt, and the Emperor Frederike: ſometimes ſtirring up ſeditions and rebellions at home, as he did againſt the Emperor Henry the IIII. Henry the IIII. king of France, and Queen Elizabeth, ſometimes miniſtring occaſions to make wars betwixt themſelues, as Pope Iohn did by crowning another Emperor while the firſt was living; ſometimes, by giving away their kingdomes, as Navarre and England, ſometimes leaving them deſtitute of ſuccour, and open to the univerſall profeſſed enimie of all Chriſtians, the Turke, as they did the Grecian Emperors: ſometimes ſetting ſecret Traitors to murder them, and ſometimes procuring open enimies to invade them, ever excommunicating, curſing and interdicting one or other of them. Let the hiſtories of late times be peruſed, and ſee whether their ende and drift hath not been continually for theſe 900 yeeres and upwards, to maintaine and advance their own power, riches, juriſdiction and preeminence, by holding chriſtian princes alwaies obnoxious to them, and to make them obnoxious, and to keepe them under awe, by ſuch meanes as aforeſaid? So likewiſe for Prieſts and Prophets: is he not an adverſarie to all that will not ſubmit themſelues unto him? as namely to the Greek Church, and all the

biſhops and learned paſtors of the ſame, to the godly Valdenſes, Albigenſes, Wicklevites and others? Laſtly if we take the name of Chriſt here for his myſticall body, which is the Church, this is alſo a ſpeciall note of Antichriſt. For ſo it is plainly ſaid, that the woman was drunke with the bloud of Saints and Martyrs. And who hath ſhed more bloud of godly men, profeſſing the word of Chriſt Ieſus, then the Popes haue done for theſe laſt nine hundred yeares? I referre my ſelf to the hiſtories and Chronicles of thoſe times.See Abb
                        •
                     t demonſt. antich. In that one warr which they cauſed Chriſtian Princes to undertake for Ieruſalem, under Godfry of Bollen, it is recorded, that there were ſlayn two thouſand millions of Chriſtians. In Merindall, Cabriers and other places held by the poore Valdois, they murdered all, men, women, and ſucking children. In the Maſſacre of France Anno 1572 within eight daies were murdered a hundred thouſand, beſide many other at other times, in England and elſe where. So that howſoever we take the name of Antichriſt, either, as Vicar to Chriſt, or as adverſarie, eyther denying his graces, or ſuppreſſing his Liuetenants and miniſters, or perſecuting his members; I finde this name moſt agreeable to Rome: and I demand, Whether it can be ſo well applied unto any other? But here will be demanded of me a queſtion, how this name Ho Antichriſtos that Antichriſt (as they expound the Greeke Article, which they would perſwade, is to be underſtood of one man) can be applied to a ſucceſſion of men, eſpecially, ſeeing ſome of the Fathers ſeeme to ſpeake of him, but as one man? For the Fathers (to clear that firſt) it muſt be confeſſed, that quaeſtionibus non dum motis,
                  P
                        ••
                     k in Prob. they ſpake ſometimes impropriè, & incautius, as Bellarm. confeſſeth, or ſecurius, as S. Auguſt. ſometimes Rhetoricè as S. Ierom.

ſometimes populariter, as others do affirm. This queſtion concerning Antichriſt, was not appointed for them, but for us, upon whom it muſt needs be confeſſed, that the uttermoſt ends of the world are fallen, neither did they much labour in it. And yet we ſee not all of them runne in one ſtraine. Hilarie ſeemeth to ſpeak more largely. He that refuſeth the judgment of the Scriptures, Antichriſtus eſt. Chryſoft. in opere imperfecto doth not reſtraine himſelf to one man: but we (ſayth he) videmus abominationem deſolationis jam ſtantem in loco ſancto, id eſt, populum Antichriſti in locis eccleſiae. and yet confeſſeth that Antichriſt muſt continue to the end. Let the whole place be conſidered. Howſoever it be, it can not be ſaid, that this queſtion was ſo well ventilated in thoſe times, as it hath been of late. Then for anſwer I demand, what, or how much, the queſtion will be altered if the Pope be acknowledged to be Antichriſt, though he be not proved to be that Antichriſt? what difference will it make in the end? Muſt not all true Chriſtians beware, avoide, & deteſt everie Antichriſt? But to the point. It is cōmonly known in Grammer ſchooles, that this particle, Ho, in Greeke, is not alwayes uſed ſignificantly; nor in a ſignificant uſe, is it alwaies taken to ſignifie a particular and individuall perſon; nor yet in particulars is it alwaies uſed to note Eminence or ſingularitie. Sometimes, and that verie frequent it is uſed indefinitely; many times it is joyned with a name of multitude, or with a name of ſucceſſion. He that hath any knowledge in the Tongues may eaſily obſerue, that Ho, in Greeke, is not ſo Emphaticall as Ha, in Hebrew, or the, in Engliſh, which yet is ſometimes emphaticall, and ſometimes not. For in the ſame chapter, where it is ſaid, Ho Antichriſtos, in the ſame it is ſaid 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,2 Ioh. 2. 
                  he that ſayth he is in light, and hateth his brother is in darknes. And again 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .

                  &c. The luſt of the fleſh, the pride of life &c. and the verie laſt word of that Epiſtle is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Keepe your ſelues from Idols. So in other places it is joyned with names indefinite, as 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   in another place with the name of Chriſt,
                     Epheſ. 5. to ſignifie his myſticall body conſiſting of a multitude ſucceſſiue, under one head immortall. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
(ſayth he) ſo is Chriſt.
                  Hebr. 9. Abbat. in demonst. And in another place it is joyned expreſſely with a name of perſonall ſucceſſion, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which is ever tranſlated, thé High-Prieſt once a yeare entred into the holy place, there ſpoken of.1 Pet. 2, 17. So in another place 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Honour the King. Will any man ſay it was meant onely of one king? And again 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  by the Highprieſt.
                  
                     Hebr. 13, 11▪
                   And the uſe of Ho in theſe places, wherein it cannot be meant of one ſingular Prieſt or King, is ſo like and paralell to the uſe of it in the name of Ho Antichristos, that I ſee not what difference can be made betweene them. Yet if any will not take this for a ſufficient anſwer, let him well conſider, how he can anſwer the problems following, by which I thinke it will appeare, that the Pope is not onely an Antichriſt, but euen that Antichriſt, whereof the Scripture ſpeaketh. Foraſmuch as the Prophecies can be verified of none but of him, and that not of one alone, but of the whole ſucceſſion. And therefore, to proceede to the Names, I deſire the Reader to examine, whether any of the ſix names that I ſhall now produce, do not fully agree to the Pope, and to all the Popes that haue bèen in Rome, ſince the time of Pope Conſtantine: and if theſe names do agree, I muſt demand, How it can be denied, but that they, and everie one of them, is Ho Antichriſtos, that Antichriſt?
               
               The ſecond name therefore is Pontifex maximus, or ſummus, the Higeſt or Great Prieſt. This name I am ſure they will not deny to their Pope, and likewiſe I am ſure that,

they will deny it to any other, unleſſe it be to our Saviour Chriſt. To our Lord it belongeth of right, & if any other take it upon himſelf, it muſt be by uſurpation, and ſuch an uſurper of the right and title of our Saviour Chriſt, muſt be Antichriſt. It was never given to any by God, but to our Saviour Chriſt. Mel
                        •
                     hiſedeck is called a Prieſt of the High God,
                     Hebr. 6, 20. and 8, 1. Aaron is called an High Prieſt, our Saviour Chriſt the High Prieſt, and the great Sheepheard of our ſoules,Ecce Pontif. ſum. qui non eget alieno ex. piariſauguine Aug. medit. and ſuch like titles: but the title of the Higheſt, or Greateſt belongeth to none, but peculiarly to our Saviour Chriſt. I aſke then firſt, whether the Pope of Rome do not declare himſelf an enimie to Chriſt, in that he doth exalt himſelf aboue all that is called God, or that is worſhiped, in taking a name upon him higher and greater then was ever giuen to the ſonnes of men? not to Aaron the holy, not to Phinehas the zealous, not to Iehojada the worthie, not to Iehoſhua the noble, not to Simeon the glorious, not to Iohn the fore-runner, nor to Melchiſedek the royall and ſingular: everie one in his time, the type of our great and eternall High Prieſt, farre aboue them all, whoſe conſecration is eternall, whoſe Prieſthood is eternall,
                     Hebr. 7, 16, 24. & 6, 8. & 9, & 10. whoſe entrie into the Holy place is eternall, whoſe oblation is eternall, whoſe ſacrifice is eternall, whoſe mediation is eternall, and whoſe preſence in his Church is eternall. Againe, the Apoſtle proveth the excellencie and divinitie of our Saviour farre aboue all Angels, becauſe he hath received a more excellent name. Doth not the ſame argument proue, that the Pope in taking an equall name, maketh himſelf equall in dignitie? therefore never durſt any of the faythfull Martyrs, or Biſhops of the primitiue Church, take upon him this name of Summus, or Maximus Pontifex, never any of the Holy Patriarks, or Prophets, never any of the divine Euangeliſts, never any of the moſt

bleſſed Apoſtles, for they all knew it belong onely to that great High Prieſt, whoſe Prieſthood is for ever. And how dareſt thou (O miſerable mortall man) take upon thee a name ſo divine, as to be called the Higheſt or Greateſt Prieſt, whilſt he is living to whom it ſo inſeparably belongeth? Why doſt thou not alſo directly call thy ſelfe Chriſt, as well as the Higheſt Prieſt, which is equivalent? I demand againe, whether in taking this name, thou doſt not proclaim, that thou doſt deny, that our Lord Chriſt Ieſus is now the Higheſt or Greateſt Prieſt? and ſo profeſſe thy ſelf to be his enimie, and claime to be aboue him: ſeeing it muſt be confeſſed, that if the Pope be greateſt, then Chriſt is not the greateſt. For two may be great, but of two each of them cannot be greateſt, no more then two can be infinite, or two principall. But (ſay they) Chriſt is in heauen Head of the Triumphant Church,Panorm, the pope is onely head of the church militant upon earth. (O blaſpheamer
                     •
                   is not Chriſt Ieſus truly God? in earth, as preſent by his power,Enter, praeſenter Deus est. & ubique potenter. Pſ. 139 Sed familiarius in electis pergratiam. to rule the church militant, as in heauen? How then dareſt thou, ſitting onely at Rome, proclaim thy ſelf Head of the univerſall church, as well, which is in Brittanie, Germanie, France, Spaine, Africa, America, and India, parts where thou art not, as at Rome? and yet confine him to heauen, as if he were wholly excluded from the earth, who is here, as preſent as there? But they ſay againe, the Pope claymeth onely as Vicar to Chriſt, O ſtill blaſpheamer! anſwer againe, what hath a Vicar to doe, in the preſence of his ſuperiour? yea of ſuch a Superiour, who filleth heauen and earth, and hath bound himſelf by ſpeciall promiſe,
                     Ier 23. Matth. 28. to be with his church for ever? Doſt thou not, in making thy ſelf his Vicar, deny his preſence, and in denying the preſence of our Lord and Saviour Chriſt in his church, deny him to be truly God? Quid verba audiam, cum facta videam?
                  
Againe I aſke, whether thou doſt not in this name uſurpe the rights of our Saviour, and ſo alſo declare thy ſelf to be his enimie? When the valiant King Edward the third, of England, intended warr againſt Phillip the French King, he proclaymed himſelf King of France, & that was the beginning of the warr, & ſo everie Prince taketh it for a denuntiation of war, when his neighbour Prince taketh his title. And ſhall not we ſay, that this is a publike proclamation of war, by the Pope againſt our Saviour Chriſt, when he taketh upon him the ſtile of Pont. Max. that properly belongeth to our Saviour, and was never giuen truly to any man, but to him? yea doth he not exalt himſelf aboue Chriſt? For Chriſt did not take it to himſelf, but received it of his Father. But the Pope taketh it to himſelf, without the gift of any, unleſſe it were of Phocas the Murtherer, of whom we ſhall ſpeake hereafter. Neyther yet doth he onely take this title to himſelf, but other titles alſo not inferiour, as caput, and ſponſus eccleſiae, &:c. which onely belong to our Saviour. I demand further, whom doth he follow in this title? Doth he follow Melchiſedek, or Aaron? They were both called High Prieſts, and they were indeede Types of our Saviour Chriſt, (the onely true High-Prieſt) and ordeined by God for certeine ſignes that he ſhould come, and ſo had a lawfull calling. But when the truth was come, then all types were aboliſhed, yea and they alſo are aboliſhed from Chriſt, & fallen from grace, whoſoever do uſe them. Whereupon the godly Fathers do affirme, that the Céremonies of the Law are now not onely mortuae, but mortiferae, not onely in uſe dead, but to be uſed deadly. And the reaſon is apparant, for that whoſoever doth uſe them, doth deny that our Saviour is come in the fleſh, namely, by uſing thoſe

Ceremonies which were Inſtituted to ſhew that he was not then come, but to be expected. But the Pope uſing the title of High Prieſt after the order of Melchiſedek, or of Aaron doth uſe a Ceremonie, inſtituted to ſhew that Chriſt was not come in the fleſh, but was to be expected: Therefore I aſke, Whether he doth not denye that Chriſt Ieſus is come in the fl
                        •
                     ſh, and ſo alſo declare himſelf to be Antichriſt? But if they will ſay, that in taking this title upon him, he followeth our Saviour Chriſt: I aſke by what authoritie, or who calleth him to it? No man (ſayth the Apoſtle) taketh this title upon him, ſaue he that is called of God, as was Aaron. And againe, the Prieſthood of Chriſt cannot paſſe from one to another. The reaſon, becauſe Chriſt is God eternall, who can haue no ſucceſſor in his offices, and therefore he that will take upon him to ſucceed Chriſt, doth deny his divinitie, as he that will be his Vicar, by pretence of his abſence. Well, if the Pope can ſhew no calling, then I aſk, by what example or precedent? if it were a title lawfull to be uſed, why did none of the Apoſtles nor of the Diſciples uſe it? not Tuus, not Timothie, not Paul nor Peter, not Iames the brother of our Lord, Biſhop of Ieruſalem, & Preſident of the counſell of the Apoſtles, nor yet our Apoſtle S. Iohn, which outlived all the reſt, and therefore might beſt do it. In a word, I finde none to whom this title of Summus, or Maximus Pontifex hath any wayes ben applied, but either Melchiſedek, or Aaron, or to our Saviour Chriſt: nor any that hath taken it upon them by humain authoritie, but onely the Idolatrous Pontifex Maximus that was in Rome, of whom I haue ſpoken before. And if the Pope cannot juſtifie his higheſt and greateſt Pontificalitie, by ſome title from one or other of the three firſt, it will fall out inevitable, that he is the true and undoubted ſucceſſor of the laſt. And that is moſt conſonant and agreeable to

the words of our prophecie, that Antichriſt ſhould be one of the ſeauen heads of Rome, and namely that head of whom S. Iohn ſayth, He was, and is not, and yet is, as is before proved.
                     Probl 2. The ſame alſo may be proved by his name Papa, whereof divers haue made divers derivations, but for my part I thinke none more probable, then to ſay it cometh from one of the titles, uſed or uſurped by the old Roman Emperors, which upon their coines were wont to ſtampe Pa. Pa. for Pater Patriae, and now the Roman Prelate, as he ſucceedeth them in the name of Pont. Maximus, ſo he taketh that title of Papa likewiſe, to proue himſelf their undoubted Succeſſor. I will not therefore ſtand here further to confute their pretence and claime, to be Vicarius Chriſti, although I might ſay. that it cannot ſtand with the celſitude of a Pontifex max. to be but a Vicar, neither can a Vicar diſpenſe with the lawes of his ſuperiour: nor will I anſwer to, Tu es Petrus, and ſuch like, which haue been ſo many times anſwered by our learned divines, neither do I think my ſelf bound to refute the immoderate titles giuen to the Pope by S. Barnard, or other late Doctors, a pointe of this weight is not to be carried away with ſwelling phraſes of Rhetorick, but by evident teſtimonies of undoubted truth. Certain it is that he who ſaid Tu es Petrus, never ſayd Tu eris Pontifex Maximus, nor Tu eris meus vicarius,
                  Chryſost. no nor ſuper hunc Petrum aedificabo &c. neither did he giue any keyes to him, more then to the reſt of the Apoſtles. But if I may ſpeak my opinion, this name Pontifex max. is the verie name of blaſphemie written in the forehead of that purple whore, euen that Antichriſt. &c. So much therefore be ſpoken of this name of Pontifex Max. which the Pope taketh to himſelf. A third title is Servus ſervorum Dei. This attribute the Pope alſo, and he alone accepteth, acknowledgeth and uſeth it. But this title was

never giuen to any, but by the godly prophet and patriarch Noah, to the curſed Canaan, whoſe Father was the ſcorner of that godly patriarch, and his poſteritie the mortall enimies of our Saviour Chriſt in his Church of Iſraell, and ſo a type of Antichriſt, and therefore were commanded utterly to be deſtroyed, rooted out, and aboliſhed, as Antichriſt ſhall be. It will be ſaid, that the holy man S. Grigorie uſed this name. I will not deny but he was an holy man, and although a man ſubject to ſome errors and infimities, yet as I verily believ a Prophet. For he prophecied of the comming of Antichriſt. It is the last houre (ſayth he) the king of pride is at hand, an armie of Priests is prepared to attend him. But I know that the prophets by the inſtinct of Gods ſpirit did and ſaid many things, which were in them propheticall, but in others would be abſurd & inconvenient, as Eſaiah and Hoſea, naming their children with ſtrange names. Ezechiel lying many dayes upon one ſide, baking his bread in doung, and creeping out through a wall at noone, and ſuch like; or if theſe things be taken to be viſions or parables, yet that cannot be denyed, that one of the prophets commanded another to ſtrike and wound him. Iacob was by an Angell called Iſrael, and Salomon was named by a prophet. And who knoweth whether that propheticall Biſhop Gregorie did take that name in humilitie, foreſeeing that his own ſucceſſors would uſe it in pride, & as the king of pride? It might be a title holy in him, and yet accurſed in them, as the name of Iudah was bleſſed in the patriarch, and in one of the Apoſtles, but moſt accurſed in the Traitor. Theſe two names therefore uſed by the Pope, you ſee may well be applied to Antichriſt. Now wil I ſhew forth three other names giuen in the Scripture to Antichriſt, which may as well be applied to the Pope, whereof the firſt is the man of ſin, or the Lawleſſe one: for the

word Anomos in Greeke doth ſignifie ſo properly, and the word Belial in the old Teſtament is near to the ſame effect. And in this, as in the reſt of the names that follow, it is worthie to be obſerved, that as the title of Summus Pontifex, Servus ſervorum, & others, which the Pope doth take unto himſelf, and approue, do aptly agree to the types and deſcriptions of Antichriſt in the ſcripture, ſo likewiſe the titles giuen to Antichriſt in the ſcripture do moſt aptly agree to the actions and practiſes of the Popes, recorded in their owne Hiſtories. For inſtance, in this name of the man of ſinne, or the Lawleſſe man, what Monarch, prince, prelate, or potentate, did ever ſo much practiſe allow, and maintain open and notorious ſinnes, as the Popes do and haue done now for theſe many hundred years, by their faculties, pardons, licences, and diſpenſations? Adulterie, 
                     •
                   inceſt, Sodomie and Treaſon, murder & parricide, & wha
                     •
                   not beſides? What enormous, horrible and abhominable practiſes do we read of Boniface the 7. and 8. Gregorie the 7. otherwiſe called Hildebrand: Silveſter the 2. Stephen the 6. Iohn the 8.9.10.11.12. and all the reſt? It may eaſily be obſerved in their Hiſtories, how many of them haue ben Simoniakes, Idolaters, Adulterers, inceſtious, murderers, Traytors, Sacriligious, Sodemites, and Conjurers. Eaſily do I ſay, nay not eaſily, unleſſe you name all ſince Pope Conſtantine. For everie one of them ſince his time, which was about the yeare of our Lord 707, exalted themſelus aboue the Emperors, & tooke away from them their provinces and Territories, therein committing open Treaſon and rebellion. All of them ſince that time openly, & ſtoutly maintained Idolatrie, and not one of them but hath been taynted with ſome other of the crimes aforeſaid. For proof whereof let me aſk, which of them hath reformed, or diſavowed the wicked actions of their predeceſſors? namely

                  the Idolatries, Adulteries, Stewhouſes, Luciferian Pride, and ſuch like? And yet; who they are that will be lawleſſe and ſubject to no mans cenſure,Platin
                        •
                     . let them anſwer that haue read in Platina the life of Pope Leo the 3. who being accuſed to the Emperor, Charles the great, for certain offences, the Emperor intending to examine the matter, Reſponſum est ab omnibus (ſayth the Author) ſedem apoſtolicam omnium eccleſiarum caput, à nemine, Laico praeſertim, judicari debere. It was anſwered by all the Biſhops, Clergie & people of Rome, that the Sea Apoſtolike, the Head of all churches, ought to be judged by none, eſpecially not by a Lay man. Which reſolution they haue held, & continued ever ſince. Let them anſwer that haue read their Decree,Dist. 40. & can. 9, q. 3.
                   
                  That the Pope though he draw millions of men, catervatim, by heaps into hell, yet is to be judged by no man. Let them anſwer that haue read their Doctors, Canoniſtes, and Caſuiſtes, determining,Sum. Angel, t. Papa. 
                  That the Pope may diſpence with ſome of the Commandements of the firſt Table, and all of the ſecond, as (ſayth my Author) Pope Martin did with him that had taken his owne ſiſter to wife. And if conſent and approbation do make a man partie, or acceſſorie to the ſinnes of another, according to the common Rules of all lawes; let them anſwer, which of them haue diſadvoued or diſſented from the actions of the ſaid Pope Conſtantine, who erected & mainteyned Idolatrie; and for that cauſe,Onuphr. in Plat. 
                  Palam & in os (ſayth the Hiſtorian) openly and to his teeth reſiſted the Emperor, rebelled againſt him, and deprived him of the government of all Italie?See more of this lawleſnes in M. Downh. treatie of Antichrist, lib. 1. cap. 5, & 6. where he citeth Hoſtienſis and others, with theſe ſentences: Legi non ſubjacet ulli. Item, potest diſpenſare ſupra jus, contra jus, & extra jus. And out of Panor. Potest omnia ſacere quae Deus. Item, Papa poteſt diſpenſare contra ius Divinum. &c. Which of them doth not acknowledg his ſucceſſion from Silveſter the 2. and Gregorie the 7, the great Necromancers: and from Iohn the 11. and 12. the great adulterers? which of them diſavoweth the actions

and decrees of Boniface the 8. Benet the 12. Iulius the 2. and the reſt of that rabble, that filled all Chriſtendome with warres and bloudſhed? Let us but caſt our eyes upon the moniments of ſome of them. Of Boniface the eight it is thus written: Intravit ut vulpes, regnavit ut leo, mortuus est ut canis. Of Benet the 12. thus:
               
                  Hic ſitus ille Nero, Laicis mors, vipera clero,
                  Devius a vero, cuppa repleta mero.
               
               Of Pius 2. the learned Cardinall, that would needs take the name of Pius upon him, when he was made pope.
               
                  Vendidit aere polum, terras in morte reliquit,
                  Styx ſupereſt Papae, quam colat una Pio.
               
               Of Paulus the 2. thus:
               
                  Pontificis Pauli teſtes ne Roma requirat
                  Filia quam genuit ſat docet eſse marem.
               
               Of Sixtus called the 4. thus:
               
                  Dic unde (Alecto) pax iſta repulſit, & unde
                  Tam ſubitò reticent praelia? Sixtus obit.
               
               Of Innocent the 8. thus:
               
                  Spurcities, gula, avaritia, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ignavia deſes
                  Hoc (Octave) jacent, quo tegeris, tumulo.
               
               Of Alexander his next ſucceſſor, thus:
               
                  Vendit Alexander Sacramenta, altaria, Chriſtum
                  Emerat ille prius, vendere jure poteſt.
               
               Of his daughter Lucretia thus:
               
                  Hoc jacet in tumulo Lucretia nomine, ſed re
                  Thais Alexandri filia, ſponſa, nurus.
               
               Of Iulius the 2. thus, that he threw the keyes into the river Tibris, ſaying, that the ſword of S. Paul ſhould help him:
               Quandoquidem clavis nil juvat ista Petri.
               Such kinde of excellent Elogia are giuen to all the reſt, and yet ſtill their ſucceſſors, Paraſites & Sectaries call them Moſt holy Fathers, and the Vicars of Chriſt. But if I ſhould

recite all, it would aſk a juſt volume of it ſelf.See 
                        〈◊〉
                      Myſt. Let theſe be ſufficient to ſhew, that theſe are the men to whom theſe titles, The Man of ſinne, and The lawleſſe man may moſt rightly be given. And if any man will yet deny or doubt of it, let him anſwer upon good adviſement, whether ever he read, or heard of ſuch monſters of men, among the Iewes, Turkes, Infidels, or any Pagans in the world: and whether he thinke it likely, that any man ſhould go beyond theſe men in wickedneſſe, and yet withall obteyne ſuch a privilege and prerogatiue to be lawleſſe. And if not, then whether this be not, that man of ſinne, that lawleſſe man, that Antichriſt?
               
               I come to the fifth name which is giuen to Antichriſt in the Scripture, which is, The Sonne of perdition. A title firſt giuen by our Saviour Chriſt to Iudas the Traytor,
                     Iohn 17. 2 Theſ. 2. and after by S. Paul to Antichriſt, ſhewing, as may eaſily be collected, that Antichriſt ſhould be like to Iudas, in profeſſion a Chriſtian, in calling a Biſhop,
                  Of Iudas ſee Act. 1, 20.
                   in title an Apoſtle, in practiſe a Traitour. Now, whether all theſe things do not moſt properly concurre in the Pope, let them anſwer, that haue read the Hiſtories of England, Germanie, France and Italie, eſpecially of late dayes. For of his profeſſion, Biſhoprik, and Apoſtolate no queſtion is made. And of his treaſons: let them tell me, by whoſe practiſes Rome and Italie rebelled againſt the Emperors,See more in Fox Monim. in his deſerce of the L. Cobham and heye probl. 7.
                   by whoſe practiſes ſuch rebellions and treaſons were ſet on foote in England & Ireland, againſt Queene Elizabeth, and in France againſt the late Henry IV. by whoſe Partiſans traitors of late time haue beene moſt ſet a worke, approved and commended, and whether he be not called a Christian, a Biſhop, and an Apoſtle.
               
               The ſixth name is Abaddon, a Deſtroyer, well agreeing with the former names. And how many millions of men the Popes haue deſtroyed, by ſetting Chriſtian

Princes ſometimes to deſtroy their own ſubjects under the names of Heretikes, ſometimes to fight with Pagans and Turkes, and ſometimes to fight one with another, they can beſt tell us, who are converſant in their hiſtories. I will here inſtance but in one or two examples, in which I deſire them to anſwer; how manie thouſand Chriſtians were ſlaine in the civill warres, ſtirred up in Germanie by the Popes, in the times of Henrie the IV. and Henrie the V. Conradus Frederick, and Adolphus of Naſſau, Emperors of Germanie? Alſo in the warres ſtirred up between the two Antipapes, Vrban and Clement,Fro
                        •
                     ſſart. when each of them ſent out Bulles, to ſtirre up Princes to deſtroy the adherents one of another?See more Probl. 5.
                   How many thouſand chriſtians were deſtroyed by the Turks, by occaſion of that wofull diſcomfiture at Varna, whereunto the King of Hungarie was thruſt, by the importunitie of the Pope, and his Cardinall Iulian, inciteing him to break the Truce, ſworne to, with the Turke? How many in France in the civill warres there ſtirred up by the Legue? How manie in Germanie in theſe laſt warres, which are yet in hand? And yet herein is further to be obſerved, that whereas the Turke & other Tyrants do murder and kill onely mens bodies, and yet do not profeſſe that, but deſire to be called mercifull & gracious Lords: onely the Pope profeſſeth, that if he draw millions of mens bodies and ſoules with him into Hell, yet he is to be judged of no man, he is to be redargued of no man for it. I aske then, whom ſhall we call Abaddon, a deſtroyer, if this be not he, that profeſſeth he may do it without controulment. Or, what Abaddon ſhall we looke for beſides? But if any man will contend that the title of Abaddon belongeth to the Divell; yet I thinke he cannot thereupon inferr, that it ought not to

be giuen to Antichriſt, at beſt wiſe if we conſider of the Rule in S. Auguſt. De diabolo & eius corpore.
                  Dedoct. chriſt. For it is no more inconvenient, that the name of the Divel ſhould be giuen to him, that doth the works of the divell,
                     Pſal. 82. then the name of God to good princes, which do the works of God.
                     Iohn 10, 34. And ſo our Saviour expreſſely calleth Iudas a Divell, yea the Apoſtle Peter he calleth Satan,
                     Iohn 6, 70. Matth. 16. & a ſcandall, perhaps intimating, that his pretenſed ſucceſſors ſhould poſſeſſe the ſeat of Satan, & be the greateſt ſcandall of all others, when they ſhould begin to ſavour the things of men.
               
               The ſeauenth and laſt name giuen to Antichriſt in Scripture, is that which is not expreſſed, but ſignified by three Greek letters, yeelding the number of 666. which to count the H. Ghoſt commendeth unto us, as a point of wiſedome. Neither can I eaſily be drawne to reject the computations of Names of this number by the Fathers, and other godly Interpreters. Let everie man bring forth his opinion without prejudice to others, and pray to God to inlighten us all. I, for my part, thinke it beſt to follow the ancient opinion ſo farr as it may ſtand with the Scriptures. Now it is knowne that the ancient godly Father Irenaeus ſeeking for names anſwerable to this number, findeth none ſo fit, as Lateinos. For although he mention other names, as Teitan, &c. yet to the name of Lateinos he addeth his judgment of approbation, ſaying that it is verie like to be the true name. For (ſaith he) the trueſt kingdome is called by that name, and Latini ſunt, qui nunc dominantur. They are Latines, which now do raigne. This alſo ſuteth with other prophecies of Antichriſt, whereof I haue ſpoken before, and with the interpretation that ſome do make of the prophecie of Balaam, where he

ſayth, that Ships from Chittim ſhall afflict Aſhur and Eber. which cannot be verified of any but the Romans, and S. Hierom there interpreteth Chittim to be Italie. And the Affliction of Eber, muſt be alſo underſtood of the Prince of Eber, the Starre of Iacob, and that in his Myſticall body aſwell as his Naturall. This alſo agreeth with other names, which godly learned men haue foūd out repreſenting the ſame number, all leading and directing us to the Pope, as the name of Romanus or Romyth,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   in Hebrew letters obſerved by the venerable Divines, Fox and Paraeus. So alſo Dux Cleri, by the godly Walter Brute a ſcholer of Wicleue our Country-man. Vicarius Dei generalis in terris in Latin, taking onely the numerall letters, & Eccleſia Italica, in Greek letters. And what ſhall we ſay to the names of divers Popes conteyning the ſame letters in effect & ſound, which are uſed to expreſſe the ſaid number of 666 in the Apocalyps. In the name of Calixtus is there not the perfect ſound of all thoſe Greeke letters 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ? And may not the ſame be eaſily conceited in the name of Sixtus? And was not Calixtus, whom they call the ſecond, but indeed the firſt of that name, that was called Summus Pontifex, he that forbad mariage to Prieſts, which S. Paul calleth the Doctrine of Divels. The ancient verſe may ſerue for a ſufficient teſtimonie:
               
                  O bone Calixte, nunc totus Clerus odit te,
                  O lim Preſbyteri poterant uxoribus uti,
                  Hoc deſtruxiſti, postquam tu Papa fuiſti.
               
               And was not Calixtus the ſecond of that name (that was called Pont. Max.) he that made ſuch a terrible and ſolemn vow to perſecute the Turkes by war, curſes, &c. and by colour thereof levied a tenth of the Clergie, & put all into his purſe? And when as afterwards the

noble Vaivod of Hungarie, Hunniades had obteyned a glorious victorie, againſt that publike enemie at Belgrade, was it Calixtus, that ever helped to advance the Chriſtian cauſe, or to proſecute ſuch a good beginning? Or did he not rather ſet his minde upon his own profit, by drawing to himſelf not onely the chiefe Biſhopriks, but the whole kingdome of Naples, after the death of Alfonſus, and ſo labour to diſinherit his ſonne Frederike, if the incomparable Prince Scanderbeg had not aſſiſted him? And what ſhall we ſay of Sixtus? Do not the Latin letters X. & T. being joyned together yeeld the ſame ſound, as all the ſaid three numerall letters would do, if they were put in the ſame place? And was not Sixtus (who by them is called the fourth, but indeed, the firſt that was called Pont. Max. for thoſe before him were called Xiſti, & had no greater title then biſhop of Rome) was not that he that raiſed ſo many wars in Italie to advance his kinred, and in ſtead of a church or Hoſpitall, built the famous Lupanar, the bitcherie houſe at Rome, Vtri
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Veneri, for which cauſe Agrippa called him the great bawde? Was it not he that upon a Petition exhibited unto him, for the uſe of Sodomie,Homicus Agrippa. ſubſcribed, Fiat ut petitur? Let be as is deſired? and raiſed the rents of the Stewes to ſo high a Rate, that it is now accounted for a principall revennue of their church? O excellent Father, and chaſt Vicar of Chriſt! The Primitiue Chriſtians were half perſwaded that Nero was to come againe and be Antichriſt. And haue not we reaſon to belieue that this is he, of whom alſo it is written for his Elogium.
               
                  Gaude Priſce Nero: vincit te crimine Sixtus.
                  Paedico, inſignis praedo, fucoſus Adulter
                  Qui moriens nullos credidit eſſe Deos.
               
               
                  And was not Sixtus the 2. who is by them called the 5. he that ſent out his blaſphemous Bulles againſt the late King of France Henrie the third, who was ſhortly after moſt villanouſly murdered by one of their breeding? And was not he the ſame Sixtus, who moſt highly commended that wicked Parracide, in a ſolemne Panegyrick, before his Cardinals? Was not he the ſame that excommunicated the noble Henry the fourth of France, when he was but King of Navarre, who was afterwards alſo murdered by one of their Sectaries. Was not he the ſame who animated the Spaniards to invade this kingdome of England, in the year 1588? In ſetting forth of which action, it is worth the Obſervation,Cicarell in vita Sixti. how carefull the Paraſite is to perſwade us, that the Engliſh and the Spaniards never came ad juſtam pagnam, to a juſt fight, as if the Engliſh did affirm any ſuch matter. No Cicarella. Farre be it from us to challenge the glorie of that victorie to our ſelues. That God who gaue us the grace, upon the newes of the approch of that navie, to humble our ſelues before him, with faſting and prayer: (a thing howſoever neglected or forgotten by ſome of our Hiſtorians, yet moſt true and regiſtred by others, and remembred by many yet living witneſſes▪) That God, who detected and defeated the Treaſons and Rebellions of Sanders, Parrie, Ballard, Lopas the Powderplot, and many others, was he that fought for us, as he did ſometimes againſt Siſera. and for Theodoſius. and
Sic conjurati venere ad claſsica venti.
Witneſſe our moſt excellent Soveraine, a witneſſe aboue all exception, in his Sonnet worthie to be remembred:

                     The Nations banded gainſt the Lord of might,
                     Prepar'd a force, and ſet them in the way:
                     Mars dreſt himſelf in ſuch an awfull plight,
                     The like whereof was never ſeen they ſay:
                     
                        They forward came in ſuch a ſtrange array.
                     Both ſea and land beſet us everie where,
                     Their brags did threat our ruine and decay;
                     What came thereof the iſsue did declare,
                     The windes began to toſſe them here and there;
                     The ſea began in foaming waues to ſwell,
                     The number that eſcapt, it fell them faire:
                     The reſt were ſwallowed up in gulfes of hell.
                     But how were all theſe things ſo ſtrangely done?
                     God lookt on them from out his heauenly Throne.
                  
This Sonnet publiſht with the conſent and applauſe of all the ancient Brittain Nation, inhabitants of this kingdome, truly euen of verie ancient time,Polydore both by a king and a Saint, intituled the kingdome of God, ſhall be an everlaſting teſtimonie for us, that we never challenged the glorie of that action to our ſelues. The ſame alſo will be confirmed, by the ordinarie remembrances, and thankſgivings which our Preachers uſually make thereof, in their prayers and Sermons. The ſame alſo is proved by the Paper lately ſet forth, ſo well accepted and bought up by all ſorts of people amongſt us, wherein the defeating of that invincible Armada, and the Powderplot is repreſented & expreſſed. Behold then you Ieſuites & Romaniſts againſt whom you fight, and who it is that fights for us. It was God who then pleaded the cauſe of Religion againſt ſuperſtition, of Pietie againſt Idolatrie, of Chriſt againſt Antichriſt. It was he onely (for he onely ſearcheth, ruleth, and moveth the Hearts) who then put it into the heart of our Zenobia, and of her ſervants to ſend out thoſe Peti-fierbotes, that made the grear Sea-caſtles to cut their cables, looſe their Anchors and flye away. It was he that ſtirred up the courage of our ſeamen, and inflamed the hearts of our nation with incredible loue and zeale, to defend their Countrie & religion.

Now alſo our drummes and trumpets ſound nothing elſe againſt you, but God and Chriſt Ieſus; our Martiall cryes are nothing elſe, but Chriſt Ieſus; our gunnes thunder out nothing, but Chriſt Ieſus againſt you. For him we fight, & in this quarrell, that he onely is our High Prieſt, our Mediator, our Iuſtification and Salvation. This was our courſe then, and this muſt be the courſe of all that will prevaile againſt Antichriſt & all Antichriſtian forces, namely prayer to God, and unitie amongſt themſelues. But to returne to my purpoſe, this may ſuffice, to ſhew how this Sixtus not onely in name, conteyning in it the ſound of thoſe three myſticall letters, but in his actions repreſented Antichriſt. What ſhall we ſay of Pope Paul the fifth, was not his picture made with the inſcription of Paulo Vo. Vicedeo. comprehending in numerall letters the ſame number of 666. Neither yet will I affirme, that eyther he, or Sixtus, or Calixtus, or Gregorie the ſeuenth, or Boniface the third, or the eight, or any other of them was individually Antichriſt, any more then the reſt of that order. No, nor yet Pope Ioane, whoſe hiſtorie though they by all meanes labour to ſuppreſſe, yet they cannot blot out their bookes that haue written of her, being at leaſt ſix and twentie, all learned, and all Catholikes, amongſt which Martinus Polonus, Archbiſhop of Conſentia, and the Popes owne Penitentiarie, Marianus Scotus, monke of Fulda, Platina and Theodoricus the Popes Secretaries, Antoninus Archbiſhop of Florence, Baptiſta, Mantuanus, and Cornelius Agrippa, Nanclerus the Cardinall, and Trithemius the Abbat, were men, I think, as well thought of for learning & fidelitie in their times, as any of theſe our new maſters, Bellarmine, Baronius, Onuphrius or Florimondus, who labour to raſe out of ancient moniments and Records, that which the chriſtian world for fiue hundred yeares or more, moſt undoubtedly

beleeved. Yet neither ſhe, nor any of the reſt do I affirme to haue been individually and excluſiuely Antichriſt, but one of that myſticall bodie, and ſucceſſion, which is called by our Apoſtle Antichriſt, as I proved before, that the article Ho in Greek is uſed & applied aſwell to a ſucceſsion or multitude, as to a ſingular perſon. But why may not we thinke that in this ſucceſſion, the All ſeeing ſpirit of God in his ſecret providence, and divine adminiſtration, the better to awake and ſtirre up his church and children, to beware of this great and yet deceitfull enimie, would haue the marks and ſignes of Antichriſt to appeare ſome of them more evidently in ſome of them, and ſome in others, as the name of Pontifex Max. in Boniface the third, the perſon of a whore, in Pope Ioane, their filthie adulterie, Sodomie, and inceſt, in Sergius, Iohn the 11. and 12. Boniface the eight, and Alexander, the number of his name in thoſe before named? It may be alſo demanded, who were the types of Antichriſt before the comming of our Saviour? For types are a kinde of notation. And ſo it may ſeeme that the wiſedome of God hath ordered the courſe of times, that in ſo great varieties nothing ſhould be new,
                  
                     Eccleſ. 
                     
                        •
                     . but that former times ſhould be figures of the future. I dare not ſay but more may be found, yet I think in the Scriptures principally ſeauen are to be noted. 1, Cain. 2, Cam. 3, Eſau. 4, Egypt. 5, Amalek. 6, Antiochus. 7, Babylon. which haue ſome things in common, & ſome things proper and peculiar. They were all perſecutors, & for the moſt part murderers and parricides, and that without cauſe, as the Prophet David ſpeaketh, They hated me without a cauſe. And therefore they were all curſed of God. Yea ſome of them ſo deteſted, that the people of God were charged to make no peace with them: as for inſtance, Canaan the Iſſue of Cham and Amalek: & God executed his heavie wrath upon them

all. In particular, 1,1. Gen. 4. Cain perſecuted Chriſt in ſemine. 2,2. Gen. 9. Cham in radice. 3,3. Gen. 27. Eſau, in ſtirpe. 4,4. Exod. 1. Egyptus, in Germine. 5,5. Exod. 17. Amalek, in frutice. 6,6. Dan.
                   Antiochus, in propagine. 7,7. Ier. 50. Babylon, in capite. Cain perſecuted Chriſt in the ſeed. Cham in the roote, Eſau in the ſtock, Egypt in the bud, Amalek in the ſhrubbe, Antiochus in the ſpread, and Babylon in the Toppe or head. Cain is noted for murdering his onely brother, Cham for ſcorning his godly Father. Eſau for his profanenes. Egypt for bloudineſſe. Amalek for malice. Antiochus for Tyrannie. and Babylon for blaſphemie. How theſe things may be applied to Rome is not hard to be underſtood by them who are converſant in their ſtories. Let me here make but one inſtance, that Romulus the firſt king, being the firſt head of that Seauen-headed beaſt, was a murderer of his brother, like to Cain. Brutus the firſt Conſull put to death his owne Sonnes and his Brothers. Appius the Decemvir by his beaſtly and outragious luſt forced the father to commit a Paricide upon his chaſte daughter Virginia. The Tribunes, Dictators, and Caeſars the fourth, fifth, and ſixth Heads, what were they all, but ambitious turbulent ſpirits, incendiaries, & raiſers of moſt bloudie inteſtine warres, wherein manie innocent & quiet citizens were wickedly murdered? And of the Pontifex Max. the seauenth head I haue ſayd ſomewhat before, and more I ſhall haue occaſion to ſay hereafter. Let this ſuffice for the Names of Antichriſt; from all which I demand, Whether they do not fully agree to the popes, and everie one of them, ſince the time of Constantine, that was Pontifex Max. about the yeare of our Lord 707? And whether they can be ſo fitly, and ſo many wayes, applied to any other Prince, perſon or ſtate: And whether we may looke for any other in time to come, to whom they may be more truly and fitly applied?
               
            
            
               
               IIII. The Riſing of Antichrist.
               THoſe who think that a great and mightie monarch, king or Commander of the cittie of Rome, able to ſubdue other kings, and to raiſe up a greater and more terrible perſecution againſt Chriſtians, then any of the old Emperors of Rome, ſhould riſe up like a muſhrump in a night, and continue ſo ſhort a time, as three yeares and an halfe, ſeeme to take litle conſideration of the manner of Gods proceedings and adminiſtration, who, as he hath appointed a time and ſeaſon for all things, ſo he limiteth times and ſeaſons proportionable for the effecting of ſuch things. A woman cannot conceiue and beare in a moneth or a day. An Elephant muſt haue at leaſt two yeares, and ſome ſay ten. Quando, when, is a Relatiue, as well as ubi, where, & everie thing exiſtent muſt haue his due proportion, as well of the one as of the other.
               Let us now then come to the riſing of this fifth Beaſt or monarchie of Idolatrie, and ſee how that is deſcribed in this divine Revelation, and whether that deſcription alſo do not moſt aptly and properly ſute the Popes, from the time that the impediment of the Roman Empire began to be removed by Conſtantine the Emperor, untill the Pope attained to his Antichriſtian name in Boniface the third, to be called Pontifex Maximus, and his ſuperlatiue power to reſiſt the Emperor in Conſtantine the Pope. This Riſing is deſcribed by ſeauen adjuncts. 1, His kinde or Exiſtence,
                     Revel. 13. 
                  another beaſt. 2. The place from whence he came, comming out of the earth. 3, Having two hornes like a lambe. 4, He ſpake like the Dragon. 5, His actions, ſeauen fold, as ſhall be ſhewed hereafter. 6, His Marke. 7, And laſtly his Name. Whereas he is called another beaſt, and yet not reſembled to any Beaſt, working in the preſence of the first, ſeauen things

are again to be obſerved. 1, The time of his riſing. 2, That this which is here deſcribed muſt be an Empire or monarchie, which is ſignified by the name of a Beaſt, as all the former were, and as the Angell in Daniel hath taught us to interpret. 3, It muſt conſiſt, not of one particular man, but of a Succeſsion. For ſo all the former did, or elſe it ſhould not haue the name of a Beaſt, without diſtinction, as it hath, and as they had. 4, It is not like any of the reſt. For if it were like in any part, it would be ſo expreſſed, as it is ſaid that the firſt was like a Lyon, the ſecond like a beare, the third a Leopard, the fourth in ſeverall parts like everie one of them, but this like none of them. 5, It is not onely unlike to them, but it is of no certaine forme. And herein our Apoſtle in the deſcription of this laſt Beaſt obſerveth the ſame caution,
                     Dan. 7. that was before by the Prophet Daniell, in the Deſcription of the fourth beaſt, ſaying, it was unlike any of the former, and yet not expreſſing whereunto it was like. So indeed was the Roman Empire in its Riſing, for that after the kings, who were as the nurſing Fathers of that ſtate were expelled, it held for a long time no certain form of government. So it ſeemeth our Propheticall Apoſtle intendeth, that the kingdome of Antichriſt in his Riſing, muſt be of an uncertaine forme. 6, It muſt ariſe in the preſence of the first beast. And this agreeth with the words of S. Paul,2 Theſ. 2. who ſayth not, that he which withholdeth muſt be aboliſhed, deſtroyed, determined, or ended, but that he muſt be removed, or ſet out of the way, in ſome other place. So this Beaſt, or Monarchie muſt ariſe after the Roman Monarchie, not ended, (for ſayth Daniel, that fourth Beaſt or Monarchie muſt continue till the judgment be ſet) but removed out of the way, from Rome, the place appointed for Antichriſt. 7, It muſt ſtill be a Beaſt, that is, a Monarchie of Idolatrie, as all the reſt were. Now let us ſee how, and

to whom theſe Prophecies may be applied, wherein we muſt ſo goe forward, that we do not forget that which went before. By the former Problems I ſuppoſe it hath appeared, that the place of Antichriſt muſt be the Great cittie Rome, and that in time of Chriſtianitie, that the State ſubject unto him, muſt be the ſtate of Rome, and that he muſt be Summui Pontifex, one of the ſeauen Heads of that state. In this part of his deſcription we may ſee not onely a further point revealed unto us, which is the time, and manner of his Riſing, but a further confirmation of thoſe former points. And firſt, for the time, a moſt materiall circumſtance to be conſidered, I demand, Whether it be not here ſufficiently and plainly expreſsed in the Text, that this ſecond beaſt muſt ariſe, while the former is yet in being, and that not altogether, but in tract of time: ſeeing it is ſayd, that he doth all that the firſt could do, in the preſence of the firſt, or before his face, and cauſeth the firſt Beaſt to be worſhipped? And ſeeing it is confeſſed, that the place of the first Beaſt was Rome, it muſt follow, that the place of the ſecond muſt be Rome, and ſeeing the ſecond muſt worke before the face of the firſt, and cauſe the firſt to be worſhipped, it followeth evidently, that both theſe Beasts, that is to ſay, the firſt Beast departing, and the ſecond ariſing muſt be at one time in Rome. This therefore confirmeth that which hath been ſayd before concerning his place. And this being compared with the words of the Apoſtle to the Theſſ.2 Theſ. 2. that Antichriſt muſt be deſtroyed by the brightnes of our Lords comming, is a ſtrong proof of his times, viz. that he muſt ariſe, before the Emperor be quite departed out of Rome, & muſt continue to the end of the world, which cleerly overthroweth the opinions of all Demiſeptennians, and Ho Antichriſtians. For if he began then to work, and muſt be in Rome in the preſence of the firſt Beaſt, that is, of the Old Empire, & muſt continue till the comming againe of our Lord: How can it be

imagined, that he ſhould be but one man, or that he ſhould continue but three yeares & a halfe, or that he is not yet come, or ſuch like dreames, &c. Or let any man ſhew me with conſent of Scriptures, who beſides the old Roman Empire, can be meant by the firſt Beaſt, who beſides Antichriſt can be meant by the ſecond? For to ſay, that theſe two beaſts are to be taken for one thing, is verie abſurd, and contrarie to the Text, which calleth the ſecond Beaſt, another. To ſay that by the firſt is meant Antichriſt, can hardly ſtand with the Text; for then what is meant by the ſecond? If you ſay his bodie or Clergie, how can that be admitted? when it is ſayd firſt, that it is another, therefore no part of the ſame: Alſo it riſeth from another place, viz. the Earth, whereas the firſt roſe from the ſea: Alſo it doth all thoſe things which the firſt Beaſt could do before his face: But that is verie abſurd to ſay, that the Body doth as much as the Head, or the Clergie, as the chief Prelate. By the ſame, or like reaſons are refelled the opinions of thoſe that take the firſt beaſt for the Divell. For how can that ſtand with the Text, that the Dragon gaue him his Throne, and great power, &c. So the opinion of thoſe that take Antichriſt, or the firſt beaſt pro caetu impiorum, for the multitude of the wicked, may be refelled by the Text. For then, why ſhould it be diſtinguiſhed into two ſeverall Beaſts, the one riſing after the other? and why ſhould there be ſo many ſeverall attributes applied unto it? Therefore not intending to ſtand long upon the refutation of other mens opinions, but following the counſell of the excellent learned Scholler of S. Paul,Dion Ar. to finde out that which may be moſt agreeable to the Text of the Scripture, and the Truth of Hiſtorie, I aſke whether this Prophecie of the riſing of Antichrist in this ſecond Beaſt, were not fully performed in the Roman Biſhops, who ſucceeded Silveſter from the yeare of our Lord, 313. untill the time of

Conſtantine the Pope, in anno 707? Was not the old Empire continued in Rome for the moſt part of that time? Were there not in Rome for the moſt part of that time, namely, untill the yeare of our Lord 540, Conſuls, which repreſented the Imperiall power, and were elected and created with Heatheniſh and Idolatrous rites, and Auguries,See Helviens Renſuerus & other chronologers. as Salvianus aboue cited doth teſtifie? Were not the Emperors themſelues many times made Conſuls of Rome in that time? And yet were not the Idolatrous Stageplayes, with Beſtiall filthines, ſtill celebrated in Rome, as the ſame reverend and Godly Author, and not he alone, but the irrefutable Doctor S. Auguſtin witneſſeth:De civ. Dei lib. 1. ca. 23. See alſo Blondus. 
                  That peſtilent corruption (ſayth he) did infect the ſoules of miſerable men with ſo great deformitie, that euen now, the cittie of Rome being ſpoyled, men poſſeſſed with that pestilence, flying from thence to Carthage, dayly play the mad men upon ſtages. And this wrote he about the year of our Lord 413, fully an hundred yeeres after Silveſter, and after that the cittie of Rome was governed by Chriſtian Biſhops; agreeable to that which I proved before out of Salvianus. Beſides, did not the Emperor Conſtantine and his ſucceſſors, for an hundred yeeres after him, reteyn the name of Pont Max.Pleſſ. ex Zoſum & Baron. and uſe the Robes & Ornaments? So then, here was the firſt Beaſt, ſtill continuing both in Idolatrie and Majeſtie. Yet notwithſtanding I thinke no Papiſt will deny, but that the Biſhops of Rome after Silveſter, had the Imperiall ſea, and exerciſed the ſame principalitie, and did the ſame things, which the Emperors or Conſuls were wont to doe. For ſo is their decree.
                     Dist. 96. And what elſe do they clayme or pretend by the Donation of Conſtantine, which they ſo ſtoutly maintayn, but that they had that power lawfully, which they exerciſed apparantly? And yet, this was not in any certaine form of government, or reſolute manner, but ſometimes by ſchiſme and faction,

and ſometimes by flatteries obteyning the conſent or connivence of the Emperors. When they ſaw the Emperors able to pleaſe or diſpleaſe, then by and by they were their good Lords and Maſters, and they cauſed men to worſhip them. But when they would get it by faction or otherwiſe, the Emperor was but a Cypher in Augrim. as appeareth by the Hiſtories and records of that time. Sometimes the Conſuls governed, ſometimes the Exarches, and ſometimes the Roman Biſhops were oppoſed by other great Biſhops. So the Riſing of this ſecond beast was not altogether at once, but by degrees, and this ſecond Beaſt in his Riſing was (as hath been ſayd) of an uncertaine forme. And this being ſo, the other points will conſequently be confeſſed. For what can they deny? Will they deny that this principally, which the Biſhops of Rome held after Silveſter, was a Monarchie or ſtate governed by one onely at once? which is the ſecond point. or thirdly, will they denye that it went in ſucceſſion? Fourthly, will they ſay, that it was like to any of the former Beaſts? This being a ſtate Eccleſiaſtick, & all the former Saecular? Fiftly, will they affirme that theſe Biſhops had any ſetled and abſolute forme of Soveranitie, during the time aforeſaid? Will they deny that they were at Rome in the preſence of the Conſular and Imperiall Authoritie, or that they cauſed men to adore the Emperors? Seuenthly, or laſtly, will they deny the Teſtimonies of S. Auguſtin and Salvianus, that the Idolatrous Rites, Superſtitions, Auguries, & Stage-playes were ſtill exerciſed at Rome? I will here ſet downe a ſhort, Catalogue of the Biſhops of Rome of thoſe times out of their owne Hiſtorians, and let it be ſhewed in which of theſe things they will differ from me, and whether it were not with great oppoſition,

contention and ſchiſme, that they got their ſupremacie?
               
                  Silveſter, who had the Imperiall Sea and Principalitie of Rome by donation, as ſome of them affirm, or Ceſſion,
                  Platin. Onuph Ba
                        •••
                     . &c. as others.
               
                  Marcus, about the yeare of our Lord 335, tooke upon him the Title of univerſall Biſhop. in Epiſt.
               
                  Iulius tooke upon him, by abſolute Authoritie,He warreth againſt the ſaints to reſtore certaine Biſhops of the Eaſterne Churches, depoſed by their owne Synods.
               
                  Liberius, an Arrian Heretike,Platin. Pautal. &c. excommunicated the godly Athanaſius, and therefore was excommunicated by the godly S. Hilary.
               
                  Faelix the ſecond, a Schiſmatike and perjured,Onuph. Contention. and ſlayn by ſedition of Liberius, as ſome ſay. Schiſma 2.
               
                  Damaſus, a Schiſmatik, advanced by violence & murder, and that in the church, in time of divine ſervice,Pleſſis ex Matcellin. Platin. Pantal. &c. where there were found in one day 137 bodies ſlayne.
               
                  Siricius, about the yeare of our Lord 396, or as ſome ſay 383,Ambition & Contention. ambitiouſly claymed the ſuperioritie over the biſhops of Spaine and Afrik, and contended with them for it
               
                  Anaſtaſius 1. anno Dni. 398, continued but few yeers.
               
                  Innocentius 1. anno Dni. 402 ſtill urgeth and mainteyneth his ſuperioritie, and the Apoſtolike honor of his Sea (for ſo they called it.) In his dayes Rome was ſpoyled by the Gotts and Vandales.
               
                  Zoſimus anno 417 ſeeketh to draw all cauſes to RomeContention. A wiſedome earthly, ſenſuall & diveliſh Iames 3.
                  
               
               
                  Bonifacius 1, anno 420, getteth the Papacie by contention with Eulatius in a Schiſme: which is accounted the third Schiſme in that Church.
               
                  Caelestinus 1. anno Chriſti 423 contendeth with the biſhops of Africa, amongſt whom was S. August, and

other godly men.
               
                  Xiſtus 3. anno 432 continueth his claym of ſupremacy.
               
                  Leo Magnus anno 440. magnifieth S. Peter, &c. In his dayes the Roman Empire was grievouſly ſpoiled by Attila the Hunn.
                  Idolatrie. The cauſe whereof Salvianus imputeth to the continuance of their Heatheniſh Idolatries, with other ſinnes in Rome.
               
                  Hilarius anno 461 continueth &c.
               
                  Simplicius, anno 467. This man greatly laboured to advance his ſupremacie,Hereſi
                        •
                      
                   and for that purpoſe tooke upon him the Patronage of Eutiches the Heretike.
               
                  Faelix anno 483 continueth &c.
               
                  Gelaſius anno 492. Heathen Idolatries ſtill continue in Rome.Anomos. Pantal. yet, this man, Se & ſucceſſores a nemine in terris judicandos aſſerit. he will be iudged by no man.
               
                  Anaſtaſius 2. anno 469. An Heretike, and Patron of the Eutichians,Reprobatus. Dist. 19.
                   and Neſtorians. Schiſma 4.
               
                  Symmachus anno 498. advanced by faction, ſedition and murder.Paul. Diac. Sabel.
               
               
                  Hormiſda anno 513. In his time Caſſiodorus compoſed the ſchiſme between the Pontif.
               
                  Ioannes I. anno 523.
               
               
                  Faelix 4. anno 526.
               
               
                  Bonifacius 2. anno 530. created by Schiſme and Sedition Schiſma 5.
               
               
                  Ioannes 2. anno 532.
               
               
                  Agapetus anno 534.
               
               
                  Sylverius anno 535. a Magician, put down by ſchiſme. Schiſma 6.
               
                  Vigilius anno 537. A ſeditious Schiſmatike, and Eutichian: whom Baron. alſo calleth Antichriſt.
               
                  Pelagius 1. anno 555.
               
               
                  Ioannes 3. anno 566. in policie to croſſe the Conſtantinopolitan,

decreed that none ſhould be called chief Biſhop.
               
               
                  Benedictus 1. anno 576.
               
                  Pelagius 2. contended with the Archbiſhop of Conſtant. for Primacie and Supremacie.
               
               
                  Gregorius Magnus, anno 590 condemneth the title of Vniverſall Biſhop in the Patriarch of Conſtant. & yet (if we beleeue Baron. and ſome others) was contented to hold the Supremacie, and for that purpoſe wrote letters of great flatterie to Phocas the Murderer.
               
                  Sabinianus anno 604, did ſo much malice his Predeceſſor, and advance Gregorie, that he could hardly conteyne himſelf from burning his books;Platina. and after him Boniface the 3, 4, 5, and others all mainteyned their Supremacie, & the power of that Sea, untill Conſtantine, of whom we ſhall haue cauſe to ſpeake hereafter.
               Lo, theſe were the Roman Prelates of thoſe times, whoſe Hiſtories diligently collected and layd together,Pleſſis. are more at large to be ſeen in that excellent worke De Mysterio Iniquitatis. Whereupon I demand, Whether they do not fully anſwer the deſcription made of this Beaſt riſing out of the earth?
                  Out of earthly deſires of Honour, &c. Firſt here is another Beaſt or Monarchie, unlike to any of the former, and yet not of any certaine forme of Government, alwayes aſcending and ſtriving to get ſupremacie, ſometimes by one meanes, ſometimes by another, ſtirring up ſchiſmes and ſeditions, patroniſing Heretikes, contending with other Biſhops, yea with thoſe heauenly Doctors and Lights of the world, whom they could no way countervaile, Athanaſius, Hilarius, Auguſtin, Aurelius, and two hundred Biſhops of Africa with him. And yet pretending great humulitie and ſubjection to the Emperor, as appeareth by the letters not onely of Vigilius to Anthinius, and other principall Heretikes, at the command of the Empreſſe,

but of Gregorie the Great alſo to Phocas the Murderer. Yet by Schiſme and faction ſeeking to get the place, as oft as they could, without their conſent. See more at large of theſe things in that Booke of Philip Marnay. Where alſo you may reade what S. Hierom writeth of Rome in his time, expreſſely calling it Babylon, and the purple whore. And telling them of their Riches, covetouſnes, lewdnes, and Lupercatia. There are the Trophees of the Apoſtles and Martyrs, there is the confeſsion of Ieſus Christ (ſayth he:) but there is alſo ambition and Tyrannie, which keep men back from doing good. Neyther he onely, but Marcellinus. I do not (ſayth he) marvail, conſidering the braverie of that cittie, that men ambitious of that place, ſet up their Reſt for the purchaſing of it. For having once aſpired thereunto, they are ſure to be inriched with the offrings of Ladies and Noblemen, & to be carried in their coaches ſumptuouſly attyred, and ſo magnificent in their feaſtes, as paſseth any kings table. Many ſuch teſtimonies collected are to be read in the diſcourſe of that Learned Lord. But eſpecially is to be obſerved, what he hath diligently drawn out of Baronius, where he ſayth that Conſtantine in the 24 year of his raigne, ordeyned that the Biſhops of the Chriſtian Law ſhould from that time forward haue the ſame Priviledges, which the Idolatrous Prieſts had in time past. They had (ſayth he) their Rex Sacrificulus, and Pontifex Maximus. And who can think, that Conſtantine would long indure, that they ſhould exceed the Chriſtians in Pompe and glorie? So Baron. their Cardinall and learned Annaliſt, yeeldeth unto us, & freely confeſſeth a point of no ſmall moment, that this their Pontifex Maximus, who now is in Rome, ſucceedeth in priviledge, Pompe and glorie to the Heathen Pont. Max. which was before in Rome. Yet the ſame Baron. ſheweth alſo, that Conſtantine firſt tooke the name of Pont. Max. to himſelf, and giveth a reaſon for it,

namely that the Senate and people of Rome, thoſe that were, yet of the Heatheniſh faction, might not ſo eaſily be drawen to conſpire againſt the Chriſtian Emperors (was it not a verie Chriſtian policie think you?) And yet (ſayth he) the Pope had the power of ſupreame judge in all cauſes. So that this ſtandeth moſt conſonant with all Prophecies & hiſtories, that theſe two Beaſts were at one time, both together in Rome, and that the new Pont. Max. of Rome hath the power of the Pagan Pontif. But that his power appeared very ſlowly, and that the Pontificall name in Temporall cauſes was for a long time verie baſe and obſcure appeareth by the teſtimonie of the learned Guicciardin,Guicc. l. 4.
                   and other Hiſtories. I demand therefore, Whether we may not here ſee the manifeſt performance of this prophecie. I, Another Beast ariſing after the firſt in Rome, and in the preſence of the firſt. 2, Ariſing by degrees out of the earth, that is, out of the earthly luſts and deſires of riches, luxurie, Pompe and pride,1 Iohn 2. Iames 3. and alſo by earthly wiſedome ſtrife and envie. 3, Having two hornes indeed, that is, a power temporall & ſpirituall, but ſhort and weake, and (as Guicciardin ſayth) obſcure and almoſt inviſible, as the Hornes of a lambe. 4, Speaking like the Dragon, that is, contrarie to the Commandements of God,
                     Revel. 13. as the Serpent did to our mother Eue: but equivocally, as Vigilius, whom Baron. himſelf calleth Antichriſt, did equivocate with Sylverius his Predeceſſor, and Theodora the Empreſſe. See the Hiſtorie in Platina. And divers others of them did flatter & equivocate with the Emperors. The fifth conſideration therefore is of his Actions. The 6, of his works. And the 7, of his Name. But of his name I haue ſpoken before, and of his marke, I might referre the Reader to the writings of the Excellent Paraeus, Napier, & Iunius upon the Apocalyps. But I cannot omit the greate and learned Archbiſhop Antonin. In ſumma where he

ſheweth that everie one that entreth into their Holy Orders receiveth a Character,
                  p. 3. t. 14. & p. 4. t. 13.
                   which he interpreteth, to be principale inſtrumentum ordinis. But in another place upon the place of the Apocalyps now in hand,
                     Apoc. 13. he expoundeth the Character of the Beaſt to be cultum Beſtiae, the worſhip of the Beaſt in his right hand; that is (ſayth he) in his ſpirituall works, as fasting, Almes, prayer, &c. or in his forehead, in outward appearance, at the leaſt, and in outward conformitie. We may alſo obſerue, that if we ſubſcribe to the opinion of Irenaeus, that the name of the beaſt is Latinus, this is obſerved in all their prayers. But conſidering well, and comparing the opinion of Napier with Antonin, & both with the Text, I cannot chuſe but thinke, the Character is expreſſed unto us in the ſuperſtitious uſe of the croſſe, which they make upon the forehead, or otherwiſe, with their right hands. But for his Actions, they are here ſomewhat largely ſet forth in this 13 chap. For firſt it is ſayd, that he exerciſeth all the power of the first Beaſt, before his face. So did the Popes before the Emperors, as I haue ſhewed before. Secondly, he cauſeth the earth and earthly minded men to worſhip the firſt beaſt. So did the Popes to the Emperors, while they were in power, and continued Pontifices Max. Thirdly, he doth great wonders making fire to come downe from heauen in the ſight of men. So the Popes in fulminating their Excommunications out of the Church, which is commonly called Heauen in this Apocalyps. Fourthly, he deceiveth men with theſe wonders. So the Popes, for they are but ignes fatui,
                  
                     Prov. 26. cauſeles curſes, and ſo forceleſſe. Fiftly, He ſayth to earthly men, that they ſhould make the image of the first beaſt. So the Popes in ſetting up another Pontificate, with like power to the firſt. Sixtly, it was permitted to him to giue a ſpirit to the image of the Beaſt, that he ſhould ſpeake. So do the Popes animate this image of the firſt Pontificate.

And ſeauenthly, to cauſe that as many as would not worſhip the image of the Beast ſhould be killed, Regall power of life & death. And whether the Popes haue not exerciſed that power, let all men judge. What part or point then of this deſcription is not fully accompliſhed in the actions of the Popes aboue named? Is it not manifeſt, that the popes did exerciſe all the power and authoritie of the old Idolatrous Pont. Max. in Rome, before the Emperors face, who for a while held that title of Pont. Max. If we ſhould deny it, doth not Baronius himſelf affirme it? The power of the firſt Beaſt is ſayd to haue been in making warre with the Saints, and prevayling againſt them,
                  
                     Rev. 13. and over everie kindred tongue and nation. And did not the Popes moſt ſtifly contend, both with other Chriſtians, and with the godly Biſhops of the Graecian and Eaſterne churches for appeales & Supremacie, untill they had obteyned it? Did not Iulius enter into contention with the Orientall Biſhops, and amongſt them S. Athanaſius, and reprehend them for holding a Counſell without his leave to confute the Hereſie of Arrius? Did not Liberius excommunicate the ſame worthie Father and ſaint Athanaſius, which made the godly Father S. Hilarie ſo bitterly to cry out.The Pope in his first riſing excommunicated by S. Hillarie. 
                  Anathema to thee O Liberius, and all thy Companions. Anathema againe and againe to thee thou falſe hearted double dealing Liberius. Doth not S. Hierom complain of the ſenate of Phariſees, ſaying, that there was not ſo mean a ſcribe of that faction of Ignorance, but did conſpire againſt him, which made him to forſake Rome, and returne to Ieruſalem? Did not Celeſtinus ſeeke with force and armes to reſtore Antonius a Biſhop of Africa, depoſed by the Biſhops of that countrie, amongſt whom were thoſe Excellent biſhops, Aurelius, Alipius, & S. Auguſtine? which cauſed that godly and learned Father verie earneſtly to put him minde of the words of S. Peter,

                  that he ſhould not domineer over his Bretheren. And did not moſt of them contend with the Patriarchs of Conſtantinople for Supremacie? What was all this but warring againſt the Saints? And when did theſe Contentions ceaſe, but when the Pope had prevailed againſt, & gotten the Supremacie over all theſe Chriſtian Nations? And after he had ſubjugated all Biſhops, how they haue continually made warre againſt other godly Chriſtians, namely the Valdenſes, Albigenſes, Wicklevites, Huſſites, Bohemians, and others, everie man may read in the Hiſtories of theſe later times. Now if theſe things be ſo, How can theſe prophecies be otherwiſe fulfilled then they haue been in theſe Roman Biſhops? To whom elſe can they be applied, & how may we expect any in time to come that may accompliſh theſe prophecies, if they be not alreadie? It is not amiſſe here a litle to ſtay our contemplation, and as far forth, as the Sunne of Righteouſnes, and moſt pure light of truth ſhall illumine our underſtanding, to ſearch out the cauſe, why the ſame bleſſed and all ſeeing ſpirit, to whom all times are preſent, would not onely repreſent the four Monarchies, or Great Beaſts of Idolatrie by four ſeverall mettals: but alſo, why it pleaſed him to make choiſe of thoſe Mettals, viz. Gold, Silver, Braſſe, Iron, and none other, ſaue with the laſt there is mixed earth or clay. Although the Prophet Daniel hath already ſhewed the chief & principall reaſon, yet if we finde any other reaſon thereof, which is agreeable to the truth, and no way repugnant to that holy prophecie, I hope it will not ſeem unworthie of our conſideration. That the Babylonians, Perſians, Greekes and Romans were all Idolaters, is confeſſed, and therefore they were aptly joyned together in one Image. But why is this Image made of theſe ſeverall mettals? Surely ſomewhat

may be found if we ſearch into it. He that hath commanded us to ſeek, hath promiſed that we ſhall finde. Thou O King, art that Head of Gold,
                  
                     Dan. 2. ſayth Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar: thou and thy Succeſſors kings of Babel. Why? for you in your Idolatrous ſervices uſe Gold.
                  Herod. l. 1. Not. Genev. in Eſa 46. Dan. 3.
                   Thou worſhippeſt an image all of gold, the table before him is all of gold, the Altar is gold, and thou makeſt a Statue of gold, to be worſhipped. And we may well thinke the Prophet Eſay had ſome reſpect to this in calling it the Golden Babel. The Perſian Monarchie is reſembled to Silver.
                  
                     Eſay 14. Why? They, and all the reſt of Aſia worſhiped Diana with ſilver ſhrines. The Grecians are likened to Braſſe:
                     Act. 19. Why? They made Statues of Braſſe,
                  Herod. l. 9.
                   and dedicated preſents of Braſſe, as the Braſen Triped,
                  Natal. Comes li. 7.
                   which gaue occaſion to that great civill & ſacred warre. The Romans Idolatrie is repreſented by Iron. Why? They for the moſt part offred Iron Armours, as Romulus offred his Opima ſpolia, being the Armour which,Livy l. 1.
                   he being Generall tooke from the Generall of his Enemies. Which examples the Romans did much emulate, as Virgil witneſſeth of Marcellus. Tertia
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      arma patri ſuſpendit capta Quirino.
                  
                     A
                           •
                        neid. 6. Yea, ſo eagerly were his examples followed, that Rome was filled with bloudie armours,
                  Plutarch in Marcell. making a very horrid ſpectacle, ſayth Plutarch. Yet they had many Images of Earth, as Iuvenall maketh mention of Fictitis Iupiter.
                  Petr. Crinitus hon. diſ. l. 14.
                   
                  Non dubium est Romanorum regum temporibus lignea ſimulachra & fictilia in urbe fuiſſe. ſayth another. Their Great goddeſſe Veſta or Cybete, the mother of their Gods, was nothing but the Earth, or focus urbis, the hearth of the citie ſayth Tully. Matrem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Deorum tellurem ſayth Virgill. S. Auguſtin alſo ſheweth, that Iupiter was nothing but the world, Proſerpina and Ceres the Earth. And Arnobius witneſſeth, that their Images, many of them were

                  of earth,
                  
                     Je
                           ••
                        g 2. ſuch as perhaps Virgil ſpeaketh of in that verſe.
               Oſcilla ex alta ſuſpendunt mollia pinu.
               And now I demand, whether doth not the Summus Pont. which the Romans haue now ſet up with Pompe and glorie, like to the former Pagan Pontifex, maintaine and command ſuch images alſo to be worſhipped? And whether are not many of their Images now in uſe made of Playſter of Paris and ſuch like ſtuffe? And doth he not now command them to be burned as Heretikes, which refuſe to worſhip theſe Images? For what cauſe 
                     〈◊〉
                   moved Sabinian to burne the bookes of Gregorie? but becauſe he had defaced Images, howſoever Platina goeth about to blanch the matter? What elſe did they object againſt the Emperors of Greece? What elſe did they urge againſt the Valdenſes and Wicklevites, but that they refuſed to worſhip the Roman Pontifex and his images? What elſe did they object to Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper, Sanders, Bradford and other godly men in Queene Maries time, that I may ſpeak of England & not of other countries, but that they refuſed to acknowledge the reall preſence, and ſo to worſhip the Sacrament, & other of their images? I demand alſo whether the Turke, or any other Idolater do command and compell men to worſhip images, under ſuch capitall and Tyrannous paynes? Whether any Idolater do compell men to worſhip ſo many Images? or ſet up ſo many to be worſhipped? And whether any do proceed ſo cruelly againſt thoſe that refuſe to worſhip their Images? The Popes in their lawes, declare them to be Heretikes, and excommunicate, which do not worſhip their images, and conſequently depriue them, not onely of lands and goods, but alſo of their liues: yea if it be a Prince, they abſolue his ſubjects from obedience and alleagiance, givin

his ſubjects power & libertie to kill their Natiue king, and giue away his kingdome to another? Did ever any Iew, Turke, Infidel or Pagan attempt to doe the like? If they ſhould, is it credible, or likely that they ſhould be believed, and obeyed as the Popes haue been? Thus therefore their actions being ſo agreeable to the Riſing of this ſecond Beaſt: I demande againe, How theſe Prophecies can be otherwiſe performed by any Monarch, Prince, Potentate, State or perſon whatſoever, past preſent, or to come? And if not: then, Whether this be not that Antichriſt, or whether we may expect any other? And ſo we come to the deſcription of Antichriſt, mounted upon the Roman State, and raigning in his glorie, which is the fifth generall parte of his deſcription.
            
            
               
                  Ʋ. The Raigne of Antichriſt.
               IT is not unworthie of our obſervation that the Holy Ghoſt in ſetting forth the kingdome of Antichriſt uſeth no ſuch forme of ſpeech, as when he ſpeaketh of particular men, but ſuch as is commonly uſed & applied in ſcripture to ſignifie greate kingdomes and Monarchies. When he prophecieth of particular men, for the moſt part, he noteth them by ſome proper Adjunct. As of Iohn Baptiſt.
                     Eſay 40. 
                  A voyce cryeth in the wildernes, prepare the way of the Lord. &c. So of our Saviour Chriſt, My Righteous ſervant ſhall juſtifie many. and againe, He was broken for our ſinnes. &c. Sometimes by the name of ſome other man: as,
                     Mal 4. 
                  Behold I ſend you the Prophet Elijah. &c. Sometimes he calleth them by their proper names, as that, He ſayth to Cyrus my Sheepheard.
                  
                     Eſay 44. 
                  &c. and I will call Eljakim. and ſo he prophecieth of Ioſiah and againſt Shallum & Coniah, The king of Babel and Tyrus.
                     Eſay 22. 
                  
                     Ier. 22. But when he ſpeaketh of great kingdomes or Monarchies, he

figureth them ſometimes under the names of Great Beaſts, as all the four Monarchies in Daniel: ſometimes under the names of women,
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        zech. 23. as Ezechiel calleth the two kingdomes of Ieruſalem and Samaria, Two women. Nahum calleth Niniveh,
                     Eſay. 47. 
                  the beautifull harlot. Eſayah and Ieremie reſemble Babylon ſometimes to a woman tender and delicate, ſometimes to a Queene,
                  
                     Iu. 51. ſometimes to an Harlot, whoſe words and Phraſes our Apoſtle delighteth much to uſe. It is no marvell therefore, that having here to ſpeak of the ſtate of two Great kingdomes, namely the Kingdome or Church of Christ, and the kingdome or Synagogue of Antichriſt. He deſcribeth one of them, as a Chaſte and undefiled ſpouſe prepared for her huſband: and the other, as a ſumptuous, glorious, luxurious, proud and intiſing Harlot, alluring kings, princes. and all ſorts of people to come unto her. Wherein, although it be true, that Contraries compared & layd together, do illuſtrate one the other, yet I will not here proſecute that glorious and heauenly deſcription of the true Church of our Lord Chriſt Ieſus, able to take up all my thoughts and meditations, but ſtrictly following my former courſe, obſerue ſeuen Attributes in the Deſcription of the Antichriſtian ſtate and power,
                     Revel. 17. now mounted upon the back of the Roman ſtate. Firſt, it is called the Great Whore. Secondly, which ſitteth upon many waters. Thirdly, with whom the kings of the earth haue committed fornication, and the Inhabitants of the earth haue been made druncken with the wine of her fornication. Fourthly, moſt richly, and gorgeouſly cloathed and adorned with purple and ſcarlet, gold and pearles, having a golden cup in her hand, full of her fornications. Fiftly, ſhee hath a name written in her forehead, a Myſterie, Babylon, The great Mother of Harlots & abhominations of the earth. Sixtly, She is druncken with the bloud of the Saints and Martyrs of Chriſt Ieſus. And laſtly, to make all plaine, who this is, It is

(ſayth our Prophet) the Great Cittie that ruleth over the kings of the earth. Of ſome parts of which Deſcription I haue ſpoken before, both in the firſt and ſecond Problem. For which cauſe I ſhall not neede to ſpeak much here, but onely, of ſuch things as haue not been touched before. And to ſpeake a word by the way of that which is moſt plain and evident, which is laſt mentioned, that it is called the Great cittie, by which name we commonly underſtand, the king, Prince, or Prelate thereof, as in the Prophecies againſt Iuda, Iſraell, Babell, Ninive, we underſtand many times their Princes and principall men; and in our common ſpeech we call Prelates by the names of their Seas: as Canterburie, London, Magunce, Trever, &c. So here, by the moſt proper Adjunct we underſtand Rome, and by Rome her Prince, Prelate or Governour. It will be in vaine therefore to aſke whether this be hee, ſeeing the Holy Ghoſt ſayth, this is he. But it will be (I thinke) worth our labour, to conſider, how theſe qualities may be applied to the chief Pontifex of Rome, and whether they may be applied to any other: And if to them alone, then whether to one more then to another: or to the whole ſucceſsion. Let us therefore peruſe them in order. The firſt qualitie is, The Great Whore. Whoredome in Scripture (as hath been ſayd) is underſtood ſometimes literally, for the corporall filthines: ſometimes myſtically, for the ſpirituall whoredome, which is Idolatrie. Now for this later it is evident, not onely by the Teſtimonie of Salvianus, aboue recited, but of their own hiſtories, that the verie Heathen Idols continued undefaced in Rome, and worſhiped untill the time of Boniface the fourth, who having obteyned the Pantheon of the Emperor Phocas did conſecrate that Temple to the honour of the Virgin Marie, and of all martyrs,
                  Platina. Faſc. Temp., ejectis prius Gentium ſi
                        •
                     ulachris. Firſt caſting out of it the Images of the Heathen.

Now if he firſt caſt them out, then conſequently they remayned unto his time unremoved. And although S. Gregorie is ſayd by ſome Authors in a zeale to Chriſtian Religion to haue broken & defaced ſome of theſe diveliſh moniments, and that therefore Sabinian his Deacon, & next Succeſſor, was ſo much offended with him, that he was about to burne his bookes,In vita Sabin. yet Platina ſtiffely denyeth that either Gregorie did deface Images, or that, that was the cauſe of Sabinians malice againſt him, although he himſelf ſheweth no other cauſe for it. But howſoever it was, whether Gregorie did ſo, or not ſo, yet both by the teſtimonie of Platina, and by the Action of Boniface, we may ſee that the Romans ſtill continued thoſe heathen abhominations. And no ſooner had Boniface, who ſucceeded next but one after Sabinian, caſt out the Heathen Idols, but ſhortly after, they erected the Images of Saints, and commanded and compelled men to worſhip them,about the yeer 625.
                   & that with ſuch eagernes, and furie of contention, that they deprived the Grecian Emperors, and tooke from them all Italie, becauſe they reſiſted them, namely Leo, whom they called in ſcorne Iconomachus, that is, a fighter againſt Images. This worſhipping of Images was then, and ever ſince condemned by godly men, and held to be direct Idolatrie, unexcuſable, whatſoever diſtinctions they pretend, which indeed are but Gloſſes of their ſchoolemen, and haue no ground nor evident proofe in the Scripture. For what Scripture warranteth us to giue the worſhip of Doulia to any Image or Saint whatſoever? I am ſure the Text in one place ſayth: Thou ſhalt worſhip the Lord thy God, and him onely ſhalt thou ſerue: where the word is the ſame that ſignifieth Doulia. What warrant haue we in Scripture to giue the ſame worſhip to the picture, Image, or Croſſe of Chriſt, that we giue to Chriſt Ieſus? What warrant haue we to

ſet up Images for remembrances? Yea, what ſhall we ſay, alſo thoſe groſſe and Heatheniſh ſuperſtitions and Rites in obſerving the Calends of Ianuarie, the dayes Egiptiacall, and the courſe of the ſtarres, all which S. Auguſtine held to be Idolatrous, and yet continued in Rome till the dayes of Pope Martin,
                     Can. 2
                        •
                     . qu
                           •
                        
                      7. which was about the yeare of our Lord 640. yea untill the dayes of pope Zacharie. Where then was the zeale & godlines of the Romiſh prelates before to reforme theſe things? And yet no ſooner were they condemned by the ſayd pope Martin, but that ſhortly after, euen by the ſame pope Martin was commanded both the adoration of Images, and the vow of Chastitie to be obſerved by Monks and prieſts, which was the beginning of the Corporall Fornication alſo, in that, that under the name & pretence of chaſtitie they reſtrayned them from lawfull mariage. Which when they had thus taken away from the Monkes, ſhortly after, that is to ſay, in the yeare of our Lord 660 or thereaboutes, the pope with his Councell decreed, that the Cloyſters of Nunnes ſhould be ſubject to Monks and Fryers, 
                  Conc
                        •
                     l. Hiſpa contrarie to the Synod Agath. Vide Tom. 1. Concil. ciroa ann. 475. Pantal. then which nothing in the world could be deviſed more forcible, and opportune to induce & increaſe common whoredome betwixt them. And about the yeare 697. a king of Spaine gaue publike libertie to prieſts, that everie one of them might keepe as many Concubines, as he would, which eyther he durſt not haue done, or the prieſts durſt not haue put in practiſe, without the popes conſent. And by the counſel of Toledo, about the ſame time, Priests were licen
                     
                        •
                     ed to keepe everie one a Concubine. May we not then here plainly ſee the power of the Greate Whore beginne to ſhew it ſelf, about the year of our Lord 666, when as theſe three great things were in that time publikely eſtabliſhed: firſt the Popedome, or univerſall Pontificate, in Boniface the fourth, Secondly, the adoration of Images. And thirdly,

                  this corporall fornication. But of the power of the pope, how it grew and increaſed,
                     Problem 7. I ſhall ſpeak more hereafter. In the mean ſpace let us take a Review of theſe things, and compare them to the firſt Attribute and Notation here giuen to Antichriſt by the Holy Ghoſt, when he repreſenteth him and his eſtate to a Great Whore. And let us aſke the Queſtions before touched: Firſt, Whether the Popes for theſe nine hundred yeares laſt paſt, haue not continually mainteyned theſe two kindes of Fornications by their lawes, faculties, diſpenſations and practiſes? Secondly, Whether all of them haue mainteyned them, or whether any one of them hath reformed any of theſe ſinnes, during that time? Thirdly, Whether any other Prince, Potentate, State or perſon haue done the like? Fourthly, And if not, then whether they may not well be comprehended and underſtood under the name of one Man, as the whole ſucceſſion of the princes of Iudah and Iſrael, is called Iuda, Iacob, Iſrael, Ephraim, &c. And here, although to any that well conſidereth the places of Scripture aboue cited, it may ſeeme idle and impertinent to ſeeke for Antichriſt in any place out of Rome, or to imagine, that he ſhould be any other then the ſeauenth Ruler of that Septimontane cittie: yet becauſe there are ſome which thinke the Turke to be Antichriſt: others that think Antichriſt muſt be a Iew, and of the Tribe of Dan, and ſuch like vayn opinions: I demand, Whether ever any Turke or Iew commanded, mainteyned, or ſuffred the worſhiping of Images, and the publique uſe of whoredome, ſo much, and in ſuch open manner, as the Popes haue done? And ſeeing both the Iewes and Turkes by the grounds of their Religions do abhorre and deteſt Images: Whether it be likely, that any Iewe or Turke will ever ſuffer ſuch Idolatrie as is common amongst the Papiſts? And yet further becauſe ſome do thinke that the Raign of Antichriſt muſt continue but three yeares and

an half, and ſome thinke he muſt be one particular man; and ſuch like fantaſies: I demande, Whether it be poſſible, that there ſhould be ſo much whoredome and Idolatrie committed, within that ſhort ſpace of time, or in the life of one particular man, though he liue an hundred yeares, as hath been committed within the Popes kingdome and Iuriſdiction, during the ſayd nine hundred yeares laſt paſt? I demand (I ſay) Whether it be poſſible, that there ſhould be ſo many millions of Fornicators, Whores, and Idolaters, in the life of one man, as in the time of theſe Popes? Item, Whether it be poſſible in ſo ſhort a time, for any man or divell to eſtabliſh, uſe and practiſe ſuch powerfull meanes, for the increaſe of whoredome and Idolatrie? And if the Sectaries of the Roman Pontif. will not anſwer, I will aſke the Earth, (as Eſra is called to do) Whether within the compaſſe of ſuch a time ſhe be able to bring forth, or beare ſo many millions of whores, Fornicators,
                  2 Ezd
                           •
                        u 
                     
                        ••
                     
                   
                  and Idolaters, as in the Succeſſion of ſo many ages ſhe hath ſuſteyned? And if ſhe cannot anſwer, but as the wombe of a woman, that it is altogether impoſſible to bring forth ſo many at once, as ſhe doth in tract of time, then will I aſke againe: Whether any of the Popes be free of this, and whether they be not all of them as one man, guiltie of theſe great ſinnes, by act, approbation, conſent and imitation, and conſequently, fit to be repreſented under one perſon, and called one Man? And if this be ſo, then will I demand (as Salvianus doth) of the conſciences of all men, that haue any ſence or feeling of Truth: Whether this be not that great Whore, here deſcribed, then whom never any, no not the Divel himſelf, if he ruled the Earth, but three yeares and an half, or for one mans life onely, could practiſe or cauſe more fornication or Idolatrie to be committed? And ſo much of the firſt note, the Great Whore.
               The ſecond is, that ſhe ſitteth upon manie waters. Which

the Angell expoundeth, to ſignifie Peoples, and Multitudes, Nations, and Tongues. Here firſt I obſerue the word of ſitting, which is uſed not onely here, but by the Apoſtle 2 Theſ. 2. And it is a word 
                     ••
                  metimes applied to Kings, ſometimes to Biſhops. Kings are ſaid to ſit on their Thrones, Biſhops in their Chayres or Churches. Both are applied to Antichriſt. For in the 2 Theſ. 3. it is ſayd, He ſitteth in the Temple or Church of God: and here upon manie Nations. The one place ſheweth, he muſt be a Biſhop, the other a King: can this be applied to any but the Pope? Now that the Pope and Church of Rome for theſe nine hundred yeares haue been ſupported by many Peoples, nations and Tongues, I will deſire to haue none other witneſſes, then their owne chief Authors and Advocates, who make their greateſt brags of their Vniverſalitie:Bellarm. Stapl
                        •
                     ron. 
                        •
                     lendus &c. & how the power of their Pontif. extendeth it ſelf, not onely to Europe, but to all, euen the fartheſt remote parts of the world, America and India: which the Turke, nor any other Potentate cou
                     •
                  d never yet attaine unto. And if this be evident and undeniable, let us againe peruſe over the Queſtions 
                     •
                  boue propoſed: Whether this may be affirmed of any Iewe or Turke. And whether it be poſſible, that the power of any Iew or Turke, or any one man whatſoever, ſhould within the ſpace of three yeeres and an half, or of one mans life ſo far prevail, or procure to haue ſo many Peoples, Multitudes, Nations and Tongues ſubject unto it, as the Multitudes, Nations and Tongues, which haue ſerved the Popes for theſe nine hundred yeares do amount unto? Or to giue a nearer inſtance: ſo many at once, as within that time haue come to Rome to their Iubiles & ſolemnities.
               
               The third note of this Antichriſtian Harlot is, that the Kings of the Earth haue committed fornication with her,
                  
and the Inhabitants of the Earth haue been made druncken with the wine of her fornication. And what king was there in Europe, for theſe nine hundred yeares, which did not committ or permit fornication both corporall and ſpirituall with the Church of Rome? Which of them did not worſhip the ſame Images, and uſe or permit the ſame uncleanes? And I demand againe, whether this can be verified of any Iew, Turke or other perſon whatſoever, paſt, preſent or to come?
               
               The fourth note, is her exceeding great riches, pompe and gorgeouſnes. Let me inſtance, but in one or two particulars. Majora, vel certe paria, &c. ſayth Blondus. All Europe ſendeth to Rome greater, or ſurely no leſſe Tributes,
                  In Roma inst. urata. 
                  then were payed to the Ancient Roman Emperors. Pope Iohn left at his death in treaſure, ducentos quinquaginta Tonellos Ducatorum,
                  Bib
                        •
                     iand. ex Palmerio ad ann. 1334.
                   ſayth another. Omnes Reges mundi non poſsent tantum de Theſauro reddere infra unum annum, quantum fuit de Papali Palatio aſportatum, & de Palatiis trium Cardinalium & Marchionis. ſayth another, ſpeaking of Pope Boniface the eight,R. Aveſb. and three Cardinals, and the Marquis his nephew. I demand then, Whether Prince or Potentate, State or perſon haue had the like teſtimonie of Riches, and whether it be credible, that any in three yeares & an half, or one mans life time ſhould attaine to the like?
               
               The fifth note: She hath a name written in her forehead, A Myſterie, Babylon the Great, Mother of Harlots and abhominations of the earth. Firſt it is called Great. I demand, Whether ever this title were ſo much giuen to any cittie beſides Rome? The old Babylon was never ſo many times called great. And I thinke, none will make queſtion of any other. And Whether the Biſhop of Rome, the Church of Rome, and the cittie of Rome, haue not everie one of them had a ſpeciall title of Greatnes, I referre me to the conſciences of the Romans themſelues, to their Decrees and Canons, who

giue to their Biſhop the Title of Pontifex Max. or Summus, ſo Lipſius, that hath written a Booke, De magnitudine urbis Romae, and to that other, who writ a Booke, De magnitudine Romanae Eccleſiae. So their Church is great, their cittie is great, and their Biſhop is greateſt of all. Of the name of Babylon I haue ſpoken ſufficiently before. And for the other title of Mother of Harlots or Sodomites (as Scaliger and others reade) and abhominations of the earth: I demand of all that know Rome, eyther by travelling in thoſe countries and eye witneſſe, or by reading and heareſay: Whether there be in any place of the world, being of no greater extent ſo many Harlots, and Sodomites, and ſo publikely mainteyned, and allowed, as in Rome, and the Popes Iuriſdiction, and where his power is acknowledged, and whether any other Prince or Prelate, Church or State, Turke or Iew, haue giuen or made ſuch, and ſo many faculties and diſpenſations, pardons and Lawes, for ſuch things. Let the notable booke of the Taxa and the caſes reſerved to Papall diſpenſation be peruſed. And here is to be noted the Name that the Holy Ghoſt giveth to her, calling her, The Mother of Harlots or Sodomites and fornications, which is ſingularly Emphaticall. For it cannot be denied, but there are many Harlots and Fornicators in other places, neyther can it be denied, but other Empires and kingdoms are called Whores, as Inda and Iſrael by Ezekiel, Ninive by Nahum: Babylon by Ieremie. But no other place is called the mother of Harlots or Sodomites. This of all the reſt ſeemeth to be Proprium quarto modo. A propertie inſeparable, which agreeth to the Popes, omni, ſoli, & ſemper, to them onely, and everie of them ever ſince the Councels of Hiſpal. and Toledo aboue mentioned. For nōne but the Popes haue forbidden Mariage, nor made Lawes that the Cloyſters and Convents of Nunnes ſhould be ſubject to monkes and Fryers, and that it ſhould be lawfull

for Prieſts to haue Concubines. No other Prince, State or perſon, hath built ſuch Stewes and Brothelhouſes for Venerie and Sodomy. Wherein whores, Sodomites and Fornicators are dayly bred, cheriſhed, increaſed and multiplied. None but they haue granted pardons, faculties and diſpenſations for ſuch things. And if any had done, or ſhould do the like, may we thinke it poſſible, or credible, that he ſhould obteyne ſuch abſolute power and reputation of Holynes, as the Pope hath to be credited and beleeved in the ſame? Was there ever any Sodomite, Aegyptian, Babylonian, Iew, Turke, or Infidell ſo deſperately impudent, as the Romans haue been, not onely in doing ſuch things, but in boaſting of them, and ſetting forth bookes thereof, as of old, Virgil, Ovid, Tibullus, Catullus, Propertius; and of late Caſa, the noble Archbiſhop of Sodom? Boccate, their Conceits upon Orlando, Baptiſta de Albertis, Petrus Haedus and manie others.Cornel. Agr. de van. Sci. cap. 63, 64.
                   
                  Vidi ego nuper Italica lingua editum Dialogum utriuſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Veneris, omnium flagitioſiſsimum. And againe, Flagitioſiſsimi Lenones, ſceleſtiſsimae
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Lenae ſaepe ſub Religionum pellibus deliteſcunt. And hereupon againe I aſke, Whether this can be applied to any Prince, Potentate, State or perſon, and whether theſe prophecies can be otherwiſe fulfilled?
               
               The ſixth note alſo is evident. She is druncken with the bloud of the Saints, and Martyrs of Chriſt Ieſus. Peruſe the Hiſtories of the Chriſtian Church, & likewiſe of all Iewes, Turkes, Infidels, and Pagans, that haue been ſince the beginning of the world, and ſhew me, whether ever any nation haue ſhed ſo much Chriſtian bloud, or haue cauſed ſo much to be ſhed, as the Romans haue done? To omitt thoſe ten Primitiue Perſecutions, which remaine without parallell of any other: How many millions were ſlayne in thoſe ſacred warres, ſtirred up by the Popes, to recover Paleſtina? in the civill warres of Germanie and France?

How many were maſſacred in France in the yeare 1572, and not long before in Merindall and Cabrieres? How many Reverend Biſhops, and godly Preachers were burned in England, with Men, women, Children and Infants under pretence of their fierie zeale? How many thouſands, did their great Champion, the Duke of Alva deſtroy in few yeares in the Netherlands, what by his Soldjors, what by his Hangmen, and executioners? How many haue they ſwallowed up in their bloudie Inquiſitions? To ſpeake nothing of thoſe which they count but viles animas, as the Valdenſes, Hugunots, Gewſes, Lutherans and Calviniſts, how many Princes and Noblemen haue they made away? Egmond, Horne, and the Prince of Orenge, in the Low Countries. The Admirall Chaſtillon, Count Rochfocault, Teligni, the Queene of Navarre, and two Kings, in France. In Spaine, Prince Charles, beſides many others. But what talke I of particulars. Let all Princes of the world joyne together againſt the Lord and his Chriſt, as the Iewes and Romans did againſt our Saviour: Yea, let the greate Turke and great Divell joyne with them, and raigne but three yeares and an half, or but for a mans life, and ſpend all that time in murdering the Saints of Chriſt Ieſus, and I will yet aſke, Whether any man can imagine, that in ſo ſhort a time they be able to kill ſo many godly Christians, as haue been murdered and ſlayne by the power, practiſes, and procurement of theſe Pontifices Max. ſince they got that Antichriſtian title? And if men will not confeſſe the truth, I will againe appeale to the Earth, and aſke, Whether ſhe in ſo ſhort a time, be able to bring forth ſo many to be martired? And if the Conſciences of men be not more dull and dead then the earth, I will demand againe of them, Whether all theſe Pontifices maximi, and everie one of them, be not guiltie of all the Bloudſheds of their

Predeceſsors, by Conſent, Approbation, Imitation and proſecution? And whether the like can be ſayd, of any State, Potentate, prince or perſon in the world beſides? Let us yet caſt our eyes a litle more abroad, and conſider of the great deſtructions of Chriſtian men, by Turkes and Saracens. It cannot be denyed, but theſe open and profeſſed enemies of Chriſt haue ſhedde much Chriſtian bloud, yet I thinke if Hiſtories be diligently ſearched, and compared together, it may be proved, that ſince the ſayd yeare of our Lord 700. the Popes and their Sectaries haue been verie Great, if not the chiefeſt meanes and cauſes, eyther by procurement, 
                  Qui non defendit nec obſiſtit, ſi poteſt infuriae, tant est in vitio, quam ſi parentes, aut patriā aut ſucios deſerat. Cic. lf. Offi. or deſtitution, of the Effuſion of all, or the moſt part of the Chriſtian bloud, that hath been ſhed by thoſe Miſcreants in Europe. For what was the meanes, whereby, the Saracens firſt prevailed in Aſia, but the weaknes of the Graecian Empire? And what cauſed that weaknes, but the Revolt of Italie and other weſterne Countries from the Empire, procured by the Pope? Whereby the Graecian princes were not onely deprived of many mightie Chriſtian kingdomes, but diſtracted by Rebells at home, from defending their ſubjects abroad? And what then brought the Turke into Europe, but the weakenes of the ſame princes, when they were neither able to hold their Provinces which they had in Aſia, nor to ſuppreſſe the factions in Graecia? Who ſtirred up the Chriſtian Princes of Britayn, Germanie and France, to ſpend their ſubjects bloud in Syria, where ſo many millions of Chriſtians were ſlayne, and then left them ſuccourleſſe to their enemies, and ſometimes rewarded them with excommunications & ſeditions ſtirred up againſt them at home, whereby their ſubjects rebelled, and their enemies prevailed? Who moved our noble King Richard the firſt, to enter into that Saracenicall warre, where he loſt ſo many men,Math. Fari
                        ••
                     
                  
                  
and yet when he was taken Priſoner by a Chriſtian Prince, in his Returne, what meanes did the Pope make for his libertie,Bleſenſis. for all the pittifull letters of his mother, when in the mean ſpace his kingdome was moſt greevouſly oppreſſed and ſpoyled? What help had the Grecian Emperors,In conc. Lugdun. ann. 1275. & in concil. Bouon. circa 1439. a'ter which, within 16 yeres the Turk tooke Constantinople. when with moſt humble ſubmiſſions & ſupplications they ſollicited the Pope to aſſiſt them, being Chriſtians, againſt the Turke, being the common enemie of our fayth? Who was the cauſe of that wofull and never ſufficiently deplored ſlaughter of Chriſtians at Varna: but the perſidious Pope, and his Cardinall Iulian, cauſing the poore ſeduced King, to violate his oath and league with the Turke? What helpe or ſuccour did the Popes giue or procure to thoſe two Invincible Soldjours of Chriſt Ieſus, Hunniades and Scanderbeg,Historia Scanderb. againſt the Turke, though this later with all humilitie in perſon deſired it, offering to driue that publike enimie out of Europe, if he might haue aſſiſtance? It is ſayd indeed, that Pius the ſecond gathered an armie, ſuch as it was, to help him, but nothing came of it, and perhaps he loſt nothing by the Bargain. And what ſhall we ſay of Boniface the eighth, who hired the Saracens to warre againſt the Chriſtians in Sicilia? What ſhall we ſay alſo to the firſt comming of the Turkes into Europe? Who tranſported their armies by Sea, but the Popes owne ſubjects of Genua, the countrie that was giuen to the Pope by Herebertus the Lombard, and whom he might haue eaſily reſtrayned, if he would. More of this might be ſayd, but let this ſuffice; and let me demand upon it, whether we may not juſtly thinke him guiltie of all the Chriſtian bloud, that hath been ſhed by the Turkes in Europe? I aſke againe, whether any of theſe Pontifices Maximi haue amended theſe

things, or ſhewed any repentance or ſorrow for them, or any diſlike thereof ſince their perpetration: yea, whether they haue not by all meanes extolled and approved of thoſe their Predeceſſors, boaſting of their Succeſſion from them, and mainteyning that they cannot erre, and that they ought not to be judged by any man? And therefore before I paſſe from this point, let me ſpeake one word to thee, (O Lord of Trueth Loue and mercie) or let my teares ſpeake to thee, that yet at length, thou wouldest take pittie upon thy rent and torne bodie, thy poore distreſſed Church, which by intestine diſſentions, and the malicious practiſes of this inward and ſecret enimie, is become the common ſtage and Theater of all bloudie Maſſacres, and dolefull Tragedies, while their enimies both forreyn, and domeſtick proſper, and triumph in their unitie and agreement. O let it pleaſe thee at length to reunite in Trueth and Loue, that the enimie may no longer ſay, Where is their God?
               
               Well, the laſt note is inſeparable and undeniable. It is (ſayth the Holy Ghoſt) that Great cittie, that ruleth over the Kings of the Earth. Whereof I haue ſayd ſufficiently before, and having ſhewed that it cannot be applied to any other place in the world, and that the Antichriſt can be no other then the ſeuenth Ruler of that High ſeuen hilled Cittie, and namely, that Head which next ſucceeded the Emperors, as the beſt Fathers, and ancient Interpreters with one mutuall conſent do agree: I will adde to the deſcription of this Antichriſtian ſtate, a ſhort ſurvey of the words and actions of Antichriſt, as by the H. Apoſtles and Prophets they are noted, to ſhew, how all Prophecies are fulfilled touching the comming of Antichriſt, and do all concurre in the Roman State and Prelate, and this is the ſixth generall part, which I propoſed at firſt.
            
            
               
               
                  ƲI. Of the words and actions of Antichriſt.
               THe Prophet Daniel ſpeaking of Antichriſt, giveth us four notes,
                     Dan. 7, 25. verie notable and remarkeable. Whereof the firſt is, He ſhall ſpeake words againſt the Moſt High. Secondly, He ſhall conſume the Saints of the Most High. Thirdly,
                     Apoc. 17. 
                  He ſhall thinke to change times. Fourthly, He ſhall thinke alſo to change Lawes. Our Apoſtle repeating alſo the two firſt, addeth two more, Adulterie and Idolatrie.
                  2 Theſ. 2. And the Apoſtle Paul addeth one, namely Luciferian pride, and Exaltation. For he exalteth himſelf againſt all that is called God, or that is worſhiped, and he ſitteth in the Temple of God, boaſting himſelf, that he is God. Of ſome of theſe things I haue ſpoken ſo much alreadie, that I need not ſtand long upon them. Firſt, He ſhall ſpeak words againſt the Moſt High, which is Blaſphemie. Did Antiochus ſo (for of him ſome do interpret this place) when he forbade ſacrifices,1 Mat. 1. and burnt offerings to be made unto God, when he burnt the bookes of the Law and commanded Idols to be worſhiped? And haue not the Popes of Rome done ſo, when they forbid prayers and thankſgiving to God in the vulgar tongue, cauſed the Bibles, tranſlated into Engliſh and other tongues to be burned, and commanded Images to be worſhiped? Secondly, He ſhall conſume the Saints of the moſt High. Did Antiochus ſo, in commanding godly men to be put to death? And hath not the Pope done much more? Haue they not cauſed many millions of Chriſtian men to be ſlayne in their great expeditions and Maſſacres? Hereof ſufficient hath been ſayd before, and yet becauſe it cometh now to hand, I hope it will not ſeeme tedious to adde one inſtance more,Do not eccl. cap. 18.
                   out of the Arch-advocate of Antichriſt Bellarmin. who confeſſeth that in France, in one

expedition under Innocent the third, there were ſlayne an hundred thouſand. Thirdly, He ſhall thinke to change times & Lawes, two things which God ſeemeth to challenge, as reſerved, and peculiar to himſelf. For of Times David ſayth, My times are in thy hands. and Daniel,
                     Pſal. 31. 
                  God changeth times and ſeaſons. And our Saviour Chriſt himſelf ſayth,
                     Dan. 2. that God hath kept them in his owne power. And of Lawes,
                     Act. 1. Salomon ſayth, By me Kings and Princes decree juſt things.
                  
                     Prov. 8. Now I aſke of thoſe that will haue theſe Prophecies to be applied onely to Antiochus: What did he in this kinde? what times did he change, or what Lawes? But of the Pope and all the Popes ſince Boniface, who is called the fourth, but indeed the ſecond that tooke upon him that title, which was about the yeare of our Lord 607, I demand, whether they haue not all taken upon them this power, to change times and lawes? Did not Boniface himſelf make a new feast to the honour of all Saints? Haue not his Succeſſors likewiſe made verie many new Feaſts and Faſts? Let their owne Kalenders be witneſſe. Haue they not ordeyned Iubilees, and altered them at their pleaſure? Haue they not altered the whole Kalender of the Iulian year from the Dionyſian account, to the Litian or Gregorian? and thereby altered all the Feaſts, both moueable and unmoueable, from the times, wherein by the old account they are obſerved? Haue I neede to ſtand long to proue this point, which is knowen to all the world? Hath this been done upon any warrant of Gods word? Or hath it not beene done by Aſtronomicall computations of Minutes and Seconds, which are almoſt inſenſible and imperceptible. Will they ſay it may be done by Arte? And what will they anſwer to thoſe excellent learned men, who deny their account, and haue noted great defects in men of no meane eſtimation among the learned, namely

Scaliger,Vid. Thuan. l. 129.
                   Petavius, and Vieta, to ſpeake nothing of our owne Countriman Lidyat. What will they ſay to thoſe that hold the Arte of Aſtronomie, not onely imperfect, but impoſſible to be perfected: and therefore compare the ſtudie of it, to the building of the Tower of Babylon? And that alſo was the ſentence of a man not of the meaneſt account, no leſſe then Raimarus Mathematician to the Emperor Rudolphus?
                     Act. 1. So that the ſentence of our Saviour Chriſt may ſeeme to extend to this alſo: Non ad vestrum ſcire tempora. You muſt be content ſapere ad Sobrietatem: to be wiſe, and not too wiſe, but within the compaſſe of ſobrietie. Now let me aſke, Whether any Prince, Potentate, State or perſon ever did the like in the changes of times, as theſe Popes haue done: and whether any can do the like, eſpecially that ſhall continue but three yeares and a halfe, or one mans life time? Again, haue not the Popes and everie one of them changed lawes, by eſtabliſhing a New law, which they call the Canon Law? Haue they not added to their Decrees, Decretals, Extravagants, Clementines, and do they not ſtill publiſh new Bulles, Faculties, and Diſpenſations with ſpeciall words of Non obstante? I hope no man will put me to proue any of theſe things; unleſſe it be ſome that will make a queſtion, whether that rule of Law be to be held, which ſayth, that Notoria non ſunt probanda? or make a doubt, whether the Popes Bulles, Faculties, Diſpenſations, and other publike Inſtruments be Notoria.
                  Anton. ſum. part. 3. t. 22. Sum. Angel. tit. Papa. Againe, do they not teach and mainteyne, that the Pope may make New Religions, change the ordinances of Generall Councels, and diſpence with all Lawes, both of the Temporall State, and of the Church, yea with all the Laws of the ſecond Table, and with ſome of the firſt? As when God in his Law ſayth, It is not lawfull for thee to haue thy Brothers wife. Doth not the Pope ſay, It is lawfull by my

diſpenſation. When God ſayth, Thou ſhalt not kill: doth not the Pope ſay, thou mayſt kill euen thy Prince, when I haue declared him to be an Heretike? Is not this to change lawes,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   and haue not all the Popes, for theſe many hundred yeares now laſt paſt, with one conſent and voice, all making one Man of ſinne, or Lawleſſe one, arrogated this power, and practiſed it? Haue they not all maynteyned and approved the Actions of their Predeceſſors in doing ſuch things? And do they not ſtill maintaine and practiſe the ſame? So that I need not to ſay with Salvianus, Etſi hoc commune omnibus non faciebat actus, faciebat tamen aſsenſus. For which of them hath not done it? And what elſe hath been the cauſe of ſo many millions of ſinnes committed in the Chriſtian world, for theſe many hundred yeares, but the Bulles, Indulgences, Pardons, abſolutions, faculties and diſpenſations of the Pope, together with the perſwaſion that men had of their Holines, Infallibilitie, and power to grant ſuch things, and that by ſuch Bulles, Indulgences, Pardons and Diſpenſations their ſinnes were forgiuen? Now let any man ſhew me, Whether ever any Prince, Potentate, State or man haue done the like, or whether it be poſſible for any, in time to come, to doe ſo much in this kinde, as the Popes haue done: namely, to make ſo many Lawes, to break and change ſo many Lawes, and to grant ſo many Bulles, faculties and diſpenſations, eſpecially within the compaſſe of three yeares and an half, or one mans life time? Concerning their Adulteries, which is the fifth, I haue ſayd ſufficiently before, onely this one queſtion may be added, viz. Where ſhall we finde Antichriſt, and Babylon the Great Whore, and mother of Whoredomes, but in that church and ſtate, whoſe chief Biſhop publikely alloweth them, becauſe he hath a greate part of his Revennues from them, which as ſome in former times haue accounted, hath been to the

value of fortie thouſand ducats yearly? Concerning their Idolatries alſo I haue ſpoken before, and ſhall ſay more hereafter. There reſteth but the laſt note, which S. Paul giveth,2 Theſ. 2. and is principally to be obſerved, becauſe the Fathers do agree, that it is without doubt ſpoken of Antichriſt, viz. That he ſitteth in the Temple of God, as God, boaſting that he is God, and exalteth himſelf aboue all that is called God, or that is worſhiped, and yet working with all deceiuablenes of unrighteouſnes. If any man yet remain doubtfull whether the Pope be that Antichriſt, let him anſwer me upon theſe words, Who ever was comparable to the Pope in theſe things?
                  Aug. de civ. dei li. 20.
                   Who ever beſides him hath ſitten in the outward viſible Church, or Temple of God, as chief Biſhop, head or Governour thereof, or upon the Church, as commanding, ruling, and raigning over it. or as the Temple of God, with ſuch a ſingular opinion of ſanctitie and infallabilitie, (for all theſe wayes doth the Father interpret that word) as the Popes haue done? And whether it is credible that any ſhall do the like in time to come? Whether is there, or was there ever any Prince, Potentate or perſon, Christian or Iew, Turke or Pagan ſo adored as he hath been, and that in the verie Temple, and Charch of God, and that by the chief Biſhops, Archbiſhops, Cardinals, Patriarks, and Primates of the Church? Whether can they giue any greater Adoration to God himſelf outwardly, if he were corporally preſent? Or do they giue any greater to the Sacrament, in which they affirme the bodie of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt to be really preſent? Again Whether hath any Prince, Potentate or perſon, Chriſtian, or Iew, Turke or Pagan, invented, or practiſed ſuch a powerfull meanes, to depriue or depoſe Emperors, Kings and Princes, as the Popes haue done by their Excommunications, Suſpenſions, Interdictions and Decrees? Did ever any ſo practiſe, to diſcharge Subjects of their Alleageance

and oathes, to giue kingdomes away to others, to crowne and uncrowne Emperors with his foote, to treade upon them, and yet ſtill reteyne ſuch an opinion of Holynes,See more in the Collect. of M. Fox in the end of his firſt Tome. and haue a Cleargie ſinging to him in the meane while, Super Aſpidem, & Baſiliſcum, &c. Did ever any do the like, and was obeyed in ſuch things, and thought to do it lawfully and rightfully? And hath he not in theſe things more then ever any other exalted himſelf as God, aboue all kings and Princes, which are called Gods and worſhiped?
                  See much more of this in M. Downhams Treatiſe of Antichr. l. 1. cap. 5.
                   Yea doth he not exalt himſelf aboue our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, as much as man may doe, when he affirmeth, that not onely he himſelf, but everie one of his Maſſe-prieſts and Friers is able to make the verie carnall bodie of our Saviour, which muſt be worſhipped as God? Doth he not cauſe the Sacrament to be caried before him by a Pedarie, or Footeprieſt, when he himſelf is mounted up in a Throne of Majeſtie, and caried upon mens ſhoulders? Doth he not exalt himſelf aboue our Lord, when he weareth the Crucifix (which he likewiſe commandeth to be worſhiped as God) upon his ſhoes and pantofles,Poſſevin
                        •
                     
                   which euen the Rude Moſcovite, when he heard of it, utterly abhorred and deteſted? Doth he not exalt himſelf aboue God, when he taketh upon him to alter the Articles of Fayth, and adde to thoſe which were anciently made, and declared in the times of the Apoſtles, or ſoone after, by the conſent of the Primitiue Church? For what is that they haue declared ſo imperiouſly; ſubeſſe Romano Pontiſici,Extra. Com. de Majorit. omni humanae creaturae declaramus, definimus, &c. eſſe de neceſsitate ſalutis. and therefore, where the ancient Creed teacheth us to beleeue the Catholike Church, they will now haue us to ſay the Catholike Roman Church? Doth he not exalt himſelf aboue God, when he diſpenſeth with the Lawes of God, and with ſinnes; not onely with ſinnes done, but to be done,
                  
which God himſelf never would doe? For proofe whereof let the Bulles be reviewed which he hath granted, as to Henry the eight to marrie his Brothers wife, and ſuch like; Alſo the Bulles which he hath ſent forth againſt Queene Elizabeth and King Iames, the Kings of France and other princes, exciting their Subjects to Treaſon, murder and Rebellion. Yea hath he not granted to private men faculties or pardons for ſinnes to be done? I am ſure our Soveraine king Iames telleth us of two ſuch pardons,His Majeſties Meditaetion upon the Lords prayer. which he ſaw himſelf. Did ever any Iew, Turke, Infidell or pagan take upon him to doe the like? Or is ever any to be expected that may do more? I demand alſo, whether ever any other hath had, or whether any other may be expected in time to come, that may haue greater, or the like power to deceiue men in unrighteouſnes, or to make them beleeue, that it is lawfull for them to commit ſinne and wickednes in ſuch manner as the popes haue done by their pardons, Faculties and ſuch like marchandize? And whether this hath not been a moſt effectuall and potent meanes to induce men into ſinne and unrighteouſnes? And, Whether it be poſsible for any other man to do the like in time to come, eſpecially in the Church of God, and within ſo ſhort a time, as three yeares and a half, or one mans life time? as hath been done by the Popes in all theſe ſeauen points laſt before ſet downe. And if it be altogether impoſſible, let us at length abandon that, and ſuch like incredible, and impoſſible opinions, and not ſuffer our ſelues to be deluded any longer, but ingenuouſly and freely confeſſe, that this is he; and that it is in vaine to looke for another. And thus by the gracious & merciful aſſiſtance of our Almightie Lord, Chriſt Ieſus, I haue paſſed through theſe ſix parts of the deſcription of Antichriſt; his Place, his State, his Names, his Riſing, his Raigne, and his Words and Actions,
                  
everie one of them ſo ſutable to the Roman Pontifex, that I for my part thinke it imp
                     •
                  ſſible to apply them to any other. And ſo I come to the ſeauenth and laſt part, which is his Times.
               
            
            
               VII. Of the Times of Antichrist.
               ONE of the greateſt Arguments, that the Popiſh Advocates do inſiſt upon, to proue that their Pope is not Antichriſt, is this of the Times: wherein firſt they ſtifly mainteyne, that Antichriſt ſhall raigne but three yeares and an half, whereas the Pope hath raigned (ſay they) many hundred yeares. Marke here by the way, they confeſſe that he raigneth in Rome. Secondly, they hold that Antichriſt ſhall be but one man, and ſhall not come, untill ſhortly before the end of the world. Thirdly, that Enoch and Elias muſt come before, or in his time. All which conceits are without any warrant of the Holy Scriptures, and haue been largely refuted by others, eſpecially by the excellent learned Robert Abbat late Biſhop of Saleſburie. and for the two firſt, I haue ſayd before ſufficiently. Againſt the laſt I will propoſe but one queſtion, which ſhall be drawen out of the verie words of the Text.
                     Apoc. 11. For in the 11 chapter of the Revelation, where there is mention made of the two Prophets; whom they will haue to be Enoch and Elias, it is ſayd, that they ſhall be ſlayne by the Beaſt which commeth out of the bottomleſſe pitt, and not by the Beaſt which cometh out of the Earth. Now in the 13 chapter we finde two Beasts, the firſt aſcending out of the Sea, having feauen heads and ten hornes. Which is by the beſt Interpreters judged to be the Old Roman Empier, and

the Temporall ſtate thereof: The ſecond Beaſt aſcendeth out of the Earth, and that 
                     〈◊〉
                   properly underſtood to be Antichrist, as hath been ſayd before. And in the 17 chapter it appeareth,
                  
                     Rev. 17. that the firſt Beaſt, which hath the ſeuen Heads, is that which is ſayd to aſcend out of the Bottomleſſe pitt. I aſke then upon the Conference of theſe Texts together, How it can stand with theſe Prophecies, to ſay that theſe two Prophets must be Enoch and Elias, & ſhall be ſlayne by Antichrist, when as they must be ſlayne by the Roman Empire, and not by the ſecond Beaſt, nor by the Whore? and the Roman Empire muſt be removed before Antichriſt be revealed. Iudicent Theologi. But theſe and ſuch like conceits of theirs being brought into the light, and appied to the flames of thoſe holy burning and ſhining Candles, the Prophets and Apoſtles, will eaſily diſſolue and melt away like ice before the Sunne. For whoſoever applieth himſelf with any heede and diligence to reade and marke the Scriptures, and compare them together, may ſoone perceiue that the bleſſed ſpirit of Trueth, who leadeth us into all Trueth, verie often, and verie largely ſpeaketh of the Times of Antichriſt, deſcribing them with ſeauen remarkeable Conſiderations, whereof not one of them telleth us of Henoch and Elias, or that Antichriſt ſhall be but one man, or indure but three yeares and an half, &c. But contrariwiſe repreſenteth unto us long Periods and continuance of times. As to the Purpoſe: Firſt, that which we may call Praeparationes or Diſpoſitiones Materiae, which by the Apoſtle I thinke is called the working of the Mysterie of Iniquitie, and began in the Apoſtles time,
                  2 Theſ. 2. and muſt continue till the removing of the Roman Empire, which was about three hundred yeares. The ſecond is the Removing of the Impediment, and the Riſing of Antichriſt, which in reaſon

muſt follow, for ſublato impedimento emergit actio. And this not at an Inſtant, but at leaſt in 300 or 400 yeares more. For ſo long it was before the Empire was cleane removed out of Rome. The third is his Revelation not upon a ſodayne, but by degrees in long time, accompanying his Riſing. The fourth therefore is his Raigne more near to a Septingentan, then to a Demi-Septennian. The fifth is of the Signes of his times, and the manners of men in thoſe times, not incident to a ſhort time. The ſixth is of his decay and conſumption, not haſtie: and the ſeauenth of his finall end, and utter deſtruction; which muſt be by the ſecond comming of our Lord Ieſus Christ. So that the working of this myſterie, and the progreſſe thereof muſt be from the time of the Apoſtles unto the end of the world. And there is not one of theſe ſeauen Conſiderations but is expreſſely ſpoken of in the Scripture moſt of them verie often, as ſhall appear by that which followeth: Whereupon I aſke, Whether it would not ſeeme verie vaine and unſeemly not onely for the majeſtie of divine Truth, or dignitie of Apoſtolike writings; but euen for the gravitie of a ſober man to ſpeake ſo often, or make ſuch incuications of things, that ſhould either come ſo late, or continue ſo ſmall a time. Therefore to ſpeak of the firſt conſideration, I 
                     •
                  ſke whether it be not expreſſely & directly intimated unto us by the Holy Apoſtle S. Paul, where he ſayth,2 Theſ 2. 
                  the Myſterie of Iniquitie beginneth to worke alreadie. And by S. Iohn,1 Iohn 2. 
                  Euen now there are manie Antichriſts. And againe,2 Iohn 7. 
                  now alreadie he is in the world. And againe, Manie deceivers are entred into the world, which confeſse not that Ieſus Chriſt is come in the Fleſh,
                  2 Pet. 2. 
                  ſuch a one is Antichriſt. And S. Peter, and S. Iude, with many words & great diligence warne the Church of God,Iude epiſt. that there were then certaine men crept in, which defiled the fl
                        •
                     ſh, and deſpiſed government. Is it poſſible that the

Apoſtles ſhould be ſo carefull to admoniſh and advertiſe the church, that there were ſuch beginnings, and ſuch workings of Antichriſt in thoſe times, and yet that he ſhould not come in 1600 yeares after? or ſhould continue ſo ſhort a time? I am not ignorant that it was the opinion of ſome learned and godly men, from whom I do not willingly diſſent. But I know that God doth not reveal all things, to one man, nor all things at one time, nor in one manner.
                  
                     Iohn 3. Everie man hath his gift and meaſure. Everie thing hath his time and ſeaſon; and everie time his temper and diſpoſition.
                  
                     Eccleſ. 3. It was ſayd of a verie learned and excellent Doctor of the Church. Non videt omnia. And he that is non unus è multis,
                  See Io. Pic. Mir. in apolo. 
                  ſed inter omnes prope ſingularis, held ſome ſtrange opinions. Yea Moſes and David erred in ſome things. It may be alſo that the Fathers of the Primitiue Church, having other great Controverſies in hand, gaue themſelues but little to the ſtudie of the Apocalyps, that booke being then in queſtion, as it ſeemeth, and not publikely received untill the Councell of Toledo, which was about the yeare of our Lord 630,Vida concil. & Pantal. 
                  as if our Lord had provided it againſt that time. Yet ſomethings they ſaw, and where their opinions are conſonant with the Scriptures, they are verie much to be regarded. Leaving therefore the ignorance of thoſe godly Fathers in ſome points, to ſleepe with them in their graues, and covering them with a vail of juſt excuſe, in that they ſaw not the ſucceſſe of times, and fulfilling of divers prophecies, which haue ſince appeared, and with a Robe of Honorable and Sacred Memorie for the gifts and graces of God, which otherwiſe ſhined in them (as Shem and Iaphet did the nakednes of their Father) Let us follow with ſtraight ſteppes the light of divine Trueth, ſhining in the Scriptures, whereunto the Fathers themſelues do ſend us, to guide us out of the

miſtie cloudes and perplexed Labyrinths of Humane Errors. And let us ſee what the Apoſtles meant by the words aboue cited, as where one of them ſayth,2 Theſ. 2. 
                  The Myſterie of iniquitie worketh alreadie. And againe; His working is with all deceiuablenes &c. And another,
                     Iohn 3. 
                  Euen now there are manie Antichriſt &c. and there are many deceivers gone out &c. Did they meane this of Turks, which were then ſcarce heard of in the world? or of Iewes, which did not then deceitfully, but had long before openly and profeſſedly ſhewed themſelues to be the Enemies of Chriſt and all Chriſtians? Or of Heatheniſh Pagans, that were alſo open perſecutors? or of any that ſhould openly and profeſsedly deny that Chriſt was come, as now the Greate Patrons of the Romiſh cauſe would perſwade us? If ſo, what needed they to tell us of a Mysterie, Deceiveablenes, Deceivers, &c. What Myſterie or deceit could there be in the direct and profeſſed denying of Chriſt?1 Iohn 3. Or doth not S. Iohn teach us plainly that they meant it of perverted & Hereticall Chriſtians, where he ſayth: They went out from us, but they were not of us. For if they had been of us, they would haue continued with us. They went out from the Church, and they would haue continued with the Church: Do not both theſe words ſignifie, that they were ſometimes of the Church? and not Iewes, Turkes, or Pagans that were never of the Church? So in the Epiſtle to the Elect Ladie, where he ſayth: Such a one is a deceiver. So S. Paul, His comming is with all deceiueablenes. Theſe admonitions might ſeem verie impertinent, if they had underſtood that Antichriſt ſhould haue been a Iew, Turke, Pagan, or other profeſſed enemie of Chriſt. So in another place: They profeſſe that they know God, but by works they deny him, and are abhominable, diſobedient,
                  
                     Titus 1. 
                  and to everie good worke repr
                        •
                     
                     bate. The like may be ſayd of that fatherly and ſerious admonition

and charge, which the beloved Apoſtle giveth unto us:1 Iohn 4. that many falſe Prophets were gone out into the world, and therefore that we ſhould trye the Spirits. What tryall neede we make of anie Turke, Iew, Pagan, or profeſſed enemie of Chriſt?2 Pet. 2. And the Apoſtle Peeter ſeemeth alſo to warne us of ſuch men, whom he calleth Falſe Teachers, which ſhould privily bring in damnable Hereſies, denying the Lord that bought them, &c. He ſayth Hereſyes: ſhall we ſay Iudaiſme, Turciſme, Paganiſme? He ſayth privily, ſhall we ſay openly? What manner of Interpretation is this to contradict the Text? Surely the Ancient Fathers would not ſo interpret it. Tertullian, Qui pſeudoprophetae ſunt niſi falſi praedicationes?De praeſcript. qui pſeudoapostoli niſi adulteri Euangelizatores? qui Antichriſti interim & ſemper niſi Chriſti rebelles?
                  Ad Magnum. Cyprian. Indignandum & dolendum eſt Christianos Antichriſtis aſsiſtere & praevaricatores fidei, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      proditores Eccleſiae, intus in ipſa eccleſia contra eccleſiam stare. Auguſt.August. 
                  Opera loquuntur & verba requirimus? Magis mendax est Antichriſtus qui ore profitetur Chriſtum, & factis negat.
                  In Matth. Chryſoſtom. Exercitus Antichriſti ſunt omnes Haereſes, praecipue iſta,Bern. quae obtinuit Eccleſiae locum. Ministri Christi ſerviunt Antichriſto? Were theſe men ignorant of the Catholike veritie? Or are not theſe ynough to proue that which Vincentius requireth: Quod ubi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſemper & ab omnibus creditum est?
                  Vincent. Let us returne then to the Apoſtle S. Iude,Iude epist. who exhorteth us earneſtly to maintaine the faith againſt ſuch as turne the grace of God into wantonnes, and defile the fleſh ſpeaking ill of Magiſtrates denying the onely Lord God and our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. If we ſhould aſke upon theſe words, who they be that deny God, would not the Apoſtle himſelf anſwer us, that they are the ſame who turn the Grace of God into wantonnes, defiling the fleſh, and ſpeake ill of Magiſtrates? Such perhaps as the Nicholaitans, Ebion, and

Cerinthus were, which at firſt were Chriſtians and would be called Chriſtians, and yet fell to teach Hereſies in Doctrine and looſenes of life: Cerinthus did not deny in word that Chriſt was come in the fleſh, but taught that the works and Ceremonies of the Law were neceſſarie to Salvation. Whereupon the Apoſtle inferreth,
                     Gal. 2. 
                  Then Chriſt dyed in vayne. So by conſequent he denyed Chriſt, in denying the effect of his death and paſsion to be ſuch as the Apoſtles teach us. So the Primitiue Fathers teach us to underſtand the denying of Chriſt. Hilar. Quiſquis Chriſtum, qualis ab Apoſtolis praedicatus est negat, Antichriſtus est. Ambroſ. Chriſtum negat, qui non omnia quae Chriſti ſunt confitetur. See more of theſe in that learned Demonſtration of Antichriſt ſet forth by Doctor Abbat.
                     Ca. 12. For in Charitie indeede we muſt hold, that He that is not againſt us is with us:
                     Lucae 9. but in Fayth, He that is not with us, is againſt us. Ebion did not denye Chriſt to be come, but denyed him to be verie God:
                     Luc. 11▪
                   and ſo denied him to be ſuch as the Apoſtles taught, and therefore againſt him S. Iohn wrote his Goſpell. The Nicholaitans did not deny the comming of Chriſt verbally, but in turning the grace of God into wantonnes, holding that wiues ought to be common, and uſing Promiſcuous filthines and adulteries, they denyed that great and inſeparable effect of his comming to call us to repentance and holynes of life, and to be a Saviour to ſaue us from committing ſinne, as well as from the puniſhment of ſinne committed. So the Simonites and Menandrians, which were alſo in the Apoſtles time, in holding that the graces of God were to be purchaſed by mony, denyed by conſequent the effect of Chriſts comming, namely the free giveing of the Grace of God: as it is written: He aſcended up on High, and gaue gifts unto men.
                  Nazianz. Epheſ. 4.
                   And ſo it may be ſayd of all other Heretikes, which profeſſing Chriſtianitie, do affirm

and teach any thing contrarie to the Doctrine of the Apoſtles and Prophets. For there are two kinds of denying God,
                  In Tetrast. Tit. 1.
                   ſayth Nazianzen, out of the Apoſtle: Verbo & Opere, in Word, or in Works. Or as David: Ore & Corde.
                  Pſ. 53. Naz. or as by another is proved, Expreſly, or by Conſequent: Non tantum divinam Authoritatem habent & fide tenenda, ſunt ea quae in ſacris Scripturis expreſſe continentur, ſed etiam ea omnia, quae ex illis neceſſaria & evidenti conſequentia deducuntur, ſayth the Father. By all which teſtimonies layd together, I thinke it may eaſily appeare, what the Apoſtle meaneth, when he ſayth, that manye Antichriſts are gone out into the world, which deny that Chriſt Ieſus is come in the Fleſh. And, His comming is with deceitfulnes, &c. Not any Iew, Turke, Pagan, or other that ſhould expreſſely, directly and verbally deny the coming of our Saviour, but ſuch as profeſſing Chriſtianitie teach any falſe Doctrine, and ſo by conſequent, denie him to be ſuch as the Scripture hath taught us. This alſo agreeth with other parts of the Deſcription, as with his place, in the Temple of God: with his names, to be Vicarius Chriſti, as well as Adverſarius: to be the Succeſſor of Iudas, &c. I demand then, if the name of Antichriſt was ſo intended by the Apoſtles and Primitiue Fathers; and if that were then held the denying of Chriſt, to denie him by works or by conſequent, what warrant haue we to hold, that the Great Antichriſt muſt be a Iew, Turke, Pagan, or any other, that ſhould verbally, expreſly, or directly deny Chriſt Ieſus, as now the Romaniſts would haue us to beleeue? And if theſe Propheſies muſt be underſtood of Chriſtians that were Heretikes: and theſe were the preparations or workings of iniquitie, then ſurely the Great Antichriſt himſelf muſt be of like qualitie, and he that is held to be the higheſt, and chiefest of all Chriſtians, if he be an

                  Heretike he muſt be That Antichriſt. For ſo ſayth Chryſoſtom: The greatnes of ſinne is conſidered, eyther by the Magnitude of the offence, or by the Altitude of his dignitie that committeth it. So of all Chriſtians,
                     Dist. 40. he that moſt excelleth in dignitie, and moſt turneth the grace of God into wantonnes; He that is moſt advanced, and yet moſt defileth the fleſh, and deſpiſeth government, ſpeaking ill of them that are in Authoritie; he muſt, and none elſe can be that Antichriſt. And who that is I referre it to thine owne conſcience, Chriſtian Reader. Who is it that being in dignitie among Chriſtians, moſt ſupereminent, doth yet moſt defile the Fleſh, and deſpiſe government? Who is it amongſt Chriſtians moſt High, and yet moſt preacheth Chriſt otherwiſe then the Apostles teach us? as where the Scripture ſayth, that the Spirit quickeneth, the fleſh profiteth nothing, I aſke whether they which teach, that the fleſh carnally taken doth conferr Grace,
                  
                     Ioh. 6. opere operato, may be ſayd to confeſſe ſuch a Chriſt to be come, as the Scripture ſetteth forth? So he that affirmeth, that the Picture of Chriſt, or the Croſſe, or the Virgin Marie is to be worſhiped with divine adoration: I aſke whether he do confeſſe; that ſuch a Chriſt is come, as the Apoſtles haue preached? if yea; then where did our Saviour Chriſt or his Apoſtles teach any ſuch thing? And ſo of other points of doctrine and manners, which I leaue to learned Divines to proſecute. And how the Pope hath been declared to be an Heretike, not onely by ſome particular men or congregations, but by the whole Chriſtian Church in Europe, and that in three great and generall Councels ſhall be ſhewed hereafter. So much therefore be ſpoken of the beginnings or preparations of Antichriſt, which the Apoſtle plainly affirmeth, was in his time, adding this.2 Theſ. 2. Onely he which now withholdeth

ſhall let, till he be taken away, and then ſhall that lawleſſe man be revealed. This concerneth our ſecond conſideration,Hierom Lact. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Theo. Cecum Ambroſ August. Tertul Abb. in demonst. c. 4 & alij. Then the ea
                        •
                      of the Dragon. Rev. 13, 2.
                   wherein we haue firſt to ſpeak of the Withholder, or Impediment, ſecondly of the Remoue, and thirdly, of the revelation. Concerning the Impediment. The moſt learned and beſt Interpreters, both old and new do agree it to be the Roman Empire, which as the Apoſtle ſayth, ſhall withhold, donec e medio fiat, untill it be removed out of the way, or out of the mideſt: he ſaith not, till it be aboliſhed: Marke. And then (ſayth the Apoſtle) ſhall that wicked man be revealed. But when that was, or how it ſhould be removed it is not ſo well explayned: although comparing the Scriptures and times well together, it ſeemeth to me, that we may well underſtand it, if we marke the ſteps and degrees. Nemo repente fuit turpiſsimus, ſayth the learned Poet, but more learnedly; ad ſummum non per ſaltus, ſed per gradus pervenitur, ſayth a Reverend Biſhop, ſo this Removing of the Empire was not all at once, no more was the riſing of the Pontificate, but by degrees, as by that which followeth may appear. Therefore to obſerue the proceedings of this remoue of the one, and riſing of the other, I demande upon the 13 chap. of the Revelation, whereof we haue ſpoken before, Whether the time of that Riſing be not there preciſely pointed out, when he ſayth, that Antichrist there ſignified by the ſecond Beaſt, ſhall worke before the face of the firſt Beaſt, that is, of the Roman Empire. And I demande alſo, Whether we may not well ſay that the Roman Empire began then ſenſibly to be removed, when the Emperor Conſtantine removed the Imperiall Sea from Rome to Conſtantinople? yet no man can ſay, but the Imperiall power, and the Majeſtie of an Empire continued ſtill in Rome, in the Conſuls, which dignitie the Emperors alſo themſelues

many times tooke upon them, as I haue noted before. This therefore may be well taken for a beginning of the Remoue of the one, and Riſing of the other, which was about the yeare of our Lord 327, and but a beginning. For the better aſſurance whereof let us firſt conſider the Prophecies of the Scripture, concerning the continuance of the Roman Empire, and then ſee by Hiſtories, how they were fulfilled. By the Euangeliſt we are taught, that the first Beaſt, that is,
                     Revel. 13. 
                  the Heatheniſh Roman Empire ſhould continue and make warr againſt the Saints two and fortie Months.
                  
                     Rev. 12. So it is ſayd in another place, that the Holy cittie, (whereby we underſtand the Church of Chriſt) ſhould be trode under foote of the Gentiles two and fortie moneths, and that the two witneſſes of God ſhould prophecie in ſackcloth one thouſand, two hundred and ſixtie dayes, that theſe Prophets ſhould be ſlayne,
                  
                     Rev. 12. 
                  and riſe againe after three dayes and an halfe, and that the woman figuring the Church, fled into the wildernes, where ſhe hath a place prepared of God a thouſand, two hundred and ſixtie dayes, and that there ſhe ſhould be nouriſhed, for a time, times, and a halfe time. All which places do manifeſtly ſpeak of the perſecutions of the Church: of the Paucitij & Povertij of the Preachers and Teachers of Chriſtian religion in thoſe times, and of the flight of Chriſtians into the wildernes, and other ſecret places, to avoide the furie of thoſe perſecutions.
                     Deut. 18. 22 Nothing can better expound a prophecie then the event and fulfilling of it. But it is manifeſtly and certeynly knowne that the perſecutions of the church by the Heatheniſh Roman Empire ended about the yeare of our Lord 326. about which time the laſt Heathen perſecuting Emperor Licinius was ſlaine, and Conſtantine calling the Church out of the wildernes, as in a Triumph cauſed that great

and reverend Councell of Nice, the firſt to be held, wherein the Nicene Creede was publikely proclaymed, to the utter condemnation and profligation of all Heathen ſuperſtitions, and confutation of the great Hereſie of Arius, which then was newly begunne. This time falleth out ſo agreeable to the prophecies, on the one ſide, and to the events on the other, that it ſeemeth no doubt can be made, but that here begann the Remoue. For if we follow M. Foxes computation in the ſeverall times aboue mentioned, we ſhall finde that thoſe ſeverall Notations of time, as they ſpeake but of one thing, that is, the perſecutions of the Church by the Roman Emperors: ſo they ſignifie but one time, namely two hundred, ninetie four yeares, the ende of which falling ſo certeyne in the dayes of Conſtantine, do ſhew that the beginning muſt be accounted from the Aſcention of our Lord, in the yeare of Grace four and thirtie, or there abouts.
               For firſt, a thouſand two hundred and threeſcore dayes,Note this limitation of a time, two times, and half a time in ſeverall places ſeemeth to ſignifie ſeverall times: for in Dan. 7, 25, 26. it ſeemes to intend a cō
                     tinuance of the time of the Roman state, under the litle Horne unto the ende of the world. But in Rev. 12.14. compared with Rev. 12, 6. and Rev. 11.2. and Rev 13, 6. it ſeemeth rather to ſignifie the time of the perſecutions of the Church, under the Heathen Roman Empire. See the places. make two and fortie moneths, take everie moneth for ſeauen yeares, as everie one of Daniels weekes were to be counted, it maketh two hundred ninetie four yeares.
               Secondly, three dayes and an halfe, or a time, two times, and halfe a time. Reckon, as our Saviour doth, twelue hours to everie day, and we finde two and fortie hours, then account everie hour to be a ſabbath of yeares, and it maketh alſo two hundred ninetie and four yeares, which being added to the yeares of our Saviours life upon earth, being four and thirtie, maketh 328 from his Nativitie.
               
                  Of the other ſide, if we account the beginning of theſe yeares to be certaine,
                     Rev. 12. the continuance and end alſo will fall out evident. But by the twelfth chapter of the Revelation it is manifeſt, that the Dragon went out to perſecute the Church, when? After that our Saviour was taken up into heauen: ſo then reckoning theſe 294 yeares to beginne at the Aſcention of our Lord, we muſt adde the yeares of our Saviours life upon earth, which was about four and thirtie yeares, and it commeth fully to the yeare 328, about which time the ſaid great Nicene Counſell was celebrated. And ſo taking the beginning of our computation from the end of the perſecutions, in the time of Conſtantine, about the yeare of our Lord 328, and reckoning backwards 294 yeares, we come to the ſame yeare of grace 34, wherein was the Aſcention of our Lord. So that both wayes, whether that we expound the prophecie by the event, or meaſure the event by the prophecie, we are brought to the ſame yeare of our Lord 328. Now therefore, no longer was the holy Cittie troden under foot of the Gentiles, Now the Martyrs of God, which had ſo long time prophecied in ſackcloth, and were ſlayne, were againe revived in their Doctrine. Now the two Witneſſes of God, the Old and New Teſtaments,
                  So expounded by his Majeſtie in Praefat. admonit. with conſent of the beſt Interpreters. which were ſo long time hidden, and as it were layd dead, were brought to light, and aſcended into heauen, that is, in the Church, which is called the kingdome of Heauen. For now the Church of God returned out of the wildernes, & now the power of the Heatheniſh ſtate of Rome, to make warre againſt the Saints, was ended, though their Idolatrie (as Baronius confeſſeth) continued long after, namely unto the end of another period, whereof we haue ſpoken partly before, and ſhall ſpeake ſomewhat hereafter.

Not long before that time alſo aroſe that great Heretike Arius who by the common voice of Godly chriſtians in thoſe dayes was called Christomachus and Principium Antichriſti,
                  Arius affirmed that the HGhost was Creatura ſilij, & ſi ium non eſse ejuſdem cum patte ſubſtantiae. Pantal. ex Hilar. Ruf. Epiph. & alijs. the Holy Ghoſt (as it ſeemeth giueing out that for a watch-word, to ſtirre up the Chriſtians at that time to expect the comming of the great Antichriſt. About the ſame time roſe up Macedonius the Heretike, who affirmed the Holy Ghoſt to be a creature, againſt which Hereſies it ſeemeth, that not onely the Creedes of Nice and Athanaſius, but alſo the verſe Gloria patri, &c. and Veni Creator Spiritus, and the beginning of the Letanie was inſtituted. About the ſame time alſo the ſeat of the Empire was removed from Rome to Conſtantinople and ſhortly after a godly Emperor, making a graue and Chriſtian exhortation to the Biſhops, to agree together in peace and unitie,Hilar in libro quem Constā
                     tio ipſi tradidit. and to determine their controverſies by the Scriptures; it is anſwered againe by a learned and godly Father,1 Ioh. 4 6. 
                  Hoc qui repudiat, Antichristus eſt. He that refuſeth this is Antichriſt, therein alſo giving us another ſpeciall ſigne or marke whereby to judge of Antichriſtian Doctrine. About the ſame time alſo, or ſhortly after roſe up the Heretike Pelagius, who affirmed freewill and the merits of human works; alſo Eutiches, who defended, that the fleſh of Chriſt Ieſus was not like ours, and that he was not truly borne of the Virgin, and many others. So that here we may ſee a great concurrence & conſent of prophecies, with events, and with the Iudgements of godly Chriſtians upon the corruptions of true Doctrine in thoſe times, that now Antichriſt was beginning to riſe. And certaine it is, that the Biſhops of Rome from this time forward, ſometimes by flatterie, ſometimes by ſedition, ſometimes by patroniſing Heretikes, ſometimes by oppoſing the godly did incroach to themſelves dayly more and more authoritie,

untill they had obteyned the full and abſolute government of the Septimontane cittie, the ſeat of the firſt Beaſt, driuen the Emperors out of Italie, and ſo become Heads of that cittie, appointed to be the ſeat of Antichriſt. What the Roman Biſhops were from Silveſter untill Boniface the third, I haue ſhewed before.Pantal. Bibliand. Baron. About the yeare of our Lord 333 the Temples of Heathen Idols were commanded to be ſhut up by Conſtantine, yet that Command (as it ſeemeth) was not executed, the Empire was ſetled in Conſtantinople,Salviamiss. and the Romans euen then began leſſe to regard it, yet the title of Pontifex Max. was reteyned by Conſtantine, and Conſuls were ſtill made in Rome, with Heathen rites and Ceremonies, and many of the Senators and Nobles continued ſtill in their Pagan Idolatrie. Conſtantine therefore againe commanded the Heathen Temples to be ſhut up, about the yeare of our Lord 348. But the ſacrifices and abhominable Auguries by the entrals of Beaſts and ſuch like were forbidden,God. tit. 
                        〈◊〉
                      de Pagan. firſt by Theodoſius and then by Gracian and Valentinian about the yeare of our Lord 387. Yet long after this their Idols and Heatheniſh Auſpices and Rites in the creation of the Conſuls remayned;Salvianus. and likewiſe their Idolatrous & abhominable playes and ſhewes, in their Circis, Gymnaſiis, and Theatris, as witneſſeth Salvianus. But in the yeare 533, or thereabouts Conſuls began to ceaſe, and were no more made with ſuch abhominable auguries, which bringeth as fully to the end of another Period of 1260, from the fiue and twentienth yeare of Romulus, whereof I ſpake before, in the ſecond Problem. So that we may ſee, how by many degrees the Heatheniſh Idolatrie and Roman Empire were removed. In the ſame times alſo the ſeauenth head of Rome aroſe,Aug. Steuch. de Donat. Conſt. and the kingdomes of Chriſtendom, ſignified by the tenne Hornes began to take their power, namely, in Brittanie,

France, Spayne, Greece, Germanie, Pannonia Denmarke, Polonia, Suetia and Norway. All which in time gaue their power to the Pope,2 Theſ. 2. and were ſubject unto him. About thoſe times alſo was the great Schiſme between Silverius and Vigilius,Platina. Onuphr. for the Papacie, the one an Heretike, the other a Schiſmatike, and perjured at leaſt. And ſhortly after, about the yeare 580, Pelagius was made Pope by Election of the Cleargie, without any licence from the Emperor, and Iohn Patriarch of Conſtantinople tooke upon him the title of Vniverſall Biſhop, whereby was kindled the great contention for Primacie, which continued untill the time of Boniface, of whom I will ſpeake hereafter. Thus, I ſay, the old Idolatrie was by degrees ſuppreſſed, and the ſecond Beast began to worke in preſence of the first. But here by the way a queſtion may be moved, becauſe we haue entered into a conſideration of the times limited in the holy Scripture, for the accompliſhing of Prophecies, whether thoſe times are to be alwayes accounted by an exact Aſtronomicall Calculation, as ſome learned men haue laboured to doe, caſting up Minutes & Seconds of time, which are ſcarce ſenſible or apprehenſible, with more curioſitie then profit, or whether we may content our ſelues with a vulgar computation, onely obſerving ſigna temporum, the ſignes of times, the neglect whereof our Saviour in many places objecteth to the Phariſees. For anſwer whereunto, it muſt needs be confeſſed in common ſenſe and experience, as the Philoſopher alſo noteth, that things of great moment cannot be removed in a minute. Neyther can I chooſe but thinke, it was for ſome cauſe, that our Saviour, when he forewarned his Diſciples of the deſtruction of Ieruſalem (though it were then neare at hand) yet did not tell then of the certayne day, moneth or yeare, but gaue them a ſigne of it:
                     Luc. 21. 
                  When ye ſhall ſee Ieruſalem compaſsed

about with armies, then know, that the deſtruction thereof is at hand.
                  
                     Luc. 12. So when he reprehendeth the Scribes and Phariſees, he doth not reprehend them, for not making the preciſe computation of the ſeauentie weekes of Daniel, but for not marking ſigna temporum: ſo he teacheth his Diſciples to judge of ſummer, by the greenneſſe of the leaues, and of harveſt by the whitenes of the corne,
                     Matth. 24. and of the ende of the world by the ſignes that ſhall goe before it. And what to call ſignum temporis,
                  
                     Luc. 2
                        •
                     . the Apoſtle teacheth us, when he ſayth, that in the last dayes there ſhall come perilous times: For men ſhall be lovers of themſelues,
                  
                     Ioh. 12. 
                  &c. So our Saviour, when his Apoſtles told him, that certayne Graecians deſired to ſee him, anſwered that the time was come that he ſhould be glorified amongst the Gentiles: intimating thereby, that the inclinations, diſpoſitions and works of men, are evident ſignes of the times. But the ancient oracle delivered by God unto Abraham is moſt of all remarkable:
                     Gen. 15. for (ſayth God) thy ſeede ſhall be a ſtranger in a forrain land four hundred yeares, yet Moſes coming to reckon thoſe yeares, upon the departure of the children of Iſraell out of Egipt, ſetteth four hundred and thirtie yeares,Read Matt. 11. what anſwer and uſe our Saviour maketh of the Meſsage of Iohn Baptiſt. And what an heavie voe he pronounceth againſt thē that did not marke his works. whereby it ſeemeth plainly, that in the prophecies of the holy Scripture, either propter rotunditatem numeri, or to check our curioſitie, that we ſhould not ſearch after points, and minutes, or for ſome other reaſon, the holy Ghoſt will haue us to conteyn our ſelues within a ſobrietie of knowledge, and to reſt our ſelues upon the obſervation of the ſignes, which he hath expreſſed. And this agreeth with the rule de temporibus given by the Fathers, which is the rather to be obſerved by us,Aug. de doct. christ. l. 3. & ſaper. Exo. q. 47. Iſidor. Raimarus. for that we ſee theſe accounts of Aſtronomie are ſuch, as the beſt learned men can hardly agree upon, and the Arte it ſelf by a man not unlearned, is compared to the tower of Babell, & as ſome ſay, to the Temple

of S. Peter at Rome, ever in building and never perfected. And what difference there is betwixt Chronologers, eſpecially of later times,Of theſe differences Pantalion oftē complayneth vid. Pantal. aun. 645. in conſi
                     
                        •
                     iis. whoſoever looketh upon the Chronologies of Euſebius, S. Ierome, Beda, Marianus, Martinus, Regino, Hermanus, Bibliander, Scaliger, Baronius, Keplerus, Suſlyga, and others may eaſily perceiue. Who beſides many other differences can hardly agree, how many yeares our Saviour lived upon the earth,I haue of late looked upon Chronologers, and do findetheir differences verie great and many, concerning the account of the yeares before the comming of our Saviour Christ, and the true Epocha of his incarnation. Renſuerus in Iſagoge, reckoneth up about eight and twentie ſeverall opinions, everie one placing it in a ſeverall yeare of the world; Himſelf finding it in the yeare 3970, and therein agreeing with Io. Picus. Bucholcerus, Dreſſerus, and Pantaleon. Yet others are not ſo contented, whoſe differences he that deſireth to ſee, may peruſe the writings of Baronius, Scaliger, Deckerus, Suſ
                        ••
                     ga, Keplerus, Vieta, Patavias, our Countriman Lidyat, and the last of all Alstadius. Which t
                        •
                      o last, being as I thinke yet aliue, I could haue wiſhed, to haue taken ſome paynes, to haue explayned their opinions more at large; eſpecially M. Lidyat, who ſeemeth, not without reaſon, to inſist upon an aera, different from all the rest. And as their differences of the yeares before Christ are great, ſo in the account of the yeares ſince his comming, they differ ſomewhat, which I leaue to the conſideration of the learned. in what yeare of the world he was borne, or how many are paſt ſince his Nativitie: the Holy Ghoſt ſeeming to reproue ſuch preciſe accounts, with a non eſt vestrum ſcire, It is not for you to know them. Act. 1.
               And yet they do not ſo much diſagree, but that we may follow any one of them, ſo long, as we haue an eye to the ſignes, to which, as to a moſt certayne ſea-marke, our Saviour directeth us. Let us then goe forward, and ſee how the Prophecies doe agree with the ſignes, and the ſignes with the times, and both with the actions of men in thoſe times, recorded by credible Hiſtories, as we haue done in the former conſideration of the removing of the Impediment, which muſt preceede his Revelation, as the Apoſtle affirmeth, and began, as we haue ſhewed, about the yeare of our Lord 328. Now the next ſtep or degree of time, that we come to, is the yeare 666, which is not much more then double to the former number, and is expreſſed in the text,
                     Rev. 13. and by the beſt Interpreters applied to Antichriſt, and figured in the ſecond Beaſt, of whoſe Riſing we

haue ſhewed how it began, from the removing of the Impediment of the Roman Empire, in the dayes of Conſtantine, and increaſed more and more, untill it grew neare to this notable Epocha of 666, whereof both the precedents and conſequents are worthie to be obſerved. Firſt therefore in the year 600 that great and vigilant Biſhop S. Gregorie, obſerving the immoderate ambition and contention, that was then for Primacie and Supremacie, between his Predeceſſor in Rome, and the Patriarch of Conſtantinople, out of a propheticall ſpirit, moved no doubt with grief of hart, to ſee ſuch things in the Church of Chriſt, made as it were a publike Proclamation of the comming of Antichriſt. Filioli noviſsima hora eſt, &c. As if he ſhould ſay, Litle children, do you looke for the accompliſhment of the times of Antichriſt, or of thoſe 666 yeares? Behould it is the laſt yeare of the laſt times, the laſt day of the laſt yeare, and the laſt hour of the laſt day, The Prophecies are fulfilled, the king of Pride is at hand, and an armie of Prieſts is readie to attend him. What ſhall we ſay to this notable Proclamation, made by this great and eminent Biſhop? Was it true or falſe? If falſe, then that great Biſhop was a falſe Prophet: if true, then is Antichriſt come into the world long agone, and the Pope muſt needs be he, for none elſe hath had Armies of Prieſts to attend him, neither doth S. Gregorie goe ſingle. For S. Barnard ſeconds him: Ministri Christi &c. The ſervants of Christ now ſerue Antichriſt. And in another place: The Beaſt of the Apocalyps, ſpeaking blaſphemies, and warring againſt the Saints occupieth the chaire of Peter. But to returne to S. Gregorie. He writing to Iohn of Conſtantinople affirmeth, that whoſoever calleth himſelf Vniverſall Biſhop in his elation is the forerunner of Antichriſt. Was this alſo a true prophecie, or did the holy man fayle in his predictions? if true,

then was Iohn of Conſtantinople the forerunner; and Sabinian, or Boniface of Rome, who next called himſelf by that title,Renſuer. was Antichriſt himſelf. This firſt contention for Primacie began about the yeare 588, and continued till the Pope had gotten it to himſelfe. But that great Biſhop did not fayle in theſe prophecies. For immediately after his death Sabinian was made Pope, a man of obſcure birth,Platina. and more obſcure in manners, and therefore might well be ſayd,
                     Rev. 13. to riſe out of the earth: And he tooke upon him this Title of Vniverſall Biſhop, and had armies of Prieſts readie to attend him. Et invidia exarſit in Gregorium homo malevolus, ſayth the Author: And the malicious man was ſo incenſed with envie againſt Gregorie, that he had almoſt cauſed his bookes to be burned. See at firſt how he warreth againſt the Saints. Boniface the third, and the fourth went forward in the ſame courſe, and obtayned of Phocas the Paricide,By Traytors Tyrants, and Murderers & uſurper; the Pope is advanced viz Phocas Arithpertus &c. the priviledge of Primacie, which none of their predeceſſors had: and therefore here ought the Catalogue of Popes to beginne, and not as they doe with S. Peter or Silveſter. For it appeareth manifeſtly by Gregorie, that none of the former Biſhops of Rome had the title of Vniverſall giuen to him. I aſke therefore, whether here were not an evident beginning of the Revelation of Antichriſt. The Emperour was removed out of Rome, the making of the Conſuls was diſcontinued; the tenne Kings began to receiue their kingdomes. The Pope tooke upon him to rule in Rome, and was Summus or Maximus Pontifex, onely, the Exarches remayned at Ravenna, with little power. I aſke then, Who was now revealed to be the ſeaventh Head, or Governour of the Roman State, but this Vniverſalis, and Summus Pontifex? Let us ſee then how by degrees this Antichriſt was dayly more & more revealed.Platina Faſc. Temp. About the yeare 608 the Pope obteyned of Phocas the Pantheon,

or Temple of all Divels, and conſecrated the ſame to the honour of the Virgin Marie, and all Saints. So ſayth the Carthuſian: Vbi impij colebant Daemones, ibi Chriſtiani colunt omnes Sanctos; ſic ars deluditur arte. About the ſame time the Pope gathered a Synod at Rome, for the confirmation of his primacie. About the yeare 618 Boniface the fifth ſucceeded, who ordeyned, that churches ſhould be Sanctuaries for theeues and murderers. About the ſame time began the great Apoſtacie and departure of the Greeke Church from the Roman, of the Eaſt Church from the weſt, the Greeke church not yeelding to the Roman ſupremacie, and the Eaſterne churches receiuing the damnable doctrine of Mahomet: ſo the propheſies by litle and little began to be fulfilled. The Empire it ſelf was now almoſt wholly removed, the Kings were riſen, that after gaue their power to the Pope. The Apoſtaſie was come, the pope was called Summus Pontifex: one of the ſeauen dignities, which had long before been of greateſt power and authoritie in Rome, and which the Heathen Emperors had uſed, and ſo the ſeauenth Head of the Roman ſtate began to appear. Three things yet lacked: One to haue their ſupremacie fully confirmed and acknowledged by the Emperor (which yet was queſtioned, as well by the Exarches, as by the Emperors) for in the yeare 647 Pope Martin, one of the beſt of them that ſucceeded Gregorie, was taken by Theodorus the Exarch,Pantal. anno 650.
                   and ſent priſoner to Conſtantinople, and from thence baniſhed into Pontus. A ſecond thing was after ſuch confirmation obtained to ſhake of all ſubjection, and all ſignes of ſubjection to the Emperor. And a third, to make this an Empire of Idolatrie, and as it were the Image of the old Idolatrie, uſed by the Pagans. All three followed ſhortly after. For about the yeare 663, the Emperor Conſtans comming to

Rome, confirmed their priviledges and prerogatiues, and about the year 684 Benet the Pope obtained of the Emperor, that whoſoever ſhould be choſen by the Cleargie,Pla
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     . Renſu. people, and Armie of Rome to be Pope, he ſhould be Pope, without any further confirmation of the Exarch or Emperor. Marke he nameth the Cleargie, People, and Armie of Rome: claiming thereby as well the Temporall, as the ſpirituall ſtate, which before he had not. Then came the yeare 700, which was but 666,
                     Rev. 12, 5, 6 after the aſcention of our Lord, which is properly S. Iohns aera,
                     Ioh. 16, 19, 20. and ſo foretold by Chriſt, that the ſorrows of the Church ſhould beginne, when the Bridegrome was taken away:
                     Luke 5, 35. Therefore about the ſame time, as Bellarmine collecteth,Pantal. anno 700.
                   namely in the yeare 699, Aripertus the uſurping Tirant gaue to the Pope the Cottian Alps, where now Genua ſtandeth: and ſoone after, that is to ſay, in the yeare 707, the Emperor Iuſtinian the ſecond falleth downe before Pope Conſtantine, and kiſſeth his feete,Platin. Na
                        •
                     cl. Bibliand. Renſuer. thereby acknowledging him to be the abſolute Head of Rome. And about the yeare 712, the Pope now in fulneſſe of power commandeth of his owne authoritie, Images to be worſhiped, and when the Emperor Philip reſiſted, the Pope pronounced him excommunicate, and likewiſe, when the Emperor Leo, and Conſtantine after him, in a zeale of godlynes, and deteſtation of Idolatrie, commanded Images to be defaced, the Pope,On up in Plat. Paul. Diac. Sigiber. Renſ. Polidor. Paul. anno 710, & 725.
                   not ſecretly or under hand, but palam & in os, openly and to their faces reſiſted them (ſayth Onuphrius) and forbadde all Italy to pay them Tributes, diſcharging the Italians from their oathes and alleagiance: and ſo in the ende deprived the Grecian Emperours of all the Empire of the weſt. And ſoone after, that is to ſay, about the yeare of our Lord 755. the Pope by colour

of the guift of King Pipin, uſurped the Exarchate of Ravenna, with a great part of Italie. I aſke therefore, what accompliſhment of the Prophecie, concerning the Revelation of Antichriſt may we looke for, or can we expect, if it be not here fully accompliſhed? Whether was there not here in the open ſight of the world, another Head of the Roman cittie and state? Whether was not the Impediment of the Empire now fully and wholly removed? And whether had not the ſecond Beast now giuen life ſufficient to the Image of the firſt Beaſt, or Idolatrous Monarchie? Neyther was this by Tumult, but with an orderly proceeding. For the Pope gathering an Armie of Prieſts, as S. Gregorie calleth it, namely a counſell of a thouſand Fathers, or rather Stepfathers at Rome, decreed that Images ſhould be worſhiped.
                  Blund. Pal
                        •
                     
                     ▪ Sigiber. Anton Biblian. Reuſ. Here therefore both Chronologers and Divines,Hermanus cō
                     tract. Paul. Diac. Biblian. Avent. Lyra in 2 Theſ. Staputenſ. Faſc. Temp▪
                   with great concent, do end the ſupputation of the Roman Empire. And with great reaſon, for now they ſaw the Summus Pontifex was ſet upon the back of the Roman State, Romanorum Imperium (ſayth the Author) circa haec tempora, ubique in orbe terrarum caepit deficere irrecuperabiliter. And a little after: Et ſic jam omnes quatuor Monarchiae defecerunt, & non reſtat alia, niſi Antichriſti. The Roman Empire began to faile about this time without recoverie. And ſo all the four Monarchies are decayed, and none other remaineth, but that of Antichriſt. The Romans ſayth Baron about this time tooke a ſolemne oath, to be obedient in all points,In anno 726▪
                     
                   and to all purpoſes to the Pope. And here (ſayth he) was an end of thoſe Dukes and Governours, which the Emperors were wonte to ſeeme to command in Rome, and the places thereabouts. So alſo ſayth Sigonius, that Rome,vide Sigon. li.4. de regno Italiae. and the Dukedomes of Rome, the Exarchate of Ravenna, the Duchies of Peruſia, Tuſcia and Campania were

giuen to the Pope: and Mornay out of Zonaras and Cedrenus ſetteth downe particularly,Pleſs. in myſt. progreſs. 27.
                   what Townes and Territories fell to the Pope, upon this revolt. Alſo Onuphrius telleth us in plaine termes, that Pope Gregorie ſucceeding Conſtantine,Vide Pantal. anno 760.
                   tooke away from the Grecian Emperor all the Empire of Italie, which was not poſſeſſed by the Lumbards. About the ſame time alſo there was another Councell gathered at Rome, wherein was decreed, that whoſoever would not doe religious honour unto Images ſhould be cut off from the body and bloud of Chriſt, and from the unitie of the whole Church. So the power of the Pontifex Max. and Idolatrie grew up together. And although many Synods were held, ſome in the Eaſt, as at Nice, and Conſtantinople; others in the weſt, as at Frankford, wherein theſe Idolatries were condemned: though both the Emperors, aſwell Charlemain of France, as Conſtantine of Greece, oppoſed themſelues againſt theſe Idolatries, having alſo the Authoritie of the Elibertin counſell, Picturas ad Eccleſiis arcendas, ne quod colitur aut adoratur in parietibus pingatur. Yet the Popes prevailed. Curavimus Babylonem, & non eſt ſanata,
                  
                     Ier. 51. ſayth the Prophet. The zeale of Charlemaine to haue this Idolatrie ſuppreſſed was excellent, and exemplar, for he not onely cauſed a Synod to be held within his owne Empire for that purpoſe, but ſent the booke of the Synode of Nice, which is called the ſecond, wherein the worſhip of Images was decreed, into Great Brittanie, in which Booke, Proh dolor (ſayth our Hiſtorian) out alas, manie things were found inconvenient,Honed. anno 792.
                   and contrarie to the true fayth, eſpecially, that with one conſent of the Orientall Biſhops, three hundred or more, it was inacted, that Images ſhould be worſhipped. Quod omnino Eccleſia Dei execratur. Which

the Church of God doth hold altogether execrable. And the learned Albinus wrote an Epiſtle againſt it marvelouſly fortified with authoritie of the ſcripture,Almaricus Gall theolog. imagines, altaria & invocationes ſanctorī
                     
                        •
                      Idololatrians cenſce. which he preſented to the Emperour. So fully were the Godly of thoſe times perſwaded, that the adoration of Images, then newly thruſt upon them by the Pope, was meere, and inexcuſable Idolatrie. And yet, when the ſame Emperour Charles came to Rome, to reforme the abuſes of the Pope, and began to inquire of them,Bern. Lutz. Pantal. anno 1205.
                   
                  Reſponſum eſt ab omnibus, &c. it was anſwered by all,Platin Blond. dec. 2. Pant. that the Apoſtolike Sea, being the Head of all Churches, ought to be iudged of none, eſpecially not by a Lay man. I aſke then upon all theſe premiſes, If Antichriſt were not now ſufficiently revealed, when will he, or how can he be revealed? Rome the great cittie, that ruled over the kings of the Earth, the cittie of ſeauen Hills, and that had receaved ſeauen kings of Soveraigne command; Rome that glorious mountaine of holynes, yet full of Sodomiticall filthines, and Egyptian Idolatrie. Rome and the Roman Empire ſo many times, and ſo ſignificantly deſcribed by the holy Apoſtles and Prophets, had now ſet up her Seauenth Head, the Summus Pontifex, the propheticall number 666 was fulfilled, as well in his time, as in his name, the Impediment of the Empire was removed. This Summus Pontifex was become the abſolute Ruler and king of that State, acknowledging no ſuperiour, Controull, or Countermand. And hath done ſuch, and ſuch things according alſo to the prophecies of Antichriſt, as no Iew, Turke, or divell can do in ſo ſhort a time, as they would make us beleeue is allotted for Antichriſt: If by theſe things he be not ſufficiently revealed, when will he come, or when ſhall we expect him: or ſhall we imitate the Iewes, in looking as long

for Antichriſt, as they doe for Chriſt? To this may be added an Argument à ſufficienti diviſione, which I propoſe in this manner. Firſt upon the words of Tertullian, that Antichriſt muſt be a rebell to Chriſt, and S. Aug. that is Refuga Chriſti. Now if a Rebell, then eyther one profeſſing Chriſt, or not profeſſing. If you ſay not profeſſing, S. Auguſtin is againſt you, which ſayth, that he doth profeſſe Chriſt in words. Alſo S. Chryſoſtom. Exercitus Christi ſunt omnes Haereſes, praecipue ista, quae obtinuit Eccleſiae locum: If a profeſſor of Chriſt, then either revealed or not revealed; if you ſay not revealed; then how can you anſwer the Apoſtle, who ſayth, that he ſhall be revealed when the Impediment is removed. And the Fathers, who with great conſent affirme, that by the Impediment there is meant the Roman Empire. And the great Conſent of Divines and Chronologers upon the ſame place, affirming that the Roman Empire is long ſince removed. If revealed, then eyther it is the Biſhop of Rome, whom manie godly men haue publiſhed and proclaymed to be Antichriſt, or elſe you muſt ſhew ſome other, who is not to come, but alreadie declared to be Antichriſt. And if you can ſhew none, then muſt the Pope neceſſarily be that Antichriſt.
                     Rev. 17. Againe, either it muſt be he to whom the kings of the earth haue giuen their power, or ſome other. If you ſay ſome other, then how do you anſwer the text. If he: then to whom haue the Kings of the Earth giuen their power but to the Pope? Againe upon 2 Theſ. 2. and the expoſition of S. Ambroſe, and other Fathers upon that place. Antichriſt ſhall ſit in the houſe of the Lord, in the ſeat of Chriſt; If he ſhall ſo ſit, it muſt be either as a king, or as a Biſhop, or as both, or as neither. If not as a King, then how upon manie peoples and Nations? If not as a Biſhop, then how in the Temple of the Lord? as the

Apoſtle ſayth, in the Houſe of the Lord? as S. Ambroſe, in the Houſes and walles of the Church? as S. Hilarie, in Eccleſia as Theodoret? in the Holy places of the church as S. Chryſoſtom? in the chaire of S. Peter, as S. Barnard ſayth. If as both, then who hath done ſo but the Pope? Neither neede we much to ſtick at the ſwelling words of the ſame S. Barnard in another place, Tu es Sacerdos magnus, & Pontifex Summus, tu princeps Epiſcopurum, tu Haeres Apostolorum. Tu primatu Abel, Cubernatu Noe, Patriarchatu Abraham, Ordine Melchiſedec, Dignitate Aaron, Authoritate Moſes, Iudicatu Samuel, Poteſtate Petrus, Vnctione Chriſtus. This ſentence of S. Bernard, though it ſeemeth he was ſomewhat caried away with the overflowing ſtreame of his Eloquence, yet it appeareth his purpoſe was to drawe the Pope to a more ſerious conſideration of his dutie. But the Popes and their followers, which ought to haue tempered it with humilitie, haue made it but a ſtep and advantage to their Elation,Anton. ſum. p, 3. c. 22.
                   as appeareth in their Decretals and Canoniſts, where they arrogate and aſſume to them ſelues Plenitudinem poteſtatis & ſcientiae,
                  See M. Down ham of Antic. lib. 1. c. 5.
                   and that they haue one and the ſame Tribunall with God and Chriſt Ieſus, and that Chriſt and the Pope are but one and the ſame head of the church. Which titles none but the king of pride durſt to take upon him.
               Let us yet goe forward, and ſee how he is further revealed in the time of his Raigne, and how the prophecies of that time alſo were fulfilled, we haue before conſidered the deſcription of his raigning, and how he ſitteth on the ſeauen headed Beaſt. Now of the time: which falleth out to be likewiſe 666 yeares, or thereabouts. For that is the number of the Beaſt,
                     Rev. 13. ſayth our Euangeliſt. And if we adde this to the former number,

we come againe to another ſtrange and wonderfull concurrence of prophecies & events, times and actions, namely the yeare 1366, and 1400, whereof we will ſpeak hereafter, when we haue taken a view of the actions that fell out in the meane time, namely, in the end of the ſaid firſt 666 yeares, and beginning of the ſecond, and ſomewhat conſidered what manner of men raigned over the Roman ſtate, during the ſecond terme of 666 yeares. Firſt therefore, as the Apoſtle propheſied, that there ſhould be an Apostaſie, ſo there fell out (about thoſe times eſpecially) divers great and lamentable Apoſtaſies, ſuch as the like were never ſeene, neither can the like be expected in any time to come: namely, firſt about the year 760 the great and wofull rent and departure of the Eaſt Church from the Weſt, by reaſon of that wicked contention betweene the Patriarches for primacie, and that abhominable doctrine of Idolatrie, which an Hiſtorian verie Chriſtianly calleth execrable. Secondly, the wofull rent, and departure of the weſt Empire from the Eaſt, by the Popes ſetting up of the French kings Pipin and Charles. Thirdly the rent and diviſion of the greateſt part of the Eaſt Empire from their lawfull Prince, by the ſodaine and great victories of the wicked Saracens in Aſia, ſent of purpoſe to plague Chriſtians (I thinke) for their Idolatrie, as they do object it unto us unto this day. And fourthly the lamentable ſpoyle and falling away by that meanes, not onely of thoſe ſeauen excellent churches, whom S. Iohn by his Epiſtles ſo ſtrongly fortified and forewarned: but of all the reſt of the flouriſhing Churches of Aſia, which yeelded either by feare or force, to the overflowing Impieties of Mahomet, ô lamentable times! O times never without grief, and ſhame, and teares of Chriſtians to be remembred! Within a few years, and as it were with a ſodaine floud and inundation of impietie,

blaſphemie, and filthines, the great and mightie kingdomes of Arabia, Syria, Paleſtina, Phoenicia, Anatolia, Perſia and Media, and many other Countries, the famous churches of Ieruſalem, Antioch, Epheſus, Nice, Galatia, and all the reſt of the leſſer Aſia, which the Apoſtles had ſo diligently planted with their doctrines, which the Martyrs ſo plentifully watered with their bloud, & crowned with their Confeſſions, yeelded to the horrible blaſphemies and Idolatries of Mahomet, with infinite effuſion of Chriſtian bloud, and murder of Soules. What Apoſtaſies were ever like to theſe? or how can we looke for the like in any time to come? Say that we ſhould imagine an Antichriſt yet to come, can we haue the prophecie of the Apoſtle S. Paul concerning an Apoſtaſie precedent ſo fulfilled? Hath all the Chriſtian world now ſufficient roome or place, wherein the like Apoſtaſies may fall out? What do theſe Summi Pontifices, theſe Vniverſall Biſhops, which would needs be the Head of the Catholike Church in the meane time. Let us take a ſhort view of their actions alſo in generall and particular, and ſee whether it be poſſible for any Antichriſt hereafter to do the like. The firſt great action that we meete with of theirs, is the puting downe of three kingdomes to advance themſelues; according to the propheſie of Daniell, concerning the Litle Horne, before whom three of the other Hornes fell. For firſt they draue the Grecian Emperors out of Italie, upon the quarrell concerning Images, by the helpe of the Lombards. Secondly, having ſubdued the Lombards by the helpe of the French, they draue out the French by their owne diſſentions, and the help of the Germans: and laſtly, they expelled the Germans alſo by rayſing factions amongſt them ſelues: the Hiſtories whereof, becauſe they are too long for this place, & are well collected by the learned Mornay, I think

needleſſe here to proſecute. Is it poſsible for any Antichrist to come to doe the like? Are there any ſuch three kingdomes in the Chriſtian world, everie one of them having command of Rome and Italie, to be put downe hereafter, to make roome for another Antichrist?
               
               And it is to be obſerved, that this firſt Action containeth in it ſelf, manifeſt Treaſon and rebellion againſt their lawfull Princes the Emperors, whom Gregorie and all the Biſhops of Rome before him had acknowledged to be their gratious Lords.Colimus Imp. ut hominem a Deo ſecundū ſoloque Deo eminorem. Terul. ad Scap. Whom they were bound to obay, as thoſe to whom God had giuen power over all men. The ſecond great action, was their ambitious and Luciferian exaltation aboue all Biſhops, Patriarchs, Princes, and Emperors, in taking the title of Vniverſall Biſhop, and uſurping power over them by excommunications, deprivations, interdictions, and other ſentences: incouraging ſometimes their Enimies, and ſometimes their ſubjects againſt them: as they moved the Lombards againſt the Emperors, the French againſt the Lombards, and cheriſhed factions and diviſions amongſt the French, and thereby ſtill increaſed their owne power and dominion. And in this they advance themſelues againſt God, and our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, to whom onely the Supreame and Royall Prieſthood after the order of Melchiſedek is confirmed by the oath of God himſelf: and that individually, as we noted before: and who hath placed Kings and Emperors in their ſupream places. A third action is the lawleſſe pardoning and diſpenſing with horrible and crying ſinnes, ſtill to advance their owne authoritie. As namely, their diſpencing with the horrible Parricides, Treaſons and Rebellions of Phocas, who murdered not onely the Emperor Maurice, but all his male children; namely Theodoſius then crowned,Pleſsis. Tiberius, Paulus, and Iuſtinian, Peeter his brother,

Conſtantine a principall Senator, and divers others. And this is that Phocas notwithſtanding, whoſe actions they all to this day juſtifie, and Baronius will haue us to beleeue that he was a good Catholike. Although he can ſhew no teſtimonie of his repentance, but that he ſent his owne picture and his wiues to Rome, which were preſently ſett up in the pallace. And in this point alſo the Popes advanced themſelues aboue God himſelf, who never pardoneth ſinnes without repentance. But this Phocas, three years after the murders of Maurice and his ſonnes,Pleſsis. hearing that the Empreſſe Conſtantia and her daughters were kept ſecretly hidden in a Church, ſent certayne Souldjers to make them away. But Cyriacus the Patriarch of Conſtantinople withſtood them: and would not deliver them, till he had taken an oath of the Tyrant, that he would do them no violence. Whereupon this good Roman Catholike conceived a deep and inplacable hatred againſt the Patriarch, and for the preſent put them in a Monaſterie, but about a yeare after cauſed them all to be murthered: and ſo Phocas four or fiue yeares together continueth ſtill a murtherer, adding to his paricide perjurie, and to his perjurie parricide, with extreame hatred againſt the good patriarch Cyriacus, that would not approue of ſuch hideous actions. But the Roman Pontifex made good uſe hereof. For thereupon, and by ſlattering this Catholike Phocas, he obteyned of him the title of Soveraigne, Catholike, or Vniverſall Biſhop, which from that time to this they all maintaine. A fourth noble action was their violent and open uſurpations, of the Territories and Lands belonging to the Emperours, their lawfull Souverains: which they gotte partly by the Lombards, partly by the French: another act of perfidious Treaſon and rebellion. A fifth action was their favouring, exciting and countenancing

of Subjects to rebell againſt their lawfull princes, and to depoſe them, as they did the French againſt the Emperors of Greece: Pipin againſt Childerick of France, and Advaldus the Lombard againſt the king his Brother in law, all to ſerue their owne turnes. And this alſo the popes to this day do allow and maintaine, ſtill reaping the fruits, and enjoying the Territories and lands, which they got by theſe practiſes. A ſixth action is their horrible Idolatrie, in the erecting and worſhiping of Images, which howſoever they labour to blanch, excuſe, or defend with ſubtill or Sophiſtike diſtinctions, which cannot be proved by the Scripture (as they ought to be, for Vbi Scriptura non diſtinguit, neque nos diſtinguere debemus, quia ſenſus nostri & enarrationes ſine Scripturis teſtibus non habent ſidem:) yet both at the firſt beginning and ever ſince it was ſtill judged to be open and manifeſt Idolatrie, and that not onely by godly Chriſtians,vide Agrip. de van. ſci 
                        •
                     .57 Morton in Apol. cath. li. 1. cap. 46. lo Pic. Mir. in Apol. as at the firſt by the Churches of Graecia and Aſia in the Eaſt, and of France and Britaine in the Weſt, and by many godly men in particular, but alſo by Turkes and Iewes, which do utterly condemne it, as it is uſed by the Papiſts, for meer Idolatrie, and unexcuſable:See the place Eſai 41, 21, 22, 23, 24. & ſuch like, and conſider how it can be anſwered by their idle diſtinctions of Image & Idolum. lat
                        •
                     ia & donlia, &c to which we may adde the Canoniſing of Saints, and making them to be publikely invocated in their ſolemne Leiturgies, therein taking upon them another individuall propertie of God, who onely maketh Saints, and ſo committing manifold blaſphemie, joyned with Idolatrie of invocation. And a ſeauenth or laſt notable action is the publike declaration and proclamation to the world, that they hold themſelues abſolutely lawleſſe, and that if the Pope neglect his owne Salvation and others, and thereby draw millions of ſoules into hell with him, yet no man may judge of him, no man may reprehend him. Theſe were the firſt, and the generall actions of this ſeauenth Head of the

Septimontan cittie. And all of them are juſtified and mainteyned by the Popes, and by all of them with one conſent, from their firſt perpetration and beginning, unto this day. All of them take the benefit, all of them do allow and approue of theſe things, magnifying theſe ther Predeceſſors, juſtifying their ſucceſſion from them, and mainteyning their Decrees and Actions: holding this for a Principle inviolable, that they will not confeſſe themſelues to erre in any thing, as Thuanus hath obſerved.Thua
                        •
                     
                   Whereupon I demand, Whether they do not all of them thereby declare themſelues to be that Sonne of Perdition, that exalteth himſelf againſt, and aboue all that is called God, or that is worſhiped? And I demand, whether ſuch things haue been done in any other kingdome or nation under heauen, and whether we may expect ſuch things to be done by any Turke, Iewe, Pagan, or any other perſon whatſoever, in Rome the place determined, in any time to come? Now let us ſee and conſider of the particular actors of this Antichriſtian perſon during the time of his Raigne, which from the former Period, muſt continue for 666 yeares more, or thereabout, and in everie one of them, I deſire thee (Good Chriſtian) to conſider, which of them all is not Homo peccati ſedens in Templo Dei. that man of ſinne that fitteth in the Temple of God, and is worſhiped, and exalteth himſelf aboue all that is called God, or is worſhipped; &c. And alſo what may be thought of the whole ſucceſſion taken together.
               Anno Domini 707 Conſtantine the Pope would haue his foote to be kiſſed, like another Diocleſian, thereby making evident demonſtration,King of pride. if not in words yet in deede, that he claymed to be his ſucceſſor.Onuphr. And it defence of Images he openly reſiſted Philippicus the Emperor of Greece. But Iuſtin, and Anaſtaſius tyrants

and Murderers ſubmitted themſelues unto him, and approved his Decrees.Idolatrie and rebellion. This adoration, rebellion, and Idolatrie the Popes haue continued ever ſince.
               Anno 720 or thereabouts, Gregorie the ſecond and third continued the ſame Idolatrie and rebellion, and cauſed all Italie to withdraw their obedience from the Emperor Leo. and to deny their Tributes, becauſe he had commanded Images to be broken and burned, and for the ſame cauſe alſo excommunicated him, & tooke to themſelues the Cottian Alpes,Curſing Princes. by colour of guift from the Lombards.
               Anno 749 Zacharie incourageth and aſſiſteth Pipin to depoſe his maſter Childerick king of France, and to take upon him the kingdome of France, which was afterwards confirmed by the Popes that followed, for which the ſayd Pipin gaue to the popes the Exarchat of Ravenna, which belonged to the Grecian Emperor.
               Anno 756 Stephen who cofirmed the kingdome of France to Pipin, this man would be caried upon mens ſhoulders, which his ſucceſſors haue continued ever ſince.
               Anno 757 a notable Schiſme, wherein Conſtantine the ſecond gott the papacie by mony and armes. This Schiſme is reckoned the ninth.
               Anno 772 Adrian the firſt, a valiant defender of Images and ldolatrie.Changing. He beganne to grant priviledges and diſpenſations.
               In his time there was held a counſel at Rome, wherein the pope with the conſent of the Counſell,Firſt horn put downe. clearly to caſhier the Greek Emperors & thruſt them out of all, made Charlemain prince of the Senate,Diſt 63 can. Adrian. papa Romā &c. this was Adrian the firſt. giving unto him the power of inveſting the pope. And as Mornay collecteth out of Sigonius and others, the pope acknowledged

to hold of him Ravenna and other pieces by fealtie and alleageance, adoring him after the manner that was uſed to the ancient princes. Yet no ſooner was Charlemayn dead, but they wrought upon the good nature of Lewis his ſonne: and about
               Anno 816 Stephen procured himſelf to be choſen and conſecrated without conſent of the French Emperor,Second Horne put downe. and ſo Paſchatis and others after him. Whereupon followed Schiſmes, Seditions, and Murthers, in the times of Eugenius, Gregorie, Sergius and Leo.
               Anno 854 pope Ioane.The kingdome of the whoore. 
                  Sexum mentita veritatem faemina, — To whom alſo it is ſayd that the Divell anſwered in verſe,
Papa, pater patrum, papiſsae pandito partum.
               
               A ſtorie omitted by ſome for the filthines of the fact, ſayth Rainulphus: but averred by ſo many and ſo learned authors, that it will never be blotted out.Polychron. whereof I haue ſpoken before.
               Anno 856 Benet the third, Schiſma 12.
               Anno 860,vid. diſt 19. Si Romanor. Blaſphemie. pope Nicholas who admitteth that the Old and New Teſtament were to be received by vertue of the papall decrees. And if any man will ſay, that this was but by way of argument, let him conſider of ſome other of his Decrees. As that, that none preſume to reprehend his judgment, nor to judge of it.9. q. 3. patet.
                   That the pope may not be bound or looſed by any ſecular power,Dist. 96, ſatis evident. He boasteth that he is God becauſe he is called God, and God cannot be bound, or looſed by any man.
                     Dist. 19. That all the popiſh Decretals be obſerved, &c. All theſe Decrees haue his Succeſſours mainteyned, and do mainteyn them to this day.
               Anno 868, Adrian the ſecond. This man cauſed a Counſell to be gathered, wherein it was decreed,
                     Diſt. 63, Adrian 2. that no Lay Prince or Potentate ſhould intermeddle with

the election of any Patriarch,So here the French Emperors were quite caſhierd. Renſu. & alij. Metropolitan, &c. are theſe pettie-matters, or are theſe proofs inſufficient?
               Anno 872, Ioannes, who crowned three ſeverall Emperors, all liuing at one time, thereby giving occaſion to moſt grievous civill warres, to the infinite effuſion of Chriſtian bloud.Exalting himſelfe aboue God, And this man granted pardons to them that were dead.
               After him Martinus, Adrianus, Stephanus followed in the ſame ſteppes.
               Anno 891, Formoſus made Pope by a great ſchiſme.
               Anno 896 Boniface by tumult and faction. About this time Sanctimonia & Pietas omnis Pontifices dereliquit. Platina,Reſpōde Suareſ. Pantal. &c.
               Anno 897 Stephen by Schiſme. He cauſed the carcaſſe of his Predeceſſor Formoſus to be taken out of his graue, comdemned of Symonie, and caſt into the river of Tibris. And ſo they continued in Schiſmes and tumults between the Factions of Formoſus and Sergius from the yeare 891 untill 907.
               Anno 906 Sergius a notable Schiſmatike. Famous for abhominable filthines with the Noble Strumpet Marozia,Kingdome of the Whoore. by whom he had iſſue, Iohn, who afterward obteyned the papacie. And about this time the impudent, and filthie whoore Theodora, and her ſonne Albericus, with her two daughters Marozia and Theodora in filthines like their Mother, governed all things in the Church of Rome. Whereupon Baronius beginning the ſtorie of theſe times, confeſſeth it was an Iron age, barren of all goodnes: and a Leaden age, abounding with all wickednes. For this Theodora gotte the kingdome of Rome,See Pleſſis ex Leithpr. & Pantal. ſayth the Hiſtorie, by whoredome with Pope Sergius, and continued it to her poſteritie, by advancing her Paramours, and her daughters Paramours or

Baſtards to the papacie, and proſtituting her daughters to the Popes ſucceeding one another. Proh dolor!
                  Sic Baronius, Quid ad haee Suareſ. e
                        •
                     quid pudet. 
                  proh dolor! (ſayth Baron) Here thou mayſt ſee the abhomination of deſolation in the church. So proclaimeth our great papall Annaliſt. How then hath it been removed therehence ſince that time? Yet behold greater abhominations.
               Anno 932, Iohn, called of ſome the eleuenth,In reckoning of theſe Iohns there is great difference among Chron
                        •
                     l. of others the twelfth, the Paramour of Theodora, as ſome ſay.
               Anno 938, Stephen the eighth made Pope by the power of Marozia, and Hugo king of Artes her huſband.
               Anno 956 Octavian, otherwiſe Iohn ſonne of Marozia by Sergius, was made pope by Aberik, the ſonne of Theodora. This Iohn was made pope,Monſtrum hō
                     minis. Platin. being but a childe, and after grew to be moſt beaſtly in Adulterie, making the pallace of Lateran Prostibulum,
                  Au. Incest. Pleſſis ex Pantal. & la
                        ••
                     th. a Stye or Brothell houſe (ſayth the author.) He uſed adulterie with Raineria, Stephana, and many others, and committed rapes with ſuch violence and outrage, euen in the moſt holy places, that women durſt not come to the Church, for feare of him. This is he that carouſed in wine an health to the Divell: and playing at dice, uſed to call Iupiter, Venus, and all the Divels to help him, and at length was ſlayn by the divell, being taken in adulterie, as ſome write. And ſo the Rule of theſe Harlots and their children, in the open ſight of all the world, continued in Rome almoſt an hundred yeares. What pope? what Cardinals? what ſucceſſion from Peter was here? and where ſhall we find the Whoore, where ſhall we find Antichriſt, if this were not he?
               Is there any Hiſtorie or record whatſoever, of any

prince or Monark, Salvage, or Barbarous, Iew, Turke, or Pagan, of ancient or later time, that can ſhew meaſure of ſuch abhominable and horrible practiſes: and yet ſee more.
               Anno 964, Leo the eigth was made pope, in whoſe time a Synod was held,Pleſsis ex Albert. Crantſ. wherein Pope Leo with all the Cleargie and people of Rome, to avoid the French (as they had before the Grecians) granted, and confirmed to Otho, the firſt King of the Germans, and his ſucceſſors, authoritie to elect, and ordaine the Biſhop of Rome, pronouncing Anathema, and baniſhment, or death to them that ſhould doe the contrarie: and confirming by oath to him and his ſucceſſors, all that which they held by donation, or otherwiſe, from Iuſtinian, Charles, Pipin, or Arithpertus, declaring that whoſoever ſhould hinder the effect thereof, ſhould by the Law Iulia, incurre the puniſhment of high Treaſon. So now they were become ſubjects to the Germane Emperors. How long did they hold it? Otho was no ſooner dead, but that in the yeare 974, Boniface the ſeauenth, contrarie to the Law, and to their oathes, was made Pope by ſedition and murther, having ſtrangled his predeceſſor, Benet the eigth; and put out the eyes of Iohn, that was choſen againſt him. And ſo the Popes and Clergie of Rome; who firſt rebelled againſt their Leige Lords the Graecian Emperors, and after againſt the French,Third Home put downe. Go up againſt the land of rebels. Ier. 50.1
                   became now perjured, Traitors, and Rebbels againſt the Germans; uſurping their Rights, and invading their territories.
               Anno 995, Gregorie and Iohn Schiſmatikes. And thus haue I runne over about three hundred years of the raigne of Antichriſt, from the time that the Pope was become univerſall Biſhop, had ſet up his kingdome of Idolatrie, and diſpoſſeſſed the Emperors of all Italie. And if theſe ſeeme

not evill inough, Behold yet greater abhominations.
               Anno 998, Silveſter the ſecond got the Popedome by the helpe of the Divell, to whom he did homage,Kingdome of the Divell. Faſc. Temp. Volat. Pleſſis ex Pantal. Quid ais Suareſ. which was ſo well knowne, that divers of his Succeſſors made thoſe diueliſh Artes their profeſſion. Was this the Chaire of S. Peter? are theſe his Succeſſors? If theſe be not, who are their Succeſſors?
               Benet the eight, and Iohn the one and twentieth,
                     And of theſe Necromantick popes there were 22. ſaith Napier, one of Zegedin.
                     And this being now the ſeat of the beast & the divel, how hath it been recovered from them ſince? Reſponde.
                   both Magicians.
               Benet the ninth, otherwiſe called Theophilact, the ſcholler of Silveſter. This Benet ſacrificed to Divels in woods and mountains, and by Magick practiſed to gette himſelfe the loue of women, (ſayth Cardinall Benno.)
               Silveſter the third, and Gregorie the ſixth, alſo Magicians. And at this time, being about 1046 the Sea of Rome began to ſhew it ſelf like the Divell, having three heads like Cerberus: namely, Silveſter the third, Benet the ninth, and Gregorie the ſixth.
               Anno 1048 Damaſus gott the popedome by poyſoning his predeceſſor, and intruſion: ſhortly after whom followed two Schiſmes more:Yet the kingdome of the divell. and ſo we come to the renoumed Gregorie the ſeauenth, otherwiſe called Hildebrand, famous for Negromancie, Blaſphemie, Sacrilege,He alſo threw the holy ſacrament into the fire. ſic Benno. Reſponde Suarez. Perjurie, Simonie, Treaſon and murther: the Trumpet of Sedition, and firebrand of Civill warres, who ruled all things at his pleaſure, in the times of divers of his predeceſſors, untill he had gotten the papacie to himſelf, which is ſayd to be in anno 1073.
               Anno 1080 followed another notable ſchiſme for one and twentie yeares together.O abomina
                        •
                     ionem de olatonis. Pleſsis. ex Lamperto Herveld. Reſponde Sua▪
                  
               
               Anno 1103, Anſelmus Archbiſhop of Canterburie in a Synod, publikely declared, that by forbidding Prieſts to marrie Sodomie became frequent amongſt them.
               
                  Anno 1118 followed another Schiſme, in number accounted to be the two and twentieth Schiſme of that Sea, and that was no ſooner ended,
               But anno 1124 another Schiſme being the three and twentieth, and anno 1130 the four & twentieth ſchiſme, and ſo for many yeares one ſchiſme followed another, which continued till the year 1138,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      of curſing Pſal. 10. vid. H
                        •
                     eron in iocum. the Popes ſtill curſſing and excommunicating one the other, whereby aroſe manie factions and ſeditions in Rome, in the time of Innocent the ſecond, which continued ſtill to 1188.
               Anno 1154 Hadrian the fourth thundered out excommmunications againſt the Romans, untill they had driuen their Conſuls out of the cittie, and likewiſe againſt the Emperor Frederick, for holding his left ſtirrop, and putting his owne name before the Popes, and thereupon ſowed the ſeeds of Rebellion in the Empire.
               Anno 1177 Pope Alexander moſt inſolently treadeth upon the necke of the Emperor,Plat
                        •
                     n. Biblian Pleſs. ex Pant. &c. when he had ſubmitted himſelf to him, his Cleargie ſinging in the meane time, Super aſpidem & Baſiliſcum, &c.
               
               Anno 1181 Lucius the third, of whom that moderate Elogium, which I will recite for a breathing & recreation to the Reader.
               
                  Lucius est piſcis, rex at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      tyrannus aquarum,
                  A quo diſcordat Lucius iſte parum.
                  Devorat hic homines, hic piſcibus inſidiatur.
                  Eſurit hic ſemper hic aliquandò ſatur,
                  Amborum vitam ſi lanx aequata notaret,
                  Plus rationis habet, qui ratione caret.
                  
                     Which may be thus Engliſhed:
                  
                  Lusy the fiſh a tyrant is, or king of fiſh by title,
                  From him Pope Lucy differeth in nature but a litle.
                  The fiſh hunts fiſh, men to devour the man doth exerciſe:
                  
                     The fiſh is ſometimes ſatiſfied, the man will nought ſuffice.
                  If both their liues were laid in ſcale, & weighed with equall hand,
                  More reaſon would be found in him that none doth underſtand.
               
               Anno 1188 Clement the third filled all things with robberies and murthers, while he ſought to get the kingdome of Sicily by armes, as eſcheted unto him.
               Anno 1198 Innocent the third excommunicated King Iohn of England,Full of curſing pſal. 10, 7. another ſpe
                        ••
                     
                     all mark of Antich. and filled England with Rebellions and murders, till he had forced the poore King to yeeld up his crowne, and yet ſo he could not be in quiet. The ſame pope alſo excommunicated the Emperor Phillip, and publiſhed the fiue firſt bookes of the Decretals.
               Anno 1215 Tranſubſtantiation was decreed and confirmed in the councell of Lateran, conſiſting of 1300 Praelates: whereupon inſued the Idolatrous worſhip of the Sacrament.
               Anno 1223 Gregorie the ninth excommunicated the Emperor Frederick,He loved curſing pſal. 109
                   and ſent him to warre againſt the Saracens, and in the meane time tooke Apulia from him, abſolved the Emperor for a great ſomme of mony, and then excommunicated him twiſe againe. He canonized Francis and Dominick, whom their followers compare with our Saviour Christ, and are by the Pope allowed.
               Anno 1243 Innocent the fourth excommunicated the Emperor Frederick the ſecond againe, and corrupted ſome of his houſhold ſervants to poyſon him. The Popes ſucceeding for many yeares continued in moſt diſloyall and wicked practiſes againſt the Emperors, of whom I will not ſpeake particulerly, becauſe me thinks I ſtay too long from the moſt excellent and renowned pope Boniface the eight, anno 1290, or 1300.
               
                  Who commeth in with a pageant of Antichriſtian pride, fulfilling all the prophecies concerning the Revelation and Raigne of Antichriſt, the place Rome, and the ſtate of Rome, the thouſand two hundred and three ſcore dayes in the Apocalyps being fulfilled, and the 1290 dayes of Daniell alſo being expired,
                     Dan. 12. the time▪drawing neare to the 1335 dayes of the ſame Prophet, which conteyneth fully twiſe 666. Another great concurrence of prophecies. The actions ſuteable, firſt he reneweth the Iewiſh Ceremonie of a Iubile, by conſequent denying,Reſponde Suarez. that Chriſt Ieſus coming in the fleſh had ended all Iewiſh Ceremonies, and brought in an eternall Sabboth and Iubile. By the ſame he maketh a change of times, and by his Indulgences he diſpenceth with lawes. He ſheweth himſelf one day in Pontificalibus, as Pontifex Max. the next day in Imperialibus, with a naked ſword before him as an Emperor, and abſolute head of the Roman Empire, arrogating to himſelf (in his Decretals, and namely in the Sent, which he publiſhed) fulnes of knowledge and power, and ſo boaſting that he is God. Claiming ſupreame power and dominion over all princes, Kings and Emperors, and ſo advancing himſelfe against, and aboue all that is called God. Pronouncing full remiſſion of all ſinnes, not poenitentibus, as our Lord Ieſus Chriſt did, but viſitantibus Apoſtolorum limina. Theſe things doth this man, a Murderer of his Predeceſſors, (if we beleeue Collenucius) a nouriſher of inteſtine warres amongſt Chriſtians (as he did in Greece) a rebell to his Soveraigne the Emperor, forbiding all Cleargie men to pay Tribute to Kings & Princes, as he doth in the Sent. a ſtirrer up of Treaſon and Rebellions, by excommunicating princes, and abſolving their ſubjects from their alleagiance, as he did the French: An Heretick in denying

the ſoule to be immortall, an Inceſt with two of his owne Neeces, and a confederate with the publike and profeſſed enimies of our Saviour Chriſt, the Saracenes, whom he intertained in pay againſt the Chriſtians in Sicilia. Can there be any more in a lawleſse man, in the man of ſinne, in Antichriſt? Yet this mans Acts and Decrees all his ſucceſſors haue, and yet do maintaine defend, and imitate, as occaſions are offered, ſo making themſelus one with him.
               Then followed Clement the fifth, not onely in publiſhing the Clementine decretals, as his predeceſſor did the Sext: but in excommunicating of Princes and Free ſtates,Curſing nations. Balaam. namely the Venetians, Florentines, and Luccanes; and after him Iohn the 21, 22, or 23, (for they cannot agree upon the reckoning) an open Heretick, denying that the ſoules of good men ſhould ſee God before the laſt day. He publiſhed Septimum Clementinarum, he alſo excommunicated the Emperor, and ſtired up rebellions againſt him. Tell me good Chriſtian, and giue me Inſtance, but in one of theſe, which of them was not the man of ſinne, ſitting in the Temple of God, advancing himſelf aboue all that is called God? Which of them was not Rex ſuperbiae? And if in this Catalogue I haue omitted any, it is but ſome few, which continued but for ſhort times, and ſo could not do much; but that they did was like their predeceſſors. Now ſhortly after the time of the ſaid Iohn, laſt ſpoken of, followed that noble ſchiſme, which laſted fortie or fiftie yeares together, one pope ſitting at Avinion in France, the other at Rome in Italie, continually curſing and excommunicating one the other: and in this time, ſayth the Carthuſian, I know not who was Pope. Where then was the Succeſſion? Where was the infallible chaire? How can we now know who is pope, ſeeing they knew it not themſelues? And by this notable ſchiſme we are brought

to the fulfilling of many prophecies, & propheticall numbers, accompanied with ſo many, and ſuch great actions, as the like are no where againe to be found, but in this Antichriſtian ſucceſſion. But if any will object, that theſe things were not done by all of them, I anſwer ſtill with Salvianus: Ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      homicidae ſemper occidunt. And againe, Etſi hoc commune omnibus non faciebat actus, commune tamen omnibus faciebat aſsenſus. For which of them reformed or reproved any of theſe things? Which of them ſhewed any diſallowance or diſlike of them? Which of them hath refuſed the adoration giuen to Conſtantine? Which of them hath reſtored the Townes and Provinces Traiterouſly and rebelliouſly gotten from the Emperors, their Liege Lords, to whom they had ſworne fealtie? Which of them abrogated the decree de Majoritate? the Idolatrous worſhip of Images? or other decrees or decretals made by Innocent, Boniface, Clement, or Iohn? Which of them I ſay, hath put downe the great Baudie houſe of Sixtus, or reproved the Inceſts, Rebellions, Negromancie, Sodomie, unjuſt excommunications, or other ſinnes of their predeceſſors? And I demand, Whether any man, Iew, Turke, Infidell or divell can be imagined, or any time hereafter can be expected, wherein ſuch a conſent, and concurrence of Prophecies and events, with the judgments of godly learned men can be imagined to come? For if we take Daniels aera, that is, the ceaſing of the dayly Sacrifice, by the deſtruction of Ieruſalem and the Temple, which was in the yeare of our Lord 70, and adde unto 70 that number 1290, limited by the ſame Prophet,
                     Dan. 12. it cometh to the yeare of our Lord 1360, about which time the excellent Iohn Wicklieue in England, and ſhortly after Iohannes de Rupeſciſſa in France, whoſe labours upon the Apocalyps are ſaid to be extant, prophecied, or rather, declared many prophecies out of the Apocalyps,

concerning Antichriſt, amongſt which that is notable, which the Carthuſian recordeth, that there ſhould ariſe two Antichrists, &c. And in the verie next leafe the ſame Author ſheweth, that within few yeares after there did ariſe two popes, one at Rome, the other at Auinion, each of them called Pont. Maximus, and exerciſing all manner of Antichristian impieties, having mouthes full of curſing, as the Prophet ſpeaketh, and ſo making that greevous ſchiſme, like to the which was never heard of in any Christian Church, whatſoever. And this ſchiſme began about the yeare of our Lord 1378, and continued fiftie yeares, as ſome do account, namely to the yeare of our Lord 1428, or thereabouts. Within the compaſſe of which fiftie yeares, the number of many other prophecies were accompliſhed, & accordingly many other things verie obſerueable, were done in the Church of Chriſt; whereof ſome ſhall be remembred. For beſides that number of 1290 the number of 1335, to which the Prophet Daniell giues a bleſſing is alſo fulfilled. For account that from the deſolation of the Temple, and ceaſſing of the dayly ſacrifice, which happened about the ſaid yeare of our Lord 70. Add (I ſay) to that 70 the number 1335, and it commeth fully to the yeare of our Lord 1405. Againe, if we take the Apocalyptik number 666 double it makes 1332, adde that to 70, & it maketh 1402, or take the Apocalyptick number of 1260, and adde that to S. Iohns aera, which is the aſcention of our Lord, and was in the yeare of our Lord 34, or 35, and it maketh 1394, or 1395, which is alſo within tenne yeares of the former numbers. The like may be ſayd of the number of 42 moneths, which yeeldeth 1620 dayes, and of three dayes and a halfe, which accounting twelue houres in the day, as our Saviour Chriſt doth, yeeldeth 42 houres, and everie houre to be reckoned according to propheticall accounts,

a ſabbath of yeares, or ſeauen yeares, ariſeth to l260 yeares. So a time, two times, and half a time; everie of theſe reckoned from the Aſcention of our Lord cometh to the ſame yeare 1394: all concurring within the fiftie yeares aboue mentioned, and making a great concurrence and conſonance of Propheticall yeares. So that here we may boldly ſay, that ſeauen thunders, namely many Prophets uttered their voices, that is to ſay,
                     Pſal. 29. 
                  the voyces of God mightie in operation, like to the thunder, as the Pſalmne ſpeaketh, in a time doubtleſſe, which the All-ſeeing ſpirit of God, to whom all times are preſent, would not haue ſo marked out, but for ſome ſpeciall purpoſe. Let us then conſider the actions of theſe times, and ſee, whether they alſo be not ſutable to theſe prophecies. The actions of the popes we haue briefly touched before, Now let us ſee the works of God in theſe times, which truly are wonderfull,
                     Pſal. 111. and moſt worthy to be remembred. For ſhortly upon that yeare of our Lord before remembred 1405, God aſſembled his whole church of Europe,Italie, Britanie, Germanie, France, Spain. In this order they are named Conſil. Baſil. Seſs. 1.
                   conſiſting of fiue great and worthie Nations, three ſeverall times, in three great and generall Councels, and in everie one of them, notwithſtanding all the power of the Popes (a thing not a little to be wondred at) it was decreed, that the generall Councell was and ought to be aboue the Pope, and that whoſoever denyed that Trueth, was an Heretike, Anathema. And thereupon in the Councell of Piſa, being firſt of the three, the two popes then ſtanding in ſchiſme, were both declared to be Heretikes, and unworthie, and compelled to abdicate, and another was made pope, namely, Alexander the fifth. And to this councell there came learned men out of this our Countrie of England, as well as out of other nations, and were entertayned by that famous and excellent learned Chancelour of Paris, Gerſon, who declared

the conſent of the Church of France with the Engliſh church in that matter. Shortly after this the Papall Church had againe three popes together, and ſo became Triceps, like to Cerberus: and ſo the great cittie (ſayth Luther) was divided into three parts, according to the prophecie Apoc. 16. Soone after that therefore was aſſembled the ſecond great councell of the ſaid fiue Nations at Conſtance. And therein it was againe with great conſent, namely of 900 Biſhops and learned men, fully concluded and decreed, againſt the Popes Law, that the Councell is aboue the Pope, and hath authoritie immediately from Chriſt, unto which all, of whatſoever ſtate or dignitie, etiamſi Papalis, albeit the Papall, is bound to obey. And yet in the ſame councell, the pope ſhewed himſelf in his Antichriſtian pride, riding to Church on horſeback, the Emperor of the one ſide, and one of the Princes Electors on the other ſide, leading his horſe: yet in the ſame Councell the godly Bohemians Iohannos Hus, and Hieronimus Pragenſis, openly proteſted againſt the Pope: ſaying, that if he did not follow Christ in his life, he was not Chriſts Vicar: for which & other like ſentences, they were condemned and burned, contrarie to the publike fayth, and ſafe conduct of the Emperor, and to the eternall condemnation of all Popiſh faith and fidelitie. And yet in the ſame Councell God himſelf overruled their voices, and cauſed them to decree againſt the Popes canon law, as aforeſaid. Thirdly, within the ſame compaſſe of yeares, there followed another great Councell at Baſil, of the ſame fiue Nations;Seſs. 38. Faſc. tem. 88 Carleton of Iuriſd. pa. 276.
                   Wherein after much contention and diſputation, it was decreed again contrarie to the Popes comon law, and his great Proctor Panormitane, that the Councell is aboue the Pope, and that the Pope hath not power to diſsolue, prorogue, or tranſfer it to another time or place. And whoſoever denyed that veritie, ſhould

be judged an Heretike. Yet againſt all theſe Councels, the popes and all their Succeſſors ever ſince haue, and to this day doe oppoſe themſelues, in mainteining their Antichriſtian power,Articulos ſolvit ſynodumque facit gevera
                        •
                     em. elation, and authoritie: affirming, That the Pope onely may make a generall Councell and cannons, and that to him a man may appeale from the generall councell, and that the Councell can determine nothing without the Pope; and ſo that he is aboue all generall councels, ſtill continuing alſo in their abhominable Idolatrie, filthines, and wicked practiſes. And ſo all the Popes ſince that Councell of Baſil ſtand openly declared Hereticks, by the conſent of all the Chriſtian Churches of Europe, in three great Councels.Clemangis. But to croſſe theſe, the Pope gathered another councell at Rome, wherein after a ſolemne Maſſe, of Veni Creator Spiritus,
                  If th
                        •
                      be denyed let them ſhew forth but one act or dec
                        •
                     ee of that Counc
                        •
                     ll. there appeared a hideous and dreadfull owle, and the Councell ſhortly after, without any thing done, diſſolved. Neyther hath the Antichriſtian Sect any thing to object againſt the Decrees of thoſe three former Councels,See the historie of this c
                        •
                     ū
                     ſell ſet forth by Pet. Scave & judge whether it were any thing elſe but a ſaction. unleſſe it be a Conventicle, and conſpiracie of their owne faction at Trent, where the fiue Nations did not meete. What then ſhall we ſay to theſe things? Were not theſe extraordinarie great actions, or are not theſe actions ſutable to the Prophecies? or may we ever expect the like againe? Whether then may we not here ſafely reſt and fixe the eyes of our attention and contemplation upon this notable periode, ſo manie times pointed out and defined by God himſelf, and accompanied with ſo great and notable events, as happened within this one Centure of yeares, or litle more, namely from the time of Boniface the eight, till the Councell of Baſill. In the beginning we ſee the Pope like a God, proclaiming a Iubile, and thereby changing times and lawes, renewing a Iewiſh Ceremonie, and thereby denying that Chriſt is come in the fleſh,
                  
clayming the abſolute Lordſhip and command of all the world, as well in temporall, as in ſpirituall things, excommunicating great and vertuous Princes for ſmall faults, and yet he himſelf weltring and wallowing in Egyptian filthines, and inceſt with his owne Neeces. Then great ſchiſmes in the church, his Succeſſor mounted on horſeback, the Emperor & Prince Elector leading his Palfrey by the bridle, with many ſuch like notes of more pride and elation, then was ever read or heard of to be uſed by any mortall man whatſoever. And in the end the Pope, notwithſtanding all his pride and Luciferian exaltation, by three great and generall Councels gathered out of all Chriſtendome, declared to be an Heretike, which in reſpect of the greatnes of his Sea, his followers, his long continuance, and other circumſtances, muſt needs be underſtood the greateſt Heretike, of all that ever were or can be; and ſo by undeniable conſequence declared to be Antichriſt. Not ſo, will ſome Babylonian peradventure ſay. It is not any of thoſe circumſtances, nor all of them, can make him the greateſt Heretike, no more then Arius in his time was therefore accounted the greateſt Heretike, becauſe the whole world (as it is ſayd) became an Arian; but becauſe he denied one of the greateſt points of our fayth, namely, the equalitie of God the Sonne, with his Father, and therefore was called Chriſtomachus. Be it ſo: yet I thinke no man will deny, but caeteris paribus, the circumſtances aforeſaid will both augment, and aggravate the Hereſie. But let us conſider firſt, the greatnes and extent of that point, which the ſaid three generall Councels condemned for Hereſie: ſecondly, what other Hereſies, and how manie and great the Pope doth maintaine, and if either that point ſo condemned be

great, yea verie great, or that he mainteyneth more or greater, then any other; then will I leaue it to thine owne Conſcience Chriſtian reader, to judge and determine, whether the Pope be the greateſt Heretike, that ever was or not. And becauſe it is not my meaning either to build upon weake foundations, or to make long work, of that which is readie at hand, I deſire thee to conſider of the termes of this diſputation, ut conſtet quid ſit id qou de agitur: Firſt I ſay, I deſire to know whether thou doſt hold, that there is a Rule of the Catholike fayth, whereby to judge of Hereſies, which rule ought to be certaine and knowne to us; as not onely the Fathers,De verbo dei, l. 1. c. 2.
                   but we at this day do all agree, and Bellarmine the great Champion of the Romiſh Church affirmeth; For (ſayth he) if it be not knowne it connot be a rule unto us, and if it be not certaine, it can be no rule at all. So ſayth the Scripture.
                     Prov 22, 21 The words of trueth are certaine, and therefore was the Scripture written,
                     Luc. 1.4. that we might knowe the certaintie of that we haue learned. Secondly,Summa provi dentia carere fuco voluit ca quae divina ſunt, ut omnes intelligerent, quae ipſe omnibus loquchatur Lailant. De verbo dei. l. 3. c 2. 2 Tim. 2.
                   I aſke how it is knowne, whether it be not knowne according to the literall ſenſe, out of which effectuall arguments ought to be drawne, as we alſo are agreed. For certaine it is (ſayth the ſame Bellarmine) that that ſenſe which is immediately gathered of the words, is the ſenſe of the Holy Ghoſt: which I thinke he intendeth; ſo as it ſtand with other plaine places: For in the Word of God no contradiction is to be admitted. God cannot denye himſelfe. But the ſenſes myſticall and ſpirituall, which may be gathered out of the Scriptures are various, and therefore cannot be uſed for arguments to confirme points of Fayth, becauſe we are not certaine, that they are intended by the Holy Ghoſt, as the ſaid Bellarmine affirmeth out of S. Auguſtine. Laſtly then, it reſteth to

know, what that rule is, and where to be found. Of which becauſe thou mayſt ſee, that I will not hide, or diſguiſe any thing from thee: I finde four opinions. Whereof none in my underſtanding can juſtly be reproved: for they all agree together in ſubſtance. The firſt is of the moſt ancient Tertullian,De praeſcript. who goeth no further for the rule of fayth, then to the Vulgar Creed,The ſame as it ſeemeth is followed by Diony. Ar. commonly called the Creede of the Apoſtles, which (ſayth he) amongst us hath no questions, but ſuch as Hereſies bring in and make Heretikes: To know nothing but this, is to know all that we ought to know. And they that do not beleeue this, are not faythfull, are not Chriſtians, are not to be admitted to diſpute of the Scriptures (ſayth he.In Enchirid. ad Laur.) The ſecond is that of Auguſt, who affirmeth, this rule to be conteyned in the Creede and the Lords prayer: For (ſayth he) therein is the whole ſumme of all Chriſtian religion, namely, whatſoever concerneth fayth, hope, or charitie. A third opinion is that of the common Catechiſtes, which adde to the two before named, the Decalogue, and the doctrine of the Sacraments. The fourth is that which is now commonly imbraced, which maketh the Scripture in generall, to be the rule of fayth. And in this Bellarmine alſo conſenteth. My queſtion therefore is, whether thou do not approue theſe rules, or any of them? if thou do, and do acknowledge, that theſe Rules, or any of them be certeyne and knowne to us, and to be litterally underſtood, as Bellarmine confeſſeth, it followeth then to conſider, who by theſe Rules ſhall be ſaid an Heretick, and whether that be not clearly defined unto us by Moſes, S. Iohn,
                     Deut. 12. Rev. 22. and S. Paul to be ſuch a one, as doth adde any thing to the true fayth expreſſed in theſe Rules,
                     Tit. 3, 10. or taketh any thing from them, and will not be reformed by due admonition. To this agreeth Vincent. Lirinen. c. 32. Chriſti

Eccleſia ſedula depoſitorium apud ſe dogmatum cuſtos, nihil in iis unquam permutat,
                  Haereſis graece Electio latine, est ſententia humano ſenſu electa, verbo dei contraria, palam docta, pertinaciter de ſenſa. Groſsetest. Epiſ
                        •
                     . Lincoln. in Mat. Paris. 
                  nihil minuit, nihil addit. Then to the point: I aſke firſt concerning that Article, by the councels aforeſaid decreed, That the holy Catholike church, being the body of our Saviour Chriſt, repreſented in a generall Councell, is aboue the Pope, and hath authoritie immediately from Chriſt, unto which the Pope himſelfe, as a member to the whole, ought to obey, & whoſoever denieth that verily is an Heretike: Doth not the Pope (as I ſaid) and haue not all the Popes ſince the making of that decree, mainteyned themſelues to be aboue the generall Councell, and ſo denyed that veritie, and that no decree of a generall Councell is able to binde them, neither is lawfull, if it be made without the authoritie of the Roman Pontifex? Aſke Bellarmine their Advocate. Do they not maintaine that he is the head of the Church? that he cannot erre in matters of fayth, and that all are bound to obey him, ex neceſſitate ſalutis? Are theſe things expreſly and literally to be found in the Creede, the Lords prayer, the tenne Commandements, the Sacraments, or any part of the Scripture? If they be, why did all the Chriſtian Churches of Europe ſo manie times determine againſt theſe Prerogatiues of the Pope? If not, then whether are not theſe moſt great additions to that Rule, to which none muſt adde, and from which none muſt deminiſh? If we will truly judge of the greatnes of this Hereſie, let us conſider the greatnes of the buildings erected upon it. For great buildings muſt haue great foundations. Firſt therefore upon this Supremacie over the Church of Chriſt, repreſented in the generall Councell, they haue grounded their abſolute power to call, beginne, determine, ende, prorogue, and tranſfer generall Councels at their

pleaſures, and alſo to confirme and allow, or to abrogate and diſanull them. Which point if it be granted, they are ſure, that nothing can be determined againſt them in any ſuch Councell. Then an abſolute power over all not onely Biſhops and Prelates, but kings and princes will eaſily be inferred. For it ſtandeth with reaſon, that he who is aboue the whole, is aboue everie parte, in toto & pars continetur. Then followeth their power to adjudge and condemn that for Hereſie, whatſoever he thinketh fit. Then the power to excommunicate Nations and Countries, to depriue and depoſe kings and princes, & to giue their lands for an Heritage to whom they will. And in a word, their abſolute Anomy and lawleſſenes, that no man may judge of him, no man may diſpute of his judgment, or call it in queſtion, though he draw millions of ſoules with him into hell; a prerogatiue which the Scripture never intimateth to be claymed by any but Antichriſt, and never claymed by any but the pope; wherein all the authoritie, power and ſtates of Chriſtian kings, and ſubjects, prelates and generall Councels, with their lands and goods, bodies and ſoules are giuen to the Pope, and that without appeale, revocation or queſtion, whether he goe to heauen or hell. Iudge then Chriſtian Reader, whether this Hereſie be not greater then that of Arius, Pelagius, Montanus, Ebion, Cerinthus, Simon Magus, or any other? Who although they rayſed damnable Hereſies, yet never claimed ſuch prerogatiues? Yet you will ſay, that theſe Hereſies mainteyned by the Pope do not denye Chriſt Ieſus, as it is ſayd of Antichriſt, that he denyeth both the Father and the Sonne. Well, if thou be not ſatisfied by that which I haue ſayd before, conſider what other Hereſies are mainteyned by the Pope, and how

great they be. Firſt in the Creede, when we beleeue in one God,1 Tim. 6. 1 Ioh. 4. the Father almightie, who is a ſpirit inviſible, whom no man hath ſeene at any time, nor can ſee; for he dwelleth in light inacceſſible: is it a ſmall Hereſie, to maintaine, that that moſt glorious and inviſible ſpirit may be repreſented to us by the picture of an old man, painted upon a wall, or graved in ſtone or wood? Is this to be found in the expreſſe and literall ſence of any the Rules aforeſaid? When we beleeue in one Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who was borne of the virgin Marie, as a naturall man (though not onely man) crucified dead and buried as a true man, and aſcended up into heauen; is it a ſmall addition or Hereſie to ſay, that this naturall and carnall body now conteyned in heauen, is in ſo manie thouſand millions of conſecrated Hoſtes upon earth, carnally fleſh bloud and bones? Muſt we now haue ſo many millions of Lords, and the Virgin Marie ſo manie millions of naturall ſonnes borne of her bodie? And our Saviour muſt haue ſo manie millions of bodies, that ſuffered upon the croſſe, died and was buried for us &c. Yea but Hoc eſt corpus meum, and God is Almightie, and can doe what he will, and ſo we muſt beleeue. It is true he hath ſaid, this is my bodie, but did he ever ſay, This is my carnall bodie, or naturall Bodie: or this is changed, or ſhall be changed into my naturall bodie? Is there one word to that effect produced by Bellarmine out of the Scripture, or out of any the rules aforeſaid? He ſayth, This is my bodie. So it is ſaid alſo, that we are members of his bodie,
                  
                     Epheſ. 5. 
                  of his bones, and of his fleſh. And the head of everie man is Christ.
                  1 Cor. 11. Muſt we beleeue then that we are members of his naturall bodie? If not, then it appeareth,Aug. Sent. 340, 341. de doctr. christiana lib. 3. 1 Cor. 15.
                   that Chriſt hath another bodie, which is called myſticall or mixt, namely his Church. There is alſo a ſpirituall bodie, as well as a naturall, ſayth the Apoſtle.

And may we not ſay, that he hath a repreſentatiue or Sacramentall bodie,1 Cor. 11, 39. upon the words of the ſame Apoſtle concerning the Sacraments.1 Cor. 10, 17 Now if there be ſo manie kindes of bodies attributed to our Lord, where is that knowne and certain rule of Fayth, whereby we are bound to beleeue that the words of the Sacrament are meant of his naturall bodie? Of which of his bodies is it ſaid, that it aſcended into heauen? Of which is it ſaid, that the heauens muſt conteyne him untill the time of restauration? Of which is it ſaid, that the fleſh profiteth nothing? Of which I ſay of his bodies are theſe things ſaid, if not of his naturall? We muſt beleeue, that God is Almightie, and can do all things; but will he haue us beleeue things contrarie or contradictorie?
                     Eſa. 40, 26. We muſt beleeue God hath ordered all things in number and meaſure.
                     Wiſd. 11, 17 For this is the difference betweene the Creator, and the Creature.
                     Ioh 28, 25. And will he haue us to beleeue, that a naturall bodie created,
                     Prov. 8, 29. ſhould be contained in heauen, and yet diſperſed in earth; carnall in ſubſtance, and yet inviſible and imperceptible; finite in meaſure, yet infinite in places? one in number, and yet innumerable? Do they that affirme ſuch a Tranſubſtantiation, confeſſe the ſonne to be truly man of the ſubſtance of his mother, as the Creede ſpeaketh? or doe they agree with Eutiches? Gods word is true,1 Ioh. 1, 1. but would he haue it without witneſſes? He would haue our eyes, eares, and hands, to be witneſſes of the true incarnation of our Saviour.
                     Marc. 5, 19, 30. Luc. 17, 17 Act. 1, 22 & 10, 41, He would haue manie witneſſes to his miracles, twelue at leaſt to his Reſurrection, and in ore duorum aut trium, &c. In the mouth of two or three witneſſes everie word ſhall ſtand: And would he haue us to underſtand the words of the Sacrament, in abſence, which hath no witneſſes, nor any evident place to proue it? Looke into Bellarmine, and ſhew but one peece, word, or place of Scripture, that he bringeth

to proue it. Chriſt worketh miracles: but will he haue us to beleeue a miracle, where neither our ſenſes can perceiue it, nor he nor any of his Apoſtles doth ſay it? ſtill I appeale to the Rule of Fayth, which muſt be certaine and knowne, as Bellarmine confeſſeth. And if this ſenſe that they will haue of the words of our Saviour cannot be knowne▪ or certain by any of the Rules of fayth, then ſaith Bellarmine, it is no rule; and then I aſke, whether this be not a great and wicked addition, which they haue made in this point, for which ſo many godly Chriſtians haue been ſo cruelly martired by them? Let us paſſe to another pointe, where we beleeue that our Lord Ieſus Christ ſhall come to judge both quick and dead, that to him the Father hath giuen all judgment,
                  
                     Ioh. 5, 22. as to him that is verie God of verie God.Athan. in Symb. Is it a ſmall matter or addition, to ſay that there is an other ſummus I
                        •
                     dex, whom that eternall Iudge hath made (as they would haue it) his Vicar generall, Soveraign Iudge over all the world,Bellarmine. both of fayth and manners, and that can make lawes to binde the Conſciences of all men. Diſpence with Gods Lawes, giue Indulgences for ſinnes, and cannot erre? Doth he who mainteyneth ſuch things confeſſe the Sonne of God to be the onely Iudge, or doth he deny his Divinitie with Arius,To deny in fact is more then in word. in ſaying he hath neede of a Vicar? For God is everie where, if Chriſt alſo be everie where, then to what purpoſe ſerveth a Vicar generall.
                     Mat. 2, 31. And where is this point certainly and litterally to be found in any the Rules aforeſaid in ſuch ſort as may ſtand conſonant with other parts of the ſame Rules? If not, then whether doth he that affirmeth ſuch things, confeſſe the Father and the Sonne,Christum negat qui non omnia quae Chriſti ſunt conſitet. Ambroſ. Quiſquis Chriſtum, qualis ab Apostolis predicatum est, negat, Antichriſtus est. Hill. in ſuch manner, as by the ſaid rules we are taught? So when we beleeue in the H. ghoſt, who ſpake by the prophets,

who is the ſpirit of trueth, that ſhall leade us into all truth, whom God promiſed to poure out upon all fleſh,
                     Ioel 2. Act. 2. Acts 10. & our Saviour Chriſt would haue not onely his Apoſtles, but Captaines and Souldjours Iewes and Gentiles to be baptiſed with that ſpirit, and hath promiſed to giue it to everie one that beleeveth,
                     Io. 7, 38, 39 Luc. 11, 13. and to everie one that prayeth for it: Is it a ſmall addition, to ſay that that ſpirit is now not to be found, neither in any particular beleevers, nor in any Chriſtian Church, nor in anie Nationall Councell, nor in the Prelates, who are called the Angels of the church, nor in all the Churches gathered together in a generall Councell, but onely in the Pope of Rome and his Church? Without whom no Decree of any Generall councell muſt be held firme or lawfull. When we beleeue the holy Catholike Church, is it a ſmall addition to ſay, that this Catholike Church is now confined to Rome. When we beleeue the forgiuenes of ſinnes, is it a ſmall addition to ſay, that we haue this forgiuenes by the Popes pardons, and indulgences, eyther for ever, or for ſo manie thouſand yeares? Doth this agree with that article, wherein we beleeue, that Chriſt ſhall judge the quick and the dead? ſhall he judge, when the Pope hath pardoned, or ſhall he judge according to theſe pardons? Is it a ſmall detraction from the commandements to leaue out a parte of the firſt? Is it a ſmall addition to the Sacraments to make ſeauen in ſtead of two, to adde ſpittle and other ſuch traſh to baptiſme? Is this literally to be found in the rules aforeſaid? is it knowne? is it certaine? Is it a ſmall addition to giue to the Sacrament of the bodie of our Lord devine adoration? or is it a ſmall detraction to make it private, and ſo to take it away from the common people, except ſet and ſolemne times, and the cup alwaies? Finally, when we are agreed, that the litterall ſenſe of the Scripture is the

moſt certaine and ſafe rule of our beleefe, and that it hath in it ſelfe an incredible harmonie and conſent, and is the ſenſe of the Holy Ghoſt; is it a ſmall addition to this point, alſo to ſay, that the Pope is the ſupreame interpreter thereof, and judge of fayth and manners? And that he cannot erre? If this be knowne and certaine, then why did none of the rules aforeſaid expreſſe and ſay ſo? Why is it not expreſſed in the Scripture, why did no ancient generall Councell decree it? yea why did the three generall Councels aforeſaid, decree contrarie, that the generall councell is aboue the pope? Admitte the caſe to be, that the pope judge contrarie to the litterall ſenſe of the Scripture, muſt it be no error? Admitte that he maintaine, that the Scripture is to be received by vertue of his authoritie? that he may diſpence with the commandements of God? that he is the generall Commiſſarie of God, aſſumed into the plenitude of power, are theſe ſmall additions to the rules aforeſaid? The like may be ſayd of manie other points, upon all which I thus propoſe, and referre it to thine owne ſoule and conſcience (good Chriſtian) to judge if theſe be great additions and detractions, and more, & greater, then ever any other Heretike made to thoſe Rules of fayth before mentioned, and if they haue been oftentimes reproved, and admoniſhed for them, and yet ſtill maintaine the ſame, then, I ſay, I leaue it to thine owne ſoule to judge, Whether the Pope be not the greateſt Heretike that ever was? And whether we may not well affirme him to be that Antichriſt, then whom never any was nor can be greater,
                  
                     Dan. 12. 
                  and with the Prophet Daniel ſay, that they are happie and bleſſed, that lived unto theſe times, to ſee ſo great an Enemie of Chriſt his Church, and yet ſo diſguiſed; ſo holy in name, and yet lawleſſe indeede; ſo great a Prelate in ſhow, and

yet in deede ſo great an Heretike: Such a Vicar generall of Chriſt, and yet indeede Antichriſt, to be diſcovered and declared by three ſuch great and generall aſſemblies of the Church. It will percaſe be demanded, how I can call him an Heretike, that maketh the ſame confeſſion of Fayth, as we doe. And I aſke, if we confeſſe the ſame fayth, why doth he call us Heretikes? But I thinke it appeareth ſufficiently by that which hath beene ſayd, that in making ſo great additions to the true Catholike and Apoſtolike fayth, he hath declared himſelf to be the greateſt Heretike that ever was, and conſequently that Antichriſt. Let us then conſider the ſignes of the times of Anti-Chriſt, and ſee whether they alſo do not concurre in diſcribing men fit for ſuch times and actions, fit to be miniſters unto Antichriſt, and who thoſe men may be but the Roman Cleargie: Firſt our Saviour Chriſt giveth us a ſhort but notable and notorious ſigne importing blaſphemie, which is ſuch a propertie of Antichriſt, as no man can doubt of; Many (ſayth he) ſhall come in my name, and ſhall ſay, I am Chriſt, or annointed,
                  
                     Mat. 24. 
                  for ſo the word ſignifieth: is not this litterally fulfilled? Haue not all the popiſh Cleargie taken this title upon them? And what: not for any good or godly purpoſe, but to defend themſelues in their moſt heynous and flagitious crimes againſt the ſword of ſecular juſtice, by alledging that place of the Pſalme, Nolite tangere Chriſtos meos,
                  
                     Pſalm 105. 
                  touch not mine annointed. I appeale to the conſciences of all men, that haue beene any whit, though meanly converſant in the Hiſtories of late times, or obſerved their actions: if any will ſay, that this text may be uſed, as it is in that Pſalme, for the defence of godly Prophets, I will not deny it, ſo it be not uſed for their protection in wicked actions: for to uſe it in the protection of

ſinne is no leſſe a blaſphemie, then to make our Saviour Chriſt the protector and Author of ſinne and wickednes. A ſecond notable deſcription of men of thoſe times is made by S. Paul. For (ſayth he) In the laſt dayes (which S. Iohn calleth the times of Antichriſt) men ſhall be lovers of themſelues,
                  2 Tim. 3. 
                  coveteous, boaſters, proud, curſed ſpeakers, diſobedient to parents, unthankefull, unholy, without naturall affection, truce breakers, falſe accuſers, intemperate, feirce, diſpiſers of good men, Traytors, headie, high minded, lovers of pleaſures more then lovers of God, having a ſhew of godlynes, but haue denied the power thereof. So farre the Apoſtle. And theſe men who they haue been, and who they be, is not hard to be diſcerned. For who be they that now for many hundred yeares haue laboured, onely under the title of the church, with unmeaſurable and unſatiable coveteouſnes to inrich themſelues? The goulden Hiſtorian Matthew Paris, Aventinus, and all other Hiſtories of Chriſtendome, proclaime it is the Pope, and Courte of Rome, according to the Common verſes:
Curia Romana non captat ovem ſine Lana. and againe:
Burſas exhaurit & arcas. and againe:

                     Roma caput mundi eſt, omnia nam
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         capit,
                     
                        Ejus avaritiae totus non ſufficit orbis:
                     
                     
                        Ejus luxuriae meritrix non ſufſicit omnes.
                     
                  
Paris.
               The Romiſh Cleargie haue turned the tenne commandements into two words,See more in Abb. demonſt. and in M. Domuham. 
                  Da pecuniam, ſayth S. Brigitt. So if we aſke, who haue boaſted themſelues, and in pride exalted themſelues aboue all princes, Kings and Emperors? who hath excommunicated and curſed Chriſtian Princes, Nobles, States, and Nations? Who haue ſeduced Children and Subjects, to take upon them habits, and vowes of Religion, and ſo to caſt off all obedience to their Parents and Superiors? who haue ſhewed themſelues moſt unthankfull

to their Benefactors, and ſpecially to their Leige Soveraignes, under whoſe gratious and peaceable government they were borne and bredd, and haue injoyed their goods and Lands, houſes and Inheritance, Wiues and children, Liues and livings, and yet haue gone about moſt wickedly & traiterouſly to take away their Crownes and kingdomes, yea their life and breath, by whoſe onely mercie they injoy their owne? Who haue taught men to breake their truces, oathes, Leagues and covenants by new trickes and devices, ſometimes of Equivocation, mentall reſervation in themſelues, ſometimes of diſpenſation from their chief Biſhop the Pope, ſometimes of falſe and malitious calumniations, pretending that they be Heretikes and Infidels, with whom no fayth is to be holden, as they haue learned of their good predeceſſors Atreus,Cie. 3 offic. in whoſe name that doctrine was firſt publiſhed, and Laomedon that practiſed it, according to that verſe.
               Laomedont aeae luincus perjuria Troiae.Virg. Georg. 
                        
                           •
                        
                     
                  
               
               Yet by the way, I will not denye that ſentence of a godly Father, vouched in their Decree: In malis promiſsis reſcinde fidem. Impia eſt promiſſio, quae ſcelere adimpletur. But it is one thing promittere malum, and another promittere malo. If we promiſe an evill thing it is better to breake it, then to keepe it, as we learne by the ſaid Sentence, and the example of Herod. But if we promiſe to an evill man, yet if the promiſe be not evill, we are bound to performe it,
                     Ios. 9. 2 Sam. 21. as by the example of Ioſhuah, and king David. And yet who hath giuen them ſuch a ſuperlatiue and ſupereminent prerogatiue, that whomſoever they call an Heretike or Infidell he muſt be ſo? yea in their owne cauſes, contrarie to the Decree of immutable Iuſtice; that None ought to be a Iudge in his owne cauſe. Who haue againe by falſe infamous and ſeditious Libels accuſed and ſlandered Princes,

Nobles and whole nations, as they did Queene Elizabeth, calling her a Baſtard, & flagitiorum ſervam: the late Prince of Orenge, calling him an Heretike, and all that proteſt againſt their impieties, calling them Heretikes, Valdenſes, Huſſites, Lutherans, Calviniſts, Hugonots, and I know not what? Finally, who haue ſhewed themſelues moſt intemperate, fierce, and cruell? who haue moſt deſpiſed good men? Who haue been moſt traitors? who moſt headie and obſtinate? who moſt proud and high minded? who haue moſt followed their pleaſures, and yet made moſt hypocriticall ſhewes of godlines? I haue neither read nor ſeene much, I know litle or nothing, and therefore will not take upon me to ſay any thing, but I referre it to thine owne conſcience (good Chriſtian) and I deſire thee to conſider in thine own hart, whether thou do know any ſuch men in the world or not? and if thou doeſt, then whom they ſerue and follow? A third note of the times of Antichriſt is that which the ſame Apoſtle telleth us in another place,2 Theſ. 2. 
                  that there ſhould come an Apostacie first, and then that man of ſinne ſhall be revealed. Conſider with thy ſelfe whether in anie Hiſtorie of times paſt, thou canſt find any Apoſtaſies in any degree parallell or comparable to thoſe, whereof we ſpake before? or whether in any probabilitie the like may be expected in any time to come. Or if by the word of Apoſtaſie in that place thou wilt underſtand, that whereof the ſame Apoſtle ſpeaketh elſewhere, that ſome ſhall apostate and fall from the fayth, giving heede to ſeducing ſpirits and doctrines of divels,
                  1 Tim. 4. 
                  ſpeaking lyes in hypocriſie, forbidding mariage and meats. Conſider alſo who they be that teach ſuch things? And who they be that forbid meats and mariage, ſome meats to all men at ſome times, and all mariage to ſome perſons at all times. Fourthly S. Peter giveth us another none of them,2 Pet. 2. ſaying: They walke after

the fleſh and deſpiſe government, ſpeaking evill of dignities. I neede not aſke what theſe men be: But I aſke whether any other of any Religion, countrie, nation or profeſſion, either in theſe, or in any of the former, haue been like to thoſe that profeſſe the Roman Catholike, or Popiſh ſuperſtition? Fifthly S. Iude following S. Peter,Iud. epist. deſcribeth them thus: They haue gone in the way of Cain, and runne greedily after the error of Balaam, and periſh in the gainſaying of Core. Who be thoſe that haue moſt followed Cain in murther and Bloudſhed, not onely of private men, but of princes? Who haue runne after Balaam, to curſe, excommunicate, & interdict
                  ▪ not onely perticular offenders, but whole nations, townes, citties and countries? and that for coveteouſnes, when they refuſed to pay their unreaſonable demands? Who alſo haue followed, Core, Dathan, and Abiram, in oppoſing themſelues againſt Magiſtrates and Superiours,
                  
                     Iames 
                     
                        •
                     . 
                  plotting of conſpiracies, and rayſing inſurrections? Sixtly S. Iames deſcribeth a wiſedome which is carnall, ſenſuall, and diueliſh, conſiſting in curſing and bitternes, envie, and ſtrife. Conſider of theſe who they be, that haue been moſt giuen to theſe things, and whether ever any like or comparable to the Romiſh Synagogue? Laſtly, as we touched before S. Iohn giveth us a ſpeciall note: He that is not of God heareth us not: and hereby we know the ſpirit of trueth,
                  1 Iohn 4. 
                  and the ſpirit of Error. Who be thoſe that flye from the Scriptures, and will haue us with an implicit fayth, and blinde obedience to ſubmitte our ſelues to their decrees and decretals, cannons and traditions, Church and Pope, whom they will haue to be accounted of ſcience infallible, power irreſiſtable, and judgment unqueſtionable: Neither are theſe things to be ſhifted of with that rotten diſtinction, that theſe are vitia hominum, non profeſsionis, the faults of particular men, and not of the whole profeſſion, ranke or

order. The Heathen man will refell that, telling us, that where all runne one way, eyther by act or conſent, the corruption of the ſingulars, giue a denomination to the totall.
                  
                     Heliaca urbs ſimul est mendax at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ebria, Talis
                     Tota urbs est, Domus ut quaelibet eſse ſolet.
                  
Yet I cannot chuſe, but thinke there were ſome Infants there, that were neither lyers, nor druckards actually: but ubi maior pars ibi tota. So the ſeverall kinds of conſent expreſſed by their owne confeſſors:
               
                  Conſulo, praecipio, conſentio, provoco, laudo,
                  Non retego culpam, non punio, non reprehendo,
                  Participo, defendo, meum in caput iſta redundant.
               
               Salvianus will tell them, Etſi commune omnibus non faciebat actus,
                  Cic. 1 off. 
                  faciebat tamen aſsenſus. Cicero will ſay, Qui non defendit nec obſiſtit (ſi poteſt) injuriae, tam eſt in vitio, quam ſi parentes, aut patriam, aut ſocios deſerat. Their owne Decree will teach them: Quid eſt immundum tangere, niſi peccatis conſentire? Quid est exire inde, niſi facere quod pertinet ad correctionem; If they will avoide this charge, let them ſhew, how they haue corrected, puniſhed, reprehended, or diſliked theſe things. If not, then muſt we needs ſay, that all are guiltie.
                     Gen. 3, 17. & 6, 12. And as the earth it ſelfe is ſayd to be corrupted and curſed,
                     Pſa 107, 34 when the Inhabitants haue corrupted themſelues with ſinnes;
                     Eſa 24, 4. ſo, and much more all ſtates profeſſions and degrees of men. To this S. Auguſtine will adde, that as our Saviour Chriſt hath his myſticall bodie, which is his church: ſo the Divell hath his bodie, or his Synagogue, comprehending all the wicked, qui ſunt eius quodammodo corpus, ſayth he. And ſo all the Reprobates are one in the divell, as all the elect are one in Chriſt. And as he that is joyned with an Harlot maketh himſelfe one bodie with her, by the ſentence of the Apoſtle; ſo he that joyneth himſelfe with Antichriſt (the great whoore) eſpecially

in the head, becometh one with him, euen that Lawleſſeman, that childe of perdition. What then ſhall we ſay to theſe things? Places and Times, Perſons and Actions, Names, and things Propheſies and Events, do all concurre in the revelation of this man of wickednes, conſiſting wholly of moſt horrible and enormous ſinnes, by act and conſent, in particular and in generall, in ſingular perſons, and in their whole bodie politike, order & ſucceſſion: Such ſinnes, ſo many, and ſo great, that the Divell himſelfe can no way match or parallell. For if one divell ſhould do homage or ſacrifice to another, or commit or giue a licence to commit Treaſon, Inceſt, or murther, yet that could not be any way ſo great a ſinne, as when a Chriſtian, baptiſed in the name of Chriſt, and for whom our Saviour Chriſt the onely ſonne of God, hath ſhed his moſt precious bloud, committeth ſuch an offence, or giveth ſuch a Licence. And by the ſame rule of proportion: if theſe haynous Idolatries, Treaſons, Murthers, Adulteries and other ſinnes, which haue beene committed by the Popes, and their Licences and diſpenſations, were done, or licenced, committed, or permitted by any other then a Chriſtian, & one that taketh upon him to be the head of all Chriſtians, and over all Chriſtian Biſhops, yea and ſuch an Head as cannot erre, certainely theſe ſinnes in any other could not be judged ſo great, offenſiue, or in intollerable. As it is in the ancient Lawes truly defined, Re, perſona, loca, tempore atrociores injuriae indicantur. And ſo the Prophets everie where aggravate the ſinnes and offences of the people of God, by the greatneſſe of the benefits which they had received: and our Saviour Chriſt teacheth us, that he to whom much is committed, of him much ſhall be required. And he that knoweth his maſters

will and doth it not, ſhall be beaten with manie ſtripes. It followeth therefore inevitably, that theſe ſinnes in the pope are farre greater, then if any Chriſtian, Iew, Turke or Heathen did the like. And now ſeeing we haue obſerved Antichriſt in all theſe mayne and principall circumſtances, of his Place, and State, his Name and Riſing, his Raigne and Actions, his Times and Manners, what is more to be expected, but his Conſumption and Deſtruction two times, which the Holy Prophets, and divine Apoſtle expreſſe in one verſe, ſaying, that the Lord ſhall conſume him with the breath of his mouth,
                  
                     Dan 7, 26. 
                  and deſtroye or aboliſh him with the brightnes of his comming.
                  
                     E
                           •
                        a 11, 4. Whereof I will ſpeake breefly,2 Theſ. 2. partly becauſe others haue ſayd ſufficient, but chiefly becauſe of the times to come we muſt not preſume too farre, either to judge, or to inquire. Firſt therefore in his Conſumption two things are to be conſidered, the Times and the Manner. The times are two fold, paſt and to come. For the time past, it ſeemeth to haue beene ever ſince the ſaid yeare aboue mentioned 1405, being the time that Daniel bleſſed. For if we account thoſe 1335 years noted by Daniel, from the deſtruction of the Temple,
                     Dan. 12. which is Daniels aera, and was about the yeare of our Lord 70, adde that 70 to the numbers 1335, and it falleth out fully in the year of our Lord 1405, as I ſhewed before, which was within four yeares of the Councell of Piſa, the firſt generall Councell, that declared the Pope to be an Heretike; ſhortly after which the Noble Ziſca, Procopius Magnus and other worthie Bohemians began to breake downe the Popiſh Idolatrie, and ever ſince the Romiſh Antichriſt hath decayed more and more, as everie one that is acquainted with the ſtories of Chriſtendome may eaſily perceiue. So that we may well ſay, that the conſumption hath

now continued about 220 years. For the time to come I would deſire all godly Chriſtians to conſider of theſe particulars: Firſt, whether we may not expect that the tenne Kings ſhall ioyne together to ſpoyle the whore,
                  
                     Rev. 17▪
                   
                  and burne her with fire?
               
               
                  Secondly, What account or anſwer Chriſtian Kings can make to their great Lord and Maſter, for continuing in their warres against their brethren, and neglecting that warre, whereunto God himſelf hath called them.
               
               
                  Thirdly, whether upon the deſtruction of the Whoore we may not hope for the converſion of the Iewes, in a more gratious manner, then yet we ſee. And there by the way muſt be obſerved the word which the Holy Ghost uſeth;
                     Dan. 12, 11. Abhomination of deſolation: whereupon I aſke, Whether it may not be underſtood of Antichrist, to ſignifie, that ſo long as the Antichriſtian abhominations ſhall continue in the Church, ſo long the Church must continue deſolate of one of her principall parts, namely the ancient people of the Iewes, which muſt make the other maine wall, to be ioyned with that of the Gentiles in one principall and fundamentall corner ſtone, Chriſt Ieſus, which is not to be expected, as long as the abhominable Antichristian Idolatrie raigneth in the Church?
               
               
                  Fourthly, What we may thinke of thoſe froggs in our Apostle,
                  
                     Rev. 16. 
                  who they be that must gather the kings of the earth to the battail? Wherein is to be obſerved that the Frogge hath his name of his voice, which the Latins call Ran, Ran, like a trumpet, the Grecians Trac, Trac, like a drumme; and ſo in the Text it is ſayd, that they goe forth to the kings of the earth to gather them to battail. Concerning the Hebrew name, I would ſaine learne of the learned, whether it may not be taken for a word compounded of two words, whereof the one ſignifieth to make haſt, the other Defection or destruction, & ſo ſignifieth haſting to destruction or defection,
                  
which agreeth with the Text. Their nature, as we ſee by dayly experience,
                     
                        ••
                     nimalia amphibia. is to leape on the land, & ſwimme in the water, ſpoyling, polluting and corrupting in both. And to whom this may be applied, I leaue it to learned Divines to conſider.
               The fifth thing to be conſidered is the joyning of the Beaſt,
                     Rev. 19. and the Kings of the earth, and the gathering of their armies.
               The ſixth is the gathering of Gog and Magog together:
                     Rev. 20. and whether this be the ſame battail, which is ſpoken of in the former chapter.
               
               The laſt is the glorious and triumphant victories of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who is God bleſſed for evermore. But of theſe things I dare not ſpeake, but onely moue them; deſiring to learne, and not thinking it altogether unlawfull to ſearch, ſo it be done with Chriſtian modeſtie and humilitie, no more then the ancient Prophets did thinke it unlawfull for them to ſearch,3 Pet. 1. what time the ſufferings of Chriſt ſhould be accompliſhed, & the glorie to follow. But for the manner of the conſumption of Antichriſt, that alſo ſeemeth to be two fold: The one by the preaching of the Goſpell, the other by the open falling away of peoples, nations & countries from Antichriſt. Of both which other godly learned men, haue ſufficiently ſpoken at large: namely, M. Fox in his Martirologe, the two learned Biſhops Abbat and Downham in their ſeverall bookes of Antichriſt: alſo Catalogues Testium, the learned Morney, in his booke De Myſterio Iniquitatis, and many others. And concerning the laſt time which muſt be the ſecond comming of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, becauſe God hath reſerved it to himſelfe,
                     Act. 1. I therefore reſt in the prayer, preſcribed to the Church by our Apoſtle:
                     Apoc. 22. 
                  Euen ſo come quickly Lord Ieſus.
               
            
            
               
               The Concluſion.
               VPon all theſe premiſes, for a concluſion, I would deſire the Chriſtian Reader, to conſider of theſe ſeauen ſhort Problems, firſt concerning theſe propheſies before touched, as I haue demanded of them everie one in particuler: ſo now of them all in generall: If they be not fulfilled alreadie, I demand, how they can be accompliſhed, or how long & when we ſhall expect their accompliſhment? There are now almoſt 1600 yeares paſt, ſince they were giuen.
                     Rev. 1. And the Holy Ghoſt teſtifieth, both in the firſt and laſt Chapter of his Revelation, that the time was not long, but ſhortly to come.
                  
                     Rev, 22. and by another, that the myſterie of Iniquitie beganne euen then in the Apoſtles time to worke. Secondly,2 Theſ. 2. if theſe propheſies be fulfilled, as hath beene ſhewed, and if the Pope be indeed that Antichriſt, ſpoken of in the Scriptures, and all the propheſies concerning Antichriſt do concurre in him, and can be applied to no other, ſo aptly as unto him: then I aſke, why ſhould we halte any longer betweene two opinions? why ſhould we flatter our ſelues,
                  1 Reg. 10. 
                  or dallie with idle diſtinctions of the Antichrist, and an Antichrist, as if any Antichrist might be admitted to stand in competition with our Soveraigne Lord Chriſt Ieſus: If that diſtinction muſt yet ſtill be obſerved, as well at this time, as in the dayes of S. Iohn; unleſſe the diſtinguiſher can ſhew ſome other that may be called the Antichriſt, beſides the Pope: I demand, whether it may not be inferred: that The Pope is The Antichriſt, and that everie Papiſt is an Antichriſt. O deare Chriſtians, let us at length awake, and if God be God ſerue him; if Rome be Babylon, let us flye out of her, and

if the Pope be Antichriſt, let us utterly forſake him. For to follow both, ſerue both, cleaue to both, or relie upon both, is abſolutely impoſſible. Thirdly, if theſe things be ſo, I aſke in what caſe they be that take parte with Antichriſt, or entertaine him eyther by way of Obedience, converſation, aſſiſtance, permiſſion, connivence, or howſoever: ſeeing it is written, that if any man worſhip the Beaſt, the ſame ſhall drinke of the pure wine of the wrath of God. And what concord can Christ haue with Belial? Fourthly, upon the ſame grounds, I demand what power this Pontifex Max. which is Antichriſt, can haue over Chriſtian Kings, Princes, Magiſtrates, or other perſons whatſoever to excommunicate, interdict, depoſe or depriue any of them? Fiftly, I aſke what authoritie he hath to interpret the Scriptures, or what he hath to doe with them, or to pardon or diſpence with ſinnes, namely inceſt, murther, treaſon, Idolatrie, &c. or to make Canons, Decrees or Decretals to bind Chriſtians? Sixthly, ſeeing the Monarchie of the Pope is directly holden of the Divel, by homage actually performed by ſome of them, and aſſented unto by all their Succeſſors, in approving and maintaining their ſucceſſion from, and by them which did it: I demand whether all that follow the Pope, or take parte with him, do not thereby ſubmit themſelues to the Divell, in approving of that horrible Act; and withall renounce and forſake our onely true and rightfull Lord, and Soveraigne Chriſt Ieſus? And laſtly, all the premiſes conſidered, whether it may ſtand with the policie, ſafetie, or peace of any Chriſtian kingdome ſtate or common wealth, to permit and ſuffer Antichriſtian and diueliſh practiſes of filthines, infidelitie, murther, treaſon, Idolatrie, blaſphemie, and ſuperſtition to increaſe amongſt them. And whether it be not high

time for all Chriſtians to awake, and betime to flye out of Babylon, leaſt they be taynted with her ſinnes, & ſo made partakers of her puniſhments, and for Chriſtian Kings to reward her (according to Gods commandements) as ſhee hath rewarded the ſervants of Ieſus Chriſt.
               
                  Saue thy ſelfe O Sion, that dwelleſt with the Daughter of Babylon.
                  
                     Zach. 2, 7.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Eccleſiae querela. Woe is me, that I ſojorne in Meſhec, that I dwell in the tents of Kedar. My ſoule hath long dwelt with him that hateth peace: I am for peace, but when I ſpeake, they are for warre.
                  
                     Pſal. 120.
                  
               
               
                  Ariſe O Lord, let not man prevaile: Let the Nations be judged in thy ſight.
               
               
                  
                     Sententia divina. Put your ſelves in aray against Babell, round about. All yee that bend the bow ſhoote at her, ſpare no arrowes: for ſhe hath ſinned against the Lord. Shoute againſt her round about, ſhe hath giuen her hand. Her foundations are fallen, her walls are throwne downe: for it is the vengeance of the Lord. Take vengeance upon her, as ſhe hath done, doe to her.
                  
                     Ier. 50.
                  
               
               
                  Babylon is fallen it is fallen. Apoc,
            
            
               A Problem what ſucceſſe is to be expected by Chriſtians in any action, joyning with Antichriſtians or Idolaters.
               
                  
                     Ioſh. 7.THus ſayth the Lord God of Iſrahel, there is an accurſed thing in the mideſt of thee O Iſraell. You cannot ſtand before your enimies, untill you haue taken away the curſed thing from among you.
               2 Chron. 16. 13. Aſa made a covenant with Benhadad king of Syria: then Hanani the Seer came to him & ſaid:

Becauſe thou haſt relied on the King of Syria, and not relied on the Lord thy God, therefore is the Hoſt of the King of Syria eſcaped from thee. Herein thou haſt done fooliſhly. Therefore from hence forth thou ſhalt haue warre.
               2 Chron. 19. Iehoſhaphat King of Iuda, helped Ahab againſt the King of Syria, and Iehu the ſonne of Hanani, the Seer, went out to meete him, and ſaid to King Iehoſhaphat: Shouldeſt thou helpe the wicked, and loue them that hate the Lord, therefore is wrath upon thee, from before the Lord. And ſhortly after the Moabites and Ammonites came againſt him.
               2 Chron. 20. Iehoſhaphat joyned with Ahaziah King of Iſrael, who did verie wickedly, and he joyned with him in making ſhips to go to Tarſhiſh. Then Eliezer the ſonne of Dodavah propheſied againſt King Iehoſhaphat, ſaying: Becauſe thou haſt joyned thy ſelfe with Ahaziah, the Lord thy God hath broken thy works. And the ſhips were broken.
               2 Chro. 21. Iehoſhaphat had taken Ahabs daughter for a wife to his ſonne Iehoram, hoping perhaps to draw back the kingdome of Iſraell, but it proved the overthrow of his poſteritie.
               2 Chro. 23. Amazia hired an hundred thouſand mightie men out of Iſrael, for an hundred tallents of ſilver. But there came a man of God to him ſaying, O King, Let not the armie of Iſrael go with thee. For God is not with Iſrael. &c.
               
                  Eſa. 48. Ier. 51. Rev. 18. Flye out of Babylon my people, that ye be not partakers of her ſinnes, and that ye receiue not of her plagues. See more Eſa, 20, 5.30, 1, 2. Ier. 17. &c. and conſider of all the leagues, and treaties made by the Kings of Iuda with the Syrians, Egyptians, Aſſirians, Babylonians

&c. what came of them? What good gott Salomon by his affinitie with the Egyptians? was not his ſonne ſpoyled by them? What gotte Hezekiah by his courteſie ſhewed to the Babylonian Embaſſadors? Eſa 39. &c.
               It were a worke not unworthie the vacation of a learned man, to adde unto this a conſideration of all the Leagues, Pacifications, and Treaties, that haue been made by the Romiſh Catholikes with other Chriſtians, as namely with the Graecians, the Albigenſes, Valdois, Bohemians, Lutherans, Calviniſts, Huguenots, Proteſtants &c. How they haue obſerved their covenants and fayth, and what hath beene the ende and ſucceſſe of everie of them. What good the Grecian Emperors, what good the Albigenſes under the E. of Tontons, what the Valdois, Bohemians, and others gotte, by ſubmitting or yeelding to the Romaniſts, and what fayth thoſe Romiſh Catholikes haue held with them: alſo what is come of all the great warres, that Chriſtian Princes haue undertaken by the inſtigation and procurement of the Pope, as namely thoſe of ancient time for Ieruſalem, and thoſe of late in France. Alſo what good hath come to Chriſtendome by all the victories gotten by Romiſh Catholikes againſt the Turkes: haue they enlarged or defended Chriſtendome? haue they not loſt a great part of it? Yet they hold ſome part. True, taking Chriſtendome in their ſenſe, who admitte none to be Chriſtians, but thoſe that are ſubject to the Pope. But for other Chriſtians it is much worſe. For the Grecian Chriſtians, though grievouſly oppreſſed, are ſuffred in ſome ſorte to liue under the Turke, but Proteſtants in no ſort under the Pope. &c.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   