
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  〈☐〉
                Ban wedy i dynny air yngair allā o hen gyfreith Howel ða / vap Cadell brenhin Kymbry / ynghylch chwechant mlyneð aeth heibio wrth yr hwn van y gellir ðeall bot yr offeiriait y pryd hynny yn priodi gwrageð yn ðichwith ac yn kyttal ac wynt in gyfreithlawn.
            
               ❧ 
               A CERTAINE CASE EXTRACTE out of the auncient Law of Hoel da, kyng of Wales in the yere of oure Lorde, nyne hundred and fourtene paſſed: whereby it maye gathered that prieſtes had lawfully maried wyues at that tyme. ☞
            
               i. Cor. vii.
               ❧ It is better to mary, than to burne.
            
               S. Ambroſſe.
¶ The conſent of the wyll, is thys burnyng.
            
               
                  •••
               mas owner of Llantathun
            
         
      
      
         
            
               heb law bod yn rhydd er oed hyd heddiw wrth gyfreth ddeo / ac weithie wrth anwadal gyfreith y Pap / a bod rhydd ac yn gyfreithlawn yr owrhon wrth gyfreith y Brenhyn / Lhyma heued Text o Grifreith howel da: wrth yr hwn y gellir dyall bod yr offeireit yr amſer hynny yn priodi gwrageð / ac nad oeð waherddedic wrth y dywededic gyfreith / yr hon oeð wedy i chonffyrmio ae d
                  •
               rbin yn gymradwy / yn ðedðfol ac yn divei / trwy auturtot yr eſcop oeð yr amſer hynny yn Ruuein: megis y kewch weled yn eglurach wrth darllein y text o iſot.
            
               LYma lyuyr kyfreith a wnaeth hywel da yn yHwn ywr deunowuet hynaif ir b. Edward y chwechet ty gwyn ar daf / kyn bot heuit petheu erill yn daw o gyfreithieu da a wnayth doethion / a chyn no hynny a gwedy hynny.
            A hyn a wnaythpwyt yn erbin kyfreith hywel / Kyfreith hywel a deleir i chredu. A chyt del yno o wys Hywel / chwegwer doethaf o Gymryf / o bob kymwt yngGwilia yr hen orgraph Cambereic. kymry o leygyon / a ſaith vgeint bacloc o Eſgyb / ac archeſcyb / ac athraon da / ac Abadau. Or doethion hynny oll / kymryt a wnaythpuyt y deuddec doethaf ar neilltu y wneuthur y Kyfreith. Ac vn yſcolhayl huotlaf o Gymryf olh y yſcriuenny y kyfreith. Ac edrych rac gwneuthur yn erbyn kyfreith eccleis na chifraith yr amerawdyr. A llymma henweu y gwyr hynny oll / nyd amgen.

                  Morgeneu enat
                  Kyfnerth y vap.
                  Gweir vap Rufawn.
                  Gronwy vap Moridic.
                  Retwyd enat.
                  
                     
                  
                  Iddic enat.
                  Gwyberi hen o is kenuen.
                  Gwrnerth llwyt eu vap. Medwan ail keriſt.
                  Gwyn vaer / y gwr oeð berchēnawc ar lann tathwn byoed y ty y gwnaythpwyt y kyfreith yndaw.
                  Gwgawn dyuet.
                  Bledrus vap Bleyðud.
               
            
            A Blewgwaret archdiagawn Llantaf a oed yr yſcolheyc / a doctor yn kyfreith Siuil / ac yn kyfreith eccleis. A gwedy daruot gwnethyr y kefreith oll yn gwbyl. Ef aeth Hywel a theyrnet o Gimryf gyt ac ef a Lābert eſcop Mynyw: a Mordef eſcop Bangor / a Chebur eſcop ſaint Aſſaph / a Blewgwaret archdiacon Llandaf at Anaſtaſius Pap hyt yn Ruuein / y darllen y Gyfreith: Ac y edrych a oed dim yn erbyn kyfreith Deo o honai hi. Ac am nad oed dim yn gwrthwyneb i di / hi a deilingwyt / ac i gelwyt yn kyfreith howel da hi.
            Oet Chriſt yna ydoeð. ix. C. mlyned a. viiii. Llyma y gwerſi a wnaeth Blewgawret yna yn deſtiolaeth.
            
               Explicit editus legibus Liber bene finitus:
               Quem regi ſcripſit languoridus et quoque fuit.
               Hoeli turbe doctor, tunc legis in vrbe.
               Gornardo cano, tunc iudice quotidiano
               Rex dabat ad partem dextram, nam ſumpſerat artem.
            
            ¶ Ac ychydic yn ol hynny y darlleir yn yr vnrhyw gyfreith val hynn.
            Tri meip en dri broder vn vam vndat ni dyleant kefran o tref eu tat can eu braut vn vam vndat. Vn o na dunt yw map llwyn a pherth: a gwedi caffael y map

hwnnw / kemryt y wraic honno o roð kenedyl: Ny ðyly hwnnw keuran tir ar map a gaffat kyn nog ef yn llwyn ac ymperth.
            Eil yw kymret gwreic o eſcolhayc o rod kenedyl / ac☜ odenya kemrut vrðeu effeyryadaeth: ac ef yn effeiriat / caffael map: Ny ðyly y map a gaffat kyn yr urdeuf / keuran tir a map a gaffat wedy yr urdeu. Trydid yw mut / can ny ðyly tir ony attepo droſtaw: ac ny roddir gwlad y vut.
         
         
            The Englyſh of the aboue written Brytyſhe or Walſhe as we nowe call it.
            Beſides that it was thought honeſte, laudable, and lawfull by the law of God, and ſometyme by the inconſtant and vnſtedfaſt lawe of the Pope: and now eſtabliſhed by the kynges lawe alſo. Here is yet an other text (worthy to be noted for the antiquitie) of the aūcient lawe of Hoel da, than kynge of Wales, by the whych ye maie eaſely gather that prieſts at that time had maried wyues, neither was it prohibited or forbidden by the lawe: whyche lawe was accepted, confirmed, & auctorized by the byſhop of Rome than, as ye may more euidently perceyue by readyng of the texte vnder wrytten.
            
               THys is the boke of the law which Thys was the eightenth aunceſter frō kinge Edward the ſyxtt. Hoel da made at Tuy gwyn ar daf: who dyd abrogat, repeale, and diſanull all the lawes that were made before hym, and ſtabliſhed thys Lawe in all hys dominions.
            
               And thoughe ſince and before there were diuerſe lawes and eſtatutes conſtituted and ordeined, yet the lawe of Hoel da ought rather to be preferred. For at the parliamente holden of the ſame Hoel at the ſayde place, there were. vi. of the moſte prudeut and wyſeſt men of the laye fee of euery Commote in wales. And of the cleargye to the numbre of an. cxl. Byſhoppes archebiſhops, greate doctours and Abbots. And of all thys numbre. xii. of the beſt learned and moſte prudent were ſelected & choſen, yt after conſultation had they might make the law. And the moſt notable learned man in all the contrie was commaunded to endite this lawe, and to forſe and diligently marcke that no ſentence or clauſe therof ſhould be repngnant or contrary to the eccleſiaſticall or ciuill lawe.
            And theſe be the names of the lawe makers.

                  Morgenewe the iudge
                  Kyfnerth hys ſonne
                  Gweir vap Rufaun.
                  Gronoy vap Moridic.
                  Retwyd the iudge.
                  Idic the iudge.
                  Gwybery the olde, of lowe kenyn.
                  Gurthnerth Lhoyt hys ſonne.
                  Gwyn Uaer, he that was owner of Llantathun and of the houſe where they ſate  than in parliament.
                  Gogaune Diuet.
                  Bledrus vap Bleydud.
               
            
            And Bleguaret doctour of both the lawes, & archdeacon of Llandaphe was appointed to be pregnotarie. And immediatlye after that the lawe was fullye

made and perfeicted, Hoel thā brynging wh him a royal rewarde oute of Wales and beynge accompanied wyth Lamberte byſhop of ſaynt Dauies, Mordefe byſhop of Bangor, and Chebure biſhop of. S Aſſaph and Bleyguaret archdeaken of Landaph: toke hys iorney to Rome to haue the ſaid lawe peruſed and examined bi Anaſtaſius thā biſhop there. Which thing aduiſedly done, and euerye parte thereof founde to be conſonant and agreable wyth gods law, was ratified, confirmed, and publiſhed by the biſhop, and called the law of Hoel da. And thys was done in the yere of our Lorde. ixc. xiiii. In wytnes wherof, here be olde verſes which were made at that time.
            
               Explicit editus legibus Liber bene finitus:
               Quem regi ſcripſit languoridus et quoque fuit.
               Hoeli turbe doctor, tunc legis in urbe.
               Gornardo cano, tunc iudice quotidiauo
               Rex dabat ad partem dextram, nam ſumpſerat artem.
            
            And it foloweth a litle after in the text of the ſaid law where certayne caſes are reſolued by theſe wordes.
            There be thre ſondry caſes, where the brother (the father beynge tenaunt in Gauel kynd) ſhal not be perceuer wyth his brother of one venter and one father. The firſt is, whā a man hath iſſue two ſonnes by one wyfe, one before the eſpouſels ſolemniſed, and the other after▪ He that is borne before the eſpouſels, ſhall not be partener wyth him that is borne after. The ſeconde☜ is, whan a Clarke beynge maried hathe iſſue a ſonne, and after that he receyueth the ordre of prieſtehode, hath iſſue an other ſonne: the ſonne that is begoten after the orders ought not to part lands with his brother that was begotten before the orders.
            
               The thyrde is whan a man hath iſſue two ſonnes, whereof the one is mute or dombe: He that is mute ſhall haue no parte of the land wyth hys brother. For that he is not a man perſonable in the lawe to enioye lande, accordynge to the olde ſaide lawe.
            Raro terra datur, homini cui ſermo negatur.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London by Roberte Crowley, dwellyng in Elye rentes in Holburne. The yere of our Lord M. D. L. ★ ☞ ⚜ ☜ ★
❀ ❧ ❀
⚜
         
         
            ¶ Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
         
      
   