
      
         
            
            
            TVVO SERMONS:
PREACHED
AT TWO SEVERAL
VISITATIONS, AT
BOSTON, in the Diocesse and
County of Lincolne.
            
            BY
ROBERT SANDERSON, Bachelour of
Diuinitie, and late fellow of Lincolne
Colledge in OXFORD.
            
               PSAL. 122. 6.
Pray for the peace of Ierusalem: they shall prosper that
loue it.
            LONDON,
Printed by G. P. for Iohn Budge: and are to be sold at his
shop in Pauls Churchyard, at the Signe of the
Greene Dragon. 1622.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
REVEREND FATHER
in God, GEORGE, Lord Bishop
of London, my very singular
good Lord.
            
               My good LORD:
               
            
            
               I Had euer thought, the interest
of but an ordinary friend,
might haue drawne mee to
that, whereto the despight
of a right bitter foe should
not haue driuen mee: till the Fate of these
Sermons hath taught mee my selfe better,
and now giuen me at once a sight both of
my Errour and Infirmitie. The improbity of
some good friends, I had out-stood, who
with all their vexation could neuer preuaile
vpon me for the publishing of but the
former of them: when loe, at length the



restlesse importunity of hard censures, hath
wrung both it, & the fellow of it out of my
hands. So much haue wea stronger sense of
our own wrongs, thē of our friends requests:
and so much are wee forwarder to iustify
our selues, then to gratifie them. How euer,
if (by Gods good blessing vpon them)
these slender labours may lend any help to
aduance the peace & quiet of the Church,
in setling the iudgements of such, as are
more either timorous then they need bee,
or contentious then they should bee: I shall
haue much cause to blesse his gracious prouidence
in it, who, with as much ease, as
sometimes hee brought light out of darknesse,
can out of priuate wrongs worke
publique good. In which hope, I am the
rather cōtent to send them abroad: though
hauing nothing to commend them, but
Truth and Plainenesse. Yet such as they are, I
humbly desire they may passe vnder your
Lordships protection: whereunto I stand
by so many deare names engaged. By the
name of a Visitour; in respect of that Society,
whereof I was of late a member: which
founded by your Lordships godlyRichard Flemming, and Thomas R
                     •
                  therham, Bishops of Lincolne.
                
               Predecessors,


               
hath had plētiful experience of your
Lordships singular both Care and Iustice i
                  •
               
preseruing their Statutes, and maintaining
the rights of their foundation. By the name
of a Diocesan; in respect of the Country,
wherein it hath pleased God to seate mee:
which hath found much comfort in your
Lordships religious and moderate gouernment.
By the name of a Master; in regard
of that dependance I haue vpon your
Lordship by speciall seruice. Which, as it
putteth a boldnesse into mee, to tender this
small pledge of my thankefulnesse to your
gracious acceptance: so it layeth a strong
Obligation vpon me to tender my best prayers
vnto Almighty God for the continuance
and increase of his blessings vpon your
Lordship, to the good of his Church vpon
earth, and your eternall crowne in heauen.
            
               Bootheby Paynell Linc. Nouem. 20. 1621.
            
               Your Lordships Chapleine in
all dutifull obseruance,
ROBERT SANDERSON,
            
         
         
            
            
            AN
ADVERTISEMENT
TO THE READER.
            
               GOod Christian Reader, vnderstand,
that in the deliuery of
these Sermons (because it was
fit I should proportion my speech
as neere as I could, to the houre)
I was forced to cut off here and there part of
what I had penned: which yet now, together
with that which was spoken, I here present to
thy view, distinguished from the rest with this
note (,,) against the lines. Thus much I thought
needfull to aduertise thee (because I see men
are captious more then enough,) lest I should
bee blamed of vnfaithfulnesse, in either adding
any thing vnto, or altring any thing of, that
which I deliuered: which I haue auoided, as
neere as the imperfection both of my Copies,



and memory would permit. Reade without
gall, or preiudice: Let not truth fare the
worse for the Plainenesse: Catch not aduantage
at Syllables and Phrases: Study, and
seeke the Churches Peace: Iudge not anothers
seruant. Let vs all rather pray one for another;
and by our charitable support, helpe to
beare the burdens one of another: and so fulfill
the Law of Christ. Amen, Amen.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FIRST
SERMON.
            
               
                  ROM. 14. 3.
Let not him that eateth, despise him that eateth not:
and let not him that eateth not, iudge him that
eateth.
            
            
               IT cannot be auoyded,§ 1. The occasion. so long as
there is or Weaknesse on earth,17. April 1619.
or Malice in hell, but that scandals
will arise, and differences will
grow in the Church of God.
What through want of Iudgement
in some, of Ingenuity in others, of Charity in almost
all; occasions (God knoweth) of offence are too
soone both giuen and taken: whilest men are apt
to quarrell at trifles, and to maintaine differences
euen about indifferent things. The Primitiue Romane
Church was not a little afflicted with this
disease: For the remedying whereof, Saint Paul
spendeth this whole Chapter. The Occasion, this:



In Rome there liued in the Apostles times many
Iewes: of whom, as well as of the Gentiles, diuers
were conuertedAct. 28. 24. to the Christian Faith, by the
preaching of the Gospel. Now of these new Conuerts,
some better instructed then others, as touching
the cessation of legall Ceremonies, made no
difference of Meates, or of Dayes; but vsed their
lawfull Christian liberty in them both, as things
in their owne nature meerely indifferent: Whereas
others, not so throughlyDe nou
                     •
                   conuersus, & de lege Catholica minùs sufficienter instructus. Lyra.
                catechized as they,
still made difference for Conscience sake, both of
Meates, accounting them Cleane, or Vncleane; and
of Dayes, accounting them Holy, or Seruile, according
as they stood vnder the Leuiticall Law. These
later, Saint Paul callethVers. 1. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , weake in
the Faith: those former then must by the law of
Opposition, be
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Rom. 15. 1. 
               Strong in the Faith.
            
            It would haue become both the one sort,§ 2. Scope, and
the other, (notwithstanding they differed in their
priuate iudgements, yet) to haue preserued the
common peace of the Church, and laboured the
2. Cor. 10, 8 edification, not the ruine one of another: the
strong by affoording faithfull instruction to the consciences
of the weake; and the weake, by allowing
fauourable construction to the strong. But
whilest either measured other by themselues; neither
one nor other didGal. 2, 14. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
as our Apostle elsewhere speaketh, Walke vprightly
according to the truth of the Gospel. Fault and
offences there were on all hands. The Strong faultie,
in Contemning the Weake; the Weake faultie, in



               Contemning the Weake; the Weake faulty in Condemning
the Strong. The strong proudly scorned the
weake, as silly and superstitious; for making scruple
at some such things, as themselues firmely beleeued
were lawfull. The weake rashly censured the
strong, as prophane & irreligious; for aduenturing
on some such things, as themselues deeply suspected
were vnfawfull. The blessed Apostle desirous
all things should bee done in the Church in loue
and1. Cor. 14. 26. 
               vnto edification
               
                  Cai
                        •
                     tan. i
                     •
                   hunc locum. 
               aequa lance, and
                  Bulling. in hunc locum. 
               eodem
charitatis moderamine, as Interpreters speake, taketh
vpon him to arbitrate, and to mediate in the
businesse: and like a iust vmpireIob 9. 33. 
               layeth his hand
vpon both parties, vnpartially sheweth them their
seuerall ouersights, and beginneth to draw them to
a faire & an honourable composition: as thus. The
Strong; hee shall remit somewhat of his superciliousnesse,
in dis-esteeming, & despising the Weake:
and the Weake; he shall abate somewhat of his edge
and acrimony in iudging and condemning the
Strong. If the parties will stand to this order, it
will proue a blessed agreement: for so shall brotherly
loue be maintained, Scandals shall be remoued,
the Christian Church shall be edified, and
Gods name shall be glorified. This is the scope of
my Text, and of the whole Chapter.
            In the three first Verses,§. 3. Coherence, wherof there is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . First, there is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , in the first
Verse; the Proposall of a generall Doctrine as touching
the vsage of weake ones: with whom the
Church is so to deale, as that it neither giue offence



to, nor take offence at, the weakenesse 
                  〈…〉
               .
Him that is weake in the Faith receiue you, but not to
doubtfull disputations. Next, there is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , in the
second Verse, a Declaration of the former generall
proposall by instancing in a particular case, touching
the difference of Meates. There is one man
Strong in the Faith; he is infallibly resolued, there
is no• meatVerse 14. 
               vncleane of it selfe, or (if receiued
with thankefulnesse and sobriety)1. Cor. 10. 23. 
               vnlawfull: and
because hee knoweth hee standeth vpon a sure
groundVerse 2. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , he is confident he may
eate any thing, and he vseth his liberty accordingly,
eating indifferently1. Cor. 10. 27. of all that is set before
him, making no question for conscience sake, One
man beleeueth he may eat all things. There is another
man Weake in the Faith; 
               
                  •
               he standeth yet vnresolued
and doubtfull, whether some kinds of Meates; as
namely; those forbidden in the Law, be cleane; or
he is rather caried with a strong suspition that they
are vncleane: our of which timorousnesse of iudgement,
he chuseth to forbeare those meates, & contenteth
himselfe with the fruits of the earth; Another
who is weake, eateth Hearbs. This is Species Facti;
this the Case. Now the Question is, in this Case
what is to be done, for the auoidance of scandall,
and the maintenance of Christian Charitie? And
this question my Text resolueth in this third Verse:
wherein is contained 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Saint Pauls iudgement;
or his counsell rather, and aduice vpon the Case,
Let not him that eateth, despise, &c. The remainder
of the Verse, and of the Chapter being spent, in



giuing reasons of the iudgement, in this and another
like case, concerning the difference and obseruation
of Dayes.
            I haue made choyce to intreat at this time of
Saint Pauls aduice;§. 4. and Diuision of the Text. as vsefull for this place and auditorie,
and the present assembly. Which aduice, as
the Parties and the Faults are, is also twofold. The
Parties two: He that eateth, that is the Strong; and
he that eateth not, that is the Weake. the Faults likewise
two: The Strong mans fault, that'sLiterally, setting at naught
                        •
                     
                   so it is translated, Luk. 23. 11. and the Latine translation, which Tertul. followed, readeth here fitly to the Greeke, Qui manducat, ne nullificet non monducantem. Tertullian. de ieiun: aduersi
                     ••
                   
                  Psych. cap. 5. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               ▪
               despising of his brothers infirmitie; and the Weake
mans faults, that's 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , iudging of his brothers
liberty. Proportionably, the parts of the aduice,
accommodated to the Parties, and their Faults, are
two. The one, for the Strong; that he despise not,
Let not him that eateth, despise him that eateth not.
The other, for the Weake, that he iudge not, Let
not him that eateth not, iudge him that eateth. Of
which when I shall haue spoken some what on their
generall vse; I shall by Gods assistance proceed by
way of application to enquire how farre the differences
in our Church, for conforming, and not conforming,
agree with the present case of eating, and
not eating: and consequently how farre forth Saint
Pauls aduice in this case of eating and not eating,
ought to rule vs in the cases of conforming, and not
conforming in point of Ceremonie. And first of the
former rule or brand of the aduice, Let not him that
cateth, despise him that eateth not.
               §. 5. Wee must not despise others.
            
            The termes, whereby the Parties are charactered,
He that eateth, and He that eateth not, haue in



the opening of the Case beene already so farre vnfolded;
as that I shall not need any more to remember
you, that by him that eateth, must bee vnderstood
the strong in Faith, and by him that eateth
not, the weake. And so reducing the words ab hypothesiad
Thesin; this part of the Aduice, Let not him
that eateth, despise him that eateth not, beareth sence,
as if the Apostle had said, Let not the strong in faith
despise the weake. Weake ones are easily despised:
Strong ones are prone to despise: and yet despising
is both a grieuous sinne in the despiser; and
a dangerous scandall to the despised. In all which
respects, it was but needfull the holy Ghost should
lesson vs, not to despise one another weaknesse.
Let not him that eateth, despise him that eateth not.
            
            
               Weaknesse and Smalnesse,
               § 6. Though they be neuer so weak, be it in what kind soeuer,
is the fittest obiect to prouoke contempt. As we
trauell by the way, if a fierce Mastiffe set vpon vs,
we thinke it time to looke about, and to bestirre
our selues for defence: but wee take no notice of
the little Curres that barke at vs, but despise them.
When Goliah saw little Dauid make towards him,
1. Sam. 17. the Text saith,1. Sam. 17. 42. 
               He disdained him; for
he was but a youth. And S. Paul charging Timothy
so to behaue himselfe in the Church of God, as
that none should1. Tim. 4. 12▪
                
               despise his youth; implyeth, that
youth is obuious to contempt, and likely enough
to be despised. And thoughEccles. 9. 16. 
               Wisedome be better
then strength; yet Salomon tels vs, the poore mans wisdome
is despised, and his words are not heard, Eccl. 9.
Psalm. 119. 141. 
               I am small, and of no reputation, saith Dauid, Psal.



119. And our Sauiours Caueat in the Gospel is especially
concerning little ones, as most open to
contempt:Matth. 18. 10. 
               Take heed that yee despise not one of
these little ones. But of all other, that weaknesse is
most contemptible, which is seene in the faculties
of the vnderstanding Soule: when men are indeed
weake in apprehension, weake in iudgement, weake
in discretion; or at leastwise are thought so. Farre
from any reall weaknesse this way, or any other,
was our blessed Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ,
Col. 2. 3. 
                  In whom were hid all the treasures of wisedome
and knowledge: yet because vpon conference with
him, he seemed such vnto Herod, not answering
any of his questions, nor that expectation which
the same of his Miracles had raised of him in Herod;
Herod tooke him forsome silly simple fellow,
and accordingly vsed him: for heLuk. 23. 11. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  set him at
nought, & mocked him, & put him in
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  a white coat,
as he had beene some foole, and sent him backe as
he came,  
               Luk. 23. And of this nature is the weaknesse
my Text hath to doe withall: a weaknesse in
iudgement, or as it is vers. 1. a weaknesse in Faith.
Where, by Faith, we are not to vnderstand that
iustifying Faith, whereby the heart of a true beleeuer
layeth fast hold on the gracious promises of
God, and the precious merits of Iesus Christ for
the remission of sinnes: nor by weaknesse in Faith,
that 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , wherewith the Apostles areMat. 8. 26; 14. 31; 16. 8. somtimes
charged; when the Faith of a true beleeuer
is sore shaken with temptations of incredulity and
distrust. But by Faith wee are to vnderstand an



               Fide
                     •
                   hîc significat persuasionem de vsu 
                     •
                  erum indifferentium: per Synecd
                     •
                  chen generis. Piscat. Schol. in Rom. 14. 1. 
               historicall Faith only, which is nothing else but a
firme and secure assent of the iudgement vnto doctrinall
truths in matter of Faith or Life: and by
weaknesse in such faith, a doubtfulnesse and irresolution
of iudgement concerning some diuine
truths appertaining to the doctrine of Faith or
Life; and namely, concerning the iust extent of
Christian liberty, and the indifferent or not indifferent
nature or vse of some things. Which weakenesse
of iudgement in Faith, bewraying it selfe outwardly
in a nice, and scrupulous, and timorous
forbearance of some things, for feare they should
be vnlawfull; which yet in truth are not so, but indifferent:
doth there by expose the person in whom
such weaknesse is, to the contempt and despisings
of such as are of more confirmed and resolued
iudgements, and are stronger in the Faith.
            Weaknesse then is in it selfe contemptible:
               §▪ 7. and we neuer so strong; yet
not more, then Strength is contemptuous. Passiue
contempt is the vnhappinesse of the weake.: but
Actiue the fault of the strong. They that find truly,
or but ouerweeningly conceit in themselues abilities
either of a higher nature, or in a greater measure,
then in other men, be it in any kind whatsoeuer:
it is strange to see, with what scornefull state they
can trample vpon their weaker and inferiour brethren,
and looke vpon them (if yet they will at all
vouchsafe a looke) from aloft, as vpon things below
them! which is properly and literally to despise.
For so much the very words, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                among the
Greekes, and among the Latines Despicere do import.



The Pharisee, it is like, cast such a disdainfull
looke vpon the poore Publicane, when in contempt
he called himLuk. 18. 9. 11. 
               Iste Publicanus: sure I am,
that Parable was spoken of purpose concerning
such as trusted in their owne righteousnes, and
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Luk. 18. 9. 
               despised
others, Luk. 18. And they are euer the likeliest
thus to despise others, that conceit something in
themselues more then others. Wealth, honour,
strength, beautie, birth, friends, alliance, authority,
power, wit, learning, eloquence, reputation, any
trifle; can leauen our thoughts, (partiall as they are
towards our selues) and swell vs, and heaue vs vp
aboue our brethren: and because we thinke we do
ouer-top them; we thinke wee may ouer-looke them
too, and despise them as vulgar and contemptible.
Agar could despise Sarah; the bond-seruant, the
free woman; the maid, her mistresse: onely for a little
fruitfulnesse of the wombe beyond her; because
Ge. 16. 4. 5. 
               she saw that she had conceiued, and her Mistresse
was barren, Gen. 16. All strength and eminencie
then we see, be it in any little sorry thing, is apt to
breed in men a despising of their weaker and meaner
brethren: but none more, then this strength of
knowledge and of faith, wherewith we now deale.
It should bee quite otherwise: our knowledge
should praeferre facem, hold the light before vs, and
helpe vs for the better discouerie of our ignorance;
and so dispose vs to Humility, not Pride. But pride
and selfe-loue is congenitum Malum; it is a close,
and a pleasing, and an inseparable corruption:
which by slie and serpentine insinuations conueyeth



it selfe, as into whatsoeuer else is good, and eminent
in vs, and poysoneth it; so especially into
the endowments of the vnderstanding part. Sharpnesse
of wit, quicknesse of conceit, faithfulnesse of
memory, facility of discourse, propriety of elocution,
concinnitie of gesture, depth of iudgement, variety
of knowledge in Arts and Languages, and what euer
else of like kind; are but as winde to fill the sayles
of our pride, and to make vs swell aboue our brethren,
in whom the like gifts are not, or not in like
eminencie. Scientia inflat, our Apostle might well
say,1. Cor. 8. 1. Quò didici
                        ••
                     e, nisi hoc fermentum, &c. Pers. Satyr. 1. vide Casaub. ibi. 
               Knowledge poffeth vp: 
               And that it doth
so readily and vnmeasurably, that vnlesse there
be the greater measure both of humility to preuent,
and of charity to vent it, it will in short time
breed a dangerous spiritual Tympany in the soule.
A disease, from which the strongest constitutions
that haue beene, haue not beene altogether so free,
but that they haue had, if not a spice of it, yet at
leastwise an inclination vnto it. Euen this our blessed
Apostle, who had so much humility, as to account
himselfe1. Cor. 15. 9. 
               of Apostles the least, but1. Tim. 1. 15. 
               of sinners
the chiefest; was in so great danger2. Cor. 12. 7. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               to be exalted
aboue measure through the abundance of reuelations;
that it was needfull hee should haue a thorne
in the flesh, the messenger of Sathan to buffet him, lest
he should be exalted aboue measure, 2. Cor. 12. No
maruell then, if these new Conuerts, but lately
called by God out of the darknesse of their ignorance,
1. Pet. 2. 9. 
                  into his marueilous great light; and hauing
their vnderstandings well informed, and



their iudgements throughly settled in the Doctrine
and Vse, in the nature and extent of that Euangelicall
Liberty whereinto they were called:
no maruell I say, if these, vpon so sensible a
change, were more then a little distempred with
this swelling aboue their brethren; euen as far as
to Despise them. So hard is it, euen for the most
exercised Christian, not to take knowledge of his
owne Knowledge: or doing so, not to despise and
neglect the infirmities of his lesse-knowing brother.
It was not then without good need, that S.
Paul should become a remembrancer to the strong
in faith, not to despise the weake. And there is as
good need, the very strongest of vs all should remember
it, and take heed of despising euen the very
weakest. This Despising beeing hurtfull both to
the strong, and weake: to the strong, as a grieuous
sinne; and to the weake, as a grieuous scandall.
            
            Despising,§ 8. both for the sinnes sake, first is a sinne in the strong. Admit
thy weake brother were of so shallow vnderstanding
and iudgement, that he might say in strictnes
of truth, what Agur said but in modestie, and that
with an Hyperbole too, Prou. 30. thatProu. 30. 2. 
               surely hee
were more brutish then any man, and that hee had not
in him the vnderstanding of a man: yet the communitie
of nature, and the common condition of humanity,
should be sufficient to free him from thy
contempt. His body was formed out of the same
dust, his soule breathed into him by the same God,
as thine were: and he is thy neighbour. Let his
weaknesse then be what it can be; euen for that relation



of neighbourhood, as he is a man, it is sinne
in thee to despise him,Pro. 14. 21. 
               Hee that despiseth his
Neighbour, sinneth, Prou. 14. But that's not all: He
is not onely thy Neighbour, as a man; but hee is thy
Brother too, as a Christian man. He hath imbraced
the Gospel, he beleeueth in the Sonne of God, hee
is within the pale of the Church, as well as thou:
though he be not so exquisitly seen in some higher
mysteries, nor so thorowly satisfied in some other
points, as thou art. If it haue pleased God to endow
thee with a larger portion of knowledge: thou
 oughtest to consider first, that thou art bound to
bee so much the more thankefull to him that gaue
 it; and then secondly, that it is expected, thou
shouldest doe so much the more good with it; and

               thirdly againe, that thou art charged with so much
the deeper account for it. If the same God haue
dealt these abilities with a more sparing hand to
thy brother: in despising his weakenesse, what other
thing doest thou then euen despise the good
Spirit of God,Ioh. 3. 8. 
               that bloweth where he listeth, and
1. Cor. 1
                     •
                  . 11. 
               giueth to euery one as he listeth? For though there
be1. Cor. 12. 4. 
               diuersities of gifts, (both for substance, and
degree;) yet it is the same Spirit, 1. Cor. 12. And the
contempt that is cast vpon the meanest Christian,
reboundeth vpwards againe, and in the last
resolution reflecteth euen vpon GOD himselfe,
1. Thes. 4. 8. and vpon his Christ. Hee that despiseth,
despiseth not man but GOD; who hath giuen
vnto vs his holy Spirit, 1. Thes. 4. And1. Cor. 8. 12. 
               when
ye sinne so against the Brethren, and wound their weake



consciences, yee sinne against Christ, 1. Cor. 8.
            Thus you see Despising is hurtfull to the despiser,
               § 9. and the Scandall.
as a sinne: it is hurtfull also, as a scandall, to the despised.
And therefore our Sauiour in Math. 18. discoursing
ofMath. 18. 6, &c. 
               not offending little ones; anon varieth
the word, and speaketh ofIbid. 10. 
               not despising
them: as if despising were an especiall and principall
kinde of offending, or scandalizing. And verily
so it is, especially to the Weake. Nothing is
more grieuous to Nature, scarce death it selfe, then
for a man to see himselfe despised.
                  Plaut. in Cistel. Act 4. Scen. 1. 
               Ego illam
anum irridere me vt sinam? Satius est mihi quouis
exitio interire, could he say in the Comedy. It is a
thing that pierceth farre, and sinketh deepe, and
striketh cold, and lyeth heauy vpon the heart: flesh
& bloud will digest any thing with better patience.
The greatArist. lib. 2. Rhet. 2. cap. 2. where hee thus defineth Anger. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  Philosopher, for this reason maketh
Contempt the ground of all Discontent; and sufficiently
proueth it in the second of his Rhetoriques:
there being neuer any thing taken offensiuely,
but sub ratione contemptus; nothing prouoking
to Anger, but what is either truely a contempt,
or at leastwise so apprehended. VVee all
know how tenderly euery one of vs would take it,
but to be neglected by others; to haue no reckoning
at all made of vs; to bee so reputed as if wee
were not, or not worth the looking after
                  Vide opus Adag. Mega
                     ••
                  renses neque tertij ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   quarti. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
as the Oracle said to the Megarenses.
And yet this is but the least degree of Contempt;
a
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Arist, vbi supra.
                
               priuatiue contempt onely. How
tenderly then may wee thinke a weake Christian



would take it; when to this priuatiue he should find
added a
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . ibid. 
               Positiue contempt also? when hee
should see his person, and his weakenesse, not only
not compassioned, but euen taunted, and flouted,
and derided, and made a laughing stocke, and a
iesting theame? when hee should see them striue
to speake and doe such things in his sight and hearing,
as they know will be offensiue vnto him, of
very purpose to vexe, and afflict, and grieue his
tender soule? Certainly for a weake Christian newly
conuerted to the Faith, to bee thus despised; it
were inough, without Gods singularHaue mercy vpon vs, O Lord, haue mercy vpon vs: for wee 
                     〈◊〉
                   exceedingly filled with contempt. Our soule is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that are at ease, and with the contempt of the proud, Psal. 123. 3, 4. 
               mercy and
support, to make him repent his late conuersion,
and reuolt from the Faith, by fearefull and desperate
Apostasie. And hee that by such despising
should thus offend, though butMath. 18. 6. 10. 
               one of the least and
weakest of those that beleeue in Christ: a thousand
times better had it been for him, that he had neuer
beene borne; yea, ten thousand times better that a
Mill-stone had been hung about his necke, and hee cast
into the bottome of the Sea, ere he had done it. Despising
is a grieuous Sinne, in the despiser, in the
Strong: and despising is a grieuous scandall to the
despised, to the Weake. Let not therefore the
Strong despise the Weake. Let not him that eateth,
despise him that eateth not. And th
                  •
               s much for the
former branch of Saint Pauls aduice: the other
followeth. Let not him that eateth not, iudge him that
eateth.
            
            Faults seldome goe single;§ 10. Despising and iudging compared. but by couples at the
least. Sinfull men doe with sinfull prouocations, as



ball-players with the Ball. When the Ball is once
vp, they labour to keepe it vp: right so when an
offence or prouocation is once giuen, it is
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  Et mox. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ; Max. Tyrius 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . tossed
to and fro, the receiuer euer returning it pat vpon
the giuer, and that most times with aduantage; and
so betwixt them they make a shift to preserue a perpetuity
of sinning, & of scandalizing one another.
It is hard to say who beginneth ostener, the
Strong, or the Weake: but whether euer beginneth,
he may be sure the other will follow. If this iudge,
that will despise; if that despise, this will iudge: either
doth his endeuour to cry quittance with other;
and thinketh himselfe not to bee at all in
fault, because the other was first, or more. This
Apostle willing to redresse faults in both; beginneth
first with the strong: & for very good reason
Not that his fault simply considered in it selfe is
greater; (for I take it a certaine truth, that to
Iudge one that is in the right, is a farre greater
fault, considered absolutely without relation to
the abilities of the persons, then to despise one
that is in the wrong:) But because the strong
through the ability of his iudgement ought to
yeeld so much to the infirmitie of his weake brother,
who through the weaknes of his iudgement,
is not so wel able to discern what is fit for him to
doe; what in most other contentions is expected,
should be done in this: not hee that is most in
fault, but he that hath most wit, should giue ouer
first. I
                     •
                  deed in reason, the more faulty is rather
bound to yeeld: but if hee will be vnreasonable,



(as most times it falleth out,) and not doe it;
then in discretion, the more able should do it: as
Gen. 13. 9. 11. 
                  Abraham in discretion yeelded the choise to
his Nephew Lot vpon the contention of their
Herdsmen, which in reason Lot should rather
haue yeelded vnto him. But where both are
faulty, as it is not good to stand debating who
began first; so it is not safe to straine courtesie
who shall end, and mend first. In the case of my
Text, both were faulty: and therefore our Apostle
would haue both mend. He hath school'd the
Strong, and taught him his lesson, not to despise
anothers infirmitie; Let not him that eateth, despise
him that eateth not. Now the Weake must take out
his lesson too, not to iudge anothers liberty; Let
not him that eateth not, iudge him that eateth.
            
            I will not trouble you with other significations
of the word;§ 11. Wee must not iudge others. to Iudge, as it is heere taken, is as
much as toNe condemnato. Beza.
                
               Condemne: and so the word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
is often taken in the worser sence for 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Tropically,
by a
                     Piscator in Schol, ad hunc locum. 
                  Synecdoche gener is, say Scholiasts:
and they say true. But it is a Trope, for which
both in this, andEuill manners haue bin the spoiling of many good words; as 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Tyrannus, Sophista, 
                           •
                        atro, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , Venenum, Magus, and in our English tongue, Knaue, Villaine, Churle, &c. See Minsheu Verstegan, &c.
                   in diuers other words, wee
are not so much beholden to good Arts, as to bad
manners. Things that are good, or indifferent,
we commonly turn to ill, by vsing them the worst
way: whence it groweth, that words of good or
indifferent signification, in time degenerate so
farre, as to be commonly taken in the worst sence.


               
But this by the way. The fault of these weake ones
in the case in hand, was, that measuring other
mens actions, and consciences, by the modell of
their owne vnderstandings, in their priuate censures
they rashly passed their iudgements vpon,
and pronounced peremptory sentence against
such, as vsed their liberty in some things, concerning
the lawfulnesse whereof themselues were not
satisfied; as if they were loose Christians, carnall
professors, nomine tenus Christiani, men that would
not sticke to doe any thing, and such as made either
none at all, or else very little conscience of
their actions. This practice my Text disalloweth,
and forbiddeth: and the rule hence for vs is plaine
and short, We must not iudge others. The Scriptures
are expresse;Math. 7. 1. 
               Iudge not, that yee be not iudged,
Math. 7.1. Cor. 4. 5. 
               Iudge nothing before the time, &c.
1. Cor. 4.Rom. 2. 1. 
               Thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoeuer
thou art that iudgest, Rom. 2. AndIom. 4. 11. 
               if thou
iudgest, thou art not a doer of the Law, but a Iudge,
Iam. 4.
            
               Not that it is vnlawful to exercise ciuill iudgement,§ 12. This kinde of iudging being
or to passe condemning sentence vpon
persons orderly and legally conuicted, for such
as haue calling & authoritie thereunto in Church
or Commonwealth: for this publique politique
iudgement is commandedExod. 22. 9. 2. Chron. 19. 6. Rom. 13. 4. and elsewhere. in the Word of
God; and reason sheweth it to bee of absolute
necessitie for the preseruation of States and
Commonwealthes. Nor that it is vnlawfull secondly,
to passe euen our priuate censures vpon



on the outward actions of men; when the Law
of God is directly transgressed, and the transgression
apparant from the euidence either of the
fact it selfe, or of some strong signes and presumptions
of it. For it is Stupiditie, & not Charitie, to
be credulous against sence, Charitie is1. Cor. 13. verse 5. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  ingenuous,
and will
                     Ibid. vers. 7. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  beleeue any thing, though more
then reason: but charitie must not beAs Walter Mapes sometimes Archdeacon of Oxenford, relating the grosse Simony of the Pope for confirming the election of Reginald, bastard sonne to loceline Bishop of Sarum, into the See of Bathe; concludeth the narration thus: Sit lamen domina mater
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         nostra Roma baculus in aquâ fractus; & absit credere, quae videmus. Mahap de nugis Curialium distinct. 1. cap. 22. 
                  seruile,
to beleeue anything against reason: shall any
charitie binde mee to thinke the Crow is
white, or the Blacke-Moore beautifull? Nor yet
thirdly, that all sinister suspicions are vtterly vnlawfull,
euen there where there wanteth euidence
either of fact or of great signes: if our suspicions
proceed not from any corrupt affections, but
onely from aCùm de
                        •
                     emus aliquibus malis adhibere remedium siue nostris, siue alienis, expedit ad hoc, vt securius remedium apponatur, quod supponatur id quod est deterius: quia remedium quod est efficax contra maius malum, multò magis est efficax contra minus malum, Aquin. secundae secundae qu. 60. art. 4. ad 3. 
                  charitable iealousie of those ouer
whom we haue especiall charge, or in whom wee
haue speciall interest, in such sort as that it may
concerne vs to admonish, reproue, or correct
them when they doe amisse: so was Iob
                  Iob. 1. 5. suspicious
of his sonnes, for sinning and cursing God in
their hearts. But the iudgement here & elsewhere
condemned is; either first, when in our priuate
thoughts or speeches, vpon slender presumptions
wee rashly pronounce men as guilty of committing
such or such sinnes, without sufficient euidence
either of fact or pregnant signes that they
haue committed them. Or secondly, when vpon



some actionsAperta non ita reprehendamus, vt de sanita
                        •
                     e desperemus. Gloss Ordin. in Rom. 14. 13. Non, quicquid reprehendendum, etiam damnandum est. Sen. l. 6. de benef. cap. 39. vndoubtedly sinfull, as blasphemy,
adultery, periury, &c. we too seuerely censure
the Persons either for the future, as Reprobates
and Castawales, and such as shall bee certainely
damned; or at leastwise for the present, as Hypocrites,
and vnsanctified and prophane, and such as
are in the state of damnation: not considering
into what fearefull sinnes it may please God to
suffer, not onely his
                     As Paul, Mary Magdalene, &c. 
                  chosen ones before Calling,
but euen his
                     As Dauid, Peter, &c. 
                  holy ones too after Calling,
sometimes to fall; for ends most times vnknown
to vs, but euer iust and gracious in him. Or thirdly,
when for want either of charitie or knowledge,
(as in the present case of this Chapter) we interpret
things for the worst to our brethren: and
condemne them of sinne for such actions, as are
not directly, and in themselues necessarily sinfull;
but may (with due circumstances) be performed
with a good conscience, and without sinne. Now
all iudging and condemning of our brethren in any
of these kindes is sinfull and damnable; and that in
very many respects: especially these foure; which
may serue as so many weighty reasons, why wee
ought not to iudge one another. The Vsurpation,
the Rashnesse, the Vncharitablenesse, and the scandall
of it.
            First,§ 13. 1. Vnlawful. it is an Vsurpation. Hee that is of right to
iudge, must haue calling and commission for it.
Exod. 2. 14. 
               Quis constituit te? sharpely replyed vpon Moses,
Exod. 2. Who made thee a Iudge? andLuk. 12. 14. 
               Quis constituit
me? reasonably alledged by our Sauiour,



               Luk. 12. Who made me a Iudge? Thou takest too
much vpon thee then, thou sonne of man, whosoeuer
thou art that iudgest: thus saucily to thrust thy
selfe into Gods seate, and to
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ; &c. Chrysoft. in Gen. hom. 42. 
               inuade his Throne.
Remember thy selfe wel, and learne to know thine
owne ranke. Quis tu?
               Iam. 4. 12. 
               Who art thou that iudgest
another? Iam. 4. or Who art thou that iudgest anothers
seruant? in the next following verse to my Text.
As if the Apostle had said; What art thou? or
what hast thou to do to iudge him thatRom. 14. 4. 
               standeth
or falleth to his owne Master? Thou art his fellow-seruant,
not his Lord. He hath another Lord, that
can and will iudge him; who is thy Lord too, and
can and will iudge thee: for so he argueth anon at
vers. 10. Why doest thou iudge thy brother? We shall all
stand before the Iudgement-feat of Christ. 
               God
hath reserued
                     M
                           •
                        li operis vindictam, B
                           •
                        ni gloriam, vtriusque Iudicium. three Prerogatiues royall to
himselfe;Isa. 47. 8. 
                  Vengeance,
                  Deu. 32. 35; Rom 12. 19. 
                  Glory, andRom. 14. 4. 10; Iam. 4. 11. 12. 
                  Iudgement.
As it is not safe for vs then to encroach
vponTres hominū species maximam Deo faciunt iniuriam: Superbi, qui auferunt ei. Gloriam; Iracundi, qui Vindictam; Rigidi, qui Iudicium.
                   Gods royalties in either of the other
two; Glory, or Vengeance: so neither in this of
Iudgement; Dominus iudicabit,
                  Heb. 10. 30. 
                  The Lord himselfe
will iudge his people, Heb. 10. It is flat vsurpation
in vs to iudge: and therefore wee must not
iudge.
            Secondly,§ 14. 11. Rash. it is Rashnesse in vs. A Iudge must
Et nunc Reges, intelligite: erudimini, qui iudicatis terram, Psalm. 2. 10. Stiudicas, cognosce, Sen. in Med. Act. 2. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Phocylid.
                vnderstand the truth, both for matter ofEt Formam, & Causam. Normam, secundùm quam; & Causam, de quâ statuendum. Ad Factum haec pertinet; illa ad Ius; ad illam, Peritiâ opus est; ad hanc Prudentiâ.
                
               Fact,
and for point of Law; and he must be sure he is in



the right for both, before he proceed to sentence:
or else he will giue rash iudgement. How then dare
any of vs vndertake to sit as Iudges vpon other
mens consciences, wherewith wee are so little acquainted,
that we are indeed but too much vnacquainted
with our owne? We are not able to search
the depth of our owneIer. 17. 9. I know nothing by my selfe; yet am I not hereby iustified: but he that iudgeth me is the Lord 1. Cor. 4. 4. If our heart condemne vs, God is greater then our heart, and knoweth all things, 1. Ioh. 3. 21. Latet me sacultas mea, quae in me est; vt animus meus de viribus suis ipse se interrogans, non facilè sibi credendum existiment, quia & quod inest plerunque occultum est. Aug. lib. 10. Confes. cap. 32. 
               wicked and deceitfull
hearts; and to ransacke throughly the many secret
windings and turnings therein: how much lesse
then are we able to fadome the bottomes of other
mens hearts, with any certaintie to pronounce of
them either good or euill? Wee must then leaue
the iudgement of other mens spirits, and hearts,
and reines; to him that isHeb. 12. 9. 
               the Father of spirits, and
alonePsalm. 7. 9; & 26. 2; Ier. 11. 20; & 17. 10; & 20. 12; Reu. 2. 23. 
               searcheth the hearts and reines: before
whose eyes all things areHeb. 4. 13. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , as the
word is most Emphaticall, Heb. 4. Wherefore our
Apostles precept elsewhere is good to this purpose,
1. Cor. 4.1. Cor. 4. 5. 
               Iudge nothing before the time,
vntill the Lord come, who both will bring to light the
hidden things of darknesse, and will make manifest the
counsels of the hearts. 
               Vnlesse 
                     •
                  e be able to bring
these hidden things to light, and to make manifest
these counsels; it isTemeritas est, damna
                        •
                     e quod nescias. Sen. in Epist.
                   
                  rashnes in vs to iudge:
and therefore we must not iudge.
            
            Thirdly,§ 15. III. Vncharitable; this iudging is vncharitable. Charity
is not easily suspicious; but vpon iust cause: much
lesse then censorious, and peremptorie. Indeede



when we are to iudge ofIn rerum iuditio debet aliquis niti ad hoc; vt interpretetur vnū. quodque secundum quod est: in iudicio autem personarum, vt interpretetur in melius, Aquin, 2a secundae qu 60. art. 4. ad 3. and he giueth substantiall reason for it, ibi in resp. ad 2. 
               Things, it is wisedome
to iudge of them secundùm quod sunt, as neere as we
can, to iudge of them iust as they are, without any
sway or partiall inclination either to the right
hand, or to the left. But when we are to iudge of
Men, and their Actions; it is not altogether so:
there the rule of Charity must take place,Glossa Ord. in hunc locū; & Theologi passim. Semper quod dubium est, humanitas inclinat ad melius, Sen. in Epist. 
               Dubia
in meliorem partem sunt interpretanda. Vnlesse wee
see manifest cause to the contrary, we ought euer
to interpret what is done by others, with as much
fauour as may be. To erre thus is better, then to
hit right the other way; because this course
isError charitatis, salutaris error. safe, and secureth vs as fromMelius est, quòd aliquis frequenter fallatur, habens bonam opinionem de malo homine, quàm quòd rariús fallatur, habens malam opinionem de bono homine: quia ex hoc fit in
                        •••
                     ia alicui; non autem ex primo. Aquin. 2a secundae qu. 60. art. 4. ad 1. 
                  iniuring others,
so from endangering our selues: whereas
in iudging ill, though right, we are stillAequum licet statuerie, haud aequus fuit. Sen. in Med. Act. 2. vniust

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the euent onely, and not our
choyce freeing vs from wrong iudgement. True
Charity is ingenuous; it1. Cor. 13. 5. 
               thinketh no euill, 1. Cor.
13. how farre then are they from charity, that are
euer suspicious, and thinke nothing well? For vs, let
it be our care to maintaine charity; and to auoid, as
farre as humane frailty will giue leaue, euen sinister
suspicions of our brethrens actions: or if through
frailtie we cannot that, yet let vs not from light suspicions
fal into vncharitable censures: let vs at leastwise suspend ourSi suspiciones vitare non possumus, quia homines sumus: iudicia tamen, id est, definitiuas sirmasque, sententias continere debemus, Gloss. Ordin. in 1. Cor. 4. 
               definitiue iudgement, and not
determine too peremptorily against such, as do not
in euery respect iust as we doe, or as we would haue
them doe, or as we thinke they should doe. It is



               vncharitable for vs to iudge, and therefore we must
not iudge.
            Lastly,§ 16. IIII. Scandalous. there is Scandall in iudging. Possibly he
that is iudged, may haue that strength of faith and
charity; that though rash vncharitable censures lie
thicke in his way, he can lightly skip ouer all those
stumbling blockes, and scape a fall. Saint Paul had
such a measure of strength;1. Cor. 4. 3. 
               With me it is a very
small thing, saith he, that I should be iudged of you, or
of humane iudgement, 1. Cor. 4. If our iudging light
vpon such an obiect; it is indeed no scandall to him:
but that's no thankes to vs. Wee are to esteeme
things by their natures, not euents: and therefore
we giue a scandall, if we iudge; notwithstanding he
that is iudged take it not as a scandall. For, that
iudging is in it selfe a scandall, is cleare from vers. 13.
of this Chapter; Let vs not therefore, saith S. Paul,
iudge one another any more, but iudge this rather, that
no man put a stumbling blocke, or an occasion to fall in
his brothers way. And thus wee see foure maine
Reasons against this iudging of our brethren.
1. We haue no right to iudge; and so our iudging
is vsurpation. 2. We may erre in our iudgements;
and so our iudging is rashnesse. 3. We take things
the worst way when we iudge; and so our iudging
is vncharitable. 4. Wee offer occasion of offence
by our iudging; and so our iudging is scandalous.
Let not him therefore that eateth not, iudge him that
cateth.
               § 17. Application to the case in our Church.
            
            And so I haue done with my Text in the generall
vse of it: wherein we haue seene the two faults



of despising, and of iudging our brethren layd open;
and the vglinesse of both discouered. I now descend
to make such Application, as I promised,
both of the case and rules; vnto some differences,
and to some offences giuen and taken in our
Church in point of Ceremony. The Case ruled in
my Text was of eating, and not eating: the Differences
which some maintaine in our Church, are
many in the particular; (as of kneeling, and not
kneeling; wearing, and not wearing; crossing, and not
crossing, &c.) but all these, and most of the rest of
them, may be comprehended in grosse vnder the
tearmes of conforming, and not conforming. Let vs
first compare the cases; that hauing found wherein
they agree, or disagree, we may therby iudge how
farre Saint Pauls aduice in my Text ought to rule
vs, for not despising, for not iudging one another.
There are foure speciall things, wherein if we compare
this our Case with the Apostles; in euery of
the foure we shall find some agreement, and some
disparity also; 1. The nature of the matter: 2. The
abilities of the persons: 3. Their seuerall Practice about
the things: and 4. Their mutuall carriage one
towards another. And first, let vs consider how
the two cases agree in each of these.
            First,§ 18. Agreement betwixt the two Cases. the matter whereabout the eater and the
not-eater differed in the Case of the Romanes, was in
the nature of it indifferent: so it is betweene the
conformer, and not-conformer in our Case. As there

               fish, and flesh, and herbes were meerely indifferent;
such as might be eaten, or not eaten without sinne:



so here Cap, and Surplis, Crosse, and Ring, and the
rest, are things meerely indifferent; such as (in regard
of their owne nature) may be vsed or not vsed
without sinne; as being neither expresly commanded,
nor expresly forbidden in the Word of
God.
            Secondly, the persons agree. For as there, so here 
also; some are strong in faith, some weake. There
are many, whose iudgements are vpon certaine
and infallible grounds assured and resolued, and
that certitudine Fidei, that Cappe, and Surplis, and
Crosse, and the rest, are things lawfull, and such as
may be vsed with a good Conscience. There are
some others againe, who through ignorance, or custome,
or preiudice, or otherwise weakned in their
iudgements; cannot (or will not) bee perswaded,
that these things are altogether free form superstition
and Idolatry: nor consequently, the vse of
them from sinne.
            Thirdly, the practice of the persons are much alike.
As there, the strong did vse his liberty according
to the assurance of his knowledge, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
and did eate freely without scruple; and the weake
did forbeare to eate, because of his doubting and
irresolution: So here, most of vs in assured confidence
that we may weare, and crosse, and kneele,
and vse the other Ceremonies and Customes of our
Church, doe willingly, and ex animo conforme
our selues thereunto; yet some there are, who out
of I know not what nicenesse and scruplositie
make dainty of them, and either vtterly refuse conformity,



or at leastwise desire respite, till they can
better informe themselues.
            
            Lastly, there is some correspondence also in the
fauie Carriage of the parties one towards another.
For as there the eater despised the not-eater;
and the not eater iudged the eater: so here, it cannot
be denied, but that some Conformers (although
I hope farre the lesser, I am sure farre the worser
sort,) doe despise and scandalize the non-Conformers
more then they haue reason to do, or any discreet
honest man will allow. But is it not most certaine
also, that the non-Conformers (but too generally,
yea, and the better sort of them too, but too
often and much) do passe their censures with marueilous
great freedome; and spend their iudgements
liberally vpon, and against the Conformers?
Hitherto the Cases seeme to agree. One would
thinke, mutatis mutandis, the Apostles rule would
as well fit our Church and Case, as the Romane; and
should as well free the non-Conformers from our
Contempt, as vs from their Censures. Let not him
that conformeth, despise him that conformeth not:
and let not him that conformeth not, iudge him that
conformeth.
            But if you will please to take a second surview of
the foure seuerall particulars,§ 19. Difference betwixt thē, l. in the Matter. wherein the Cases
seemed to agree; you shall find very much disparitie
and disproportion betwixt the two Cases in
each of the foure respects. In the case of my Text,
the matter of difference among them, was not onely
indifferent in the nature of it; but it was also left



as indifferent for the vse: the Church (perhaps) not
hauing determined any thing positiuely therein;
at least no publike authoritie hauing either enioyned,
or forbidden, the vse of such or such meates.
But in the Case of our Church it is farre otherwise.
Cappe, Surplis, Crosse, Ring, and other Ceremonies,
which are the Matter of our differences, though
they be things indifferent for their nature, and in
themselues: yet are not so for their vse, and vnto vs.
If the Church had beene silent, if Authoritie had
prescribed nothing herein; these Ceremonies had
then remained for their vse, as they are for their
nature, indifferent: Lawfull, and such as might be
vsed without sinne; and yet Arbitrary, and such as
might bee also forborne without sinne. But men
must grant (though they be vnwilling, if yet they
will be reasonable) that euery particular Church

                  Article 20. agreeably to the confessions of other Protestant Churches. hath power, for
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 1. Cor. 14 20. 
               decencie and orders sake, to
ordaine and constitute Ceremonies. Which being
once ordained, and by publike authoritie enioyned,
cease to be indifferent for their vse, though
they remaine still so for their nature: and of indifferent
become so necessary, that neither may a man
without sinneConstit. & Canon. 30. 
               refuse them, where authority requireth;§ 20. The maine obiection, from Christian liberty, answered:
nor vse them, where Authority restraineth
the vse.
            Neither is this accession of Necessity, any impeachment
to Christian Liberty; orEx 1. Cor. 7. 35. 
               insnaring of
mens consciences: asLincolnsh. Abridg. pag. 34. some haue obiected. For
then do we ensnare mens consciences by humane
Constitutions, when we thrust them vpon men as



if they were diuine; and bind mens consciences to
them, immediatly, as if they were immediate parts
of Gods worship, or of absolute necessitie vnto saluation.
This Tyranny and Vsurpation ouer mens
Consciences, the
                  Mar. 7. 8, &c. Pharises of old did, and the
Church of Rome at this day doth exercise, and wee
iustly hate it in her:
                  Conc. Trident. Sess. 7. Can. 13; In Spiritum Sanctum blasphemant, qui sacros Canones violant. 25. qu. 1. Violatores.
                equalling, if notCalumnia est, quam ex hoc loco extrudunt Haeretici, cuiuis fas esse scrutari Scripturas: multò verò etiam magis Papae atque Conciliorum excutere verba, & sentetias. Lorin. in Act. 17. 11. preferring
her Constitutions to the Lawes of God. But
our Church (God be thanked) is farre from any
such impious presumption: and hath sufficiently

                  Constit. &c. Can. 74; Artic. 20 Act for vniformity; and Treat. of Ceremonies prefixed to the Booke of Cō
                  mon Prayer. declared her selfe by solemne protestation, enough
to satisfie any ingenuous impartiall iudgement,
that by requiring obedience to these ceremoniall
Constitutions, she hath no other purpose, then
to reduce allWithout preiudice to the liberty of other Churches. See Praef. 
                        •
                     e Com. Booke.
                
               her children to an orderly vniformitie
in the outward worship of God; so farre is she
from seeking to draw any opinion, either of diuine
               The Church ought not to enforce any thing besides the holy Writ, to be beleeued for necessity of saluation. Artic. 20. 
               necessity vpon the Constitution; or of effectuall holinesse
vpon the Ceremony. And as for the preiudice
which seemeth to be hereby giuen to Christian
liberty: it is so slender a conceit, that it seemeth to
bewray in the obiecters a desire, not so much of
satisfaction, as cauill. For first, the liberty of a Christian
to all indifferent things, is in the Mind and
Conscience: and is then infringed; when the Conscience
is bound, and streitned, by imposing vpon
it an opinion of doctrinall Necessity. But it is no
wrong to the Liberty of a Christian mans Conscience,
to bind him to outward obseruance for Orders
sake, and to impose vpon him a Necessitie of
Obedience. Which one distinction, of Doctrinall


               
and Obedientiall Necessitie, well weighed, and
rightly applyed, is of it selfe sufficient to cleare all
doubts in this point. For, to make all restraint of
the outward man in matters indifferent an impeachment
of Christian Liberty; what were it else,
but euen to bring flatSee Conference at Hampton Court. p. 70. 71. 
               Anabaptisme and Anarchy
into the Church? and to ouerthrow all bond of
subiection and obedience to lawfull Authority? I
beseech you consider, wherein can the immediate
power and authority of Fathers, Masters, and other
Rulers ouer their inferiours consist; or the due
obedience of inferiours be shewne towards them:
if not in these Indifferent and Arbitrary things?
For, things absolutely Necessary, as commanded by
God, we are bound to doe; whether humane Authority
require them, or no: and things absolutely
Vnlawfull, as prohibited by God, we are bound not
to doe; whether humane Authoritie forbid them,
or no. There are none other things left then, wherein
to expresse properly the Obedience due to superiour
Authority, then these Indifferent things.
And if aSee Sam. Collins Sermon on 1. Tim. 6. 3. pag. 44. &c. Father or Master haue power to prescribe
to his child or seruant in Indifferent things;
and such restraint be no way preiudiciall to Christian
Liberty in them: Why should any man, either
deny the like power to Church-Gouernours,
to make Ecclesiasticall Constitutions concerning indifferent
Things? or interpret that power to the
preiudice of Christian Liberty? And againe Secondly,
Men must vnderstand, that it is an Errour
to thinke Ceremonies and Constitutions to be things
meerely Indifferent: I meane in the generall. For



howsoeuer euery particular Ceremony be indifferent;
and euery particular Constitution
               Artic. 34. arbitrary
and alterable; yet that there should be some Ceremonies,
it is necessary, Necessitate absoluta, in as
much as no outward worke can bee performed
without Ceremoniall circumstances, some or other:
and that there should be some Constitutions
concerning them, it is also necessary (though not
simply & absolutely, as the former; yet ex hypothesi,
and)See Caluin. li. 4. Instit. cap. 10. § 27 
               necessitate conuenientiae. Otherwise, since
some Ceremonies must needes be vsed; euery Parish,
nay eueryQuot capita, tot Schismata. Hieronym.
                
               Man would haue his owne fashion
by himself, as his humor led him: wherof what
other could be the issue, but infinit distraction, and
vnorderly confusion in the Church? And againe
thirdly, to returne their weapon vpon themselues; If
euery restraint in indifferent things be iniurious to
Christian Liberty: then themselues are iniurious
no lesse by their negatiue restraint from some Ceremonies,

                  Like that, Col. 2. 21. Touch not, taste not, handle not. 
               Weare not, Crosse not, Kneele not, &c. then
they would haue the world beleeue our Church is
by her positiue restraint vnto these Ceremonies of
wearing, and crossing, & kneeling, &c. Let indifferent
men iudge, nay let thēselues that are parties iudge,
whether is more iniurious to Christian Liberty;
publike Authority by mature aduice commanding,
what might be forborne, or priuate spirits through
humorous dislikes, forbidding what may be vsed:
the whole Church imposing the vse, or a few Brethren
requiring the forbearance; of such things, as are otherwise
and in themselues equally indifferent for
vse, or for forbearance.
            
               
But they say,§. 21. And the purpose and practice of our Church herein iustified. our Church maketh greater matters
of Ceremonies then thus; and preferreth them
euen before the most necessarie duties of preaching,
and administring the Sacraments: in as much
as they are imposed vpon Ministers vnder paine
of Suspension and Depriuation from their Ministeriall
Functions and Charges. First, for actuall Depriuation; 
I take it, vnconforming Ministers haue no
great cause to complaine. Our Church, it is well
knowne, hath not alwayes vsed that rigour shee
might haue done. Where she hath bin forced to
proceede as farre as depriuation; shee hath ordinarily
by her faire, and flow, and compassionate
proceedings therein, sufficiently manifested her
vnwillingnesse thereto: and declared her selfe a
Mother euery way indulgent enough to such ill-nurtured
children, as will not be ruled by her. Secondly,
those that are suspended or depriued; suffer
it but iustly for their obstinacie and contempt. For
howsoeuer they would beare the world in hand,
that they are the onely per secuted ones, and that they
suffer for their consciences: yet in truth, they doe
but abuse the credulitie of the simple therein; and
herein (as in many other things) iumpe with the
Papists, whom they would seeme aboue all others
most abhorrent from. For as Seminary Priests and
Iesuites giue it out, they are martyred for their

                  Pro inficiatione pontificatus faeminei. Aquipont. in resp. ad Solm. de Antichristo, Thes. 15. Speaking of the Priests executed in the Raigne of Qu. Elizabeth.
                religion; when the very truth is, they are

                  See Donnes Pseudo-Martyr per totum; especially, c. 5. &c.
                iustly executed for their prodigious Treasons,
& felonious or treacherous practises against lawful
Princes and Estates: So the Brethren pretend they



are persecuted for their consciences; when they are
indeed, but iustly censured for their obstinate and
pertinacious contempt of lawfull authoritie. For,
it is not the refusall of these Ceremonies they are
depriued for, otherwise then as the matter wherein
they shew their contempt: it is theThe practise of our Church sufficiently confirmeth this: which censureth no man for the bare omission of some kinde of Rites and Ceremonies now and then; where it may be presumed by the parties cheerefull and generall conformity otherwise that such omission proceedeth not either from an opinatiue dislike of the Ceremony imposed, or from a timorous and obsequious humouring of such as doe dislike it. Whosoeuer willingly, and purposely doth openly breake, &c. Artic. 34. 
               Contempt
it selfe, which formally and properly subiecteth
them to iust Ecclesiasticall Censure of Suspension
or Depriuation. And contempt of Authority, though
in the smallest matter, deserueth no small punishment:
all authoritie hauing beene euer sollicitous
(as it hath good reason) aboue all things to vindicate
and preserue it selfe from Contempt; by inflicting
sharpe punishments vpon contemptuous persons
in the smallest matters, aboue all other sorts
of offenders in any degree whatsoeuer. Thus haue
wee shewed and cleered the first and maine difference
betwixt the Case of my Text, and the Case
of our Church, in regard of the Matter: the
things whereabout they differed, being euery way
indifferent; ours not so.
            And as in the Matter;
               §. 22. I. In the Persons. so there is secondly much
oddes in the condition of the Persons. The refusers
in the Case of my Text, being truely weake in the
Faith; as beeing but lately conuerted to the Christian
Faith, and not sufficiently instructed by the
Church in the doctrine and vse of Christian Liberty


               
in things indifferent: Whereas with our refusers
it is much otherwise. First, they are not new 
               Pr
                     •
                  selytes; but men borne, and bred, and brought
vp in the bosome of the Church: yea many, and
the chiefest of them, such as haue taken vpon them
the Calling of the Ministery, and the Charge of
Soules, and the Office of teaching & instructing others.
And such men should not be weakelings. Secondly,
ours are such as take themselues to haue
farre more knowledge and vnderstanding, and insight
in the Scriptures, and all diuine learning, then
other men: such as betweene pitie and scorn seeme
most to wonder at the ignorance and simplicity of
the vulgar, and to lament (which is, God knoweth,
lamentable enough; though not comparable
to what it was within not many yeeres since:) the
want of knowledge, and the vnsufficiency of some
of the Clergie in the Land. And with what reason
should these men expect the priuiledge of weake
ones? Thirdly, our Church hath sufficiently declared 
and published the innocency of her
purpose and meaning in enioyning the Ceremonies:
not so onely; but hath beene content
to heare, and receiue, and admit the obiections
and reasons of the refusers; and hath taken paines
to answere and satisfie to the full all that euer yet
could be said in that behalfe. And therefore it is
vanity for these men (or their friends in their behalfe)
to alledge weakenesse; where al good meanes
haue beene plentifully vsed for full information in
the points in doubt. Lastly, vpon the premises it 


               
doth appeare that the weakenesse of our Brethren,
pretended by those that are willing to speake fauorably
of them, proceedeth for the most part not so
much out of simple ignorance, arising from the defect
either of vnderstanding or meanes; as out of
an ignorance at the best in some degree of wilfulnesse
and affectation, in not seeking, or not admitting
such ingenuous satisfaction, as they might
haue by reason: if not out of the poison of corrupt
and carnall affections (as they giue vs sometimes
but too much cause to suspect) of pride, of singularitie,
of enuy, of contention, of factious admiring
some mens persons. By which, and other like partiall
affections, mens iudgements become oftentimes
so blinded; that of vnwilling at the first, they
become at length vnable to discerne things with
that freedome and ingenuity they should. And so
the Cases differ in regard of the Persons.
            They differ thirdly in the practice of the Persons.§. 23. III. In their practice.
There the Strong did eate, because hee was
well assured he might doe it, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                in the Verse
before my Text: and the Weake did no more but
forbeare eating; as indeed he might doe, no authoritie
interposing to the contrary. But heere, we
conforme, not onely because we know we may lawfully
doe it; but for that we know we must of
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Rom. 13. necessitie
doe it, as bound thereunto in obedience to
lawfull authority, and in theNot onely for wrath, but also for conscience sake, Ibid.
                
               conscience we ought
to make of such obedience. And the refusers doe
not onely de facto, not conforme; to the contempt
of authoritie, and the scandall of others: but they



stand in it too, and trouble the peace of the Church
by their restlesse Petitions, and Supplicatio
                     •
                  s, and
Admonitions, and other publications of the reasons
and grounds of their such refusall. And verily,
this Country and County▪
                   hath been not the least
busie in these factious and tumultuous courses:
both in troubling our most gracious, iudicious,
and religious Soueraigne with theirMeditations on the Lords Prayer, pag. 12. in the Margent. 
                  petitions;
and also in publishing their reasons, in a
Booke called The Abridgement printed 1605.
to their owne shame, and the shame of their
Countrey. He who (as I haue beene informed)
was thought to haue had a chiefe hand in the
collecting of those reasons, and printing of that
booke; was for his obstinate refusall of conformitie
iustly depriued from his Benefice in this Diocesse,
and thereupon relinquished his Ministerie
for a time, betaking himselfe to another Calling,
so depriuing the Church and people of GOD
of the fruit and benefit of those excellent gifts
which were in him. But since that time he hath,
vpon better and more aduised iudgement, subscribed
and conformed: and the Church like an
indulgent Mother hath not onely receiued him
into her bosome againe; but hath restored him
too, though not to the same, yet to a Benefice
elsewhere of farre better value.
            
            Lastly,§ 24. IIII. In their behauiour. there is difference in the faulty carriage
of the persons: and that on both parts; especially
on ours. For though our Non-conforming Brethren
condemne vs with much liberty of speech



and spirit, hauing yet lesse reason for it then the
weake Romanes had (for the Strong among them
might haue forborne some things for the Weake's
sake; and it would well haue become them for the
auoiding of scandall so to haue done; which we
cannot doe without greater scandall in the open
contempt of lawfull Authoritie:) yet wee doe not
despise them, (I meane with allowance from the
Church; if particular men doe more then they
should, it is their priuate fault, and ought not to be
imputed to vs, or to our Church) but vse all good
meanes we can to draw them to moderate courses
and iust obedience; although they better deserue
to be despised then the Weake Romanes did: they
being truely Weaks, ours Obstinate; they Timorous,
ours also Contemptuous.
            
            Now these differences are opened betwixt the
Case in my Text,§. 25. Wee despise not our Brethren. and the Case of our Church:
wee may the better iudge how farre forth S. Pauls
aduice heere giuen to the Romanes in their case of
eating, and not-eating, ought to rule vs in our case
of conforming, and not-conforming in point of Ceremonie.
And first, of not despising: then of not iudging.
The ground of the Apostles precept for not
despising him that ate not, was his weakenesse. So
farre then as this ground holdeth in our case, this
precept is to be extended; and no further. And we
are hereby bound not to despise our Non-conforming
Brethren, so farre forth as it may probably
appeare to vs they are weake and not wilfull. But
so farre forth, as by their courses and proceedings



it may bee reasonably thought their refusall proceedeth
from corrupt or partiall affections, or is
apparantly maintained with obstinacie and contempt:
I take it we may, notwithstanding the Apostles
admonition in my Text, in some sort euen despise
them.
            But because they thinke they are not so well and
fairely dealt withall as they should be:§. 26. Their grieuances propounded; Let vs consider
their particular grieuances, wherein they take
themselues despised; and examine how iust they
are. They say, first, they are despised in beeing 
scoffed, and floured, and derided by loose companions,
& by profane or popishly affected Persons;
in being stiled Puritanes, and Brethren, and Precisians,
and in hauing many iests and fooleries fastened
vpon them, whereof they are not guilty. They
are secondly despised,All benefit of Law being d
                     •
                  
                  nyed them, and they debarred of other meanes by conference or writing for their Defence. Def. of Ministers reasons. part. 1. pref. to Reader. Wee doe accuse the Reuerend Bishops i
                     •
                   the sight of God and Man, for their hard and extreme dealing towards vs. Remouall of imputations, pag. 40. they say, in that when they
are conuented before the Bishops and others in Authoritie,
they cannot haue the fauour of an indifferent
hearing: but are proceeded against as farre
as Suspension, and sometimes Depriuation, without
taking their answeres to what is obiected, or giuing
answeres to what they obiect. Thirdly, in that
many honest and religious men, of excellent and
vsefull gifts, cannot bee permitted the liberty of
their Consciences, and the free exercise of their Ministerie;
onely for standing out in these things,
which our selues cannot but confesse to be indifferent.
            
            To their first Grieuance we answere,§. 27. and answered: The first. that we haue
nothing to doe with those that are Popishly affected.



If they wrong them, as it is like enough they
will (for they will not sticke to wrong their betters;)
wee are not to bee charged with that: let them answere
for themselues. But by the way, let our
Brethren consider, whether their stiffe and vnreasonable
opposing against those lawfull Ceremonies
we retaine, may not bee one principall
meanes to confirme, but so much the more in
their darknes and superstition those that are wauering,
and might possibly by more ingenuous
and seasonable insinuations bee wonne ouer to
imbrace the truth which wee professe. And as
for loose persons and prophane ones, that make it
their sport vpon their Ale-benches to rayle and
scoffe at Puritanes; 
               as if it were warrant enough
for them to drinke drunke, talke bawdy, sweare
and stare, or doe any thing without controll, because
forsooth they are no Puritanes.
                As wee
could wish our Brethren, and their Lay-followers, by
their vncouth and sometimes ridiculous behauiour
had not giuen prophane persons too much aduantage
to play vpon them, and through their sides to
wound euen Religion it selfe: so wee could wish
also that some men by vnreasonable and vntust, othersome
by vnseasonable and indiscreet scoffing at
them, had not giuen them aduantage to triumph
in their owne innocency and persist in their affected
obstinacie. It cannot but be some confirmation
to men in error; to see men of dissolute and loose
behauiour, with much eagernesse, and petulancy
and virulence to speake against them. Wee all



know how much scandall and preiudice it is to a
right good cause; to bee either followed by persons
open to iust exception, or maintained with slender
and vnsufficient reasons, or prosecuted with vnseasonable
and vndiscreet violence. And I am verily
perswaded, that as the increase of Papists in some
parts of the Land, hath occasionally sprung (by a
kinde of Antiperistasis) frō the intemperate courses
of their neighbour Puritanes; so the increase of
Puritanes, in many parts of the Land, oweth not so
much to any sufficiency themselues conceiue in
their own grounds, as to the disaduantage of some
Prophane, or Scandalous, or Idle, or Ignorant, or Indiscreet
opposers. But setting these aside, I see not
but that otherwise the name of Puritane, and the
rest, are iustly giuen them. For appropriating to
themselues the names of Brethren, Professors,
Good men, and other like; as differences betwixt
them and those they call Formalists: would they
not haue it thought, that they haue a Brotherhood
and Profession of their owne, freer and purer from
Superstition and Idolatry, then others haue, that
are not of the same stampe? and doing so, why may
they not be called Puritanes? The name, I know,
is sometimes fastened vponOf late our English Arminians haue got the tricke to fetch in within the compasse of this 
                     •
                  itle of Pur
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     es, all orthodoxe Diuines that oppose against their Semipelagian subtilties; of purpose to make sound truth odious, an
                     •
                   thei
                     •
                   owne corrupt nouelties more paffable, and plausible. those that deserue
it not; Raskall people will call any man that beareth
but the face of honesty, a Puritane: but why
should that hinder others from placing it where it
is rightly due?
            
               
               To their second Grieuance I answere:§ 28. The second. Publique
meanes by Conferences, Disputations, and otherwise,
haue beene often vsed: and priuate men not
seldome afforded the fauour of respite and liberty
to bring in their allegations. And I thinke
it can be hardly, or but rarely instanced; that euer
Depriuation hath beene vsed, but where fatherly
Admonitions haue first beene vsed, and
time giuen to the Delinquents to consider of it,
and informe themselues better. This course vsually
hath beene taken: though euery priuate
particular man hath no reason to expect it.The
Reuerend Fathers of our Church, wee may wel
                  •
               
think amid so much other emploiment, cānot be so
vnthriftie of their good houres, as to lauish them
out in hearing contentious persons eandem cantilenam,
sing the same note a hundred times ouer,
and require farther satisfaction, after so many publique
and vnanswerable satisfactions already giuen.
Yet haue theWitnesse the learned Bookes of diuers Reuerend Prelates; Iohn Whitgift, Iohn Buckeridge, Thomas Morton, &c.
                
               Bishops, and others, Church
Gouernours, out of their religious zeale for the
peace of Gods Church, beene so farre from despising
our Brethren herein: that they haue dispenced
somtimes with their other weighty occasions, and
taken paines to answere their reasons, and confute
their exceptions, satisfie all their doubts, and discouer
the weakenesse of all their grounds in the points
questioned.
            And as to their third Grieuance.
               §. 29. The third. First, for my
owne part, I make no doubt, neither dare I be so
vncharitable as not to thinke, but that many of



them haue honest, and vpright, and sincere hearts
to God-ward, and are vnfainedly zealous of Gods
Truth, and for Religion. They that are such, no
doubt feele the comfort of it in their owne soules:
and we see the fruites of it in their conuersation,
and reioyce at it. But yet I cannot bee so ignorant
on the other side, as not to know, that the most
sanctified and zealous men are men, and subiect to
carnall and corrupt affections; and may bee so farre
swayed by them in their iudgements, as not to be
able to discerne without preiudice and partialitie,
truth from errour. Good men, and Gods deare
children may continue in some errour in iudgement,
and consequently in a sinfull practice arising
thence; and liue and die in it (as some of these
men haue done in disobedience to lawfull Authoritie,)
and that vnrepented of otherwise, then
as in the lumpe of their vnknowne sinnes. It is not
Honestie, or Sinceritie, that can priuiledge men
from either erring or sinning.
                Neither ought the
vnreproued conuersation of men, countenance
out their Opinions, or their Practices, against the
light of Diuine Scripture, and right Reason: As wee
read Cyprians errour in old time; and wee see
So P
                        •
                     lagius, from whose root Popery (in that bran
                     •
                  h) and Arminian
                        •
                     sme sprouted, was a man as strict for life, as any Catholike
                     •
                  yet a most dangerous and pestilent Heretique. 
               Arminius his corrupt doctrine in our dayes
haue spred much the more for the reuerend opinion
men had of their personall endowments and
sanctitie. Secondly, though Comparisons be euer
harsh, and most times odious; yet since honestie
and pietie is alledged, (without disparagement be
it spoken to the best of them,) there are as good,



and honest, and religious, and zealous men euery
way of them that willingly and cheerefully conformed,
as of them that doe not. In the times of Popish
persecution, how many godly Bishops, and
conformable Ministers laid downe their liues for
the testimonie of Gods Truth, and for the maintenance
of his Gospel? And if it should please God
in his iust iudgement (as our sinnes, and amongst
others our Schismes and distractions most worthily
deserue,) to put vs once againe to a fiery tryall
(which the same God for his goodnes and mercie
defend:) I make no question but many thousands
of Conformers would (by the grace of God) resist
vnto bloud, embrace the Faggot, and burne at a
S
                  •
               ake, in detestation of all Popish Antichristian Idolatry;
as readily, and cheerefully, and constantly,
as the hottest, and precisest, and most scrupulous
non-Conformer. But thirdly, let mens honesty, and
piety, and gifts be what they can: must not men of
honesty, and pietie, and gifts, liue vnder Lawes?
And what reason these, or any other respects,
shouldNon enim in cuiusquā personâ praetermittendum est, quod institut is generalibus continetur. Leo dist. 61. Mi
                        •
                     amur.
                exempt any man from the iust censure
of the Church, in case hee will not obey her Lawes,
and conforme to her Ceremonies? especially, since
such mens immunitie would but encourage others
to presume vpon the like fauour: and experience
teacheth vs, that no mens errours are so exemplary
and pernicious; as theirs, who for their eminency
of gifts, or sanctitie of life, are most followed
with popular applause, and personall admiration.
            
               
We see their Grieuances against vs,§. 30. Our Brethren how they iudge vs. how vniust
they are, in the matter of Despising. I would they
did no more despise the Churches authoritie; then
we doe their infirmities! But in the matter of iudging;
see if wee haue not a iust grieuance against
them. As might bee declared at large in many instances,
out of their printed Bookes, and priuate
Letters, and common discourses. I will but giue
you aI referre the Reader for more particular satisfaction to Fr. Masons Sermon: on 1. Cor. 14. 40. pag. 30. Sam. Collins Sermon on 1. Tim. 6. 3. p. 21, 22. and others; but especially to their owne writings. taste; because I know I grow tedious;
and I long to be at an end.
            First they iudge our Church as halfe Popish and
Antichristian,
               § 31. I. The Church. for retaining some Ceremonies vsed
in Popery: though wee haue purged them from
their Superstitions, and restored them to their Primitiue
vse. Their great admiredBrightman in Apoc. cap. 3. 
               opener of the
Reuelation, maketh our Church the Linsey-Wolsey
Laodicean Church; neither hot nor cold. And some
of them haue slouenly compared our late gracious
Soueraigne Queene Elizabeth of most blessed memory,
to aThis Simile was first vsed by a very Reuerend, graue and worthy Deane, (who hath many wayes des
                     •
                  rued well of our whole Church) in a Sermon before Queene Elizabeth: and modestly and moderately vrged, not at all against the Ceremonies (which by his practice he did allow) but for the further restraint of Popish Priests and Iesuites, who lay thicke in Ireland, and the Westerne coasts of England and Wales, as heapes of dust and durt behinde the dores. yet I heere ascribed it to the Puritanes, who (though they father it vpon that good man) must owne it as their owne brat; because by mis-applying it to the Ceremonies, they haue made it their owne—Malè dum recitas, incipit esse tuum.
                
               sluttish housewife; that hauing swept
the house, yet left the dust and durt behinde the
doores, meaning thereby the Ceremonies. If our
Church were but halfe so ill, as these men would



make it, I thinke euery honest religious man should
hold himselfe bound to separate from it; as his
most excellent Maiesty
               Meditation
                     •
                   on the Lords Prayer. p. 11. &
                     •
                  . primae edit. 1619. hath obserued the Brownists
haue done vpon their very grounds: accounting
them as lukewarme for not quite separating, as
they doe vs for no further reforming.
            Secondly,§ 32. II. The Bishops. they iudge our Bishops and other
Church-Gouernours, as Limbes of Antichrist; Locusts
of the bottomlesse pit; domineering Lords
ouer Gods heritage; vsurpers of temporall Iurisdiction;
Spirituall Tyrants ouer mens Conscienences,
&c. seeking by all meanes to make the name
of Lord Bishop odious to the Gentry and Commons.
Witnesse their Mar-prelate; and other infamous
and scandalous Libels in that kinde. Hauing
power in their hands, if the Bishops should
vse more rigorous courses towards them, then
they haue done: could ye blame them?
            
            Thirdly,§. 33. III. Conformers. they iudge those that subscribe and conforme
Machiauellian time-seruers; formall Gospellers;
State-Diuines; men that know no conscience,
but Law; nor Religion, but the Kings: and
such as would be as forward for the Masse, as the
Communion, if the State should alter.
            Fourthly,§ 34. IIII. Ministers of inferiour gifts. all such Ministers as are not endowed
with gifts for the Pulpit, they damne, as hirelings,
and not Shepheards: calling them idol-Shepheards;
betrayers of Christs Flocke; intruders into
the Ministery without a Calling; dumbe Dogs,
and I know not how many names besides. Yea, although
they be such as are diligent, according to



their measure of gifts to perform such duties as the
Church requireth; to present the prayers of the
people to God; to declare (by reading the holy
Bible and good Homilies for that purpose appointed)
the will of God to the people; to instruct the
yonger sort in the points of Catechisme; to visit and
comfort the sicke and afflicted; and to administer
reuerently and orderly the holy. Sacraments of
Baptisme and the Lords Supper.
            
            Fiftly,§. 35. V. Them that oppose them. they iudge all such as interpose for the
Churches peace, and oppose their nouelties, as enemies
to all goodnesse, men of prophane mindes;
haters of Religion; despisers of the Word; persecutors
of the Brethren, impes of Satan; instruments
of Hell; and such as vtterly abhorre all godly
and Christian courses.
            Sixtly,§. 36. VI. All but themselues, and lastly (for I irke to rake longer in
this sinke) they bewray themselues to be manifest
Iudges of all that are not of their stampe; by singling
out vnto themselues, and those that fauour
them, certaine proper Appellations, of Brethren,
and Good men, and Professors: as if none had Brotherhood
in Christ, none had interest in goodnesse,
none made Profession of the Gospel, but themselues.
Whereas others haue receiued the signe
of their Profession in their foreheads after Baptisme,
which perhaps they did not: whereas others
dayly stand vp in the Congregation to make
Profession of their Christian beliefe, which it may
be they doe not: or, those things be not materiall:
whereas others by the grace of God are as stedfastly



resolued in their hearts, if need should be, to
seale the truth of their Profession with their bloud,
as any of them can be.
            But they will say,§ 37. Their mitigation remoued. these peremptory Censures
are but the faults of some few: all are not so hote
and fierie. There bee others that are more temperate
in their speeches, and moderate in their
courses; and desire onely they may bee spared
for their owne particular: but they preach not against
any of these things, nor intermeddle to
make more stirres in the Church.
            
                I answere first: it vvere lamentable, if this
were not so. If all were of that hote temper,
or distemper rather, that many are; they would
quickely tyre out themselues without spurring.
Farre bee it from vs to iudge mens hearts: or
to condemne men for that wee know not by
them. Yet of some that carry themselues with
tolerable moderation outwardly; wee haue some
cause to suspect, that they doe inwardly and in
their hearts iudge as deepely, as the hottest-spirited
raylers. And wee gather it from their forwardnesse
at euery turne, and vpon euery slender
occasion obliquely to 
                  ••
               rd, and indirectly to glance
at our Church, and the descipline and the Ceremonies
thereof, as farre as they well dare. And if
such men meddle no further, we may reasonably
thinke,Eadem velle eos cognosces: da posse, quantum volunt. Senec. Epist. 42. it is not for want of good will to doe it;
but because they dare not.
            
                Secondly, though they preach not against
these things in the publique Congregations; yet in



their priuate Conuenticles it is not vnknowne some
doe. Though their Pulpits doe not ring with it;
yet their houses do: though their ordinary Sermons
ad populum be more modest; yet their set conferences
are sometimes but too free, especially when they
are required their opinions by those that inuite
them. And what themselues for feare of Censure
thus preach butMat. 10. 27. 
               in the eare; their Lay-Disciples
openly preach on the house top.
            
            Thirdly, although both their Pulpits and Tables
               
should be silent: yet their Practice sufficiently preacheth
their dislike. And who knoweth not that a
Re
                     •
                  ll and Exemplary seducement maketh the Author
guilty; as well as a Verball and Oratory? Saint
Peter did not preach Iudaisme; but only, for offending
the Iewes, forbeare to eate with the Gentiles:
yet S. Paul reproueth him for it to his face, and interpreteth
that Fact of his, as an effectuall & almost
compulsiue seducement; Cogis Iudaizare, Gal. 2.

                  Gal. 2. 14. Non imperio, sed facto. Lyra. Non docentis imperio, sed conuersationis exemplo. Gloss. Ord.
                
               Why compellest thou the Gentiles to Iudäize?
            
            Lastly, it is to be considered; whether it may be 
enough for a Pastor, not to meddle with these
things: & whether he be not in conscience bound,
especially in case he liue among a people distracted
in opinions, to declare himselfe expressely either
for them, or against them. If they bee vtterly vnlawfull,
and he know it so; how is hee not bound in
conscience to reproue those that vse them, or require
them? otherwise hee betrayeth theOtherwise what else doe we, but deny and betray the truth? Defence of Min. reasons part 1. Pref. to the Reader.
                
               truth
of God by his silence, and suffereth men to goe on in
their superstition without rebuke. But if hee be sufficiently



resolued of their lawfulnesse; how is hee
not bound in conscience to reproue those that refuse
them, or oppose them? otherwise hee betrayeth
the peace of the Church by his silence, and suffereth
men to goe on in their disobedience without rebuke.
Nay more, euery Minister that hath receiued pastorall
Charge, hath twice or thrice (if not oftener)
witnessed his allowance of all and singuler the 39.
Articles of the Church of England. Once at his Ordination
before the Bishop; then at his Institution
into his Benefice, before his Ordinary; and both
these by Subscription vnder his hand; and then after,
vpon his Iuduction, before his owne Flocke; and
that by verball Approbation. By which Subscription
and Approbation, hee hath not onely acknowledged
Artic. 20. 
               in the Church the power of ordaining Rites and
Ceremonies, Act. 20. but hee hath after a sort also
bound himselfeAct. 34. 
               openly torebuke such as willingly
and purposely breake the Traditions & Ceremonies of
the Church, as offenders against the common Orders of
the Church, and wounders of the Consciences of the
weake brethren, Act. 34. He then, that for any respect
whatsoeuer is meale-mouthed in these things
wherein he is bound both in Conscience, & by vertue
of his owne voluntary Act to speake freely: neither
is constant to his owne hand and tongue; nor is
Heb. 32. 
               faithfull in Gods House, as was Moses, in discharging
a good Conscience, and reuealing vnto his
peopleAct. 20. 27. 
               the whole Counsell of God.
            
            Thus haue I endeuoured,§ 38. The conclusion. hauing the opportunitie
of this place, (as I held my selfe both in Conscience,


               
and in regard of my Subscription bound, to deliuer
my opinion freely, so farre as my Text gaue
occasion, concerning the Ceremoniall Constitutions
of our Church: and therein laboured to free, not
onely the Conformer from all vniust Censures; but
euen the Non-conformer also, so farre as he hath reason
to expect it, from all scandalous Despisings. I
beseech you pardon my length, if I haue been troublesome:
I had much to say; and the matter was
weighty; and I desired to giue some satisfaction
in it to those that are contrary-minded; and I haue
no purpose (for any thing I know) at all to trouble
this place any more hereafter. Let vs all now humbly
beseech Almightie God to grant a blessing to
what hath been presently taught and heard: that it
may work in the hearts of vs all charitable affections
one towards another, due obedience to lawfull Authoritie,
and a conscionable care to walke in our seuerall
callings, faithfully, painefully, and peaceably; to
the comfort of our owne soules, the edification
of Gods Church, and the glory of the euerblessed
Trinitie, the Father, Sonne, and Holy
Ghost, three Persons and one God. To whom
bee ascribed by vs and whole Church, as is
most due, the Kingdome, the Power
and the Glory, for euer and
euer. Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            THE SECOND
SERMON.24. April. 1621.
            
            
               
                  ROM. 3. 8.
And not rather, (as we be slanderously reported, and
as some affirme that we say,) Let vs doe euill,
that good may come: whose damnation is iust.
            
            
               A Little before,§ 1. The Occasion. at the fourth verse, Saint
Paul had deliuered a Conclusion; found,
and comfortable: and strengthened
it from Dauids both experience, and
testimony inThat thou mightest be iustified in thy sayings, and mightest ouercome when thou art iudged. Psalm. 51. 4. 
               Psalm. 51. A place
pregnant, and full of sinewes to enforce it. The
Conclusion in effect was; that Nothing in man can
annull the Couenant of God. Neither the originall vnworthinesse
of Gods children, through the vniuersall
corruption of nature, nor their actuall vnfaithfulnesse
bewrayed (through frailtie) in particular
tryals; can alienate the free loue of God from
them, or cut them off from the Couenant of
Grace: but that still God will be glorified in the
truth and faithfulnes of his promises, notwithstanding
any vnrighteousnesse or vnfaithfulnes in man.
            
               
But neuer yet was any Truth so happily innocent,§ 2. Coherence,
as to maintaine it selfe free from Calumnie,
and Abuse. Malice on the one hand, and Fleshlinesse
on the other; though with different aymes, yet do
the same worke. They both peruert the Truth, by
drawing pestilent Carollaries from sound Conclusions,
as the Spider sucketh poyson from medicinable
herbes. But with this difference; Malice slandereth
the Truth, to discountenance it: but Fleshlinesse
abuseth the Truth, to countenance it selfe by
it. The cauilling Sophister, hee would faine bring
the Apostles gracious Doctrine into discredit:
The carnall Libertine, he would as faine bring his
owne vngracious behauiour into credit. Both, by
making false, yet colourable, Inferences from the
former Conclusion. There are
                  Triplex inconueniens. Lyranus hic. 
               three of those 
Inferences: but neuer a good. The first; if so, Then
cannot God in reason and iustice take vengeance
of our vnrighteousnesse. The Colour: for why
should he punish vs for that which so much magnifieth
and commendeth his righteousnesse?Vers. 5. 
               But
if our vnrighteousnesse commend the righteousnesse of
God, what shall we say? Is God vnrighteous that taketh
vengeance? The second Inference: If so; then it is
iniust either in God or Man to condemne vs as sinners,
for breaking the Law. The Colour: for why
should that action be censured of sinne, which so
abundantly redoundeth to the glory of God?
Vers. 7. 
               For if the Truth of God hath more abounded,
through my lie, vnto his glorie, why yet am I also iudged
as a sinner? The third, and last, and worst Inference:


               
If so; then it is a good and a wise resolution,
Let vs sinne freely, and boldly commit euill. The
Colour: for why should we feare to do that, from
which so much good may come? in this verse of
my Text, And not rather, Let vs doe euill, that good
may come.
            
            This last cauilling Inference;§ 3. Diuision, the Apostle in this
verse both bringeth in, and casteth out againe:
bringeth in, as an obiection; and casteth out by his answere.
An answere which at once cutteth off both
it, and the former inferences. And the Answere is
double: Ad rem, ad hominem. That concerneth
the force and matter of the obiection: this, the state
and danger of the obiectors. Ad▪ rem, in the former
part of the verse; And not rather (as we be slanderously
reported, and as some affirme that we say,) Let vs de
euil, that good may come. Ad hominem, in the latter
end; Whose damnation is iust. In the former part,
there is an Obiection; and the Reiection of it. The
Obiection, And not rather, Let vs do euill that good
may come. The Reiection thereof with a Non sequitur;
implying not onely the bare inconsequence of
it vpon the Apostles Conclusion, but withall, and
especially the falsenesse and vnsoundnesse of it taken
by it selfe; As wee be slanderously reported, and as
some affirme that we say, Let vs do euill, &c.
            
            My ayme at this present is to insist especially vpon
a Principle of practique Diuinitie;
               § 4. and Summe of the Text. which by ioynt
consent of Writers old and new; Orthodoxe and Popish,
resulteth from the very body of this verse, and
is of right good vse to direct vs in sundry difficulties,



which daily arise in vita communi, in point of
Conscience. The Principle is this; we must not do
any euill, that any good may come of it. Yet there are
besides this, in the Text diuers other inferiour obseruations
not to bee neglected. With which I
thinke it wil not be amisse to begin, and to dispatch
them first briefly; that so I may fall the sooner, and
stay the longer vpon that which I mainely intend.
            Obserue first the Apostles Method,§ 5. OBSER. 1. Diuine truths must be cleared from cauill. and substantiall
maner of proceeding: how hee cleareth all as
he goeth; how diligent he is and carefull, betimes
to remoue such cauils, (though hePropter hos arguendos fecit Paulus hîc quasi digressionem tractando haec. Caietan. in hune locum
                step a little out
of his way for it) as might bring scandall to the
Truth he had deliuered. When we preach and instruct
others, we should not thinke it enough to deliuer
positiue truths: but we should take good care
also, as neere as we can, to leaue them cleare; and by
preuention to stop the mouthes of such, as loue to
picke quarrels at the Truth, and to barke against
the light. It were good we would (so farre as our
leisure and gifts will permit) wisely forecast, and
preuent all offence that might be taken at any part
of Gods truth: and be carefull, as not to broach
any thing that is false, through rashnesse, error, or
intemperance; so not to betray any truth by ignorant
handling, or by superficiall, slight, and vnsatisfying
answers. But then especially concerneth it
vs to bee most carefull herein; when wee haue to
speake before such, as we haue some cause beforehand
to suspect to be, through ignorance, or weaknesse,
or custome, or education, or preiudice, or partiall



affections, or otherwise contrary-minded vnto, or
at leastwise not well perswaded of those Truths wee
are to teach. If the wayes be rough and knotty, and
the passengers feeble-ioynted and darke-sighted:
it is but needfull the guides should remoue as many
blockes and stones out of the way, as may bee.
When we haue gone as warily as we can to worke,
Cauillers (if they list) will take exceptions: it is
our part to see wee giue them not the aduantage,
lest wee helpe to iustifie the Principals, by making
our selues Accessories. Those men are ill aduised,
how euer zealous for the Truth, that stirre in controuersed
points, and leaue them worse then they
found them.Aut animo demas, aut viribus addas. Dictum Archidami ad filium.
                
               
                  Stomake will not beare out a
man without strength: and to encounter an aduersarie
are requiredAs Zuinglius said of Carolosladius (whom he iudged too weake to vndertake the defence of the Truth against Luther in the point of Consubstantiation) Non sa
                           •
                        is humerorum habet. Sleidan. 
                  Shoulders, as well as gall.
               
A good cause is neuer betrayed more, then when
it is prosecuted with much eagernesse, but little sufficiencie.
This from the method.
            Obserue secondly the Apostles manner of speech.OBSERV. II.
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .§. 6. The Slandey of the Ministers regular doctrine, is more then an ordinary Slander. Translators render it; As
we are wrongfully bla
                     •
                  ed, As we are slandered, As we
are slanderously reported. And the word indeede
from the
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Originall importeth no more: and so
Writers both Prophane, and Sacred vse it. But yet in
Scriptures by a Specialty it most times signifieth
the highest degree of Slander; when we open our
mouthes against God, and speake ill, or amisse, or
vnworthily of God, that is, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , and properly
the sin wee call Blasphemy. And yet, that very word
of Blasphemy, which for the most part referreth



immediately to GOD, the Apostle heere vseth,
when hee speaketh of himselfe and other Christian
Ministers 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , as we are slandred, nay as
we are blasphemed. A slander or other wrong or contempt
done to a Minister, qu
                     •
                   talis, is a sinne of a
higher straine, then the same done to a common
Christian. Not at all for his Persons sake: for so hee
is no more Gods good creature then the other; no
more free
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Act. 14. 15. & Iam. 5. 17. from sinnes, and infirmities and passions
then the other. But for his Callings sake; for
so he is Gods2. Cor. 5. 20. 
               Embassadour, which the other is
not: and for his workes sake; for that is Gods
1. Thes. 2. 13. 
               message, which the others is not. Personall Slanders
and Contempts are to a Minister, but as to
another man: because his person is but as another
mans Person. But Slanders and Contempts done to
him as a Minister, that is, with reference either to
his Calling, or Doctrine, are much greater then to
another man: as reaching vnto God himselfe;
whose Person the Minister representeth in his Calling;
and whose errand the Minister deliuereth in
his Doctrine. For Contempts, Saint Paul is expresse
elsewhere;1. Thes. 4. 8 
               He that despiseth, despiseth not Man,
but God. And as for Slanders; the very choyce of
the word in my Text inferreth as much. The dignitie
of our Calling, enhaunceth the sinne: and
euery Slander against our regular Doctrines, is
more then a bare Calumnie; if no more, at
least petty
               Wee haue heard him speake blasphemous words against Moses, and against God, Act. 6. 11. 
               Blasphemie 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , As wee are
slandered, as wee are blasphemed. That from the
word.
            
               
Obserue thirdly,
               § 7. OBSERV. III. The best truths are subiect to Slander. the wrong done to the Apostle,
and to his Doctrine. Hee was slanderously reported
to haue taught that, which hee neuer so much
as thought: and his Doctrine had many scandalous
imputations fastened vpon it, whereof neither hee
nor it were guilty. As wee are slanderously reported,
and as some affirme that we say. The best Truths are
subiect to mis-interpretation: and there is not tha
                  •
               
               Doctrine, how firmely so euer grounded, how wari
                     ••
                  
               
so euer deliuered; whereon Calumny wil not fasten,
and stick slanderous imputations. NeitherMath. 11. 17, 18, 19. 
               Iohns
mourning, nor Christs piping can passe the pikes: but
the one hath a Diuell; the other is a glutton and a
wine-bibber. ThoughMath. 5. 17. Christ come to fulfill the
Law, yet there bee will accuse him as a destroyer of
the Law▪
                Math. 5. And though hee decide the question
plainely for Caesar, and that in the case of Tribute,
Math. 22.Math. 22. 21. 
               Giue vnto Caesar the things that
are Caesars: yet there be that charge him, as if he
Ioh 19. 12. 
               spake against Caesar, Ioh. 19. and that in the very
case of Tribute, as if heeLuk. 23. 
                     •
                  . 
               forbade to giue Tribute
vnto Caesar, Luke 23. Now if theyMat. 10. 25 called
the Master of the house Beelzebub; how much more
them of his houshold? If Christs did not; thinke
wee the doctrine of his Ministers and his Seruants
could escape the stroke of mens tongues, and bee
free from calumny and cauill? How the Apostles
were slandered as Seducers and Sectaries, and
vaine babblers, and Heretiques, and broachers of
new and false and pestilent doctrines; their Epistles,
and the booke of their Acts witnesse abundantly to



vs. And for succeeding times, reade but the Apologies
of Athenagoras, and Tertullian, and others:
and it will amaze you to see what blasphemous,
and seditious, and odious, and horrible impieties,
where fathered vpon the ancient Christian Doctors,
and vpon their profession. But our owne experience
goeth beyond all. The Doctors of our Church
teach truely, and agreeably to vnanswerable euidences
of Scripture. TheAct. 17. 
                     •
                  8. & Esay 26. 12. 
               effectuall concurrence
of Gods will and power, with subordinate Agents
in euery, and therefore euen in sinfull actions;
GodsRom. 9. 11. 15 18, &c. 
               free election of those whom he purposeth
to saue of his owne grace, without any motiues in,
or from themselues; The immutabilitie of Gods
Ioh 13. 1. Rom. 11. 29. & 5. 9. 10. & 8. 35, 38, 39. 
               Loue and Grace towards the Saints, and their certaine
perseuerance therein vnto Saluation; TheRom. 3. 28. 
               Iustification
of sinners by the imputed righteousnesse
of Christ, apprehended and applyed vnto them by
a liuely faith; without the workes of the Law. These
are sound, and true, and comfortable, and profitable,
and necessary doctrines. And yet that impudent
Strumpet of Rome hath the forehead, I will
not say to slander, my Text alloweth more, to
blaspheme God, and his Truth, and the Ministers
thereof for teaching them. Bellarmine, Gretser, Maldonate,
& the Iesuites; but none more then our own
English Fugitiues, Bristow, Stapleton, Parsons, Kellison,
and all the rabble of those Romish hellhounds,
freely spend their mouthes in barking against
vs; as if wee made God the author of sinne: as
if wee would haue men sinne and be damned, by a



               Stoicall fatall necessitie
                     •
                   sinne whether they will or
no, and be damned whether they deserue it or no:
as if we opened a gappe to all licenciousnesse and
prophanenesse; let men beleeue, it is no matter how
they liue, heauen is their owne cock-sure: as if we cryed
downe good workes, and condemned charity. Slanders
loud, and false; yet easily blowne away with
one single word, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . These imputations vpon
vs and our doctrine are vniust: but 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
let them that thus mis-report vs, know, that without
repentance their damnation will be iust.
            
            It would be time not ill spent,§ 8. With the Causes; to discouer the
grounds of this obseruation, and to presse the vses
of it something fully. But because my ayme lyeth
another way; I can but point at them, and passe.
If seldome Truth scape vnslandered, maruell not:
the reasons are euident. On Gods part, on Mans
part, on the Diuels part. God suffereth, Man rayseth,
& the Diuel furthereth these slanders against
the Truth. To begin ordine retrogrado, and to take
 them backwards. First, on the Diuels part: a kinde
of Contrariety and Antipathie betwixt him and it.
He being theIoh. 8. 44. 
               Father of lies, andEph. 6. 12. 
               Prince of
darknesse, cannot away with the Truth, and with
the Light: and therefore casteth vp slanders, as
Fogs and Mists against the Truth to belie it, and
 against the Light to darken it. Secondly, on mans
part: And that partly in the Vnderstanding; when
the iudgement either of it selfe weake, or else weakened
through precipitancie, preiudice, or otherwise,
is deceiued with fallacies in stead of substance,



and mistaketh seeming inferences, for necessary
and naturall deductions. Partly in the Will;
when men of corrupt minds set themselues purposely
against the knowne truth, and out of malicious
wilfulnesse (against the strong testimonie of
their owne hearts) slander it, that so they may disgrace
it, and them that professe it. Partly in the
Affections; when men ouercome by carnall affections,
are content to cheate their owne soules by giuing
such constructions to Gods Truth, as will for
requital, giue largest allowance to their practices,
and so rather chuse to crooken the Rule to their owne
bent, then to leuell themselues and their affections
and liues according to the Rule. Thirdly, on Gods
               
part; who suffereth his owne Truth to bee slandered
and mistaken. Partly in his Iustice; as a fearefull 
Iudgement2. Thess. 2, 10, 11, 12. vpon wicked ones, whereby their
hard hearts become yet more hardened, and their
most iust condemnation yet more iust. Partly, in 
his Goodnesse; as a powerfull fierie triall of true Doctors,
whose constancie and sinceritie is the more
1. Cor. 11. 19 
               approued with him, and the more eminent with
men, if theyIoh. 10. 12. 
               flie not when the Wolfe commeth, but
keepe their standing, and stoutly maintaine Gods
truth, when it is deepliest slandered, and hotliest
opposed. And partly, in his Wisedome; as a rich occasion 
for those, whom hee hath gifted for it,
2. Tim. 1. 6 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                to awaken their zeale, to quicken vp
their industrie, to muster vp their abilities, to
scowre vp their spirituall armour, (which else
through dis-vse might gather rust) for the defence,



and for the rescue of that1. Tim. 6. 20; & 2. Tim. 1. 14. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that precious
truth whereof they are depositaries, and wherwith
he hath entrusted them.
            These are the Grounds.
               §. 9. and Corollaries thereof. The Vses, for instruction
briefly are, to teach and admonish euery one of
vs: that we be not either first, so wickedly malicious,
                as without apparant cause, to rayse any slander; or

               secondly, so foolishly credulous, as without seuere
 examination, to beleeue any slander; or thirdly, so
basely timorous, as to flinch from any part of Gods
truth for any slander. But I must not insist. This
from the slander.
            Obserue fourthly,
               §. 10. OBSER. IV. Euery slander, how peremptorie the Apostle
is in his censure against the slanderers or abusers of
holy truths: Whose damnation is iust.
               Ambrosius; Lyra; Piscator, &c. Some vnderstand
it with reference to the Slanderers; As we
be slanderously reported, and as some affirme that wee
say: Whose damnation is iust: that is, their damnation
is iust, who thus vniustly slander vs.Chrysostomus; Caietanus; Erasmus, &c. Others
vnderstand it with reference to that vngodly resolution:
Let vs doe euill, that good may come; whose damnation
is iust: that is, their damnation is iust for the
euill they doe, who aduenture to doe any euil, vnder
whatsoeuer pretence of good to come of it.
Both expositions are good; and I rather embrace
both, then preferre either: I euer held it a kind of
honest spirituall thrift; where there are two sences
giuen of one place, both agreeable to the Analogie
of Faith and Manners, both so indifferently appliable
to the words and scope of the place, as that it is
hard to say, which was rather intended; though



there was but one intended, yet to make vse of
both. And so will we. Take the first way: and the
slanderer may reade his doome in it. Here is his
wages, and his portion; and the meed and reward
of his slander; Damnation. And it is a iust reward.
He condemneth Gods truth vniustly: God condemneth
him iustly for it, Whose damnation is iust. If we
be countable (and wee are countable at the day of
Iudgement) forMath. 12. 36. 
               euery idle word we speake; though
neither in it selfe false, nor yet hurtfull and preiudiciall
vnto others: what lesse then damnation can
they expect, that with much falshood for the thing
it selfe, and infinite preiudice in respect of others,
blaspheme God and his holy Truth?
            But if it be done of purpose,§ 11. Whether malicious. and in malice to despight
the Truth, and the Professors thereof: I
scarce know whether there be a greater sinne, or
no. Maliciously to oppose the knowne Truth, is by
most Diuines accounted a principall branch of
that great vnpardonable sinne, the sinne against the
holy Ghost: by some, the very sinne it selfe. I dare
not say it is so; nor yet that it is vnpardonable, or
hath finall impenitencie necessarily attending it:
I would be loth to interclude the hope of Repentance
from any sinner; or to confine Gods Mercy
within any bounds. Yet thus much I thinke I may
safely say; it commeth shrewdly neere the sinne against
the holy Ghost, and is a faire (or rather a foule)
step towards it, and leaueth very very little hope of
pardon. That great sin against the holy Ghost, the
Holy Ghost it selfe in the Scriptures chuseth, rather



then by any other to expresse by this name ofMath. 12. 31. 32.
               Blasphemie, Mat. 12. And wheras our Apost. 1. Tim. 1.
saith, That though he were a Blasphemer, yet
1. Tim. 1. 13. 
               he obtained Mercy, because he did it ignorantly in
vnbeliefe: he leaueth it questionable, but withall
suspicious, whether there may bee any hope of
Mercy for such as blaspheme maliciously, and against
knowledge. If any mans be; certainly such a mans
damnation is most iust.
            
            But not all Slanders of Gods truth are of that
deepe die:§ 12. or not, is damnable. not all Slanderers, sinners in that high
degree. God forbid they should. There are respects,
which must qualifie and lessen the sinne. But
yet allow it any in the least degree, and with the
most fauourable circumstances; still the Apostles
sentence standeth good: Without repentance
their damnation is iust. Admit the Truth be darke
and difficult, and so easily to be mistaken: admit
withall, the man be weake and ignorant, and so apt
to mistake; his vnderstanding being neither distinct
through incapacitie to apprehend and sort things
aright, nor ye constant to it selfe through vnsettlednesse
and leuitie of iudgement. Certainly his misprision
of the Truth is so muchInuoluntarium mintut de ratione peccati. lesser, then the
others wilfull Calumnie; as it proceedeth lesse from
the irregularitie of the Will to the Iudgement.
And of such a man there is good hope, that both
in time he may see his errour, and repent expresly
and particularly for it; and that in the meane time
he doth repent for it implicitè, and inclusiuely in his
generall contrition for, and confession of the massie



lumpe of his hidden, andPsalm. 19. 
               secret, and vnknowne
sinnes. This Charity bindeth vs both to hope for
the future, and to thinke for the present: and Saint
Pauls example and wordes in the1. Tim. 1. 13. place but now
alledged, are very comfortable to this purpose.
But yet full thus much is certaine: He that through
ignorance, or for want of apprehension or iudgement,
or by reason of whatsoeuer other defect or
motiue, bringeth a slander vpon any diuine Truth;
though neuer so perplexed with difficulties, or open
to cauill: vnlesse he repent for it, either in the
particular, (and that he must do, if euer God open
his eyes, and let him see his fault,) or at leastwise
in the generall; it is still a damnable sinne in him,
His damnation is iust. We haue the very case almost
in terminis layd downe, and thus resolued in 2. Pet.
3.
               2. Pet. 3. 18. 
               In which are some things hard to be vnderstood,
(obserue the condition of the things, hard to be vnderstood)
which they that are vnlearned, and vnstable,
(obserue also the condition of the persons, vnlearned,
and vnstable,) wrest, as they doe also the other
Scriptures, to their owne destruction. Where we
haue the matter of great difficulty, hard to bee vnderstood;
the persons of small sufficiencie, vnlearned,
and vnstable: and yet if men, euen of that weaknesse,
wrest and peruert truths, though of that hardnesse,
they do it 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , to their owne
destruction, saith Saint Peter there; to their owne iust
damnation, saith S. Paul in my Text. This from the
Censure in the first sense.
            
               
Take it in the other sense,§ 13. We must not do any euill, for any good. with reference to this
vngodly resolution, Let vs doe euill, that good may
come: it teacheth vs, that no pretension of doing it
in ordine ad Deum, for Gods glory, to a good end,
or any other colour whatsoeuer, can excuse those
that presume to doe euill; but that still the euill
they doe is damnable, and it is but iust with God
to render damnation to them for it. Whose damnation
is iust. And thus vnderstood, it openeth vs a
way to the consideration of that maine Principle
whereof I spake, and whereon by your patience I
desire to spend the remainder of my time; namely
this: We must not for any good, doe any euill. For the
farther opening, and better vnderstanding whereof,
(since the rule is of infinite vse in the vvhole
practice of our liues:) that wee may the better
know when, and where, and how farre to apply it
aright for the direction of our Consciences and
Actions; wee must of necessitie vnfold the extent of
this word, euill, and consider the seuerall kinds and
degrees of it distinctly and apart. Wee must not
doe euill, that good may come.
            First,§. 14. Touching euils of paine. 
               euill is of two sorts. The euill of fault, and
the euill of punishment. Malum delicti, and Malum
supplicij; asTertul. l. 2. adu. Marcion cap. 14. 
               Tertullian calleth them: or as the more
receiued termes are, Malum Culpae, and Malum
Poenae. The euill we commit against God, and the
euill God inflicteth vpon vs. The euill we doe; vniustly,
but yet willingly: and the euill we suffer vnwillingly,
but yet iustly. In a word, the euill of sinne,
and the euill of paine. Touching euils of paine; if



the Case be put, when two such euils are propounded,
and both cannot be auoided, whether we may
not make choyce of the one, to auoid the other.
The resolution is common and good from the old
Maxime, è malis minimum, wee may incurre the
lesser, to preuent the greater euill. As wee may
deliuer our purse to a Theefe, rather then fight
vpon vnequall termes to saue it: and in a tempest
cast our wares into the Sea, to lighten the Ship
that it wracke not: and indure the launcing and
searing of an old sore, to keepe it from festering
and spreading. And this Principle in my Text
is not a rule for that Case: that being propounded
concerning euils of Paine; whereas my Text is intended
onely of the euils of Sinne. Wee are herehence
resolued, that we are not to doe any euill, that
good may come of it: for all which yet we may
suffer some euill, that good may come of it. Although
(to note that by the way) the common answere
è malis minimum, euen in euils of Paine is to
be vnderstood, (as most other practicall conclusions
are) not as simply and vniuersally; but as commonly
and ordinarily true. For (as
                  Slater on this place. one saith well)
perhaps there are Cases, wherein two euils of Paine
being at once propounded, it may not bee safe for
vs to be our owne caruers.
            But I must let passe the Questions concerning
euils of Paine, as impertinencies.§ 15. Euils of sin simply such. The euils of sin are
of two sorts. Some are euill formally, simply, & perse;
such as are directly against the scope & purpose
of some of Gods Commandements: as Atheisme


               
against the first, Idolatry against the second, and so
against the rest, Blasphemy, Prophanenesse, Disloyalty,
Cruelty, Adultary, Iniustice, Cal
                     •
                  mny, 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and
the like; all which are euill in their owne nature,
and can neuer (positis quibuscun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   circumstantiis)
be done well. Othersome are euill onely respectiuely,
and by accide
                     •
                  t: but otherwise in their own nature
indifferent; and such as may be, and are done
sometimes well, sometimes ill. To know the nature
of which things the better, since they are of singular
vse for the resolution of many Cases of Conscience.
We must yet more distinctly inquire into
the different kinds (or rather degrees) of indifferent
things; and into the different meanes, whereby
things otherwise in nat
                     •
                  re indifferent, become accidentally
euill for their vse.
            Indifferent things are either equally,
               §. 16 Things equally indifferent. or vnequally
such. We may call them for distinctions sake (and
I thinke not altogether vnfitly)
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               indifferentia ad
vtrumlibet; and
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               indifferentia ad vnum. Indifferentia
ad vtrumlibet, or equally indifferent things
are such, as (barely considered) are arbitrary either
way, and hang in aequilibrio betweene good
and euill, without turning the Scale either one
way or other, as not hauing any notable inclination
or propension vnto either rather then other: as
to drinke fasting, to walke into the fields, or to lift
vp ones hand vnto his head, &c. Now concerning
such things of these, if any man should bee so scandalous,
as to make a matter of conscience of them,
and should desire to be resolued in point of conscience



whether they were good or euill; as namely,
whether hee should doe well or ill, to walke abroad
into the fields a mile or two with his friend, the
thing it selfe is so equally indifferent, that it were
resolution enough to leaue it in medio, and to answere
him, there were neither good nor hurt in it:
the Action of walking, barely considered, being not
greatly either morally good, or morally euill. 
               I say
morally; for in matter of health or ciuility, or otherwise
it may be good, or euill: but notQuia eorum ob
                        •
                     ectum non includit aliquid pertinens ad ordmem rationis. Aquin. 1. 2. qu. 18. art. 8. in corp.
                   
                  morally,
and spiritually, and in matter of conscience.
               
And I say withall barely considered, for there may
be circumstances, which may make it accidentally
euill. As to walke abroad in the fields, when a man
should be at Diuine Seruice in the Church, is by
accident morally euill; through the circumstance of
Time: as on the contrary, not to walke, if we haue
promised to meet a friend at such a time and in
such a place, who standeth need of our present
helpe, is by accident morally euill, through the
obligation of that former promise. But yet still,
these and other circumstances set aside; barely to
walke, or barely not to walke, and the like, are Indifferentia
ad vtrumlibet, things in their owne nature
(and that equally) indifferent.
            Things vnequally indifferent are such, as though
they be neither vntuersally good,§ 17. And things vnequally indifferent. nor absolutely euill;
yet when barely considered, sway more or
lesse rather the one way then the other. And that
either vnto good; or vnto euill. Of the former sort
are such outward actions, as beeing in Morall precepts



               indefinitely commanded, are yet sometimes
sinfully and ill done: as, giuing an Almes, hearing
a Sermon, reprouing an offender; and the like.
Which are in themselues good; and so to bee accounted,
rather then euill, though some vnhappy
 circumstance or other may make them ill. Of the
later sort are such outward actions, as beeing in
Morall precepts indefinitely prohibited, are yet in
some cases lawfull, and may be well done: as, swearing
an oath, trauelling on the Sabbath day, playing
for money; and the like. Which are in themselues
rather euill, then good, because they are euer euill,
vnlesse all circumstances concurre to make them
good. Now of these actions, though the former
sort carry the face of good, the later of euill; yet in
very truth both sorts are indifferent. Vnderstand
mee aright: I doe not meane indifferent indifferentiâ
contradictionis, such as may bee indifferently either
done, or not done; but indifferent onely indifferentiâ
contrarietatis, such as (suppose the doing)
may be indifferently either good or euill: because
so they may be done, as to bee good, and so
they may be done also, as to be euill. But yet with
this difference, that those former, though indifferent,
and in some cases euill, are yet of themselues
notably and eminently inclined vnto good rather then
euill; and these later proportionably vnto euill rather
then good. From which difference it commeth
to passe, that to the Question barely proposed
concerning the former actions, whether they bee
good or euill; the answere is iust and warrantable,



to say indefinitely they are good: and contrarily concerning
the later actions, to say indefinitely, they
are euill.
            
            Which difference well weighed (to note that by
the way) would serue to iustifie a common practice
o
                  ••
               ost of vs in the exercise of our Ministerie,§ 18. A profitable digression, occasioned from the premises.
against such as distaste our doctrine for it, or vniustly
otherwise take offence at it. Ordinarily in our
Sermons we indefinitiuely condemne as euill, swearing,
and gaming for money, and dancing, and recreations
vpon the Sabbath day, and going to Law, and
retaliation of iniuries, and Monopolies, and raising of
rents, and taking forfeitures of Bonds, &c. and in our
owne co
                  •
               t Non-residency, and Pluralities, &c. Most
of which yet, and many other of like nature, most
of vs doe or should know to be in some cases lawful;
and therefore in the number of those indifferent
things which we call Indifferentia ad vnum. You
that are our hearers should bring so much charitable
discretion with you, when you heare vs in the
Pulpits condemne things of this nature; as to vnderstand
vs no otherwise, then wee either doe or
should meane, and that is thus: that such and such
things are euil, as now adayes, through the corruptions
of the times, many men vse them; and such
as therefore should not be aduentured vpon without
mature & vnpartiall disquisition of the vprightnesse
of our affections therein, and a seuere tryall
of all circumstances, whether they carry weight
enough with them to giue our consciencesLet euery man be fully perswaded (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) in his own mind, verse 5. su
                     •
                  
                  ficient
security, not onely of their lawfulnesse in



selues, and at large, but of their particular lawfulnesse
too vnto vs, and them.
                But this by the way.
            Now to proceed.§ 19. How things become accidentally euill. There are diuers meanes wherby
things not simply euill, but in themselues (either
equally or vnequally) indifferent, may yet become accidentally
euill. Any defect or obliquity, any vnhappy
enteruening circumstance, is enough to poison
a right good action, and to make it starke naught.
I may as well hope to graspe the Sea, as to comprehend
all those meanes. I make choyce therefore to
remember but a few of the chiefest; such as happen
oft and are very considerable. Things not simply euill,
may accidentally become such, as by sundry other
meanes; so especially by one of these th
                  •
               e
                  •
               :

               Conscience, Scandall, and Comparison. First, Conscience,
in regard of the Agent, though the thing be good,
yet if the Agent do it with a condemning, or but a
doubting Conscience, the Action becōmeth euill.
Rom. 14. 14 
               To him that esteemeth any thing to be vncleane, to
him it is v
                     •
                  eleane, and
               Ibid. vers. 23 
               he that doubteth, is damned
if he eate, because he eateth not of faith, vers. 14. & 23.
 of this Chapter. Secondly, Scandal
                     •
                  , in regard of other
men. Though the thing be good, yet if a brother
Ibid. vers. 21. 
               stumble, or be offended, or be made weake by it,
the action becommeth euill.Ibid. vers. 20. 
               All things are pure;
but it is euill for that man who eateth with offence,
                ver. 20. Thirdly Comparison, in regard of other actions.
Though the thing be good, yet if we preferre it
before better things, and neglect or omit them for
it, the action becommeth euill.Math. 9. 13. 
               Go and learn what
that is, I will haue mercy and not sacrifice, Math. 9.
            
               
The stuffe thus prepared,§ 20. Nothing simply euil, may be done for any good to come thereby. by differencing out
those things, which vndistinguished, might breed
confusion: our next businesse must be, to lay to the
Rule, and to apply it to the seuerall kinds of Euill,
as they haue bin differenced. I foresaw we should
not haue time to goe thorow all that was intended:
and therefore we will content our selues for
this time, with the consideration of this Rule, applyed
to things simply euill. In them the Rule holdeth
perpetually, and without exception. That
which is simply euill, may not for any good be done: We
know not any greater good (for there is not any
greater good) then the glory of God: we scarce know
a lesser sinne (if any sinne may be accounted little)
then a harmelesse officious lye. Yet may not
                  Vide fusè Augustinum in lib. de Mendacio; & contra Mendacium; & alibi. this
be done; no not for that. Will you speake wickedly for
God, and talke deceitfully for him? Iob 13. 7. If not
for the glory of God; then certainely not for any
other inferiour end: not for the sauing of a life; not
for the conuersion of a soule; not for the peace of a
Church; and (if euen that were possible too) not for
the redemption of a world. No intention of any
end can warrant the choyce of sinfull meanes to
compasse it.§ 21. The first Reason.
            
            The reasons are strong. One is; because sinne in
its owne nature, isSuapte naturâ repugnat peccato, quòd sit eligibile: & proptereance propter se, nec propter aliud bonum, est eligibile. Caie
                        •
                     . in hunc locum.
                
               de numero ineligibilium: and
therefore as not eligible propter se, for it selfe sake,
(there is neither forme nor beauty in it, that wee
should desire it;) so neither propter aliud, with reference
to any farther end. Actus peccati non est ordinabilis
in bonum finem; is the common resolution



of the Schooles. In ciuill and popular elections, if
men take choyce of such a person, to beare any office
or place among them; as by the locall Charters,
Ordinances, Statutes, or other Customes which
should rule them in their choice, is altogether ineligible:
the election is de iure nulla, naught and
voyde; the incapacitie of the person elected, making
a nullity in the act of election. No lesse is it in morall
actions and elections: if for any intended end wee
make choice of such meanes, as by the Law of
God (which is our rule, and must guide vs) are ineligible;§ 22. The second Reason.
and such is euery sinne.
            Another reason is grounded vpon that Principle,
Aquin. 1. secundae. qu. 18 art. 4. ad 3. & qu. 19. art. 6. ad 1. ex Dionysio, cap. 4. de diuin. nomin. 
               Bonum ex causa integra, Malum ex partiali.
Any partiall or particular defect, in Obiect, End,
Maner, or other Circumstance, is inough to make
the whole action bad; but to make it good, there
must be an vniuersallNon est actis bona s
                     •
                  npliciter, nisi 
                     •
                  mnes bonitates concurrant: sed quilibet defectus singularis causa
                     •
                   malum. Aquin. 1. 2. qu. 18. art. 4. ad 3. concurrence of all requisite
conditions in euery of these respects: As a disfigured
eye, or nose, or lippe, maketh the face deformed;
but to make it comely, there is required the
due proportion of euery part. And any one short
Clause, or Prouiso, not legall, is sufficient to abate
the whole writ or instrument, though in euery
other part absolute, and without exception. The
Intention then, be it granted neuer so good, is vnsufficient
to warrant an Action good; so long as it
faileth either in the obiect, or maner, or any requisit
circumstance whatsoeuer.1. Sam. 15. 20, &c. 
               Saul pretended a
good end, in sparing the fat things of Amalek; that
he might therewith do sacrifice to the Lord: but God



reiected both it and him, 1. Sam. 15. We can thinke
no other, but that2. Sam. 6. 6, 7. 
               Vzzah intended the safety
of Gods Arke, when it tottered in the cart, and hee
stretched out his hand to stay it from falling: but
God interpreted it a presumption, and punished it,
2. Sam. 6. DoubtlesseMath. 16. 22, 23. 
               Peter meant no hurt to
Christ, but rather good; when hee tooke him aside,
and aduised him to be good to himselfe, and to
keepe him out of danger: yet Christ rebuked him
for it, and set him packing in the Deuils name, Get
thee behinde me, Sathan, Mat. 16.
            But what will wee say (and let that stand for a
third reason) if our pretended good intention proue
indeed no good intention?§ 23. The third Reason. And certainly, be it as
faire and glorious, as we could be content to imagine
it, such it will proue to be, if it set vs vpon any
sinfull or vnwarranted meanes; indeed no good intention,
but a bad. For granted it must be, that the
Intention of any end doth virtually include the
meanes: as in a Syllogisme, the Premises doe the
Conclusion. No more then can the choice of ill
meanes proceed from a good intention; then can a
false Conclusion be inferred from true Premises: and
that is impossible. From which ground it is, that
theGreg. lib. 28. Moral. cap. 13; Euseb. Enuss. hom. 26; and others. 
                  Fathers, and other Diuines do oftentimes
argue from the intention to the action, and from
the goodnesse of the one, to the goodnesse of
both: to that purpose applying those speeches of
our Sauiour, in the twelfth, and in the sixth of
Mathew,
                  Math. 12. 33. 
                  Either make the tree good, and his fruit
good: or else make the tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt:


                  
And,Math. 6. 22, 23. 
                  if thine eye be single, thy whole bodie
shall be full of light: but if thine eye be euill, thy
whole body shall be full of darknesse.
                The light of the
body, is the eye; and the worke, the intention. No
maruell, when the eye is euill, if the whole body bee
darke; and when the intention is euill, if the whole
worke be naught. That which deceiueth most men
in iudging of good or bad intentions is, that they
take the end, and the intention, for one and the same
thing: betwixt which two there is a spacious difference.
For the end, is the thing propter quid, for
which we worke, that whereat we ayme in working,
and so hath rationem causae finalis: but the intention
is the cause à qua, from which we worke, that which
setteth vs on working; and so hath rationem cause
efficientis. 
               Now betweene these two kindes of
causes, the finall and the efficient, there is not only
a great difference, but euen a repugnancie; in
such sort, as that it is impossible they should at
any time coincidere, which some other kinds of
causes may doe. It is therefore an error to think,
that if the end bee good, the intention of that end
must needs be good: for there may as well be a bad
intention of a good end, as a bad desire of a good
obiect. Whatsoeuer the end be we intend, it is certaine
that intention cannot be good, which putteth
vs vpon the choice of euill meanes.
               §. 24. The first Inference against the Church of Rome.
            
            Me thinkes the Church of Rome should blush, (if
her forehead dyed red with the blood of Gods
Saints, were capable of any tincture of shame,) at
the discouery of her manifold impostures, in counterfeiting



of Reliques, in coyning of Miracles, in
compiling of Legends, in gelding of good Authors
by expurgatory Indexes; in iuggling with Magistrates
by lewd Equiuocations, &c. Practices warrantable
by no pretence. Yet in their account but

                  Sancta Hypocrisis, was Dominicus his word. 
               p
                     •
                  aefraudes; for so they terme them, no lesse ridiculously,
then falsly: for the one word contradicteth
another. But what doe I speake of these, but
petty things, in comparison of those her lowder
impieties? breaking couenants of truce and peace;
dissoluing of lawfull, and dispensing for vnlawfull
marriages; assoyling Subiects from their Oaths and
Allegiance; plotting Treasons, and practising Rebellions;
excommunicating and dethroning Kings; arbittarie
disposing of Kingdomes; stabbing and murthering
of Princes; warranting vniust inuasions; and
blowing vp Parliament houses. For all which, and
diuers other foule attempts, their Catholique defence
is the aduancement (forsooth) of the Catholique
Cause: Like his in the Poet,Horat. lib. 1 Epist. 1. 
               Quocunque modorem,
is their Resolution: by right, or wrong, the
State of the Papacie must be vpheld. That is their
vnum Necessartum: and if heauen fauour not; rather
then faile, helpe must be had fromFlecte esi nequeo Superos, Ach
                     ••
                  unta monebo. Virg. Ae. neid 7. 
               hell, to keepe
Antichrist in his throne.
            But to let them passe,§ 25. The second Inference against a vulgar error. and touch neerer home.
There are (God knoweth) many Ignorants abroad
in the world: some of them so vnreasonable, as to
thinke they haue sufficiently non-plus't any reprouer;
if being admonished of something ill done,
they haue but returned this poore reply, Is it not



better to do so, then to do worse? But alasse, what necessitie
of doing either so, or worse; when Gods law
bindeth thee from both?Iam. 2. 10. 11. 
               
                  He that sayd, Do not
commit adultery; said also, Do not kill: and he that
said, Doe not steale; said also, Doe not lie. If then
thou lie, or kill, or doe any other sinne; though
thou thinkest thereby to auoyd stealth, or adultery,
or some other sinne: yet thou art become a
transgressour of the Lawe; and by offending in one
point of it, guilty of all. It is but a poore choyce,
when a man is desperately resolued to cast himselfe
away; whether hee should rather hang, or
drowne, or stab, or pine himselfe to death: there
may be more horror, more paine, more lingring,
in one then another; but they all come to one
period, and determine in the same point; death is
the issue of them all. And it can be but a slender
comfort for a man, that will needs thrust himselfe
into the mouth of hell by sinning wilfully,
that he is damned rather for lying, then for stealing,
or whoring, or killing, or some greater crime:
Damnation is the wages of them all. Murther can
but hang a man; and (without fauour) Petty-Larceny
will hang a man too: The greatest sinnes
can but damne a man; and (without Gods mercie)
the smallest will damne a man too. But what?
wil some reply: In case two sinnes be propounded,
may I not do the lesser, to auoid the greater? otherwise
must I not of necessitie doe the greater?
The answere is short and easie: If two sinnes bee
propounded, doe neither, E malis minimum, holdeth



as you heard (and yet not alwayes neither) in
euils of Paine: But that is no Rule for euils of sinne.
Here the safer Rule is, è malis nullum. And the reason
is sound; from the Principle wee haue in hand.
If wee may not doe any euill, to procure a positiue
good: certainlyEâdem doctrin
                     •
                  , qua horremus facere mala vt eueniant bona, horrere debem
                     •
                  us facere mala vt euitemus peiora. Euitare enim peiora, multò minus bonum est; quàm euenire bonum. Caietan. hic.
                much lesse may wee doe one
euill, to auoid or preuent another.
            But what if both cannot bee auoided,§ 26. The obiection from the seeming case of perplexitie remoued. but that
one must needs be done? In such a strait may
I not chuse the lesser? To thee; I say againe, as before,
Chuse neither. To the Case, I answere; it is no
Case: because; as it is put, it is a case impossible. For
Nem
                     •
                   angustiatur ad peccandum: the Case cannot
be supposed, wherein a man should be so strai
                  •
               ned,
as he could not come off fairly without sinning. A
man by rashnesse, or feare, or frailety, may foulely
entangle himselfe; and through the powerfull engagements
of sinne driue himselfe into very narrow
straites, or be so driuen by the fault or iniury
of others: yet there cannot be any such straits, as
should enforce a necessitie of sinning; but that stil
there is one path or other out of them without
sinne. The Perplexity that seemeth to bee in the
things, is rather in theNon enim datur perplexio ex parte rerum: sed contingere potest ex parte hominis nesciētis euadere, nec videntis aditum euadendi absque aliquo peccato. Caiet. hîc. See the glosse on dist. 13. item aduersus▪ where hee proueth against Gratian that there can bee no perplexitie.
                   
                  men; who puzzle and lose
themselues in the Labyrinths of sinne, because
they care not to heed the clue that would lead
them out, if it were well followed. Say, a man
through heate of bloud make a wicked vow to kill



his brother: heere hee hath by his owne rashnesse
brought himselfe into a seeming strait, that either
he must commit a murther, or breake a vow; either
of which seemeth to bee a great sinne, the one against
the fifth, the other against the third commandement.
But here is in very deed no strait or
perplexity at all: Heere is a faire open course for
him without sinne. Hee may breake his vow; and
there an end. Neither is this the choyce of the
lesser sinne; but onely theNon d
                        •
                     cet eligere minur peccatum, sed solutionem minoris nexus. Caietanus hîc. speaking of Councell of Toledo. loosening of the
lesser bond: the bond of charitie beeing greater,
then the bond of a promise; and there beeing
good reason that (in termes of inconsistency,
when both cannot stand,) the lesser bond should
yeeld to the greater. But is it not a sinne for a
man to breake a vow? Yes, where it may be kept
saluis charitate & iustitia, there the breach is a
sinne: but in the case proposed, it is no sinne. As
Christ saith in the point of swearing, so it may be
said in the point of breach of vow,
                  Math. 
                        •
                     37. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
Neuer was any breach of vow; but it was
peccatum, or expeccato: the breaking is either it
selfe formally a sinne; or it argueth at least a former
sinne, in the making.
                So as the sinne, in the
case alledged, was before in making such an vnlawfull
vow; and for that sinne the party must repent:
but the breaking of it now it is made, is no new
sinne; (rather it is a necessarie dutie, and a branch
of that repentance which is due for the former
rashnesse in making it,) because a hurtfull vow is,
(and that virtute praecepti) rather to be broken then



kept. TheExod 1. 16, &c. 
               Aegyptian Midwiues, not by their
owne fault, but by Pharaohs tyrannous command,
are driuen into a narrow strait, enforcing a seeming
necessitie of sinne: for either they must destroy the
Hebrew children, and so sinne by Murther; or else
they must de
                  •
               ise some hansome shift to carry it
cleanely from the Kings knowledge, and so sinne
by lying. And so they did; they chose rather to lye,
then to kill: as indeed in the comparison it is by
much the lesser sinne. But the very truth is, they
should haue done neither: they should flatly haue
refused the Kings commandement, though with
hazzard of their liues; and haue resolued rather to
suffer any euill, then to do any. 
               And so Lot should
haue done: hee should rather haue aduentured
his owne life, and theirs too, in protecting the
chastitie of his Daughters, and the safety of his
ghests; then haueGen. 19. 8. offered the exposall of his
Daughters to the lusts of the beastly Sodomites,
though it were to redeeme his ghests from the abuse
of fouler and more abominable filthinesse.
Absolutely; there cannot be a case imagined, wherin
it should be impossible to auoid one sin, vnlesse
by the committing of another. The case which of
all other commeth neerest to a Perplexity, is that of
an erroneous conscience: 
               because of a double bond;
the bond of Gods Law; which toSinne is the transgression of the Law, 1. Ioh. 3, 4. transgresse,
is a sinne; and the bond of particular conscience,
which also toWhatsoeuer is not of Faith, is sinne, Rom. 14. 23. Omne quod fit contra consci
                     
                        ••
                     tiam, aedificat ad gehennam. c. 28. q. 1. Omnes. §. Ex his.
                   transgresse, is a sinne, Whereupon
there seemeth to follow an ineuitable necessitie
of sinning; when Gods Law requireth



one thing, and particular conscience dictateth th
                     •
                  
flat contrary: For in such a case, a man must either
obey Gods Law, and so sinne against his
owne conscience; or obey his owne conscience,
and so sinne against Gods Law. But neither in
this case is there any Perplexitie at all in the
things themselues: that which there is, is through
the default of the man onely, whose iudgement
being erroneous mis-leadeth his conscience, and
so casteth him vpon a necessitie of sinning. But
yet the necessitie is no simple, and absolute, and
vnauoidable and perpetuall necessitie: for it is
onely a necessitie ex hypothesi; and for a time, and
continueth but stante tali errore.
                And still there is
a way out betwixt those sinnes, and that without a
third: and that way is dep
                     •
                  nere erroneam conscientiam.
He must rectifie his iudgement, and reforme
the errour of his Conscience, and then all is well.
There is no perplexitie, no necessitie, no obligation,
no expediencie; which should either enforce, or
perswade vs to any sinne. The resolution is damnable,
Let vs doe euill, that good may come.
            
            I must take leaue,§ 27. The Rule applyed in two instances. before I passe from this point,
to make two instances; and to measure out from
the Rule of my Text an answere to them both. They
are such, as I would desire you of this place to take
due and speciall consideration of. I desire to deale
plainely; and I hope it shall bee (by Gods blessing
vpon it) effectually, for your good, and the Churches
peace. One instance shall bee in a sinne of
Commission; the other, in a sinne of Omission.
            
            
               
The sinne of Commission wherein I would instance,§. 28. The former instance.
is indeed a sinne beyond Commission: it is
the vsurping of the Magistrates Office without a
Commission. The Question is; whether the zealous
intention of a good end may not warrant it good,
or at least excuse it from being euill, and a sinne? I
need not frame a Case for the illustration of this instance:
the inconsiderate forwardnes of some hath
made it to my hand. You may reade it in the disfigured
windowes and wals of this Church: Pictures,
and Statua's, and Images; and for their sakes the
windowes and walles wherein they stood, haue been
heretofore, and of late pulled down, and broken in
pieces and defaced: without the Command, or so
much as leaue of those who haue power to reforme
things amisse in that kinde. Charitie bindeth vs to
thinke the best of those that haue done it: that is,
that they did it out of a forward (though mis-gouerned)
zeale; intending therein Gods glory in the
farther suppression of Idolatry, by taking away these
(as they supposed) likely occasions of it. Now in
such a case as this, the Question is, whether the intention
of such an end, can iustifie such a deed? And
the fact ofNumb. 2
                     •
                  . 7, 8. 
               Phinehes, Numb. 25. (who for a
much like end, for the staying of the people from
Idolatry, executed vengeance vpon Z
                     •
                  mri & Cosbi,
beeing but a priuate man, and no Magistrate;)
seemeth to make for it.§ 29. Reserued from the rule of my Text.
            
            But my Text ruleth it otherwise. If it bee euill;
it is not to bee done, no not for the preuenting of
Idolatry. I passe by some considerations otherwise



of good moment; as namely first, whether Statua's
and Pictures may not be permitted in Christian
 Churches, for the adorning of Gods House,
and for ciuill and historicall vses, not onely lawfully
and decently, but euen profitably? 
               I must confesse,
I neuer yet heard substantiall reason giuen, why
 they might not. And secondly, whether things
either in their first erection, or by succeeding abuse
superstitious, may not be profitably continued, if
the Superstition be abolished? Otherwise, not
Pictures onely, and Crosses, and Images; but
most of our Hospitals, and Schooles, and Colledges,
and Churches too must downe: and so the hatred
of Idolatry should but Vsher in licentious Sacriledge,
contrary to that passage of our Apostle in
the next Chapter before this,Rom. 2. 22. 
                  Thou that abhorrest
Idols, committest thou Sacriledge?
                And

               thirdly, whether these forward ones haue not bewrayed
somewhat their owne selfe▪ guiltinesse in
this Act, at least for the manner of it, in doing it secretly
and in the darke? A man should not dare to
doe that, which he would not willingly either bee

               seene when it is a doing, or our owne, being done. To
passe by these; consider no more but this one thing
onely, into what dangerous and vnsufferable absurdities
a man might runne, if hee should but follow
these mens grounds. Erranti nullus terminus:
Errour knoweth no stay, and a false Principle once
receiued, multiplyeth into a
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Arist. l. 1. Phys. 
                     •
                  ec. 22. thousand absurd
conclusions. It is good for men to goe vpon sure
grounds, else they may runne and wander in infinit.


               
A little errour at the first, if there bee way giuen to
it, will increase beyond beliefe; as a small sparke
may fire a large Citie, & a
                     
                        •
                     . King. 18. 44, 45. 
                  cloud no bigger then
a mans hand, in short space ouerspread the face of
the whole Heauens. For grant, for the suppression
of Idolatry, in case the Magistrate will not
doe his office, that it is lawfull for a priuate man to
take vpon him to reforme what he thinketh amisse,
and to doe the part and Office of a Magistrate
(which must needs haue bin their ground, if they
had any, for this action:) there can be no sufficient
cause giuen, why by the same reason, and vpon the
same grounds, a priuate man may not take vpō him
to establish Lawes, raise Powers, administer Iustice,
execute malefactors, or do any other thing the Magistrate
should do; in case the Magistrate slack to
doe his duty in any of the premises. Which if it
were once granted (as granted it must bee, if these
mens fact bee iustifyable;) euery wise man seeth,
the end could bee no other but vast Anarchy and
confusion both in Church and Common-weale: wherupon
must vnauoidably follow the speedy subuersion
both of Religion and State. If things be amisse,
and the Magistrate helpe it not; priuate men may
lament it, and as occasion serueth, and their condition
and calling permitteth, soberly and discreetly
put the Magistrate in minde of it: But they may not
make themselues Magistrates,§ 30. The example of Phinehes examined, to reforme it.
            
            And as to the act of Phinehes: though I rather
thinke he did; yet what if he did not well in so doing?
It is a thing we are not certaine of: and wee



must haue certainer grounds for what we do, then
 vncertaine examples. Secondly, what if Phinehes
had the Magistrates authoritie to enable him to
that attempt? It is not altogether improbable (to
my apprehension) from the fifth Verse of the chapter
where the Story is laid downe, Numb. 25. 5. especially
paralleld with another Story of much like
circumstances, Exod. 32. 27. that as there the Leuites,
so heere Phinehes drew the sword in execution
of the expresse command of Moses the supreme
 Magistrate. If neither thus, nor so: yet thirdly,
(which cutteth off all plea, and is the most cōmon
answere ordinarily giuen by Diuines to this & the
like instances drawne from some singular actions
of Gods Worthies;) Men of Heroicall spirits and
gifts, such as were Dauid, Samson, Ehud, Moses,
Elias, and some others, especially at such times as
they were employed in some speciall seruice for
the good of Gods Church, were exempt from the
common rules of life: and did many things, (as wee
are to presume) not without theNec Samson aliter excusatur, quòd scipsum cū hostibus 
                     •
                  uin
                     •
                   domus oppressit, nisi quòd latenter Spiritus Sanctus hoc iusserat, qui per illum miracula faciebat. Augustin. l. 1. de ciu. Dei ca. 
                        •
                     1. Si desenditur non fuisse peccatum, priuatum hab
                     •
                  isse Consilium indubitanter credendus est. Bern.
                
               secret motion and
direction of Gods holy and powerfull Spirit, which
were therefore good in them (that secret direction
beeing to them loco specialis mandati, like that to
Gen 22. 2. 
               Abraham for sacrificing his sonne) but not safe,
or lawfull for vs to imitate. Opera liber
                     •
                   spiritus,
               Chytr. in Gen. 14. & in Exod 32. say Diuines, non sunt exigenda ad regulas communes,
nec trahenda in exemplum vitae. The extraordinary
Heroicall Acts of Gods Worthies are not to bee
measured by the common rules of life, nor to become
exemplary vnto others. Of which nature was



               1. Sam. 17. 
               Dauids single combate with Goliah; and
Iudg. 16. 30. 
               Samsons pulling downe the house vpon himselfe
and the Philistines; andExod. 2. 12 
                  Moses slaying
the Aegyptian; andIudg. 3. 15, &c. 
                  Ehuds stabbing of King
Eglon,
                 ; and4. King. 1. 10. 12. 
               Eliahs calling downe for fire from
Heauen vpon the Captaines and their fifties, and
diuers others recorded in Scripture. Of which last
fact we haue our blessed Sauiours iudgement, in
Luke 9. that it was done by the extraordinary and
peculiar instinct of Gods Spirit, but is not to bee
imitated by others, withoutImitando ab alijs exprimi nec poss
                     •
                  ut, nec debent, nisi e
                     •
                  dem 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Spiritus excitentur. Chytr. in Exod. 2. 
               particular certaine
assurance of the like-instinct. Where when the
Disciples would haue called downe for fire from
Heauen vpon the Samaritanes, and alledged Elias
for their precedent;Luk. 9. 54. 
               Lord, wilt thou that we command
fire to come downe from Heauen and consume
them, as Elias did? His answere was with a kinde of
indignation (as both his
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Luk 9. 55. 
               gesture and speeches
shew) Nescitis cuius spiritus estis; You know not what
manner of spirit you are of. Elias was indued with an
extraordinary spirit, in the freedome whereof hee
did what he then did: but it is not for you or others
to propose his example, vnlesse you can demonstrate
his Spirit. And if Phinehes Act also was (as
mostDe Phinees au
                     •
                  em dicendum est, quid ex inspiratione diuina, zolo Dei commotus, hoc fecit, Aquin. 2. 2. qu▪ 60. art. 6. ad 2. & Theologi passim.
                thinke it was) such as these: it can no
more iustifie the vsurpation of Magistracie; then
Dauids act can bloudy Duels, or Samsons selfemurther;
or Moses's secret slaughter, or Ehuds
King-killing, or Eliahs priuate reuenge. I haue
stood the longer vpon the discouery of this sinne,
that men might take right iudgement of it; and



not thinke it either warrantable, or exc
                     •
                  sable by any
pretension of zeale, or of whatsoeuer other good:
and that both such as haue gone too farre this way
in their practice already, for the time past, may acknowledge
their owne ouersight, and bee sorry for
it; and others seeing their errour, may for the time
to come forbeare such outrages, and keepe themselues
within the due bounds of Christian sobriety,
and their particular Callings. And thus much of
the former instance; in a matter of Commission. I
am to giue you another, in a matter of Omission.
            
            Euery omission of a necessary duty is simply euill,
               §. 31. The later instance.
as a sinne. But affirmatiue duties, are but sometimes
necessarie; because they doe not obligare ad semper:
as, being many, it is impossible they should.
And many times duties otherwise necessarie; in
case of Superiour reason and duties cease to bee
necessarie pro hîc & nunc: and then to omit them,
is not to doe euill. Among other necessary duties
this is one, for a Minister furnished with gifts and
abilities for it; to acquaint Gods people with all
materiall needfull truths, as hee can haue conuenient
occasion thereunto. And (such conueniencie
supposed) not to doe this, isSacerdos deb
                     •
                  tor est, vt veritatem quam audiuit à Deo liberè praedice
                     •
                  . 1
                     •
                  . qu. 3. noli timere. Ex Ch
                     •
                  ysostom. 
               simply euill. Now
then, to make the Case and the Question. The Case
thus: A Minister hath iust opportunity to preach in
a Congregation, not his owne; where he seeth or
generally heareth some errour in iudgement, or
outragious sinne in practice to bee continued in
with too publique allowance: Hee hath libertie to
make choyce of his Text and theame, and leisure



to prouide in some measure for it; and his conscience
telleth him, he cannot pro hîc & nunc direct
his speech with greater seruice to Gods Church,
then against those errours or sinnes. Hee seeth on
the other side some withdrawments: his discretion
may perhaps bee called in question, for meddling
where he needed not; hee shall possibly lose the
good opinion of some, with whom he hath held faire
correspondence hitherto; he shall preserue his own
peace the better, if he turne his speech another way.
This is the Case. The Question is, whether these later
considerations, and the good that may come
thereby, bee sufficient to warrant vnto him the omission
of that necessary duty?
            The rule of my Text resolueth it negatiuely:
               § 32. A Minister, in what Cases he may conceale some diuine truths from his auditory; they
are not sufficient. The Duty being necessary, pro
hîc & nunc, it is simply euill to omit it; and therefore
it may not be omitted for any other good. I
deny not, but a Minister may with good discretion
conceale many truths from his flocke; at least the
opening and amplifying of them: if they bee not
such, as are needfull for them to know, either for
the stablishment of Faith, or practice of Life; as
not onely many nice Schoole-points and Conclusions
are, but also many Genealogies, and Leuiticall
rites, and other things euen in the Scriptures
themselues. Nay more, a Minister not only in discretion
may, but is euen in Conscience bound, at least
in the publike exercise of his Ministery, to conceale
some particular truths from his Auditory; yea
though they be such as are needful for the practice



of life, and for the settling of mens consciences: if
they be such withall, as are not fit to bee publikely
spoken of; as are many Resolutions of Cases appertaining
to the seuenth Commandement (Thou shalt
not commit adultery;) and some also appertaining to
the eighth (Thou shalt not steale.) Our men
               Moulin. Buckler of Faith, part. 2. sect. 4. and not onely ours, but some of their owne too: See Espenceus ad Tit. cap. 1. iustly
condemne the Popish Casuists, for their too much
liberty in this kind in their Writings: Whereby
they reduce vices into an Art, vnder colour of reprouing
them; and conuey into the mindes of
In quibus plus proficit vitiorum ignoratio, quàm cognitio virtutis. Iustin. lib. 2. Hist. cap. 2. corrupt men, Notions of such prodigious filthinesse,
and artificiall Leger-du-maine, as perhaps
otherwise they would neuer haue dreamed on,
or thirsted after. The loose writings of the vnchaste
Poets are butQuis veterū Poetarum pl
                        •
                     s obsco
                        •
                     nitatis, impuritatis, flagitiorum, professus 
                        〈◊〉
                     , quàm doc
                        •
                     t Poenitentiale Burchardi? Quot sint, qui ignorarent multa, quae ibi leguntur, nisi ex ipso didiciscent? I. R. in confut. fab. Burdon. pag. 305. dull tutors of Lust, compared
with the authorized Tomes of our seuere
Romish Votaries. There be enourmous sinnes of
this ranke, which a modest man would be ashamed
so much as to name, especially in publike. Now
of these, onely the generalities would bee touched
in the publike; the specialties not vnfolded, but in the
priuate exercise of our Ministery: nor yet that promiscuously
to euery one, that should out of curiositie
desire satisfaction in them; but onely to such
men, (and that but onely so farre,) as they may concerne
in point of Conscience, and of practice: Besides
these, there are other Cases many, in which
it may be more conuenient to conceale, then to teach
some diuine truthes at some times, and in some
places.
            
               
But yet as the Case is here proposed,§. 33. and in what he may not. if it bee a
truth questioned; about which Gods people are
much distracted in their opinions; much mistaken by
some through error in iudgement; much abused by
sinfull, especially publike practice; occasioning
Scandals and offences among brethren; likely to be
ouerwhelmed with custome, or multitude of those
that thinke or doe against it; and bee otherwise of
materiall importance: I take it, the Omission of it
vpon seasonable opportunitie, is a grieuous sinne,
and not colourable by any pretence. Beloued, the
Minister is not to come into the Pulpit, as a Fencer
vpon the stage, to play his prize, and to make a
faire
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 1. Cor. 9. 26. 
               flourish against sinne, (Here he could haue
it, and there hee could haue it, but hath it no
where:) but rather as a Captaine into the Field, to
bend his forces especially against the strongest
troupes of the enemy; and to squander, and breake
thorow the thickest rankes; and to driue at the
Fight neither with small nor great, saue onely with the King of Israel. 3. King, 22. 31. 
               fairest. It is not enough for a Prophet toEsay 581. 
               cry
aloud, and to lift vp his voyce like a trumpet, and to tell
Iudah and Israel of sinnes, and of transgressions at
large: but if he would whet them vp to the battell,
he must giue a moreIf the trumpet giue an vncertaine sound, who shall prepare himselfe to the battell? 1. Cor. 14. 8. 
               certaine sound; he must tell
Iudah of her sinnes, and Israel of her transgressions.
If there be in Damascus, or Moab, or Ammon, or Tyrus,
or Iudah, or Israel;
               Amos 1. & 2. three transgressions, or
foure, more eminent then the rest: it is fit, they that
are sent to Damascus, and Moab, and Ammon, and
Tyrus, and Iudah, and Israel, should make them
heare of those three or foure, more then all the rest.



               Sinnes and Errors, when they begin to get head
and heart, must be handled roughly Silence in such
a case is a kind of flattery: and it isPenè idem est. fidem nalle ass
                     •
                  rere▪ & nega
                     •
                  e. Fulgent▪ lib. 1. ad Thrasim. cap. 1. Sicut incauta locutio in errorem per
                     •
                  ra
                     •
                  it, ita indiscretum silentium in errore rel
                     •
                  nquit. Greg. in Moral.
                
               almost all one,
when sinnes grow outragious, to hold our peace
at them, and to cry Peace, Peace vnto them. Our
Apostle in Act. 20. would not haue held himselfe
sufficiently discharged from the guilt of other
mens blood; if he had shunned (as occasion was offered)
to haue declared vnto themAct. 20. 26, 27. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
euen the whole counsell of God.
            In my Application of this Instance and Case,
               § 34. A more particular Application, in defence of 
                     〈◊〉
                   former Sermon.
blame me not, if I do it with some reference to my
selfe. Being heretofore by appointment, as now
againe I was, to prouide my selfe for this place against
such a meeting as this is; as in my conscience
I then thought it needfull for me, I deliuered my
mind, (and I dare say, the Truth too, for substance)
something freely, touching the Ceremonies and Constitutions
of our Church. And I haue now also
with like freedome, shewed the vnlawfulnesse of
the late disorderly attempts in this towne; and that
from the ground of my present Text. I was then
blamed for that; I thinke vniustly; (for I do not yet
see what I should retract of that I then deliuered:)
and it is not vnlikely, I shall be blamed againe for
this, vnlesse I preuent it. You haue heard now already,
both heretofore, that to iudge any mans
heart; and at this time, that to slander any truth, are
(without repentance) sinnes iustly damnable: 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
they that offend either in the one, or the other,
their damnation is iust. To preserue therefore



both you from the Sinne, and my selfe from the
Blame; consider, I pray you, with Reason and Charity,
what I shall say.
            You that are our hearers, know not with what
hearts we speake vnto you: that is onely knowne to
our owne hearts; and to1. Ioh. 3. 20. 
               God, who is greater then
our hearts, and knoweth all things. That which you
are to looke at, and to regard, is, with what

                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Act. 17. 11. Non requiritur quis, vel qualis praedicet; sed quid praedicet. Distinct. 19. Secundum 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Plat. in Charmide.
                
               truth we speake vnto you. So long as what we
preach is true, and agreeable to Gods Word, and
right reason: you are not, vpon I know not what
light surmizes or suspicions, to iudge with what
spirits, or with what dispositions of heart wee
preach. Whether we1. Phi. 15. 16, 17, 18, 
               preach Christ of enuie, and
strife, or of good will; whether sincerely, or of contention;
whether in pretence, or in truth, it is our owne
good, or hurt: we must answere for that; and at our
perill be it, if we do not looke to that. But what is
that to you? Notwithstanding euery way, so long as
it is Christ, and his truth which are preached, it is
your part therein to reioyce. 
               If an
                  Gal. 1. 8, 9. 
                  Angel from
heauen should preach any vntruth vnto you, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
Let him bee accursed: but if the very Diuell
of hell should preach the truth, he must be heard,
and beleeued, and obeyed. So long asMath. 23. 2. 3 
                  Scribes
and Pharises hold them to Moses Text and Doctrine,
let them be as damnedWoe vnto you Scribes and Pharises, Hypocrites, Math. 23. 13, 14, &c.
                   
                  Hypocrites, as
Scribes and Pharises can bee: yet all whatsoeuer
they bid you obserue, that you are to obserue and do.
               
            
            Let mee then demand: Did I euer deliuer any
vntruth? It had beene well done then to haue



shewne it, that I might haue acknowledged, and retracted
it. Did I speake nothing but the truth? with
what conscience then could any that heard me say,
as yet I heare some did; That I preached factiously,
That I came to cast bones among them, That I
might haue chosen a fitter Text, That I might haue
had as much thankes to haue kept away? For Faction;
                I hate it: my desire and ayme, next after
the good of your soules, was, aboue all, the
Peace of the Church, and the Vnity of Brethren.
 For casting bones (if that must needs be the phrase)
they were cast in these parts long before my comming
by that great enemy to peace and vnity, and
busie sower of discord, the Diuell: otherwise I
should not haue found at my first comming such
snarling about them, and suchGal. 5. 15. 
               biting and de
                  
                     •
                  ouring
one another, as I did. My endeuour was rather
to haue gathered vp the bones, and to haue
taken away the matter of difference, (I meane, the
errour in iudgement about, and inconformity in
practice vnto the lawful Ceremonies of the Church)
that so if it had been possible all might haue beene
quiet, without despising or iudging one another for
 these things. For thankes; I hold not that worth
the answering: alas it is a poore ayme for Gods
Minister, to preach for thankes.
            
            
                For the choyce of my Text and Argument, both
then and now: how is it not vnequall, that men,
who plead (so as none more) for liberty and plainnesse
in reprouing sinne, should not allow those
that come amongst them that liberty and plainenesse


               
against themselues and their owne sinnes? I
dare no
                  •
                appeale to your selues. Haue you neuer
beene taught that it is the Ministers dutie, as to oppose
against all errours and sinnes in the generall,
so to bend himselfe (as neere as he can) especially
against the apparant errours and sinnes of his present
auditorie? And doe you not beleeue it is so?
Why then might I not nay, how ought I not,
bend my speech, both then against a common errour
of sundry in these parts in point of Ceremony;
and now against the late petulancy, (or at least ouersight)
of some mis-guided ones? The noise of
these things abroad; and the scandall taken thereat
by such as heare of them; and the ill fruits of
them at home in breeding iealousies, and cherishing
contentions among neighbo
                     •
                  rs: cannot
but stirre vs vp, if wee be sensible (as euery good
member should be) of the damage and losse the
Church acquireth by them, to put you in minde
and to admonish you (as opportunities inuite
vs) both priuately and publiquely. Is it not time,
trow yee, to thrust in the sickle, when the fields looke
white vnto the Haruest? Is it not time our Pulpits
should a little eccho of these things, when all the
Country farre and neere ringeth of them?
            For my owne part; how euer others censure me,
I am sure, my owne heart telleth mee, I could not
haue discharged my Conscience; if beeing called
to this place, I should haue balked what either then
or now I haue deliuered. My conscience prompting
mee, all circumstances considered, that these



things were pro hîc & nunc necessary to bee deliuered,
rather then any other: if for any outward inferiour
respect I should haue passed them ouer with
silence; I thinke I should haue much swarued from
the Rule of my Text, and haue done a great euill,
that some small good might come of it. But many
thousand times better were it for me, that all the
world should censure mee for speaking what they
thinke I should not; then that my owne heart
should condemne mee for not speaking what it telleth
me I should. And thus much of things simply
euill.
            
            I should proceed to apply this Rule, Wee must
not doe euill,
               §. 35. The conclusion. 
               that good may come; vnto euils, not simply,
but accidentally such: and that both in the generall,
and also in some few specials of greatest vse;
namely, vnto euils which become such through
Conscience, Scandall, or Comparison. In my choyce of
this Scripture, I aymed at all this: & had gathered
much of my prouision for it. But the Cases beeing
many and weighty; I foresaw I could not goe onward
with my first proiect, without much wronging
one of both: either the things themselues, if I
should contract my speech to the scantling of time;
or you, if I should lengthen it to the waight of the
matter. And therefore I resolued here to make an
end; and to giue place (as fit it is) to the businesse
whereabout we meet. The Totall of what I haue
said, and should say; is in effect but this: No pretension
of a good end, of a good meaning, of a good
euent, of any good whatsoeuer; either can sufficiently



               warrant any sinfull action to be done, or iustifie
it being done: or sufficiently excuse the Omission of
any necessarie dutie, when it is necessarie. Consider
what I say, and the Lord giue you vnderstanding
in all things. Now to God
the Father, Sonne, and holy
Spirit, &c.
            FINIS.
         
      
   