
      
         
            
            THE THIRD DAYES CREATION.
            By that most excellent, learned, and diuine Poet, VVilliam, Lord Bartas.
            
            
               Done verse for verse out of the originall French by THOMAS VVINTER, Maister of Arts.
            
            
               
                  At sacri vates, & diuum cura vocamur:
                  Sunt etiam qui nos numen habere putant.
               
            
            
               Ouid, Amorum lib. 3. Eleg. 8.
            
            
               LONDON, Printed for Thomas Clerke. 1604.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MOST EXCELLENT AND hopefull Prince Henry, by the grace of God Prince of VVales, Knight of the most renowmed order of the Garter, &c.
            
            
               ALthough (most gracious Prince) it be a commō receiued opinion, that the fruits of learning are only sweete, and the rootes bitter; yet to him that will be but a litle conuersant in the Hexameron of Du Bartas, it will rather appeare a paradox then a sound position. For though his subiect be verie excellent, and consequently verie difficult, for 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ; yet he hath made such an insensible mixture of profit and pleasure, & so artificially cōpounded them together, that when the reader thinks peraduenture but to tickle his eare, with the sweete measure and delicate cadencie of a maiestical verse; he finds that both Diuinity and Philosophy do steale vpon him vnawares, and make him learned, ere he thinke of being taught. Which I iudge to be one of manie reasons, why your Kingly Father in those his learned instructiōs to you his dearest Sonne, doth grace him with so high a commendation;

that he not onely thinkes him most worthie to be
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               read by any Prince, or other good Christian; but doth specially wish you to be well versed in his workes. Wherein his Maiesty hath bene so much pleased, that part of his poeticall exercises at vacant houres, haue bene translations of some of his poems; delighting to beautifie his books and speeches with such pit
                  •…
               ie sayings, as do abound in this incomparable Poet. The consideration hereof makes me presume, that this Translation which here I offer to your Princely view, shall not want gracious acceptance. Whereof I do the rather assure my selfe, remembring your gracefull embracing of my former Essay of this verie nature, coming but accidentally vnto your hands. In which confidence reposing my hopes, I humbly presume to take my leaue; continually praying for your Graces happie growth in all Princely and heroicall vertues.
            
               Your Highnesse in all humblesse of dutie
T. WINTER.
            
         
         
            
            
               Sur le troisiesme jour de la premiere Sepmaine, du Sieur Du Bartas, traduict en Anglois par Tho: Winter.
               
                  QVittant le pourpris & plancher de l'air,
                  D'où chet la gresle, esclairs, vents, & frimats,
                  Q
                        •…
                     i descochez nous liurent maints combats;
                  Tu prends ton vol vers la Terre & la Mer.
                  
               
               
                  Où pourmenant par les flairants destours,
                  Tu 
                        •…
                     ueilles de leur sein plantes & fleurs,
                  Bassinez du ciel, nourriz par ses pleurs,
                  Alaictez d'eau qui là traine son cours.
               
               
                  Puis soubs les monts les riches mineraux,
                  Q
                        •…
                     i nous font tant de biens, & tant de maux
                  Vas recerchant, Or, Argent, Plomb, & Fer.
               
               
                  Lors regaignant des costauts le hault doz,
                  Et couronnant la terre de ton loz,
                  Fais icy le Printemps de ton Hyuer.
                  
               
               
                  Iean Sanford.
               
            
            
               
               Ad Thomam Winterum Gulielmi Salustij Metaphrasten.
               
                  NOmina qui nobis prima imposuêre, videntur
                  Fatidicis cecinisse modis, quae fata futura,Allusum est ad Ausonij Epigram. 19.
                  
                  Quae vitae studia, & quantùm praecordia fumant
                  Ardore A Ethereo: sic dictus virbius olìm
                  
                     Hippolytus, quòd equis sparsim discerptamarinis
                  Membra iacent: Medicus sic Virgilianus Iapis
                  
                  Et magnum augurium Brumali nomine iactas
                  O Wintere nouem soboles charissima Musis!
                  Nam deus aequoreas qui cuspide temperat vndas
                  Te vatem pelago, Phoebo cedente, dicauit.
               
               
                  Ergò age sortitus Brumali à frigore nomen
                  Perge tuo augurio Neptunia regna referre
                  Frigidiora noui mundi loca; qualiter olìm
                  Vel dicto tantùm verbo, difflauexat vndas
                  Ille sator mundi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      opifex à vertice terrae:
                  Qualiter, & tumidas in vertice comprimit vndas,
                  Littoribus
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      datis incingit Nerea ponto;
                  Qualiter Amphitrite impleto ventre tumescit,
                  An compressa deo Neptuno, an Sydere tacta
                  Tethyos vnda vagae Lunaribus aesluet horis,
                  Expedias; mundi sunt haec arcana refusi.
                  Quin age commotum Neptunum hortamine blando
                  Alloquere, vt retrahat truculenti Immanis habenas,
                  Et refugis imo in Barathro se fluctibus abda
                        •…
                     .
                  Quanquam amnes decet ira, tamen Neptune quiescas;
                  
                     Non timidi fluctus superare repagula possunt.
                  Haec miranda Dei quae primùm idiomate sacro
                  Et numeris, dicente Deo, dictante Prophetâ
                  Sunt signata pijs, quae dudum Gallia nouit
                  Arte tuâ, penso
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      tuo diuine Salusti.
                  
                  Perge tuo ingenio nostrae procudere genti,
                  Et patria cantare sono secreta profundi
                  Wintere; vt vulgus cognoscat in aethere summo
                  Qui sedet Omnipotens, ima quid praestet Abysso,
                  Et laudet, timeat
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      admiretur
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      potentem.
               
               
                  Ioannes Dunster.
               
            
            
               Ad Eundem.
               
                  QVando alimenta calor coquit, & benè digerit; illud
                  Quod capit haec, fiet pinguius inde magis;
                  Anglia sermones peregrinos concoquit; ergò
                  Facta est pinguescens inde opulenta magis:
                  In
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Hye me accrescit viuus calor; vnde profectum
                  Totum opus euenta non caruisse potest.
                  Hoc laudi est (Wintere) tibi; benè concoquis artes
                  Linguas, sermones tanquam alimenta tuos.
               
               
                  Thomas Masonus.
               
            
            
               In DIEM tertiam BARTASSII a Tho. VVINTERO Anglicè redditam.
               
                  
                     BARTASSII secunda, tibi fuit DIES
                  
                  
                     WINTERE prima: primus idcircò liber
                  Rores canebat, fulmina & coeli faces:
                  At nunc secundo (qui tuus labor) libro
                  
                     Flores canuntur, flumina, & facies soli.
                  Haec tibi secunda, tertia est illi DIES.
                  
               
               
                  In primâ haberis omnibus vates prior.
                  
                     BARTASSIO excepto vnico vatum patre:
                  Satis est Homeri si istius fueris Maro.
               
               
                  Prodis secundus in secund
                        •…
                      Nemini
                  Dum tersiore tertiam versu canis,
                  Adusque vatis sidus interpres boni.
               
               
                  Sic cautus ipse, dum DIES trudit DIEM
                  
                  (WINTERE Musis VERIS assulgens vice)
                  Prehendis ansam Temporis, captas DIEM,
                  
                  Tam
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Bona sequitur prima quàm fuit Bona.
               
               
                  Nathanael Tomkins.
               
            
            
               In tertium & quasi Mercurialem Diem primae Hebdomadis Guli
                  
                     •…
                  lmi Salustij.
               
                  ECce Deo est sua cuique dies, nec numine ab vno
                  Concipit auspicium Lucifer omnis idem,
                  Altera Sithonio lux est exorta Gradiuo,
                  Tertia Mercurio prodijt ista dies:
                  Credo nec antiquos decepit 
                        •…
                     abula vates,
                  Spirat enim numen Lumen vtrumque suum.
                  Interpres facunde Deum, te namque magistro
                  Interpres lucis prodijt ecce tuae.
                  Si fuit vlla dies solem non passa cadentem,
                  Splendeat haec, nunquam sole cadente, dies.
               
               
                  Henricus Ashwood.
               
            
         
         
            
            The Argument.
            
               THE Lord BARTAS hauing deliuered in the former Dayes-worke, an excellent discourse of the foure elements in generall, and therein more particularly comprised both the nature of the fire and the aire: doth in this third booke (which is an explanation of the third dayes creation,) descend from the superior to the two inferior elements; in the description of which, as of the former, being alway like himselfe, that is, most excellent; he doth first inuoke the Diuine assistance; then branching his whole discourse into two principall parts, he doth in the former describe the manner, how the waters were assembled together for the discouerie of the drie land; how the sea is situated and restrained within his bounds, which it neither doth, nor can transgresse; and how it imbraceth the earth in his armes, which together with the more famous riuers of the world are repeated. Vnto which discourse he addeth a briefe consideration of fountaines, brookes, land-flouds, and riuers; of their increase and falling into the sea, which being no whit augmented by their continuall accesse, brings much admiration to those, that labour in searching the reasons of the ebbing and flowing of the same: which, though it be a question full of difficultie, and either meerely or nearely vnresoluable, yet doth he couch in a very few verses, as much as reason or probability can perswade in so abstruse a speculation. Then intreating of the saltnesse of the sea, and of the admirable effects

of diuers springs and bathes, he concludes the first part of this booke with an enumeration of those singular commodities which all creatures receiue by the conglobation of the earth with the water. In the second part, which is an ample and elegant description of the earth, the stabilitie and vtilitie therof is first deciphered; the quaking ouertures and compasse of the same are proposed: which together with the sea, being but a point compared to the heauens; doth giue him occasion to deduce therehence a necessarie exhortation, to withdraw the worldly minds of wretched men from the ouer greedie pursuit of these earthly things. Now forasmuch as the earth so separated from the sea, was by the heauenly Prouidence pre-ordained to be the mother, nource, and entertaining hostesse of all mankind, he doth most artificially emblason the profitable beauties thereof, as being most variously adorned with trees, plants, hearbes and flowers of such singular and sundrie vertues for the vse of man, that they seeme to haue engrauen vpon them, and that in Capitall letters, the aboundant wisdome, and super aboundant grace of the puissant Creator. Which is amplified by the admired sympathies of diuerse creatures; by the varietie of graine, of wools, silks, cottons, flaxe, hempe, and such other commodities as the diuersified disposition of sundrie clymates produceth; all which are yearely renewed by that prouident hand, from which they receiued their originall vertues. Among other wonders of nature, he mentioneth the tree called Cocos, whose strange proprieties are almost incredible; and desiring more perfectly to anatomize the whole bodie and bowels of the earth, he rips vp her very entrailes, to find what mettals and minerals are treasured vp in that great store-house of the world. Then teaching the true vse of gold and iron, he speaketh of the admired vertue of the Load-stone, of the mariners

compasse-needle, and sundrie sorts of earth which by experience are of themselues medicinable. Which hauing performed, he greets the earth, painting out in fresh and liuely colours her deserued prayses: and by the example both of ancient Patriarkes, and men of great esteeme among the Painims) he blames those that contemne husbandrie, and the profitable knowledge of simples. And so with an excellent amplification of the vnmatchable pleasures and happie securitie of the countrie life: he conclusiuely prayeth, that he may either end his quiet dayes in the countrie, or spend them in the Court without suspition of flatterie.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               The third Day of the first Weeke of the most excellent, learned, and diuine Poet, William, Lord Bartas.
            
            
               MY Muse that whilome ouer-topt each spheare,The Poets tian sition from the superior to the inferior Elements.
               
               Whose course life-giuing influence doth beare;
               That in so braue a stile discours'd of Winds,
               And ayrie meteors frighting silly minds:
               And did of sulphur'd-lightning stormes intreate,
               And made her verse so graue a path to beate:
               Creeping to day on the base elements,
               Must cloath her speech with base habiliments:
               Where if by chaunce she sing a loftie straine,
               She's lifted higher by the swelling Maine.
            
            
               Great King of earth, and of the liquide plaine,His inuocation
               
               Whose very breath doth dreadfully constraine
               The sturdiest hils to quake, and oft exaults
               The stormie waues vp to the starrie valuts:
               Grant that my measuring skill may well suruay,
               The fleeting and firme element this Day.
               
               Grant that my learned verse may well discouer
               The nature of the sea, and of our Mother:
               That with a flowring stile I may pourtray
               The flowers▪ that cloath the earth with rich array.
            
            
               All those high hils, whose forked tops do border
               Vpon the clouds, that wander in disorder,
               Did hide their bo
                     •…
                  sed backes vnder the floud,
               Which on the earth a pudled ma
                     •…
                  ish stood;
               
                  When heau'ns great King, desiring liberally
               T'en
                     •…
                  eoffe vs with this low worlds Empirie,
               Gaue charge, that Neptune should the waters gather,
               And shew the earth, which but a litle rather
               They had ore-whelm'd; and be content with pleasure,
               That one whole day he had this All in seazure.
               Iust as the heauens showring teares adowne,Si
                        •…
                     il.
               
               And froathie flouds hiding the plainer ground,
               Do make the fields a sea; then ceassing spoile,
               Inuisibly forsakes the 
                     •…
                  urrowed soile,
               Ploude by the painefull oxe; and seemes to drinke
               It selfe, and to some channell straight to shrinke:
               So doth the sea this day leaue his possession
               Of mountaines, knoles, and fields by retrogression.
               And in the wombe of a lesse continent,
               Tuns vp with speed that watrie element.
               Whether at first the light, by God created,Cōiectural reasons how 
                        •…
                     he waters were gathered tog
                        •…
                     
                     ther for the disco
                        •…
                     erie of the 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Had store of this moyst humor eleuated
               Vnto such places, as then highest were,
               Of which he might next day make euery sphaere:
               Or whether the Almightie had created
               New roomes, to which these waters were translated:
               Or opening the poares of hill and plaine,
               Would hide some arme of that so spacious maine:
               Or whether thickening their thinner smother,
               That like a cloake of cloudes this All did couer,
               He did imprison them within their bankes,
               Gainst which the Ocean playes his daring prankes,
               Yet dares not to transgresse: for Gods owne might,The Sea consined to vnpassable bounds by▪ the pu
                        •…
                     ssance of the Almigh
                     
                        •…
                     .
               
               Kenning their nature mutinous and light,
               Thus bridled them, and gainst their fierce brauadoes,
               Made of the flower-clad earth his barricadoes:
               
                  So that sometimes the fleeting hils which roare,
               And threaten to orewhelme the bordring shoare,
               Do wast in froath, and breaking neare the brim,
               Dare not beyond their watrie dwelling swim.
            
            
               And what could herein be impossible
               To this high Admirall, whose terrible
               And powerfull voice did riue the depths in twaine,
               To saue his flocke; and made the ruddie maineExod. 14.
               
               Hang in the ayre? that forced Iordans courseIosuah. 3. 16.
               
               Backe to retire toward his double source?
               That drown'd the world become deuoid of good?Gen. 7. 21.
               
               That made the rocke gush foorth a litle floud?Exod. 17. 8. 
                  The Earth the great 
                        •…
                     land of the world.
               
            
            
               Lo then the waters crooked circling path,
               An Iland of this world yformed hath:
               As boyling lead pour'd on a place vnplaine,Simil.
               
               Doth diuers formes and sundrie fashions gaine,
               Here runneth straight, there windeth like a snake,
               Here breaking hands, there hands againe doth take,
               And in an instant makes his small hote riuers,
               Within the mould to shew themselues so diuers:
               So God did spread the waters on the ground,
               In steeple forme, croysure, and figure round,
               Crooked and square, that in the water cleare,
               The earth might faire more rich and faire appeare.
               Such is the Germaine arme, the bay of Ganges,
               
               The Gulfe of Persia, and the sea that ranges
               By Happie Arabie, such the whole Ocean
               That parts in three this All by od proportion.
            
            
               And though that euerie arme how long soeuer,Why the 
                        •…
                     mes of the Sea are subdiuided into lesser chanels.
               
               Compar'd vnto the whole be but a riuer:
               Yet makes a hundred seas in course and name,
               By's nookes and crookes, the water still the same:
               
                  To slake the thirstie drinesse of the plaines,
               With welcome moisture of their secret veines:
               To rampire in the nations, and to daunt
               The proudest champion Princes when they vaunt:
               To confine kingdomes with eternall borders,
               To ease the trauell of the trading orders,
               Shortning their way, the wind helping to get,
               With in a month from th'East to the Sun-set.
            
            
               Nor doth the earth giue to the sea aloneThe most renowned riuers of the world relie used.
               
               These bigger armes; she giues the riuer Don,
               
               And Nilus, Egypts store house, which doth hide
               Himselfe so often in the deserts wide.
               She giues the Rhene, Danubius, and Euphrates,
               
               Proud Tigris, issue of the hill Niphates,
               
               Broad Ganges riuer of such ample same,
               That Easterne India takes of it her name:
               The golden Tagus, Thames, Mariza, Rhone,
               
               
                  Tartarian Rha, Po, Seina, and Garone:
               
               
                  Garone, whose name shall sound so in my verse,
               As shall perchance ring through the Vniuerse.
               She giues R
                        •…
                     o de la Plata. 
                  Parana yeelding siluer matter,
               Great Darien which doth new Castile water:
               
                  Maraignon too, flouds of that new-found All,
               
               Which men for wealth the Golden land may call.
            
            
               The fruitfull earth from her doth draw her streames,
               And all the water running in her veines:
               Which she (not thanklesse) doth in time and place,
               Repay both wayes, as it receiued was.S
                        •…
                     ll.
               
               For as the Lembicke heated, oft doth hap
               T'exhale a vapor to his vpmost cap;
               And wanting meanes to draw that fragrant sweat
               Higher, doth gently thicken it, and let
               
                  That cleare as christall humor drop by drop,
               Replenish the receiuer to the top:
               So the thin humor of the brinie streames
               Is drawne into the aire by sunnie beames,
               Which turn'd to water showres it downe, and maketh
               That to the sea through th'earth a course it taketh.
            
            
               For the drie earth this falling water strainesHowe the springs are engendred:
               
               Through the thin boulter of her hollow veines,
               Then makes it way, and from the rockie mountaines,
               Makes bubble daily millions of fountaines;
               Of these the litle gurgling brookes do grow,
               Which ioyn'd do make the wasting torrents flow,
               The wasting torrents do proud riuers forme,
               Of which the sailing floud is eftsoones borne.
            
            
               The snowie hils that border neare the skie,
               Vnto this grouth contribute willingly:How the torrents or landflouds & riuers are engendred.
               
               For Titans taske begun anew, at times
               Which bring the faire spring to the colder climes,
               He melts vpon their backes the heapes of snow;
               Their tops turne greene, each where the waters flow
               Tumbling, and bubling as they froathing runne
               Along steepe trackes of craggie mountaine stone,
               They make a hundred torrents, one of which
               Seeing his brother ouergo him mich,
               Hastens his course to make with him an vnion,
               Whiles that a third and fourth help their communion;
               Running the same carier, and quickly drowneOf their falling into the sea.
               
               Their names and selues in streames of more renowne.
               Those streames of some great riuer are deuoured,
               Which ouerswaying fields, at length is powred
               Into that Rendez-vous, where God assigned
               They should discharge the taxes they were fined.
            
            
               
               Yet all these riuers running to the sea,Why the 
                        〈◊◊◊◊◊〉
                      a 
                        〈◊〉
                      of the fresh water
                        •…
                     .
               
               Do not a whit enlarge that watrie Lea:
               For besides that these flouds heap't all t'one top,
               Compar'd to it, are lesse then one poore drop:
               Yet doth the Sunne and Aeolus his race,
               Sweeping eftsoones great Neptunes sweating face,
               Exhale as much from that broad wauing field,
               As th'aire and earth vnto the same do yeeld.
            
            
               But as the quaking heate, and shiuering cold,Of the 
                        〈◊◊◊〉
                      of the 
                        •…
                     ea.
               
               And gnashing teeth which do the feavrous hold,
               Come not hap-hazard, but in time and order,
               Bring the weake trembling members in disorder.
               So doth the sea by sits approach to lond,
               And coming to, forsakes againe the strond.
               Whether the sea moued with Gods right hand,The thre
                        •…
                      
                     
                        〈◊◊〉
                      to
                        •…
                     
                     ching the 
                        •…
                     luxe and 
                        〈◊〉
                      of the sea. Simile.
               
               Tooke first this motion, and may not stand
               Idle not any while from's mouing course;
               Like as a whirlegig once turn'd, doth force
               It selfe to moue around, and vertue takes
               From him that formerly the motion makes.
               Or that the sea which men the Midland call,2
               
               Be but a parcell of that liquide All,
               
               Whose waues falling into some higher ocean,
               Do dash themselues in their so angrie motion
               Against the rockie hils, whose solid strength,
               Quelling their force, makes them recueile at length.
               Or that the Moone, whose influence aboue3
               
               Ruling moist bodies, cause it so to moue.
               And to speake truth, we see the sea to slow,Why this last opinion is most probable.
               
               When on our Hemisphaere the Moone doth show:
               And suddenly to 
                     •…
                  bbe, when toward Spaine
               
               The Cressant takes her backward course againe.
               
                  Againe soone as her face, constant in changing,
               Encreasing shew's th' Antipodes her ranging,
               It marches foorth, and when her waning fire
               Doth passe the other noone, it doth retire.
            
            
               Yea which is more, the Midland sea, we know,Why some armes of the sea haue greater tides then othersome.
               
               Doth farther then the Tuscane ocean flow:
               Or that hight Bosphorus: and no such motion
               Doth stirre some duller places of the ocean:
               Because the Luna. siluer Planet, which will haue
               Rule of the flowing and the ebbing waue,
               With lesser force doth shed her influence
               Vpon a sea, where the circumference
               Is mountainous, or streightened twixt two stronds,
               Then where the ocean seemes to want such bonds.
               As in the Sommer, if the windie traineSimile.
               
               Of A Eolus be calme, with lesser paine
               The Delphian flame the champion fields doth drie,
               Then dales immur'd with hils and mountaines hie.
               If so this fluxe do shew it selfe more plaineWhy the eb
                     
                        •…
                     ing 
                        〈◊〉
                      is better percei
                        •…
                     ed neare the sh
                        •…
                     e then in the maine sea.
               
               Hard by the shoare, then in the deeper maine:
               The pulse (Natures true clocke) it doth resemble,
               Whose extreame part more then the mid doth tremble;
               At least it seemes so. Now the starrie king
               Is equall to the queene, in gouerning
               The waters. For his hote light-giuing beames,How the saltnesse of the sea is caused.
               
               Scorching the fishie vessel-bearing streames,
               And sucking vp in's each dayes iournement,
               The sweeter iuice of that cold element:
               Leaues tart and thickened liquor in the Deepe,A transition frō the sea, to the consideration of 
                        〈◊〉
                      admirable effects of sund
                        •…
                     ie springs and riuers.
               
               With salt that on the vpmost top doth fleet.
               But see, how heare the sea doth pull me downe
               Into deepe seas, where I am like to drowne.
               
                  See how his fluxe makes my words ouerflow.
               Well then let's hie to land, that sitting low
               Beside the brim of riuer, lake and brooke,
               Our thoughts into their strange effects may looke,
               Whose maruels nigh exceeding saith and wonder,
               Astound our wits, our eyes, our eares like thunder.
               The spring of Med
                        •…
                     o tu 
                        •…
                      corniger 
                        〈◊〉
                     , vn
                        •…
                      die 
                        〈◊〉
                      est, 
                        〈◊◊◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                      15. Meta
                        •…
                     . 
                  Hamon, while the Sun giues light,
               Is cold as ice; and contrarie, by night
               Though the cold Cressant make the night lesse hot,
               Yet boiles and fumes like water in a pot.
               Some hold for certaine, that the boughs of wood,
               Which being wind-broke, fall into the floud
               Of In stumi
                        •…
                     e Silaro vltra 
                        〈◊◊〉
                     , non virgul
                     
                        •…
                      modo immersa, verum & 
                        •…
                     o l
                        •…
                     a lapidescunt. Pli▪ lib 2. c. 103. 
                  Silaris, or of Eurimedon,
               
               Are turn'd both wood, and barke, and leafe to stone.
               Ah, can my verse omit that streame in Iosephus lib. 7. bell. Iu
                        •…
                     , cap. 24. 
                  Iurie,
               
               That euery Sabbath stayes his running furie
               Religiously? vnwilling to be pained
               That seuenth day, which God for rest ordained.
               If so the shepheard chaunt his louely rounds
               By th'Eleusina brooke, those musickes sounds
               Do make the water boile, and dance and skip,
               And point by point the rusticke measures keepe.
               
                  Plin lib 2. cap. 1 
                        •…
                     3. 
                  Cephis turnes white, Ceron blacke, Xanthus red,
               The fleecie troupes which there are watered.
               Like an Solin
                        •…
                     s cap 40. 
                  Arabian spring, that bordring neare
               To the red sea, turnes red their woolly weare.
               You Vide Ph
                        •…
                     . lib. 2 cap 103. vbi de 
                        〈◊〉
                      so
                        •…
                     e loquitur. 
                  Solan waters, and In Andro 
                        〈◊〉
                      sula templo Liaberi pa
                        •…
                      so
                        •…
                     tem nonu Ianuarijs 
                        •…
                     
                     per vini sap
                        •…
                     e flu
                        •…
                     re 
                        〈◊〉
                      ter co
                        •…
                     . credit. Plin. lib. 2. c. 103. 
                  Andreian riuer,
               Whence comes that oyle and wine, which you yeeld euer
               Once in a yeare? art thou (O earthie Dame)
               So fruitfull? or beneath this worldly frame
               Are vines and gardens? and in them do lurke
               Men, that for Bacchus and Minerua worke?
               
                  What shall I say of thee Sclauonian spring?Pl
                        •…
                      
                     
                        •…
                     id. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        •…
                     . 
                        〈◊◊〉
                     . 
                        •…
                     
                  
               
               Or what of thee Dodonian fountaine sing?
               When one burnes cloth, the other wood doth stench
               Halfe burnt, and kindles what it earst did quench.
               Faith, I should place these vertues admirable,
               In the false Register of euery fable;
               Wer't not for due respect, which (young) I giue
               To vnreproued Writers that did liue:
               And that the greedie Pilots of our daies,
               Had not found riuers stranger many wayes.
            
            
               In this great number of such differing brookes,A continuation of the f
                        •…
                     rmer argument, confirmed by ocu lar witnesse, of later ages.
               
               Of which a scholer might compile great bookes,
               Ile choose farre hence in places harbourlesse,
               Some fiue or sixe, as true as held truthlesse.
               In th'Ile of Fer, (mong other tis an Ile,
               Which men of old with 
                     Insulae formatae. the Canatie Ilands. Happie name did stile)
               The sauage folke draw not their watrie food,
               As others do, from spring or running floud:
               Their drinke is in the aire, their waters source
               Takes from a weeping tree his dropping course:
               A weeping tree growing in a drie field,
               Doth make his sweating leaues sweet liquor yeeld:
               And (as the vine late cut, more fruite to beare,
               Distilleth gently many a pearled teare)
               Ceaslesse it droppeth downe a water cleare,
               Where round about the people pressen neare,
               Yet faile with all the vessels that they bring,
               T'exhaust the streames of this one woodden spring.
               In Thule. 
                  Ice-land men do find two wondrous springs,
               The one yeelds waxe; the other changeth things
               Cast in, to stone, although his water hot,
               Regurgeth bubbles, like a boyling pot.
               
                  In golden Peru neare Saint Helens mount,
               Defyling pitch doth issue from a fount.
               What should I say? this is that new-found All,
               
               Whose riuers running to their Westerne fall,
               Know bet then we what right vse should be made
               Of working day-time, and the chillie shade
               Of th'idle night, and therefore runne by day,
               And spend the night in idle resting play.
            
            
               Great God, I feare I iealous should be counted
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      and 
                        〈◊◊〉
                      me
                        •…
                     ble for the bodie.
               
               Of thy great praise, if there were not recounted
               In my vnthankfull verse such streames, as runne
               Through Alume, Lime, Salt-peter and Brimstone▪
               
               Whose vertues perfect medecines are held,
               For maladies that strike vs into eld
               In th'Aprill of our age, and with great strife
               Would antedate the period of our life.
               Now as my Gascoigne is the happiest fieldA particular description of the pleasant 
                        〈◊〉
                      profitable 
                        〈◊〉
                      of Gascoine.
               
               
                  
                     •…
                  or corne, and wine, and men, the world doth yeeld;
               So free-cost baths do there abounden most,
               There stranger people flocke from euery coast,
               There the drie wombe, the paralyticall,
               The gowtie, vlc'rous, deafe, sciaticall,
               Comming from East and Westerne parts, do gaine
               The speedie cure of their tormenting paine.
               Witnesse Barege, Eucausse and the hote vaines
               Of Aigue-caud, Caudret and Baigner plaines,
               
                  Baigner the beautie, paradise and praise
               Of those high hils, on whom in alder dayes
               The Hercules of France with child did bring
               
                  Pyrene, daughter to the * sire and KingBebrix.
               
               Of Gascoins, whose attempts so generous
               Shew they deseru'd a sire so valorous.
               
                  The mountaines whited with eternall snow,
               Do slanker in a part in stately row.
               Th'immortall verdure of a smiling plaine
               Excelling A valley 
                        •…
                     n 
                        •…
                      
                     
                        〈◊◊〉
                      he 
                        〈◊◊〉
                      of whose 
                        •…
                     
                     tion do 
                        •…
                      c
                        •…
                     use other pl
                        •…
                     asant 
                        •…
                     ces to be hyperbolically so called. 
                  Tempe, hemmes it in againe
               On th'other side, the houses new appeare,
               The verie tiles do shine, a riuer cleare
               As Chrystall, so transparantly doth glide
               In each streete, that the pauement may be spide:
               And though that yeie riuer runne hard by
               A bath, that cureth euerie maladie,
               It keepes her nature, scorning all desireVoyez le neuf Mu
                        •…
                     es 
                        •…
                     y 
                        〈◊〉
                      a
                        •…
                      sune des 
                        〈◊〉
                      p
                        •…
                      165
               
               To mixe her coolenesse with the others fire.
            
            
               But all these strange effects match not at all,
               Strauge Lers, that from a rockie stone doth fall.
               If it be true, that Aristoteles non capit Euripi
                        •…
                     , Euripu
                        •…
                      capiet Aristotelem. Lauren. Valle dealog. de Libero a
                        •…
                     bitrio. one most rarely wise,
               For want of skill the reason to comprise,
               How seuen times a day Plin. lib. 2 c 97▪ Pomp. M
                        •…
                     la li. 2. 
                  Euripus floweth,
               And seuen times t'his ebbing prison goeth;
               Egd with despaire, and with great shame confounded,
               Drownd him in flouds more fadomed then sounded:
               What would he do, if he should beate his braines,
               About the spring that waters Masere plaines,
               Rising at Belestat, neare th'hill of Fois,
               
               That stores with wood the people of Toloise?
               
               As oft as Phoebus ending his carrier,
               Each horizon with welcome light doth cheare,
               His burthen-bearing streames months fiue or foure,
               Doth runne and stay by turne in each halfe houre;
               For one halfe houre you may passe ouer drie,
               The other halfe it runnes so stickerly,
               As none can passe; his waters as they rise,
               The most renowmed streames would equalize:
               
                  A learned streame that doth (Nature her guide)
               Without a clocke count euerie time and tide.
            
            
               Now the great God by his eternall hand,Of the 
                        〈◊〉
                      o
                        •…
                      the earth and the sea.
               
               Most wisely plac'd the water and the land:
               For one requiring many moistning drops,
               The other chanels, banks and vnderprops,
               He enterlin'd them: so that the earth widing
               Her bosome to the sea, and the sea gliding
               About, throughout, vnder this earthie round,That the earth and the water are the center of the world, and why.
               
               Both make the perfect center of the Mound.
               For if their mingled selues be prou'd to be
               Beside the mid of the worlds axeltree,1
               
               All climats should not haue the silent night
               In equall ballance counterpoise the light.
               The ill▪deuided horizons decline2
               
               Would stretch too farre on one side of the line:
               Th' Antipodes or we should see by night3
               
               More then sixe signes to shed their glistering light.
               No certaine time should shew th'eclipsed Moone,4
               
               The heauens deboshd should seasons alter soone.
            
            
               This doth suffise to shew, that so compoundThe earth and the water make one round globe.
               
               Into one masse, they yet are fully round,
               Which by a turning art made like a ball,
               See day and night successiuely to fall.
               For Americ, Doue, Pole surnamed Marke,
                  The reason.
               
               Nor anie cunning pilot of a barke
               One pole to th'other euer could subdue,
               Or liuing on the seas find countries new:
               Nor euer lose the Northerne starre, to view
               The Southerne pole, if so the ocean blew
               To fashion with the earth one globie tumor,
               Did not each where circle his fleeting humor.
            
            
               
               But (ô thou heauenly workman) whose essayesWhy the water is of a sphearicall figure.
               
               Are nere in vaine, what arches, or what stayes
               Couldst thou inuent the sea to vnderprop,
               That by a downward line it should not drop?
               O God, is it, because the watrie masse1
               
               Would by his nature to the center passe,
               And striuing so the deepest depth to sound,
               By falling by a line, remaineth round?
               Or is't because the shoares and coasting banks2
               
               Captiue the seas within their prouder flanks?
               Or is't because the Sea some stay doth winne3
               
               By millions of rocks scattered therein?
               Or is't alonely thy all-working grace4
               
               That makes it thus the tressed earth embrace?
               It is thy hand, thy hand (O God) alone,A transition frō the water to th'earth, wherof the figure, situation and stablenesse is described.
               
               That firmes with piles mans habitation:
               For though it hang in th'aire, or else be found
               To swim vpon the sea; though it be round,
               And round about it each thing turne, nay more,
               Though her foundations haue bene mou'd of yore;
               Yet it vnmoued is, that Adams race
               Might here obtaine a peacefull biding place.The earth the dearest mother the tenderest nource and the kindest hostesse that man finds.
               
               It is the earth receiues man being borne,
               Receiued fosters him; become the scorne
               Of other elements, by Natures enmitie,
               Her lap yeelds place for his last obsequie.
               The aire against vs often doth rebell,
               The whelming waters shew their malice fell
               Gainst wretched men; gainst men supernall fire
               As well as this below displayes his ire:
               But of the foure, onely the humble earth
               Is mans alone best friend after his birth.
               
                  Tis she alone, that neuer leaues the place,
               Which earst was her assigned by thy grace.
            
            
               Yet is it true, that execrable folke
                     
                        〈◊◊〉
                     , the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of the earthquak
                        •…
                     
                  
               
               With their deboshed manners, do prouoke
               Thy angrie hand (O Lord) some piece to shake,
               Although the totall frame do neuer quake:
               Aided with Northerne winds, which being pent
               Within her bowels, cause mad rumblement.
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                     .
               
               
                  
                     •…
                  eare chils our hearts and makes our faces pale,
               The wind doth stirre the woods without a gale:
               High turrets tremble, and th'infernall caue,
               De
                     •…
                  oures in choler many a citie b
                     •…
                  aue.
            
            
               Sith then the earthie and the watrie RoundThe whole 
                        〈◊〉
                      earth and the sea, is but 
                        〈◊〉
                      point 
                        〈◊〉
                      to 
                        〈◊〉
                      he
                        •…
                     uens, whereof the least 
                        〈◊〉
                      is eighteen times b
                        •…
                     gger then the earth.
               
               Is center, heart, and nombrill of the mound;
               And that, by reason, nothing closde about
               Equals the thing enclosing it without:
               Who doubts, but that this earthie watrie spheare
               Doth lesse proportion then the others beare?
               Iudge who so will; the greatnesse of this round,
               Which we admiring, doth vs so astound,
               Seemes but a point to that high 
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                     . spheare aboue,
               Which forceth all the rest with him to moue:
               Sith the least twinkling starre, that with our eye
               We see to glitter in the vaulted skye,
               (If so Astronomers count not amisse)
               Then the whole earth twise nine times greater is▪
               
               And if we count all that the Midland maine,
               The Indian seas, and all their armes do gaine,
               Beside what other riuers do possesse,
               Or desert is by heate or colds excesse,
               This Little will▪ be nought. Lo here (
                     •…
                   men)
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                      the earth bears to the heauens, should reach men not to make a heauen of the earth.
               
               The place, for which you heauen do contemne.
               
                  See with what confines your great'st renomie
               Bounds your best actions proudest memorie.
               Ye Monarches (thral'd to pride) that for the gaines
               Of one haires breadth, hide th'earth with slaughtred swains:
               Corrupted Magistrates, that on your chaires
               Sell causes as in markets or in faires:
               Who traffiquing the Law prophane your states,
               To leaue some trifle to your thanklesse brats:
               You that do vse vpon vse multiplie,
               You that do waights and measures falsifie:
               That so for you, the yoaked Oxe may beare
               The coulter, that the clodded earth doth teare:
               You that do sell your wals; you that would faine
               Some inch of land vpon your neighbour gaine,
               Mouing by stealth and sacrilegious hands
               The ma
                     •…
                  kes, that bounded out your grandsires lands:
               Alas what get you? When a warlike prince,
               By force or fraud shall all the world euince:
               A needles point, a moate, an atomie,
               Shall be his vertues largest salarie▪
               
               A point his Empire, yea a very nought,
               Yea lesse then nothing, if that lesse were ought.
            
            
               When God (whose word doth more of nothing make,
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                     
                  
               
               Then all the paines that proudest kings can take)
               Had seuerald the 
                     •…
                  louds, equald the fields;
               Sunke downe the valleys, blowen vp the hils;
               Change, change (quoth he) o solid element,
               Thy sadder weed t'a greene habilement:
               A fragrant flowring girlond be ywreathed
               About thy forehead, by my fingers weaued.
               Display thy periwinke; with finest paint
               Embellish now thy bleake and paler taint.
               
                  That from henceforth, thy proper guests alone
               May not be fed with plentie of thy wombe:
               But that thy stored lap may meate prouide
               For people of each element beside:
               So that the water, aire, and Angels dwelling
               May of thy glorieiealously be telling.
            
            
               
                  He spake, and straight the Firre that pitch doth drop,
               The gummie Larix, Cedar with high top,
               And Boxe still greene are plac'd in trouped row,
               And on the highest tops of hils do grow.
               The aco
                     •…
                  ne-bearing Oake, the Carpie white,
               The barke-exchanging Corke, and Elme vpright,
               On litle hils and fields do pitch their ranks.
               The writhing riuers border out their banks
               With sailing Alder, with greene Osier,
               With Willow pale, and trembling Popular,
               And manie other trees for fewell made,
               For building carpentrie, and beasts to shade.
            
            
               Here hairie Peaches and the Orange golden,
               Sweete Apricots, the Quince faire to beholden
               With his white downe, vpon their backs they beare
               Ywritten faire Gods all-prouiding care.
               Sweet-smelling Apples, Nuts of either kinde,
               Idumean Dates, and Peares still apt to binde,
               The milkie Figge, the double died Cherrie,
               The sugred plumme, the hungrie Oliue berrie,
               Present a pleasant spring vnto the eyes,
               And make each field a verie Paradise.
            
            
               Here Pepper graines like clustered Grapes assemble,
               There Cynamon doth grow; here Nutmegs tremble
               With gentle gales, which do each yeare pouruey
               For Bandan ylanders a publike pray.
               
                  There the white sweetnesse of moist sugar, breeds
               Within the bowels of Canarie reeds;
               There balme in teares doth drop; there the rich Vide Pl
                        •…
                     . l. 12 cap. 14. wood
               Of Saba land weepes fuming incense good.
            
            
               The louing Vine with winding armes embracethThe praise of the vine and w
                        •…
                     e takē with moderation.
               
               Her bearing husband, bout whose stocke she traceth.
               The Vine for fairenesse t'other trees inferior,
               As she for goodnes is their farre superior:
               Her liquor sober-taken rarifies
               The spirits, cheares the heart, and purifies
               The braines, brings colour, and awaketh
               The appetite, cleares passages, and maketh
               Fresh heate, pure bloud it breeds and subtilizeth
               The grosse, and the duld vnderstanding wiseth,
               Expels bad excrements, the bladder cleareth,
               Preserues our bodie that to death anneareth.
            
            
               Though th'earth for sinne, whereby our father oldThough the degenerating earth be farre inferior to it selfe, in respect of her primitiue beautie & fertilitie during mans innocencie, yet doth the present cō
                     dition thereof minister more then sufficient matter to vndeseruing man for the celebration of the prudence and prouidence of the omnipotent creator.
               
               Banisht his seed from heauen, no longer hold
               Her former glorie, hauing grau'd vpon her▪
               
               Th'eternall makers vndeseru'd dishonor:
               Though with the world she strike her selfe in yeares,
               Though her fertilitie much lesse appeares,
               Like her who bruisd with many a wofull grone
               Of bearing child, whose oft-conceiuing wombe
               Peopling almost the circuit of a parish,
               At length becommeth barren, drie and warish:
               Yet doth it yeeld an ample argument,
               To praise the author of her ornament.
            
            
               The pleasing spring doth nere to me propose
               The blew-flour'd Flaxe, or the carnation Rose,
               The blushing Gellifloure in's purple fold,
               The snow-white Lillie, or the Marigold,
               
                  But I admire the Painter that doth trace
               In them more colours, then Aurorae's face,
               Or in that Bow, which on the thirstie plaine
               Doth promise to shoure downe his fruitfull raine.
            
            
               God not content t'enrich with wholesome fruites,
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                     .
               
               Perfume with smels, and cloath with flowrie sutes
               The plants; hath in their rootes laid vp in store
               A perfect curing salue for euery sore.
               Sure without them (death fights so many wayes)
               Man should not liue full twentie yeares of dayes:
               But (like the flowre of flaxe, that dies in th'wombe
               In one selfe day) his cradle should be's tombe,
               His spring his winter, and his birth his death.
               Good Lord, how many draw their gasping breath
               By Stigian bankes, and cur'd by hearbes againe,
               Make greedie Pluto lose his hoped gaine!
               By them young Phoebus bearded cunning 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . sonne
               Restor'd the 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . young man, that to death was done,
               That did preferre, in modest chastitie,
               His death before incestuous venerie.
               
                  
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                     . 
                  Medea by their iuice, to please her Iason,
               
               Made young againe cold and old▪aged Aeson.
               
               You hearbs that do our life in life maintaine,
               And when tis gone do call it backe againe:
               Tis not your iuice dispersed in your veines,
               That cur
                     •…
                  s alone so many deadly paines:
               But your meere smell, your onely being by,
               Gainst many daungers doth vs fortifie,
               Working such wonders as exceede beliefe,
               Vnlesse the hand and eyes do know the priefe.The 
                        〈◊〉
                      of 
                        〈◊〉
                     . V
                           •…
                        de P
                           •…
                        n. lib. 20. cap 8.
               
            
            
               He that about his necke doth suckorie bind,
               It doth expell the mists that make vs blind;
               
                  So Cy
                        •…
                     minus. Tradu
                        •…
                     t si prag
                     
                        •…
                      radi
                        •…
                     em transgrediatur 
                        〈◊◊〉
                     
                     ▪ 
                     
                        〈◊◊〉
                      accelerat, &c. Diosc. lib▪ 2. c. 155 Swines-bread hung, doth not alonely bring
               Long trauell to a quicke deliuering;
               But more, if one with child do passe secure
               Ouer the root, she's forced to endure
               Abortment there: th'vnwholesome scorching blast,
               Th'envenimd glasse, nay poison creeping fast,
               That so dispeoples all Cyrenia land,
               Hurts not the man hath Artemisia. Pl
                        •…
                     n. lib. 25. cap. 7. Di
                        •…
                     sco. li. 3. cap. 108. Mug-wort in his hand.
               The Pionie tied to an infants necke,
               It giues vnto that cruell Morb
                        •…
                      comi
                     
                        •…
                     . Ill the checke,
               That tamed Hercules. If in thy braine
               God Bacchus chance excessiuely to raigne,
               Cirkle thy front with Qut ex 
                        〈◊◊◊〉
                      
                     
                        •…
                     on 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . lib. 1. cap 24. Coro
                        •…
                     ae qu
                        •…
                     que ex co 
                        〈◊〉
                      e
                     
                        •…
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . lib. 21. cap. 20. Saffron gatherd new,
               And thou shalt sodainely that storme subdew.
               The Syrens with their subtil-charming times,
               The dankish noy some gales from Southerne climes,
               Hurt not at all, those that alonely vse,
               Betweene their teeth Angelica to bruse:Angelica.
               
               A heauenly simple by an Angell brought,
               As both the name and force thereof haue taught.
               So Burnet held within the hand, doth stop
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
               
               The fluxe of bloud which from the sicke doth drop.
               And so his vrine redly shall be varied,
               That in his fist hath Rul
                        •…
                      siue 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                      a
                        •…
                      ud quosdam (inquit 
                        〈◊〉
                     ) morbu
                        •…
                      reg
                        •…
                     um sanar
                        •…
                      
                     
                        〈◊◊〉
                     , etia
                        •…
                     si ad
                        •…
                     gatus spectet
                        •…
                     r tantū. lib. 24. cap 11. An 
                           •…
                        mplification of this discourse by other admirable instances.
                   madder long time caried.
               The force of Woad is strange, which they that touch,
               Do make the colour of their humors such.
            
            
               You Plants, your force doth not alone extend
               To men; but your strange force doth make to bend
               The fiercest creatures, and the Iron strong,
               The legions blacke of the infernall throng,
               The brightest lampes of heauen, if all be right,
               That of Vide Pl
                        •…
                     n. lib. 30. cap. 1. 
                  Thessalian sorceries men write.
               
                  The Aconitum. 
                        〈◊〉
                      (vt satua est) 
                        〈◊〉
                      es admot
                        •…
                      
                     
                        〈◊◊〉
                      qui rurs
                        •…
                     m Hellel
                        •…
                     ri contactu, 
                        •…
                     ciiantur. Diosc. li. 4. cap 66. Plin. l 27. c. 2. Libbards-bane touch'd doth of sense depriue
               The chequerd Scorpion, that was earst aliue:
               As Plin. l. 25 c. 10 Lingwort touch'd reuiues the force,
               Which smotherd was in the dead-seeming corps.
               Serpents which Betonica vit tan
                        •…
                     a per
                        •…
                     betur vt 
                        •…
                     clusae circulo cius serpentes. ipsae sese 
                        〈◊〉
                      flagellā lo. Plin lib. 25. c 8 Ma
                        •…
                     hiolus in 1. cap 4. lib Diosc. a
                        •…
                     th, that the I aliaus in cō
                     mendation of any mans excel ling vertues, do vse this proue
                        •…
                     
                     biall speech, Tu 
                        〈◊〉
                      vntu 
                        •…
                     he no he la Betonica that is, You are more vertuous then Betoni
                        •…
                     . Betonie compasd around,
               Aduance their wrathfull heads aboue the ground,
               They hisse alowd, and from their fire-red eyes
               The flames of burning candles seeme to rise;
               They stemme each other, breake their long allyance,
               And wrathfully do make to each defyance.
               With furious onset they together bring
               Poison gainst poison, sting against a sting:
               Their bloud doth soile the blew-green-yellow groūds,
               Their bodies couerd are with deadly wounds;
               Nay but one wound; and onely death so cruell
               Can from their firie feud withdraw the fewell.
               As this dissolues the knots of amitie,
               So Inue
                        •…
                     it Lysi
                     
                        •…
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      herbam. Lysinachiā, vis 
                        〈◊◊〉
                      est, vt 
                        〈◊〉
                      dis orda
                        •…
                     ibus 
                        •…
                     ugo imposit
                        •…
                     , asp
                        •…
                     ritatē co
                        •…
                     beat. Plin. li. 25. cap. 
                        •…
                     . Water-sage doth stint the enmitie
               Of sighting Genets, if some carefull eye,
               The same vnto their collars chance to tye.
               If so a Mat. hiol. vpō Diosc. allegeth as much out of Columella. Hogge out of a trough do seed
               Made of the Decoctum soliorum cum vin
                        •…
                      potum 
                        〈◊〉
                      absunut. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 1. cap. 99. 
                  Tamarix, his milt with speed
               Doth wast; as if his teeth did lately bruise
               
                  A
                        •…
                     plenū vim han
                        •…
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , vt per dies 40. pot
                        •…
                      Lientem absumat. Discor. lib. 3. cap 128. Idem affirmat Plin. lib. 27. cap. 5. Milt-wast, that cunningly doth know to choose
               By vertue strange among the bowels all
               The milt, and hungerly thereon doth fall.
               Shall I stay here? the jades that feeding go
               Vpon the ground where The Italians (saith Matthiolus) call this he
                        •…
                     be Sferra-cauallo, that is, Vnshoe horse. 
                        •…
                     lorio seemes to make it all one with the he
                        •…
                     be AEthiopis mentioned by Plini
                        •…
                      lib. 26. cap. 4. Lunarie doth grow
               Their wondring maister then away doth ride
               Vnshod. Moonwort, where dost that Loadstone hide,
               
                  That doth the yron keepe in humble awe?
               Moonwort, where are thy pincers that do draw
               So cunningly the yron? where dost lay
               That marshals hand that sweetly puls away
               Their nailes? What locke can serue t'exclude
               Your craftie skill, if so a horse well shood,
               Pacing along where you your growing haue,
               Cannot be sure his nailes from you to saue?
               But I do thinke, the world doth not bring forth
               On hils or dales a plant of rarer worth,
               Then Produut i
                        •…
                      C
                        •…
                     ta capra
                        •…
                      sagittis per
                        •…
                     ussas, 
                        〈◊〉
                      herbae pastu eas excutere. Diosc. lib. 3. ca. 31. Idem affirmat Plin. lib 8. cap. 27 lib. 25. cap 8. Aelian. lib. 1. de varia hist. Sohu cap. 31 Dittanie, which eaten by the Deere,
               Doth not his wounded side from danger cleare
               Alone; but backwardly doth daft
               Vnto the Archer his life-wounding shaft.
            
            
               What should I say? O God, is't not thy worke,
               That men may see in euery turfe to lurke
               A thousand other plants, each place t'adorne,
               Diffring in colour, in effect, in forme?
               And that each one pul'd timely from the ground,
               Doth poyson one, and make another sound.
               Th'hearbe Ferulae asinu
                        •…
                      gratissimae sunt in pabulo, c
                        •…
                     teris ve
                        •…
                     o 
                        〈◊〉
                      praesentaneo vene
                        •…
                     o: qua de cau sa
                        •…
                     d. animal Li bero patri assignatur, 
                        〈◊〉
                      & serula. Plin. lib. 24. cap 1. 
                  Ferula brings beeues to deadly passe,
               And yet is wholesome for the drudging Asse.
               
                  Galen de t
                        •…
                     mperamentis: d
                        •…
                     scribitur b
                        •…
                     c herba a Diosc. lib 4. cap. 67. lib. 6. c. 11. Et 
                        •…
                      Plin. li. 25 cap. 13. Hemlocke to Stares is right commodious,
               But vnto man is poison odious.
               The Galen de t
                        •…
                     mperamentis: d
                        •…
                     scribitur b
                        •…
                     c herba a Diosc. lib 4. cap. 67. lib. 6. c. 11. Et 
                        •…
                      Plin. li. 25 cap. 13. Rose of Daphne mules doth euer kill,
               But vnto man is counter-poison still.
               What is to man more poysonfull and vile,
               Then that fell weed which Rhododendri stores & 
                        •…
                     olia muli
                        •…
                     , cambus, asinu & quad
                        •…
                     upedum plurimis venena sunt: hominib. verò contra serpentium morsus praesidia, èvi
                        •…
                     opota, &c. Diosc. lib 4. cap. 70 Plin. 16 lib. 20. cap & lib. 20 cap. 11. 
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •…
                     a est natura, vt hominem oc
                        •…
                      dat, nisi 
                        〈◊〉
                      quod in homine perimat cum eo solo colluctatur, velut part 
                        〈◊〉
                      inuento sola haec pugna est cum venenum in viscerib. reperit, mirum
                        •…
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      per se a
                        •…
                     bo cùm fin
                        •…
                     , du
                        •…
                      v
                        •…
                     ena in homine co
                        •…
                     riuntur, vt homo supersit. Plin. lib. 27. cap. 2. Libbards-bane we stile?
               And yet his iuice doth cure that burning smart,
               That from a Serpents taile would thrill our heart.
               O valiant poyson! ô couragious iuice!
               Proud liquor! plant full of disdainfull vse!
               
                  That kils vnhelped, scornes his force to show
               Gainst vs, if any succour neare he know.
               A poyson giuing health, if so he spie
               Some other poison in vs; then he'le trie
               His force against it, and with secret spite,
               Euen hand to hand most cruelly they fight,
               So long they combat, and so strong they striue,
               That they both die, that man may scape aliue.
            
            
               Briefly, be it in fields abroad I walke,Of grai
                        •…
                     s, wool, silke, cotton, flaxe hempe, & such other commodities as the earth produceth.
               
               Climbe vp the hils, or in the woods do stalke,
               God is each where, from him comes each things store,
               He nought but giues, and I take euermore.
               Here for my food the haruest fields do waue
               Their tops; and here a thousand flieces braue
               (Worthie to make the greatest kings array)
               Shake in the silken forrests of Catay.
               
               And here the lower boughs of Malta cottons;
               Do garments beare within their tuffed buttons:
               Here linnen fine is made of flaxe ykempt,
               And sailes and tackling made of hollow hempe:
               That caried on the sea with wind and weather,
               I may acquaint the East and West together;
               And drily passe ouer the watrie lea,
               And many a towne may walke vpon the sea.As the diuine on
                        •…
                     ipotence did sh
                        •…
                     w it selfe mi
                        •…
                     aculously in the creation of all things 
                        〈◊〉
                      of nothing, so doth it shine most gloriously in the yearely reno
                        •…
                     ation of some, and the daily preseruation of all.
               
               Here Indian Wheate growes on a loftie reede,
               And thrice a yeare fiue hundred graines doth breede;
               Which Indian men do drie and bray, and knead,
               And bake it into hunger-killing bread.
            
            
               That puissant voice which built this worldly Round
               Doth euer glad vs with his ioyfull sound:
               Renewes the world each yeare, and by his strength
               Each thing is borne, doth liue, and grow to length.
               
                  It makes the plough-swaine scatter (not in vaine)
               Vpon the crumbled earth his hopefull graine:
               Which couerd with the plough and hatch'd with care,
               Vnder the labour of the renting share,
               It dies to spring; and moistly hote doth tend
               Downward his root, vpward his blade to send:
               Enriching with his verdure all the plaines,
               And cheares the husbandmen with hope of gaines:
               The bud growes to an hearbe, th'hearbe to a reede,
               The reede an eare, the eare produceth seede:
               The eares to saue them from the sparrowes wast,
               With bearded eyles is hemd and ramperd fast:
               The seed hath cods, that it nor fall, nor rot,
               Nor blast, by wind, water, or weather hote:
               And the soft stemme to beare more bet the seed,
               Is vnderpropt as t'were with a new reed.
            
            
               Reader, excuse me, if thy wondring eye,
               So many trees do in my wood espie,
               My meadow so beslowr'd, my garden hearbed,
               My close so fruitfull, and my field so garbed:
               Sith in the Ile of Zebut there's a tree
               Surnamed Cocos, which appeares to beThe tree called Cocos and his strange proprieties described.
               
               More rich then ought that woods, or hils, or fields,
               Or close, or garden, or an orchard yeelds.
               Art thirstie? in his bruised leaues is wine,
               Hast need of slaxe to make thee linnen fine?
               Then take the barke, beate it, and do it twist,
               To make thee cloth thereof when ere thou list.
               Wouldst thou so soone haue butter? do but clap
               Thy greedie teeth into the tender sap.
               Dost long for oyle? why that it yeelds also,
               If so his fruite be tossed to and fro.
               
                  Wantst vineger? why all that's to be done,
               Is for to lay it in the burning Sunne.
               Wilt thou haue sugar? take his pompions ripe,
               And coole them in some fresher water pipe.
               Tis what thou wilt. I feare when Midas shall
               But touch it, t'will become a golden ball.
               I thinke that God, to make our ioyes notorious,
               The earth so fruitfull, and his name so glorious,
               Would nothing else haue made, if the whole▪ frame
               Should not haue had lesse beautie by the same.
            
            
               Now th'earthy surface is not onely drestOf the rich mettals and minerals emboweld in the earth.
               
               With things of price; for in her fruitfull brest
               Such treasures heaped are, as by no meane
               Can lucre-hunting men make riddance cleane:
               As more then all the starres in heauens vault,
               Or roaring waues of Amphitrite salt,
               Then haruest eares, or branches in the wood,
               Then foure-foot beasts or fishes in the floud.
               I will conceale the Ieat, Marble and Slat,
               Sa
                     •…
                  t Su
                        •…
                      & monte
                        •…
                      natius salis, vt in India Oronienus, in quo lapicidinarum modocae 
                        •…
                     itur renasce
                        •…
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                      regum vect galex coest quàm ex a
                        •…
                     ro atque margari
                        •…
                     s. Pl
                        •…
                     . lib. 31. cap. 7. 
                  Oromen shall this time be forgat:
               That mount in 
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                     . 
                  Arragon also, whose shiuers
               Do season meate for all the mountaine liuers.
               I am content that now my booke do passe
               Adorn'd with Mercurie, Vermilion, Brasse,
               With Orpine, Copper, Siluer, Gold, and Oare,
               Antimonie, Lead, Tinne, and Iron stoare.
               It pleaseth me t'enchase my worke of gold
               With Christall, that each faces life doth hold;
               The purple Amethist, th'Agate of name
               So diuers, and the Diamond of rich fame,
               The Cassidon faire circled to be seene,
               The Opall, Sardonix and Emraud greene,
               
                  Hard Topaze, with the Carbuncle that burneth,
               Although the fire his substance neuer turneth.
            
            
               I know the earth seemes to a wretched wightNone of the f
                        •…
                     med mettals are of themselues hu
                        •…
                     tfull, although the co
                        •…
                      
                     
                        •…
                     pt nature of man do most vngraciously abuse them.
               
               No mother, but stepmother full of spite;
               Because she brings foorth, to our litle good,
               Care-bringing gold and iron shedding bloud:
               As if mans malice made not vice abound,
               But these vnfaultie mettals of the ground.
               Like as th'alluring treasured gold doth kill
               Both soule and bodie of the man that's ill,
               So gold doth vertue guild, and giues vs wings
               Wherewith t'aspire vnto the Formam quidem ipsam (Mar ce sili) & tanquá faciem honesti vides qu
                        •…
                      si 
                        •…
                     culis cerne
                        •…
                     etur, mirabiles am
                        •…
                     res (vt a
                        •…
                      Plato) excitaret sapientiae. Cic. de Ossic. lib. 1. fairest things.
               Man well aduis'd with iron serues his turne
               To plow the field, that (thankfull) yeelds him corne:
               For to defend his countrie and his life,
               From stranger tyrannie and ciuill knife.
               But wicked men do neuer iron take,
               But for hell furies weapons of it make,
               To spoile the passenger, to kill his brother,
               To wast his countrie, massacre his mother.
               Like drunkards that abuse a gift diuine,Other like instances.
               
               And drowne their reason in a cup of wine:Simil. 
                  Of the secret vertue and admirable sympathie of the Loadstone.
               
               As corrupt Lawyers with their eloquence
               Do palliate vice, and burden innocence:
               As Preachers false Gods word do often vse,
               When they the hearers fouly do abuse:
               For as the mustie vessell that doth stinke,
               Depriues of smell God-Bacchus richest drinke:
               So Gods best gifts are turn'd to vile excesse
               Of vice, when vicious men do them possesse.
               Shall I the Magnes appel latus est ab inuē
                     tore (vt author est Nicander) in Idareperius inuenisse autē 
                     
                        •…
                     rtur, cla
                        •…
                      crepidarum & baculi cuspide harentibus, 
                        •…
                     m armenta pasceret. Plin. lib. 36. cap. 16. Load-stone passe, that dead-aliue
               My reason doth of reason selfe depriue?
               
                  
                  Magnesian praise, vndrawing drawing stone,
               Whose Lure is secret, and his hooke vnknowne,
               His baites and grapples are insensible;
               His lines vnseene, his hands inuisible
               Draw distant iron; and is nere at rest,
               Till with a longed kisse his hope be blest,
               Nay with embracement; and knowes not the force
               (O loyall mind) of vncoupling diuorce,
               Vnlesse we them disioyne: such tender loue
               This stone and iron towards each do proue.
               And though a put-betweene barre their desire,
               It puts not out their in-bred louing fire:
               But towards one another leape they will,
               At least by signes confirming their good will.
               Good God, who can conceiue, why that a ring
               But touch't therewith should straight his fellow bring?
               That second draw a third, that third another,
               And that pull after his fifth iron brother?
               Good Lord, whence comes this vertue, that doth cause
               That one vntoucht must follow th'others lawes?
               That knit and bound and glued they should be,
               Where neither glue, nor knot, nor coard we see?
               Disprouing reason, holding no compound
               Can hang in th'aire, not falling to the ground.
            
            
               Now I know well, that Lucretius. he whose cunning witThe cause of this sympathie vndemonstrable.
               
               With Latine weeds the Grecians skill did fit,
               And from his wife receiu'd that deadly drinke,
               Wherewith t'augment his loue she (foole) did thinke,
               Doth striue to shew, by many a subtill reason,
               The reason of this sympathie so geason.
               But (Lucrece) tell whence comes that vertue forth,
               That turnes the compasse-needle to the North
               
                  Toucht by this stone? faile not in this essay,
               And I will crowne thy head with verdant bay,
               And say in Natures secrets thou speakst truer,
               Then thy Empedocles, or Epicure.
               
            
            
               
                  Bacchus for wine, Ceres for corne do bindOf the mariners compasse needle.
               
               No faster vnto their deserts mankind,
               Then Flauus, when he first did bring to light
               The compasse-needle, for the sailing wight.
               His braue inuention guides on watrie rudges,
               The caricke that so slowly onward drudges:
               Serues for a cresset-light, and for a guide
               To search all corners of the earth so wide:
               It makes a ship, enforced by the wind,
               Almost a new world in one day to find,
               To marke the clime, and pricke vpon the card,
               How farre from th'Aequinoctiall they are squard.
            
            
               But th'earth doth not deserue this glorious name,Of diuers for
                        •…
                      of earth that are medicinable.
               
               For things that grow alone vpon the same,
               Or in her bowels; but her proper merit
               To sing her praise inuites my thankfull spirit.
               I call to witnesse such as haue made proofe
               With profit, for their feebled healths behoofe,
               Of th'earth of Diosc. lib. 5. ca. 94 Plin. lib. 35. c. 16. 
                  Chios, and of Selia,
               
               Of that of Erithrie and Melia.
               
            
            
               Haile mother Earth, that bearest men and corne,Terr
                        •…
                      Encomion.
               
               Gold, houses, health, fruites, garments to be worne:
               Thou nourcing wombe, faire, patient, vnmoued,
               Fruitfull and fragrant, various and beloued,
               Clad with a robe with flowers all bespangled,
               With riuers lac't, fretted with colours fangled.
               Haile heart, roote, foot to that great Animal,
               
               Which men the World most vulgarly do call;
               
                  Chast spouse of heauen, and foundation sound
               For all the buildings of this totall Round.
               I greete thee mother, sister, nource, and hostesse
               Of man, the king of creatures; all (great Princesse)
               Do liue for thee: for euery wheeling spheare
               T'enlighten thee his slaming torch doth beare;
               To giue thee heate, the purer fierie slame,
               To motion orbicular doth frame.
               The aire for thy refreshing pleasure taketh,
               When with the North or gentler West it shaketh.
               To moisten thee, the sea, fountaine and riuer
               With veines do interlace thy bodie euer.
            
            
               Oh! how it grieues me, that the wittiest menAgainst the scornfull con tempt of husbandtie, and carelesse regard of searching the natures of simples.
               
               Do thee (O earth) so commonly contemne:
               That greatest hearts do husbandrie deride,
               And care of simples proudly lay aside
               For simplest men, and men of no demerits,
               That iron bodies haue and leaden spirits.
               Such were not once those venerable Sages,
               Whose praise the Bible tels to coming ages,
               
                  Noe, Moses, Abram, who did most time spend
               In tilling, or vpon their flockes did tend.
               Such were not Cyrus, or king Archelas,
               
               
                  Hiero, Philometor, or Attalus,
               
               Whose royall hands in steade of conquering blade
               And scepter, held a bill-hooke or a spade.
               Such were not Manius, Cincinnat, Fabricius,
                  Vide Pl
                        •…
                     n. lib. 18 cap. 3.
               
               Or Serran that made warre gainst passions vicious,
               And did with coulter crown'd, with conqu'ring hand,
               With plough triumphant raze the Romane land.
               Yea Scipio tir'd with seeming happinesse,
               With Court-eclipses, tedious The word Aubades signifies such squea
                        •…
                     ing musique, as fidling minstrels plav at mens windowes. sportfulnesse
               
                  Of following troupes; and that great (Diocletian) Emperor,
               That, mad a king, became a labourer,
               To pettie hamlets did retire againe,
               And did in tilling take as mickle paine
               As earst in warre; setting their trees in rowes,
               As orderly as squadrons gainst their foes▪
                  An excellent commendation of the countrie life.
               
            
            
               O man thrise happie that himselfe sequesters
               From Citie troubles! and that neuer pesters
               His thoughts with kings affaires; but doth him arme
               (By Ceres taught) to plow his fathers farme!
               Pale Enuies poisond tooth doth not him bite,
               Nor greedie Care depriue him of delight.
               His will is bounded iust as is his farme;
               He neuer drinks such potions as do charme
               Mens Loue in stead of wine; nor mong his meate
               Doth euer life-depriuing Arsenicum. Orpine eate.
               His hand his goblet is, the siluer streame
               His sweetest Ipocras: his cheese and creame,
               And apples graffed by his proper hand,
               In vnprepared readinesse do stand.
               False pettifoggers (harpies of the barre,
               And bloud-suckers of men) with pratling warre
               Triflingly tedious, neuer dull his sence.
               But birds with their melodious eloquence
               Deceiue the busie time, on fragrant twigs
               Chanting sweet couplets to harmonious jigs.
               His wandring ship vpon the stormie maine
               Becomes no play-game for the windie traine:
               Nor doth he roame vpon the Ocean wide,
               To seeke where death doth dreadfully abide;
               But quietly his dayes all passing thorough,
               Doth neuer lose the sight of's natiue borough.
               
                  Nor sea, nor riuer doth he euer know,
               Saue such cleare brookes as gurglingly do flow
               Watring his verdant fields; and that selfe earth
               Enterres him, that receiu'd him at his birth.
               To purchase sleepe he drinks no dulling (
                     
                        〈◊◊〉
                     . lib. 2
                        •…
                     
                     ▪ cap 18.) poppie,
               Nor the cold (
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                     
                  ) rush that growes in Aethiopie.
               
               He doth not like (
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                     
                  ) Mecaenas musique buy,
               When his grieu'd soule in bodie pain'd did lye,
               And had no resting peace, but without stay
               The iealous paine on's verie bones did play:
               But on greene carpets of soft mosse that growes
               Fringing the banks, from out his side he blowes
               Sweet slumbring naps, enchanted by the sounds
               Of warbling brookes that runne on stonie grounds.
               Nor warlike trumpe, nor clarion, drumme or tabour
               Breaking his sleepe, put him to arming labour;
               Nor the commaund of anie chieftaine braue
               Leades him from bed blindfold vnto his graue.
               The wakefull Cocke makes him the time to know,
               Limits his sleepe, and with his chearefull crow
               Cheares him to walke among the floures early,
               Which with Aurora's teares waxen all pearlie.
               Close stinking aire in streets and filthie lanes,
               His bloud with damps infectious nere enflames:
               But open aire wherein he euer liues,
               Fresh appetite vnto him alway giues:
               Maintaines his health, puts verie death in doubt,
               In manie yeares to find his lodging out.
            
            
               In clymbe-fall court he spends no wretched yeares,
               His will depends not on the greatest peeres:
               He changeth not religion with his Lord.
               His mercenarie stile doth not accord,
               
                  With lyes to make an Antan Elephant,
               Or stile a coward hard and valiant;
               Or make an Adon of some foule Thersite,
               
               Or wrong leud Flora with Alcestes right:
               But liues vnto himselfe, serues God in feare,
               And sings the verie thought his heart doth beare.
            
            
               Pale feare doth neuer feede vpon his heart;
               Nor doth he practise conicatching art:
               If he thinke on deceipt, tis to lay snares
               For rauenous beasts, or to catch vnawares
               The birds with twigs, with wieles the sealie frie.
               Now if his ward-robe be not sumptuouslie
               With silkes and tissue stuft; if so his chest
               Be not vnsafe with greedie Lingots prest:
               Yet are his garments made of purer wooll,
               And with vnboughten wines his sellar full,
               His lofts with graine, his wels with water cleare,
               His grange with hay, his parke is stoar'd with deare.
               For I speake of that countrie-mans good state,
               Whose house a pettie common-wealth doth mate:
               Not of the broken bouth, or hungrie neede
               Of the poore drudge that begs whereon to feede,
               Or hungrie fisher-man, whose foure-legd roome
               Hath but at pushes for to fill his wombe.His conclusiue oraison.
               
            
            
               Let me (ô God) of greatest Kings vnkend,
               In solitarie woods my life-time end;
               My pond my sea, my groue let be Ardena,
               
               
                  Gimon my Nilus, Sarrapin my Sena,
               
               My Lutes and quiresters the winged sort,
               
                  Bartas my The Kings house Paris so called. 
                  Louver, and my men my Court:
               Where I vntroubled may thy praise so thunder,
               As may strike dead succeeding men with wonder.
               
                  Or if my dutie and my Princes grace
               Shall call me vnto anie waiting place,
               Grant, with his fauor I nere drunken be,
               But subiect to command, may yet liue free.
               False honour I may shunne, true honour gaine,
               Lou'd for no slatterie, but for dealing plaine.
            
            FINIS.
            
               Effugiunt auidos carmina sola rogos.
               Ouid. Amorum lib. 3. Eleg. 8.
            
         
      
      
         
            To the Translator.
            
               REport that made me reade, had thrise the power,
               When I had heard thy tongue of siluer strike,
               To make me once againe to spend that hower,
               That twise before my heart did so much like:
               But while my soule held his respectiue eye
               Vpon the Leaues of thy registerd fame,
               My Heart constraind my pen to prophecie,
               That Loue and Fortune shall enrich thy Name.
               Thou mildest Winter that our age hath felt,
               In midst of whom a Lillie freshly growes,
               Put all thy heate and calmie power to melt
               From off this flower the frostie canded snowes:
               That when thy hand hath drawne the curtaine round,
               We may see Bartas picture Lawrel-crownd.
            
            
               Thomas Mason Suffolciensis.
               
            
         
         
            
            To the honorable Gentleman, Sir Thomas Chaloner Knight.
            
            
               TO thee, true picture of humanitie,
               Learnings deare friend, wisdomes high fauorite,
               That dost discerne twixt froathie vanitie
               Of want on rimes, (bellowes of lewd delight,)
            
            
               And learned straines of sacred poesie:
               My Muse this shorter sonnet doth addresse,
               Till for thy loue and gracefull courtesie,
               She may in better Layes her zeale expresse.
            
            
               For when (of better growth) she shall enroule
               The praise of Worthies in records of fame;
               Forgetfulnesse shall not her pen controule,
               For not enregistring thy worthie name.
               
                  ▪For thy deserts do truly her assure,
               Thou rightfully art he that Chaloner, 
                        〈◊〉
                      Hal'honneur. 
                  Hal'honneur.
               
            
            
               T. Winter.
            
         
         
            
            To the right worthy Knight Sir George Somers.
            
               ALthough (braue Knight) the cold and frozen pen
               Of Winter, cannot paint out Somers praise;
               Yet giue me leaue (thou ornament of men)
               Among these short and il-compos'd Essayes,
            
            
               With thy rich name to cloath my naked verse,
               And onely glance at thy deserued glorie;
               Sith if I should thy famous deedes rehearse,
               These lines would swell into an ample storie.
            
            
               An ample storie that ensample might
               Braue minds, to fixe their eyes on markes of honor,
               Directed by thy true-directing light,
               To find out vertue, and attend vpon her.
            
            
               But though I cannot (as I would) expresse
               The loue that vnto thy desert I owe:
               Yet my desire increaseth nerethelesse,
               That this, my Muse may briefly let thee know:
               As long as winter somer shall succeede,
               
                  Winter is thine in thought, in word, in deede.
            
            
               T. Winter.
            
         
         
            
            To the vertuous and nobly-descended Sir Thomas Lucy the younger, Knight.
            
            
               I Know 
                     〈◊〉
                   well, it hath bene held of yore,
               That Fo
                     •…
                  ne in her largesse still is blind:
               That there she giues her gifts in greatest store,
               Where iudgement cannot any merit find.
            
            
               But seeing Art and Nature haue conspir'd,
               To make thee louely, learned, wittie, wise,
               Let Fortune in her iudgement be admir'd,
               As hauing cleare and true-discerning eyes.
            
            
               Therefore proceede thou happie, hopefull Knight,
               Keepe on thy course in one ecclipticke line,
               Be constant in thy vertuous delight,
               And if thou wilt in perfect glorie shine,
               Shun all extreames, doate not on worldly pelfe,
               But in a word, be still most like thy selfe.
            
            
               T. Winter.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ To the learned Ciuilian, Doctor Iames, Iustice of Peace and Quorum in the Countie of Somerset.
            
               IF will and skill were true correlatiues.
               Thy worth should neuer want dese
                     •…
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  ;
               For in vnflattering superlatiues
               I would thy vertues tell, thy credit raise.
            
            
               Thou floure of courtesie, that dost embrace
               With both thine armes each wel-deseruing spirit;
               Heaping the fauours of thy bounteous grace,
               Where neuer-erring iudgement findeth merit;
            
            
               I will not venture in a daring vaine,
               To reckon vp thy each praise-worthie part;
               They are too many for so short a straine,
               But sith my heart is better then my art,
               Let Winters heart obtaine this boone of thee,
               This Winter-fruit yscorned may not be.
            
            
               T. Winter.
            
            
               
                  
                     Scinduntur vestes, gemmae franguntur & aurum,
                     Carmina quam tribuent fama perennis erit.
                  
               
               Ouid. Amor. lib. 
                     •…
                  . Eleg▪ 10.
            
            
         
      
   