
      
         
            
            
            
               SACRED HYMNS. CONSISTING OF FIFTI SELECT PSALMS OF DAVID and others, Paraphrastically turned into English Verse. And by ROBERT TAILOVR, set to be sung in Five parts, as also to the Viole, and Lute or Orph-arion. Published for the vse of such as delight in the exercise of MVSIC in hir original honour.
            LONDON: Printed by Thomas Snodham, by the assignment of the Company of Stationers. 1615.
         
         
            
            
            
               
                  〈…〉
               
            
            
               IN thee, we live; moove, Lord, by thee:
               From thee pure mynds thee-knoweing light derive.
               How then, save through thy grace, may wee
               That honour high to sing thy bliss atchieve?
               Then thow draw vp my lowe desire:
               And love of thee let noble thoughts inspire.
            
            
               
                  ETernal God! whose boundles time, not led by circling sky,
               Then former day, now later leves; whence wee som prime descry,
               Whence first, time gan his coorse; thus parts which may arrange:
               But thy blest time unmooving stands, ay perfect, void of change,
               With thee eternal, present all, unknoweing first or last,
               Deziring nothing yet to com, regretting nothing past.
               Thow infinite, (great Self-beĕing Lord,) first, highest, pure, unmixt:
               Vnbounded sole, to all thy woorks wel-mezured bounds hast fixt.
               That glorious Sun, fair Moon, and Stars, finite since wee doo knowe;
               Nor Gods themselfs, and made by thee, more glorious Light, may shew.
               And dread we yet, who serve this Lord, have prov'd his helpful might,
               Mans, Feends assalts? May earth with powĕr above-celestiăl fight?
               But Hee, though world conteins and fils, comprended though of none;
               Yet gracious, to his chozen train, his vieu in supreme throne
               (Their eys with light of glori' encleerd,) pure blessednes, prezents.
               Abiss of ioy! that thought exceeds; yet woords fresh thought prevents.
               For thow, Perfection ô entire, perfections all containst:
               No good, not in thee; 'above thee, none; whole Good, pure Bliss remainst.
               What Beauties ey, what mynd delight; what Sweetnes drawth desire;
               What Maiesties we high revere; what Glorious states admire;
               What Wisdom richly vests the mynd, and makes it All possess,
               Redoubling all by right-drawn shapes; what Goodnes things dooth bless,
               Diffuzing round it self; from thence what Vertues noble spring
               By woorthi acts to cheer the world, and better age to bring;
               What Happi life our thoughts conceive; (for ah how small a mite
               Of happi life we here enioy?) what Ioy, what deer delight,
               What flagrant Pleasures, full, and mere, in blessed state are found;
               In thee, great Fountain of them all, united all abound.
               From thee, as beams from beautĕous Sun, what evĕr is goodli seen
               In heavĕn or earth; what rich, what fair, what evĕr we loveli deem,
               And pleazed will alures; from thee, high Cause of All, derivĕd;
               By thyn aspect is all maintaind; yea dead, by thee revivĕd.
               That all thy creatures, supreme Lord, thee Goodnes high define:
               Themselfs from thee agnize; to thee their praises all resign.
               And dote we still on creatures mene; in their perfections dwell:
               Nor raize our loves towărd Him, who them must thousand folds excell?
               
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  For as the matchles Sun, though one, imbuĕd with vertu high
               From richnes thyn, in glorious walk brought round the broad-spred sky,
               And lustring earth; (how poor a clod?) with beams and inflŭence sweet
               Of spĭrit sublime, dooth various lifes (each gracĕd with beauties meet)
               Through land and sea disperse; hence beasts, hence fish, each crauling thing,
               Birds, trees, herbs, flours, fruits, spices rare, yea mettals deep respring:
               All whose perfections, great and mene, in thousand kynds renuëd
               Whom thousand graces deck, and yet with vertues more enduëd,
               In Sun himself, thy master-woork, Cause whence they all proceed,
               Must needs excell; not beĕing as here, (not so hast thow decreed,)
               By matter course, embas
                     •…
                  d; empaird, by distance great; by site
               Oblique, alaiĕd; diversifiëd, (repugnant that they fight,)
               By mixtures of ten thousand forms; but there they all refine;
               Vnite in one; one uniform, high, rich perfection shine:
               So (glorious Cause of all,) in thee; what lifeful Light in Sun;
               What Greatnes fair in Heavĕns dooth shine; through Orbs what Beauties run;
               What Powĕrs, what Vertues nobly rich, Intelligence what cleer,
               What Wisdom, Freedom, Goodnes sweet, in Angels blest appear;
               What flagrant Loves, what glorious Ioys, Celestiăl Coorts embless;
               In thee unite; doost all in one eternally possess,
               In infinite perfection more, so sort in more sublime.
               O purenes high, whereto not mans, nor Angels thoughts can clime!
               For thow, who Beeing art it self; doost Beeings all contain:
               Perfections all, thence ô derivĕd, more perfect there remain.
               Then Lord, from thee sith all proceed; to thee in iust desire
               They bend: at thee, whence first they came, Content they last require.
               For thow, First Cause; Great End of all. What evĕr true rest affects,
               Perfection his what e're dooth seek, what happi state expects;
               Thee, Lord, ô thee it still pursŭeth: som beam of bliss divine,
               As due from bounti thyn it craves. Evĕn senseles creatures thyn,
               Through natures force inclin'd by thee, woork out their Beeing best,
               And place preserving seek. But man, with understanding blest,
               And Spĭrits celestiăl, strive to knowe thee: 'who knowne, doost Love alure.
               (Growe Knowledge; Love wil growe.) True love, dooth woorthi harts procure
               Thy will to woork, thy Laws to keep: which kept, thow doost requite
               With high Reward, with God himself. Here blest with glorious sight,
               They thee enioy; to thee with love (Eternal Bliss) adhere.
               O sourse of ioys! Towărd which our hope (unwoorthi though) we rear;
               And thee, ah thee pursue. Thow Lord, in mortal life belowe,
               (Where hundred snares our soules beset, where sin dooth all oreflowe,)
               Conduct us with thy grace; and safe to life immortal bring:
               With Angels, where triumphant wee shal ay thy praises sing.
            
         
      
      
         
            SACRED HYMNS.
         
            PSALM 1.
            
               A description of the Righteous, and their Feliciti: also of the Ungodli, and their Ruine, in the day of Iudgement.
            
            
               
                  OBLESSED wight! whose pure desires to stain
               Th'ungodli crue in vain their counseils bend;
               In vain doo sinners ways his absence plain;
               And scorners chairs in vain their poison spend:
               Th'Eternals law hath rapt his whole delight;
               Th'eternal law he muzeth day and night.
            
            
               AS precious plant; whom iuiceful veins doo fat,
               Due fruits enrich, unfading leafs doo grace;
               (The Masters ioy, fair honour of the plat:)
               So righteous man; whom blessings round embrace.
               While wicked imps, as rootles fruitles chaf;
               Which whirled round, the wynd seems cauze to laugh.
            
            
               THERFORE when sovĕrain Iudge of heăvens and land
               By final doom shal destin to'each his place:
               The iust shal shine, and glorious senat stand;
               When damned rout shal fly his dreadful face.
               For righteous path th'alrighteous Lord advows:
               But track perverse towărd dire destruction bows.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 2.
            
               The Prophet King DAVID (though not here in the title, yet elswhere in holi scripture, named author of this Psalm,) foresheweth the vain conspiraci of the Princes of the world, against Christ and his Kingdom, proclaimed by God, and establisbed over all the world: And advizeth them therfore, for their owne everlasting good, to assubiect themselues to him, and it.
            
            
               
                  WHAT graceles fears, strange hates, may Nations so affright,
               Infuriate so; gainst God with mad attempts to fight?
               Gainst God, and gainst his Christ, earths Kings and Peers shal band,
               To force ioyn fraud, (ah fools!) Heăvens kingdom to withstand.
               Fond, earthi mynds! ye hate your bliss: Gods gracious hests,
               Free laws, as thrauling tys, your lawles life detests.
            
            
               BVT Hee in heăvens that sits, whose ey their thoughts divides;
               Their wicked mynd abhors; their vain attempts derides.
               He then in wrath shal speak; in wrath which sore shal vex,
               And with distracted thoughts their troubled mynds perplex,
               And then shal glorious voice from heăvenli throne proceed;
               Lo here my Son, a King to sacred Siŏn decreed.
            
            
               
                  THEN this decree I'le shew: God spake it first to Mee;
               
               My Son thou art: this day have I begotten thee,
               Thy kingdom shal encrease: Ask me; and Gentile lands;
               Yea utmost ends of earth, I'le render to thy hands.
               VVhom thou, obdur'd in sin, with rod of irŏn shalt bruze:
               As earthen pot shalt crash, while they thy laws refuze.
            
            
               THEN ô, advize ye kings; and ye instruction take
               Who Iudges are of earth, your iudgements right to make.
               Serve God with fear: (with fear best wisdom is begon:)
               With dread your ioys asseaz̆on. Then homage to his Son
               With kiss prezent: So so his kindling ire prevent,
               Which them and all their ways, gainst whom least spark is bent,
               With horrour dire consumes. But blessed ay the wight
               Who trusts in him; to him who sacred faith hath plight.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 8.
            
               The Prophet DAVID admireth Gods graciousnes toward Man: particularly in the future humiliation of Christ; and in the exaltation of Mans nature, in him, and by him, ensuing. Where together with the supernatural dominion of Manintimated, the restauration also of the natural is expressed. By the way the Childrens acclamation to our Sauiour, at his solemn entri into the Temple, and the powerful effect thereof, are pointedat.
            
            
               
                  ETERNAL Lord; th'illustrous fame
               That sounds through world thy glorious name!
               Whose greatnes fair transcends the skys;
               Whose goodnes earth dooth not despize.
               Evĕn tender lips of infants yong
               Thy grace inspires with praiseful song:
               Whose force thy foes revengeful rage
               All danted strangely dooth asswage.
            
            
               WHEN vp my wondring eys I raize
               Towărd higher coorts which preach thypraise;
               The heăvens so huge, the stars so bright,
               That Prince of day, this Queen of night;
               All which doo thee their maker knowe,
               Of peerles hand the matchles showe:
               Lord, what is man, poor clot of mold,
               That him in mynd thou still shouldst hold;
               Or son of man, defiled worm,
               Thy gracious thoughts towărd him to turn!
            
            
               A LITTLE thou wilt man abbase,
               Beneath thy blisful Angels place:
               Then ay shal man remain renound,
               With prime of glori princely cround.
               To him as King thy creatures bow,
               And dueti prest shal ioyful vow:
               What e're against his scepter swell,
               His powrful foot thou doun makĕst quell.
            
            
               THE cattle myld his service bear:
               Yea beasts most wyld his frounds doo fear:
               What flying wing the air divides,
               What swimming fin through water glides,
               What creeping thing in sea or land,
               Hast all subiected to his hand.
               O Lord, our Lord; what glorious fame
               Resounds through world thy gracious name!
            
            
               
               TREBLE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  Eternal Lord; th'illustrous fame, Thatsounds 
                     〈♫〉
                   through world thy glorious name! Whose greatnes fair transcends the 
                     〈♫〉
                   skys; Whose goodnes earth dooth not de- spize. Evĕn tender lips 
                     〈♫〉
                   of infants yong Thy grace inspires with praiseful song: Whose force

                  
                     〈♫〉
                   thy foes revengeful rage All danted strangely dooth as- swage.
            
            
               BASE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               MEANE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               COVNTERTENOR.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               TENOR.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               LUTE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 15.
            
               The moral furniture of a true member of Gods Church, set out by King DAVID.
               
            
            
               
                  LORD: who shal in thy roial tent reside?
               Whom shal thy sacred mount his dweller claim?
               The man whose feet in paths direct abide;
               Whose lips at trueth, whose hands at iustice aim.
            
            
               NO wronging tale his tong hath twynd; no deed
               Of his hath neighbour harmd; yea slander vile
               Gainst neighbour raiz'd, which itching ears dooth feed,
               With stern rebuke his righteous ears exile.
            
            
               THE godles wretch, from heăvenli coort reiected,
               As foe, he shuns; as outcast base, despizeth:
               The godli wight, by grace divine elected,
               As frend, he loves; as precious, highly prizeth.
            
            
               HIS woord as oath, his oath as sacred vow,
               He firm observes; though harm he thence endure:
               Usurious trade, the idles biting plow,
               Ne gain nor ease can him to hold alure.
            
            
               THE upright cause, sole obiect of his sight,
               No bribe can hurt, no present needs to mend:
               So hee the man, whom nought shal shake or fright;
               Whom sacred place, and blisful ioys attend.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 16.
            
               The Prophet DAVID in this Psalm, noted with a mark of excellenci, declareth that (beeing first prepared in soule, by betaking himself wholy to the service and protection of God,) he had received supernatural infusion, of Diuine Wisdom: By vertue whereof with much ioy and exultation he foreprophecieth the speedi Resurrection of our Holi Saviour from death, (the ground of mans hope and comfort;) and the happines of the Life to com in the vision of God.
            
            
               
                  THEN thow preserve me, Lord, thou anchor of my mynd;
               My wandring thoughts no rest save in thy favour fynd.
               Thee, thee my soule hath chŏzen, thee vowd hir Lord to bee:
               Though service myn I knowe can nothing ad to thee.
               Yet to thy servants may; in whom thy gifts excell;
               Terrestrial Saints; midst whom my high delights doo dwell.
            
            
               BVT sorroes them befall, yea heaped plaugs oppress;
               VVho gifts from thee to dum or damned gods address.
               Their murdring sacrifice shal never soil my face:
               Their Gods accursed names my lips shal never grace.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               THOW art my God, my Lord; the portion I love best;
               My health, and wealth; my ioy; my bliss, and glorious rest.
               And thow my earthli lot, in place both rich and pure,
               A goodli seat, shalt long to mee and myn secure.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               THE Lord with thankful praise my humble mynd adores,
               VVho mee with counseil deep in nightli muzing stores.
               For him before me ay my faithful eys engrave:
               He at my right hand stands, from falling me to save.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               VVHERFORE my hart with ioy, my spir̆it exults in praise:
               And soule hir dying flesh in hopeful rest doun-lays.
               For not my soule beneath exil'd thou'lt leue from thee:
               Ne let thyn HOLI ONE impure corruption see.
               But paths of life wilt shew, which to thy presence bring;
               VVhere fullest ioys for ay, and purest pleasures spring.
            
            
               
               TREBLE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  THen thow preserve me Lord, thou anchor 
                     〈♫〉
                   of my mynd: My wandring thoughts no rest, save in thy favour fynd. 
                     〈♫〉
                   Thee, thee my soule hath chozĕn, thee vowd her Lord to bee: 
                     〈♫〉
                   Though service myn I knowe can nothing ad to thee: Yet to

                  
                     〈♫〉
                   thy servants may, in whom thy gifts excell; Terrestrial Saints, 
                     〈♫〉
                   midst whom my high delights doo dwell.
            
            
               BASE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               MEANE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               COVNTERTENOR.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               TENOR.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               LUTE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 17.
            
               
                  DAVID grounding upon the innocenci of his owne life and conscience, appealeth to God for relief against the oppression and cruelti of his uniust enimies: who men of the world, place their happines wholy in the corporal pleasures of this life. whereas his Feliciti consisteth in enioying Gods fauour in his righteous life here, and in the glorious vision of God in the life after the Resurrection. This Psalm seemeth to haue been made, upon occasion of the second expedition which Saul made against David, at the first instigation of the Ziphites: at which time Dauid flying from the Desert of Ziph to that of Maon, was in a plain there between the mountains enclosed by Saul. But by reason of a sodain message that the Philistims did invade the land, Saul left foloing of Dauid; who so escaped.
            
            
               
                  HIGH Iudge of world, cast doun thy rightĕous eys;
               Attentive hear, while right for iustice humbly crys.
               Not causeles fear, nor sleight of faining lips,
               Or needles douts prezents, or plot disguisĕd uprips:
               Iust grief appeals; and sentence from thy face,
               Of thee craves due redress: thou then iust plea embrace.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               THOU oft my soule, yea oft in night didst vieu;
               When thoughts in silent rest prezent appearance true:
               And oft my hart with firi storms hast seen
               Dissolv'd; and trial made what dross therein hath been.
               Nought counterfeit, no palliate thing hast found:
               What secret mynd dooth think, that mouth dooth truly sound.
               All as my woords, so deeds towărd men doo frame:
               Thy sacred woord my rule: the viŏlent wrongers blame,
               I see, and shun. O still my feet contain
               In rightĕous paths; stil hands from acts not iust restrain.
            
            
               THEE Lord I call: for sure thou wilt me hear:
               Ah then receive the plaint which faithful soule dooth rear.
               Divide thy acts: display thy mercies free,
               (Thou Saviour of thy Saints from those who them and thee
               With wicked hate attempt): as light of ey
               Me fenced, under, Lord, thy shadŏing wing let fly.
               There let me rest; there safe from impious crue,
               My deadli foes, protect: who circling rage renue,
               My strength to wast, my life to earth to bring;
               Engrosd with fat; and proud, out thundring threats doo ring.
            
            
               
                  AS Lion fierce, with ireful hunger whet,
               Flings out his prey to seek; which ioious having met,
               Stands foming rage: or else as Lions whelp,
               Who coucheth close in cave, his strength with sleight to help,
               Nor bold, nor yet afraid: so Lord my foes,
               Now round with ramping troops our ways and walks enclose,
               Prezenting death: and now with spiteful ey,
               Doun-cast, dissembling leer, advantage to espy.
            
            
               THEN Lord arize, and with encounter swift
               Affront their savage looks: and bloud since is their drift,
               Midst wicked troops, that bloud may bloud repay,
               To save us by thy hand, with swoord mowe doun thy way.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               SO Lord from men, my grieving soule enfree,
               From men of baser world: who here we beast-like see
               In fading life their portion all possess;
               And panches vile, their God, from thy rich storehouse bless.
               Like sire, like son: same coorse their ofspring runs;
               Ful gorge themselues; what's left, that to their infants comes.
            
            
               BVT I, by faith, in rightĕous life, shal vieu
               Thy gracious face. And when thy powĕr shal death subdue;
               Awakened, Lord, eternal glorious sight
               Of semblance thyn, me like, shal fill with pure delight.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 19.
            
               The Almighti Lord beeing made knowne to the World by his glorious woorks, (amongst which the Sun for beauti and power is eminent;) and moreover beeing attained to by menes of his Law and gracious Woord, the vertues and happi effects whereof are mani and memorable: DAVID praieth as wel for remission of secret, as for preseruation from presumptuous transgressions of that diuine Law; that so, secured from final defection, himself and his deuotions may be accepted of God his Redeemer.
            
            
               
                  THE heăvens declare the glori' of God; that worlds great arch foorth-tels,
               "His handi woork we are himself who thousand heăvens excels.
               Both day to day resounds these woords, and night to night inures
               This knowelege high; which vieuing ey to muzing mynd assures.
               No speach, no language under sky, which hath not heard their voice:
               Their woords through earth to ends of world run rulĕd with glorious noise.
            
            
               HE here the Sun in bour hath placĕd: the Sun, like bridegrome brave
               Who coming foorth, like Giant stout to run his race dooth crave.
               His course from utmost end of heăven he takes, and round amain
               By mighti compas to' utmost end of heăven returns again.
               His glistĕring rays all guild the world: no less his quicning heat,
               What earth, what air, what sea containth, cheers up with comfort great.
            
            
               GODS law is perfect; soules to him restoring it betakes:
               His testimoni' is sure in woork; and wise evĕn children makes.
               Gods iustifyĭngs are sound and straight; to raize the hart with ioy:
               His mandates cleer; from clouded eys to chase their dark annoy.
               The fear of God is pure; and keeps from dire corruption free:
               His iudgements all as true and iust, of heăvens adored bee:
               More woorth desire then treasures huge of pearl and finest gold;
               More sweet then sweetest food which Bee in curious cels dooth hold.
            
            
               THEN Lord, behold, thy servant warn'd, to keep thy law dezires:
               Dezires thy law to keep; which kept, to high reward aspires.
               Then thow inspire thy grace: and Lord, (for who his falts can knowe?)
               To clenze my stains through sins unknowne thy gracious merci showe.
               But strange presumptŭous sins keep off, that those may never raign:
               So from the great defecting sin I cleer shall ay remain.
               And so my woords from humble lips, my thoughts from thankful hart,
               Thou shalt accept; O Lord, my strength, redeemer myn that art.
            
            
               
               TREBLE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  THe heăvens de- clare the glori of God, that 
                     〈♫〉
                   worlds greatarch foorth- tels, His handi woork we are him- self, 
                     〈♫〉
                   who thousand heăvens ex- cels. Both day to day re- sounds 
                     〈♫〉
                   these woords, and night to night in- ures This knowelege high; which

                  
                     〈♫〉
                   vieuing ey to muzing mynd as- sures. No speach, no language under 
                     〈♫〉
                   sky, which hath not heard their voice: Their woords through earth to ends 
                     〈♫〉
                   of world run rulĕd with glorious noise.
            
            
               BASE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               MEANE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               COVNTERTENOR.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               TENOR.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               LUTE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 20.
            
               The praier of the faithful people of God, for the safeti and victori of their King going foorth vnto war; recorded by King DAVID himself.
            
            
               
                  IN day of troŭble, ô woorthi king;
               God cheer thee; thence high valure spring:
               And mighti name of Iacobs Lord,
               Protect from stroke of hostile swoord.
               That day from sacred throne to thee
               On Angels wings aid heăvenli flee:
               And strength, by prostrate Church implor̆ed,
               From Sĭon
                        •…
                     
                   great Ark be fresh restorĕd.
            
            
               THY praiĕr stil pierce his gracious ears,
               As pious soule it humbly rears:
               Thy gifts his eys benign receave;
               And offrings burnt all cinders leave.
               His light illustrate so thy face;
               So favour his thy ways entrace;
               That wish of hart, that woork of brain,
               Succesful end stil blest attain.
            
            
               THVS wee, enfreed from feard annoy,
               For s
                     •…
                  feti thyn, our deerest ioy,
               All thankful shall Gods praises sing;
               And glorious name to heavĕns upring.
               Yea when thy praiĕrs his powĕr performs,
               And thee victorious (ô) returns:
               We banners, ensigns of his praise,
               And trophes to' his great name wil raize.
            
            
               O FAITH assurĕd; inspyrd from high!
               Now knowe I, God, evĕn God drawth nigh:
               Our King, the Lords anointed deer,
               Celestial sanctuări dooth hear.
               There see I, aid diuine decreed,
               To save his persŏn in hours of need:
               There Victori, by Gods right hand,
               By powĕr gainst which no powĕr can stand:
            
            
               SOME charrets make their strength and grace:
               In horses som proud glori place.
               Fond ioy, false strength! at thundring call,
               Horse, charrets, men, to ground doo fall.
               We then to heăvens address our ey,
               Where surer trust faiths eys descry:
               A trust, which, whilĕst they doun are brought,
               Our standing strength and triŭmph hath wrought.
               Then hear vs, Lord: let heavĕns great king.
               Our king on earth home safely bring.
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  •…
               ALM. 21.
            
               King DAVID yieldeth solemn Thanks unto God, at his return with Uictori over Gods enimies: and farther foresheweth their utter extermination.
            
            
               
                  THE King, (Lord,) towărd thy glorious face
               Victorious eys dooth ioyful rear:
               His strength, thy spir̆it; his health, thy grace;
               With doubled triŭmphs his soule dooth chear.
               What hart could wish, what lips did crave;
               Thy bountĕous hand him strangely gave.
            
            
               YEA whĕther his thoughts had nĕver aspyr'd,
               Thy blessing roial him prevents:
               Of purest gold croun undesyr'd
               To humble head rich hand prezents.
               Then lire he ask'd: thou long to live
               Yea life eternal didst him give.
            
            
               WHAT maiesti on earth can shine;
               What woorship mortal man may grace;
               What glori, only not diuine;
               Thy goodnes all on him dooth place.
               That him all ages, pattern rare
               Of matchles bliss, shal ay declare.
            
            
               THEN ioy his thankful hart hath fraught;
               Which from thy face serene derives:
               Which firm affiănce hath likewise wrought:
               Which ioy again stil fresh revives.
               For sith the King in th'Highĕst dooth trust;
               Thou'rt safe; ô King; ô Highĕst, thou'rt iust.
            
            
               FOR as on thyn thy love is sign'd:
               So powrful hand those monsters dire,
               Which hate the sovĕrain good, shal fynd;
               And found, confound in day of ire.
               As firi furnace they shal fume;
               Which kindled once dooth self consume.
            
            
               WITH cursed sires, corrupted seed,
               From face of earth thou shalt destroy.
               For spite gainst thee their brains doo breed:
               Vain spite, which woorks but self-annoy.
               As mark, their faces thou shalt lay;
               On which thy winged shafts may play.
            
            
               OTHOW, who euerlasting reins
               Of world almighti Guid doost sway;
               Advance thy strength; and proud disdains
               Of miscrĕants vyld great Lord repay.
               So we thy powĕr shal sing and praize;
               Which foes dooth quell, thy servants raize.
            
            
               
               TREBLE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  THe King (Lord) towărd thy glorious face Victorious 
                     〈♫〉
                   eys dooth ioy-ful rear; His strength, thy spĭrit; his health, 
                     〈♫〉
                   thy grace; With doubled triumphs his soule dooth chear. What hart could 
                     〈♫〉
                   wish, what lips did crave, Thy bountĕous hand him strangely gave.
            
            
               
               MEANE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               COVNTERTENOR.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               TENOR.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               BASE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               LUTE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 22.
            
               Our Saviours complaint vpon the Cross, thanks giuing for deliuerance, and propheci touching the great encrease and perpetuiti of his Church, foretold by DAVID.
               
            
            
               
                  MY God, my God: why doost thou me forsake?
               Why to my plaints thyn ear a stranger make?
               By day I cry, but thou far off art gone:
               By night, deer Lord; but audience fynd I none.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               YET Holi Lord, thou same doost stil endure;
               Thyn Israels ioy; their song of praises pure.
               Our Fathers, Lord, in thee did faithful trust;
               On thee they hopĕd: Thou to their hopes wert iust.
               They cry'd; and tears did not shour doun in vain:
               Their crys thou heard'st; and freedst them from their pain.
            
            
               BVTI, a worm; not man; but mans reproach:
               Where abiects vyld their basest scornings broach.
               What ey me vieuth, same ey dooth me deride:
               They wag proud heads; false lips they wryth aside;
               
                  He trusts in God; Let God from heăven above
               
               
                  Make good this trust, and now declare his love.
               
            
            
               TRVETH, Lord; my hope from mothers brest thou wast:
               Then hopes sure ground, thy gracious promise past.
               From mothers womb I rest bequeathd to thee:
               Thence me receiv'dst; my Saviour (Lord) to bee.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               THEN saving Lord, sith troŭble dooth press so neer,
               (Ah troŭble vntryd,) and no where help appear:
               Be thow not far: See Lord, what buls are met;
               Huge buls of Basan round haue me beset:
               With gaping iaws, much lion-like they play,
               Which ramps to seaze, and roars to rend his pray.
            
            
               SEE, vital iuice to watri stream distild:
               My bones disioint: my hart, with anguish fild,
               Like melting wax consumes: as fire-burnt clay
               My spir̆its being dryd, lifes vigours all decay.
               Yea withĕring tong to parched chops dooth cleve:
               Thus me, my Lord, in dust of death doost leve.
            
            
               FOR dogs have mee▪ besiegĕd: A savage rout
               Of vyld malfactors; mee envir̆on about.
               Hands, Feet, they'ue pierc'd: my bones may all be told:
               Which gazing ey
                     •…
                   from flinted harts behold.
               
                  My robe vnript amongst them they divide:
               And seamles cote by chancing lot decide.
            
            
               BVT thow, my Lord, in weakest state my strength,
               My hope in death; look doun, release at length
               From heavĕns award: my life from swoord discharge;
               From powĕr of dog my desolate soule enlarge.
               From lions mouth; from unĭcorns horns, with speed,
               Now hearĕst, ô save, in soules extremest need.
            
            
               THY glorious name I'le preach to brethren deer:
               And faithful Church, in midst, thy praise shal hear
               From thankful voice resound. Ye sons of grace,
               Who fear your Lord; and thow great Israĕls race,
               Lovĕd Iacobs seed; your revĕrend ioys enhance:
               His praise through earth, his name to heavĕns advance.
            
            
               FOR not with scorning mynd, or loathing ey,
               Th'afflicted wight he careles passed by:
               Ne helpful face from rueful sight did hide:
               But gracious ear to iust complaint applyd.
               Then vows I'le pay before them which thee fear:
               And sacred praise assembli great shal hear.
            
            
               THE spirits myld, whom dews celestial bless,
               Shal fruits of earth in plentĕous rest possess.
               Their gracious zele Gods glorious praise shal sing:
               Your ended life shal life unending bring.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               YEA, natiŏns all which earths great globe doo fill,
               Evĕn kindreds which hir bounds extremest till,
               At length themselves remember shal, and mourn,
               Till whom they left, to him again they turn.
               To mighti king, whose woord whole world dooth wield,
               Thus worship due shal world united yield.
            
            
               FOR him all states shal serve: On earths great store
               The rich shal feed, and heavĕns great Lord adore:
               And poorest wretch, who doun in dust doth ly,
               To him shal bow; and dying, death defy;
               This course great ages run: Their poster̆ous race
               In worlds cleer vieu his service shal embrace:
               And so transmit, that childrens children ay
               His iustice learn, his sacred will obay.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 25.
            
               
                  DAVID (as it seemeth) upon his last farewel and flight from the Coort of Saul, understanding perhaps of the great levi of forces to persue him; and entring in that distress of state, as well into a revieu of sins of his coortli life past, as into a forevieu of troubles which in this banishment he must endure: wholy casteth himself upon the merci and favour of God. Whom he praieth for Protection from his wrongful enimies, for Remission of his sins, and for Direction in the best coorse of life. Withall he celebrateth Gods graciousnes toward his faithful servants; and concludeth with a petition in behalf also of the people.
            
            
               
                  TO THEE his faithful soule thy servant, Lord, dooth rear:
               My God, my trust: ô dain hir humblest suits to hear.
               And let not black disgrace my lifes pure light obscure;
               And frustrate hope proud foes insulting ioys alure.
               Let none who thee attend, abasing shame depress:
               Depress it those, thy law who causeles ah transgress.
            
            
               INLIGHTEN Lord my soule so with thy guiding grace,
               That I thy trueth may fynd, and found may firm embrace,
               Revele thy paths divine: ô thow my Saviŏur deer:
               To thee perennal hope, eternal love adhere.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               THOSE gracioŭs mercies, Lord, which from thy goodnes spring▪
               
               And ay thy woorks orespred, to myndful presence bring.
               And from thy sight remoove, the wyldnes of my youth,
               The sins age more mature with sad remorse presŭeth.
               O thow who goodnes art! evĕn for that goodnes sake,
               With merci mee behold, so soules iust grief asslake.
            
            
               MOST righteŏus gracious Lord! He sinners shew'th his way;
               To humble mynds, myld spir̆its, his iustice will display.
               All trueth, yea merci all, his paths to them remain,
               His witnest will who seek, and covĕnant great maintain.
               Then for thy gracious name, propitiŏus mee behold:
               My sin (ah Lord, how great?) in merci great upfold.
            
            
               THRISE happi man, whose hart Gods sacred fear endues:
               For him shal grace direct, to bliss right way to chooze.
               And here his soule at ease midst blessings rich shal sit:
               And goods wel got, secure, to childrens seed transmit.
               These heavĕnli leaug partake: yea misteries high, conceald
               From worldli wits, to them from heavĕn shal be reveald.
            
            
               
                  O THEN my waiting eys, on God stil fixed bee:
               For hee from snaring net my feet wil rightĕous free.
               Turn then at length thy face, in bliss who sitst on high;
               Since poor abandond wretch to onli thee dooth fly.
               Ah Lord; as wave dooth wave, so wo dooth wo pursue:
               As day dooth day, fresh griefs so griefs forepast renue.
               But thow, my streits, my pain, my labours, Lord, respect:
               And on my sins, their cause, ah merci, Lord, reflect.
            
            
               BEHOLD my raging foes; how thick their musters growe,
               Whose poisĕned gals, uncausd, with bittĕrest hate oreflowe.
               But thow, Preserver great, my soule from force uniust,
               My face from shame protect: who livĕst my onli trust!
               My onli trust, and hope! on safegard none I build,
               Save what myn upright cause, and goodnes thyn shal yield.
               These then my gardiăns stand. And thow, benign, with mee,
               Thyn Israĕl deer, great Lord, from pressures all enfree.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 32.
            
               DAVID here, out of the sence of his owne experience, teacheth that he is happi, to whom God in merci imputeth not his sins: which merci is obteined, by seazonable confessing them; must be continued, by thankfully reforming our lifes; which shall be accompanied with true ioy of spirit.
               
            
            
               
                  THE blessed man; whom spring of boundles grace
               With mercies ey a Father-iudge dooth vieu;
               Whose crimes and guilt with pardon free efface;
               Foul stains orehele; so pristin shape renue.
               Yea thrice he blest; whom, who Creatour kynd
               All perfect framĕd, declynd dooth not forsake:
               Dooth not his sins impute; and darkned mynd,
               Dischargĕd of guile, to iustice dooth awake.
            
            
               I WHILST my sin in silent brest conceald,
               Benumbd, asham'd; at length with sicnes scurgĕd,
               My bones consum'd; and roars sharp grief reveald,
               Which tiring pain, my strength now tired, urgĕd.
               Thy grievous hand stil presd me day and night;
               Nor Sun could cheer, nor darknes rest prezent:
               On faded face deaths name seemd palenes write;
               So native iuice unnative heat had spent.
            
            
               ADVIS'D, I then to thee my sins confesd,
               In vain conceald; bade idle vail adieu:
               I said, Be now to God my falts expresd;
               Who guilt from soule, strait plague from corps withdrew.
            
            
               OGRACIOVS Lord, therfore our hopes abound:
               And godli men, excited by these fruits,
               In time accepted, when thou maist be found,
               With faithful harts shal bring their needful suits.
               And thow benign, from worlds tempestŭous seas
               Wilt them remoove: and mee, (my hiding place,)
               Preservĕd from wrack, dischargĕd of streit unease,
               Withioious crys of freedom round embrace.
            
            
               
                  THEN I, who e're Gods service doost profess,
               Wil make thee sciĕnt, what paths thou must ascend;
               What dounfals shun; how errors to redress:
               And guiding ey thy cariage shall attend.
            
            
               BVT men by kynd, transform not into guise
               Of sturdi horse, or more unthankful mule;
               Whose brutish brests no mutŭal duties prize;
               Sole sharpest bits their mouths from mischief rule.
            
            
               THE wicked hart, whole swarms of woes shal seaze;
               Of help without, within of rest deprivĕd;
               While faithful soule, who gracious Lord shal pleaze,
               With mercies fencĕd, with ioys shal be revivĕd.
            
            
               THEN rightĕous mynds, divorce your careful fear;
               Gods woord who trust, shout out with sounds of ioy;
               His ways who walk, your hopeful heads vprear:
               Your light appears, sad darknes to destroy.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 34.
            
               The Prophet DAVID, to escape the cruel hands of King Saul, beeing forced to fly to a neighbour King of the Philistims; where the qualiti and woorth of his person beeing to his great danger discovered, he counterfeited himself distract; and so was driven from thence, and closely returned to the confines of his countri; whether his frends and other distressed persons assembled to him: here he yieldeth to God solemn thanks for this strange deliveri; encouraging withal and instructing his associats to serve God; who never faileth to protect his Righteous servants from mischief, neither yet to destroy their persecutours. By the way is interlaced a proph
                     •…
                  ci of the not breaking of ani one Bone of our Sauiours: who was the veri pattern and perfection of Righteousnes.
            
            
               
                  THE Lord for evĕr with humblest ioy my thankfulst thoughts shalbless;
               In him my soule triumph; my mouth his glorious praise express.
               Let myld & righteŏus mynds, earths Saints, with gladnes hear this praise:
               Yea all vnite, harts, spir̆its, and sounds, to heăvens his name to raize.
            
            
               When chasĕd from home, in strangers land, midst Hethen crue, I moornd,
               And sought my God; my sighs he heard, and safely mee returnd.
               That mee his Saints example great shal cheerful ay recite;
               This poore man cryd, the Lord him heard, and freed from hostile spite.
            
            
               O THOUGHT-surmounting grace! to earth from heăvenli host descends
               Gods Angel great, and servants his as rampire round defends.
               Then tast, and see, how good the Lord; how sweet his merci flowes;
               How blest the man who trusts in him, on him vow'd love bestowes.
               And ye, Gods Saints, his fear maintain: when liŏns through hunger wast;
               Yet scarsenes none, of no thing good sour want, his servants tast.
            
            
               O COM deer children; listen well, while Gods true fear I teach;
               How life to win; how length of days in happiĕst state to reach.
               Thy tong from venŏmed woords refrain; thy lips let shun deceipt:
               Decline from evĭl; doo good: seek peace; this this be thy retreit.
            
            
               The eys of God with pleazing vieu the rightĕous race behold;
               Their suits his gracious ears attend; ful deer their lifes are sold:
               But countĕnance stern the mighti Lord gainst proud malfactors bends;
               And cursed names, corrupted seed, from earths fair bosom rends.
            
            
               TRUE servants plaints 
                     •…
                  ust Lord dooth hear; their tears and fears dicharge;
               Their contrite harts, enanguisht spi
                     •…
                  its, from pressures streit enlarge.
               Afflictions great, it's true, ful oft most righteŏus Man endures:
               God rids them all: and in their midst his bones from brack assures.
            
            
               No bone of His shal broken be. But those who hate the iust,
               Shal perish all: the wicked harts owne malice grynds to dust.
               Their owne desires them plague. But God shal rightĕous souls redeem;
               And none shal quail, to him that trust, who him their life esteem.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 36.
            
               
                  DAVID here entituled the servant of God, having described first the reprobate sence of the wicked; breaketh out into admiration of the divine infinitnes in all perfections; in the participation and fruition of which consisteth the final beatitude of Gods true Servants; when the rebellious shal ly under euerlasting destruction.
            
            
               
                  THE bestiăl mynd, forsaking God, resolv'd to ioy in sin;
               To shun remorse, first natures light t'extinguish dooth begin:
               Then cheers himself in blyndest ways; no vyld desire refrains;
               Til, in my hart, no dread of God before his eys remains.
               At length evĕn gloriĕth in his shame: and ioith (ah wretched state!)
               Inventing ill; which well adviz'd his trembling soule would hate.
            
            
               DEFYLD, distuned soule! His lips, which ought Gods praises sound,
               And world with trueth assist; in leud, and lying woords abound.
               His mynd, of vnderstanding pure, good thoughts, it self deprives,
               And nought but mischief, fraud, and wrong, on silent bed contrives.
               In sum, estrangĕd from goodnes all, enthral'd to ill; he bends
               His steps towărd death: where vengeance due rebelliŏus soules attends.
            
            
               O LORD, what highth, what depth, what bredth, thy greatnes may profess?
               What hart can goodnes thyn conceive? what tong thy praise express?
               Thy bounteŏus grace from heavĕns to earth thy creatures all comprends:
               Thy iustice mountains huge surmounts: thy trueth yond clouds extends:
               A deep abiss thy iudgements rest: O thow doost all protect;
               Thou man doost save; ne simplest beast in needful things neglect.
            
            
               BVT ô, how precious towărd mankynd thy mercies Lord redound?
               Whence servants thyn thy shadŏing wings their sure retrait have found.
               And when at last, through ended toils, they at thyn House arrive;
               There pleasantst food, there sweetest streams, ay pure delights revive.
               For thow, ô fountain great of life, their life doost still refresh:
               And beams from thee deriv'd, their eys with sight al-gloriŏus bless.
            
            
               THEN Lord, hold on thy kyndnes deer, towărd those that knowe thy name:
               And iustice thyn array the soules, whom sacred loves enflame.
               And let not proud oppressing foot my gracious ways deface:
               Nor sinning hand misdraw my soule thoughts sinful to embrace.
               Lo, sinners proud, defecting soules, throwne doun in dreadful guise,
               In dead destruction ay involv'd, to life shall never rize.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM. 37.
            
               King DAVID, now full of years and experience, remooueth here those great and difficult scandals of wicked mens prosperiti, and good mens afflictions. He sheweth that the godli, who delight in the law of God, and exercize themselves in heavenli wisdom; live alwaies in the favour of God, and under divine protection: that God maketh them partakers even of the temporal blessings of this life; though not alwaies in the largest, yet in a sufficient and conten
                     •…
                  ful proportion, and such as is for their greatest good: which blessings are to them also more constant and permanent: and that Gods holi hand, both delivereth them from the malignant practises of the wicked; and preserveth them in times of publick plagues and calamities; furnishing them with abiliti to be helpful also to others: yea, that though they fall, he raizeth them up again; and what troubles soever they pass thorough in this life, that their end yet is assured peace. Wherein they have also this pleazing comfort, that God will continue his blessings even to their seed and posteriti. Contrarily he intermixeth a discoveri of the truly calamitous state of the wicked: who beeing the enimies of God, and deprived of his protection; though they flourish for a while, ye
                     •…
                   have no stabiliti, but are sodainly cut off: yea in the midst of their wealth and pomp, they are not only uncontent and restles, but endure also much want through inordinate desires and misgovernment: As for their attempts against the good, they return upon themselves, beaten back upon them to their owne confusion: And lastly, their end is assured destruction, involving with it often the ruine of their unblest posteriti. Upon these grounds and reasons, he exhorteth the good, not to fret at the wickeds so false and fading prosperiti: but to be careful to avoid sin; to delight in God; and to employ themselves wholy in dooing that which is good. So trusting in God, and waiting patiently upon him, committing also their ways unto him; they shal be both safe under his protection, and happi by his blessing.
            
            
               
                  LET not unpleazing vieu of bad mens flouring state,
               Through indignation sour, thy ioious thoughts abate.
               For doun, like withering grass, they quicly shall be mowne:
               As bloom of tenderst herb, their flour away be blowne.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               BUT thow Gods servant true, on him thy Lord rely;
               In him delight: and thoughts to rightĕous woorks apply.
               Inhabite then the land: thou by thy land shalt live:
               Yea God thy godli hart his full desires shal give.
            
            
               IF troubles thee assail; to God thy ways commit;
               And trust to him; who them to happiĕst end shal fit.
               No shame shal thee attaint: thy iustnes, fair as light;
               And cleer as shining noon, he shall produce thy right.
            
            
               THEN rest on God: his will with patient hope attend.
               And let not woorthles man, who brings leud thoughts to end,
               And prospers in his coorse, thy discontent imbreed.
               Shun wrath, fierce choler rein: great sins from rage proceed.
               
                  For proud misdoŏer shal rot: while root they lasting take
               Who humbly wait on God; his law their mirrour make.
            
            
               BVT yet a while; and lo, the wicked shall not bee:
               His stateli seat, no place for him or his shal see.
               When as the myld with ioy shal pleasant land possess:
               Where length of plentĕous peace shal thankful ioy rebless.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               I'TS true, the rightĕous man, whose life ill lifes reprooves;
               His sight alone ill mynds to deep distemper mooves.
               That him as publique foe, the godles crues beset:
               And practise vyld apply, to wrap in snaring net:
               Yea teeth through felnes gnash. But God shal them deride:
               Who seeth their day approach, black night to all their pride.
               Let swoords be drawn, bend bowes, the poor and iust to kill:
               Bent bowes shal break; drawn swoords the drawĕrs best bloud shal spill.
            
            
               AND though som iust be poor, th'uniust with plenti swell:
               Yet in that one poor house more true content dooth dwel,
               Then all their pomps can yield. For God shal him maintain:
               When pride and powĕr uniust with shivĕred arms remain.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               OUR gracious Lord fit times for all his servants knowes:
               And now he more, now less, but still their best bestowes.
               Continŭance is their bliss: In perilous time, from wrack;
               In plague, them shields from death; in famin bare, from lack.
               Whilĕ evĕn as tenderst fa
                     •…
                   meer force of smoke consumes:
               So impious wretch, Gods foe, soon spent to vapour fumes.
            
            
               FOR though th'uniust, by fraud, by force, have much purloind;
               Yet nothing thrives: (leud gain, hath vain expence adioin'd:)
               That still a borroĕr bare, on neighbours goods he feeds;
               And none repays. The iust, still rich in vertuŏus deeds,
               From less, but better store, with pitying helpful hand,
               His wanting neighbour frames Gods goodnes t'understand.
               For where Gods blessing rests, possessions long shal last:
               As curse divine, at once, bud, branch, and root, dooth wast.
            
            
               WHERE God mans way dooth pleaze, mans steps he stable makes:
               Yea fallĕn, with succŏring hand from ground unbruzed takes.
               I have been yong, am old; yet never knew the iust
               Forsaken quite; ne're saw his seed in lothed dust
               Sit craving food: but still his courteŏus nature lends;
               And God his blessing deer to children all extends.
            
            
               
                  THEN thus thy thoughts conclude: thyn hart see first be pure;
               Fly sin; good deeds apply: so so dwel ay secure.
               For righteŏus Lord loves right: he free from wavĕring change,
               From Saints belovĕd dooth ne're his eys serene estrange.
               But safe through his defence; while impious houses fall;
               They ancient land possess, there dwell for ever shall.
            
            
               THE righteŏus man, whose mynd, cald up from earthli thought,
               Erect on high, with love of heavenli law is fraught;
               From harts abundance speaks: His mouth with wisdom floweth;
               In talk of iudgement grave glad time his tong bestoweth.
               He nevĕr shall slip. For though th'uniust maligner watch
               Both woords and ways, his life in deadli snare to catch:
               Yet shall not rightĕous Lord him leve in wicked hand;
               Ne when his iudgement coms, condemned let him stand.
            
            
               SO thow, ô vertuŏus soule, thy patient mynd retain;
               And heavĕnli ways insist: in heavĕn thy hopes remain.
               Thy God shal thee exalt: the land shal rest thyn owne;
               When vndermining wretch thyn ey shal see orethrowne.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               THESE eys of myn have seen, th'uniust, like self-sprung tree;
               With arms all gay disspred, in floŭrishing beauti glee.
               But see the end: he past; and lo, away was gone:
               The vanisht man I sought; but nues returned none.
               Now vieu the upright man, observe his sweet encrease:
               His small in more, his war stil ends in endles peace.
               Not so defectours proud; who marks of heavĕnli ire,
               At once destroyd, shal nevĕr to end dezirĕd aspire.
            
            
               BVT from the righteŏus Lord stil saving grace descends,
               Which servants his from wrack in needful hours defends.
               For God shal them protect, protect from hate uniust;
               Hee save them, since in him they chooze to place their trust.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 40.
            
               The Prophet DAVID, an Ancester and Type of Christ, in his thankful meditations of Gods former merci toward him; passeth from thence into a profound admiration of the divine grace; whereby the imperfection of the legal sacrifices beeing abolished, Christ their perfection was to succeed, a true accomplisher and teacher of righteousnes. So returneth to crave the continuance of Gods merci in his present miseri: drawn on or renued by menes of Sauls persecution, (as it seemeth,) not yet determined.
            
            
               
                  LONG patient hope Gods pleasure did attend:
               At length he ear to grievŏus cry did bend;
               And wretch forlorn, who help now no where knew,
               From miri clay of yelling hole updrew.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               UPDRAWN, my feet on stateli rock he placĕd;
               My steps made firm: so now with nue song gracĕd,
               Praise, praise t'our God my thankful glori sounds;
               Which echŏing voice with thundring ioy rebounds.
               For thousands, who revieu my late distress,
               Which revĕrent trust, towărd God cheerd harts address.
            
            
               THEN blessed hee, the Lord who makes his trust:
               Nor glorious pride, (whom self-loves charming lust
               Misdraws from God,) which fauning ey respects;
               Nor thoughts on liĕrs fond failing hopes reflects.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               O LORD, my God; thy gracious thoughts towărd man,
               Are wondrous deep: I would, but no way can,
               Or thankful them to thee in ray prezent,
               Or count to men their store and vast extent.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               WISDOMS abiss! thyn owne ordeined rites,
               Now sacrifice, now offring, no delights
               To thee can yield: myn ears hath nüer law
               So piercĕd that thoughts towărd nobler obiect draw.
               Not sinles beast, nor mene-esteemed life
               In flames consum'd, may ere compose the strife
               Wherein mans sin Iustice divine persuĕth;
               Not so thy grace, not so mans bliss renuĕth.
            
            
               WEAK shades give place. Then said I, Lo I com:
               Here Lord: On mee thy blessed will be doon;
               Sith sacred roll of everlasting book,
               For mee hath taught worlds waiting eys to look.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               
                  THY blessed will, sole scope of prudent thought,
               Iust actions rule, my pleazing cares haue sought
               To knowe, and doo: thy law in faithful hart
               Entresŭred liĕth; thence never shall depart.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               NOT silent lips, nor yet vnthankful brest,
               Thy goodnes, Lord, thou knowĕst, have e're supprest.
               Thy trueth, my talk; thy saving grace, my song:
               Thy bounties rich, my not conceling tong
               Hath loud proclaim'd: thy iustice, mercies deer,
               Assemblies great from faithful teacher hear.
            
            
               THEN, Lord, ô then thy kyndnes not withhold:
               (Thy trueth my stay:) in merci still infold
               Distressed soule; whose eys lift up on high,
               Thee, only thee their comfort can descry.
               Thrung numberles of evĭls me wretch embrace:
               My sins and pains so grasp my frighted face;
               That failing hart their vieu can not endure:
               Who thick as hair, ten thousand griefs procure.
            
            
               PLEAZE Lord at length my thralled life to free:
               Relieve the soule, who succour sole from thee
               Awaits: make speed: And blushing shame confound
               All those, whose hate me seeks with mortal wound
               On earth to lay: yea, put to shameful flight,
               Them in my ill who place their deer delight;
               Who laugh my tears, take pleasure in my pain.
               Ah, dire decay their shames reward remain.
            
            
               BVT comfort sweet, and sacred ioy refill
               Them all, whose mynds, conformd to heăvenli will,
               Thy mercies seek, saluation thyn dezire:
               High spir̆it them ay t'extol thy name inspire.
            
            
               NOW I a poor, throwne-doun, afflicted wight;
               Yet hope on God, protectour of my right:
               And knowe on me my Lord wil one day think.
               Ah, cease delay; least hart in sorroes sink.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 42.
            
               The Psalmist (it seemeth David vnder Sauls persecution) bewaileth with much passion his constrained absence from Gods presence in his Ark and Tabernacle: and after a sharp combate of soule with mani deiecting afflictions, in fine getteth above them by the strength of his faith and hope in God.
            
            
               
                  AS chased Hart, with drouth enraged first,
               Then ioid with hope, towărd watri streams dooth bray:
               So Lord, my soule, my panting soule dooth thirst,
               At lifes high spring hir restles love to stay.
            
            
               AH life of lifes! when shall that ioying sight
               Of presence thyn reioice my ioyles ey?
               Whom now salt teares are food to day and night,
               "While chasing foes, Where's now thy God? stil cry.
            
            
               SWEET-sour revieu my hart through eys distils,
               How earst high ioys midst marching troop I broacht:
               And sacred House, whom beauteŏus presence fils,
               With songs and praise in festivĕst guise approacht.
            
            
               WHY then, ô why, my sad deiected mynd,
               Should troubled thoughts thee restles now torment?
               Ah thankful wait: stil gracious Lord shalt fynd,
               In bands of woes release who al-times sent.
            
            
               YET Lord my soule behold stil dampt with grief:
               While Iordans reeds, while Hermons rocs she hants;
               While Iuri mounts affoord their poor relief:
               Remembrance thyn where melting hart redants.
            
            
               SEE gulf of woes, nue gulf stil duely cals:
               Thy thunders roar; thy fires com streaming doun:
               And raging storm, from cloudi spouts which fals
               With shouring fluds my pining soule dooth droun.
            
            
               YET gracious Lord stil succŏring hand dooth reach.
               His face serene returned ioy shal bring:
               And gladsom day shal thankful euĕning teach,
               With praiseful hymn th'alglorious name to sing.
            
            
               MENE while to God thy chased life betake;
               And doleful tune exiled wretch renue:
               My God, my strength; why doost thou me forsake?
               Why moorning soule dooth murdrous foe persue?
            
            
               O THOW who sole sustein'st my wear̆ied life,
               My wear̆ied life, whom powĕr of right bereves;
               Yet iudge that cry, mongst braiding foes so rife,
               "Where's now thy God? My bones it swoord-like cleves.
            
            
               BVT why, ô why, my sad deiected mynd,
               Should troubled thoughts thee restles still torment?
               Com grateful hope. My gracious God, I fynd
               In throng of woes still swift relief hath sent.
            
            
               
               TREBLE.
               
                  A
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   S cha- sed Hart, with drouth enra- ged
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   first, Then ioid with hope towărd wa- tri stream dooth bray: So Lord my
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   soule, my panting soule dooth thrist: At lifes high spring hir
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   restles love to stay. Ah life of lifes, when shal that ioy- ing
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   sight of presence thyn, re- ioice my ioy- les ey? Whom
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   now salt tears are food to day and night, While cha- sing
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   foes, Wher's now thy God? stil cry.
            
            
               BASE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               MEANE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               COVNTERTENOR.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               TENOR.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               LUTE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 44.
            
               The faithful people of Israĕl, vanquished now and dispersed by their Hethen enimies, (it seems the Philistims,) in their thraldom also persecuted and martired for Gods true religion; in complaining sort prezent to the high throne of grace their present condition, beeing oppressed by the enimies of God, and yet persisting in Gods true woorship; and with great vehemenci implore his favour and succour, who to their Ancesters had shewed himself so miraculously benign and helpful.
            
            
               
                  OUR pleazed ears, renoumed Lord, haue heard
               The ioious tongs of reverend elders tell;
               What acts of thyn their state of old had reard;
               Did cursed seed from chozen soil expell.
               Thy powrful hand, them rac
                     •…
                  h'd vp, ours did plant:
               Made them nor wo, nor blessing ours to want.
            
            
               NOT mortal arm, extermind Giants race;
               Nor swoord terrene, dezired land possesd.
               Thy arm divine, thy right hand, lightsom face,
               In favour deer, from heavĕn their armies blesd.
               Thou self same God, my King doost still remain:
               Command great King thy Iacobs strength again.
            
            
               SOLE thou command; revived strength our foes
               With horn should push, with feet shal trample doun.
               Not swoord, not bowe; hopes failing: thou disclose
               That aid, which foes in hates owne shame did droun.
               Thy loveli name much ioy did then confess:
               Much ioy same name in praise shal ay express.
            
            
               THUS once we livĕd: but now in life we dy;
               Cast off, debasĕd; no more our armies head:
               Harts grief to speak; vile foes us force to fly;
               And preying troops in dust our glories tread.
               Thus scattĕred lo midst Hethen lands we live:
               Where food to foes flock loved once doost give.
            
            
               AH once beloved! now sold, and not for gain.
               Thy wealth had yet our thralled lifes encreasd,
               Less grief had been: but scorn we now remain
               To neighbours round; whose hate our shames appeasd.
               Derided heard hast made a proverb growe;
               Which scoffing Hethĕn with wagging heads outcrowe.
            
            
               
                  WEAK comforts fade: strong woes stil fresh renue.
               My grief within, without my shame torments.
               Confusions, ah, confusions round accrue:
               And soul disgrace stil lothed face prezents.
               Reproaching voice, blasphemous mouth, and ire
               Of hostile eys, dire anguish still enfire.
            
            
               ALL this on us is com: yet have not wee
               Forgot thee Lord, or false thy leaug prophanĕd.
               Nor harts repining writhe their loves from thee:
               Nor feet decline from sacred ways ashamĕd.
               Yea though us ruĭnd in Dragons wasts doost place:
               And shade of death make weari lifes embrace.
            
            
               IF blessed name, unbleft we have forgot;
               Disloial hands if stretcht, in strangers guise,
               To Gods, no Gods: and should our Lord it not
               Search out, whose ey harts secretst thoughts espys?
               Ah love of thee lo tyrants hate procures:
               For thee we dy; as knife fat sheep endures.
            
            
               AH daily slain! At length yet look; arize;
               Why sleeps our Lord? awake; and not bereve
               Thyn of thy face; nor pressures their despize,
               Whose soules to dust, dead brests to ground doo cleve.
               Stand up, great Lord; and for thy mercies sake,
               Oh servants thyn to thy redemption take.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 45.
            
               A song of honour to the spiritual Marriage of Christ with his Church, for
                     •…
                  described under the shado of the marriage (as it seemeth) of King Salomon with the Daughter of Pharao: yet so, that som circumstances are verified only in the figure, and som other things only in the divine mysteri figured.
            
            
               
                  A NOBLE act, of Kings dezirĕd;
               Makes gladsom hart, with high conceipts inspirĕd,
               Boil o're; and tong stream loveli sound;
               Which echŏing pen through world shal ay rebound.
               Of peerles King my song I frame.
               And to that King, give, consecrate, the same.
            
            
               NOT mortal beauti decks thy face;
               Ne humane sounds those princeli lips engrace:
               That hieu divine, those heavĕnli woords,
               Nor race of man, nor bliss of earth affoords.
               Sure heavĕns, fair wight, thee God hath blest:
               So blest, in bliss eternal shalt thou rest.
            
            
               THEN on; but first gird swoord to thigh,
               Thow pŭisant Prince; advance with glori high;
               Ride stately foorth, in comli sight:
               Stil prosper, still prevail, brave Lord, in fight.
               So woord of trueth through world disspred;
               Give laws; fierce mynds in love to iustice wed:
               With iustice myldnes still reside;
               And striking arm, let hart of merci guid.
            
            
               BUT foes, whom goodnes none can win,
               Shal lightning hand with terrours dire begin
               To fright; then shafts, as thundred darts,
               Sharp shafts shal pierce their blunt unpliant harts.
               Thus to our King shal Nations bend:
               And arm victorious wide his rule extend.
            
            
               THY throne, ô God, for evĕr endures:
               Thy scepter, right through all thy state procures:
               Thow iustice lovĕst; hatĕst lawles ways:
               Therfore dooth God, thy God, thy glori raize
               Yond all thy troop; whose faithful love,
               Thee serves, by thee partakes same grace above.
            
            
               BUT thow bove all, with sacred oil,
               With oils of ioy, (that earths unpleazing toil
               Alay,) imbuĕd; drawst odour sweet:
               Mir, alöĕ, cassia, in thy garments meet.
               Thus doost from ivor̆ie rooms proceed;
               Whose pleasures deer stil ioying thoughts refeed.
            
            
               
                  STRAIT bevi fair prezents sweet vieu;
               Kings daughters chief, and lead the noble crue:
               Bove all the Queen; whom loveli bride
               Thou ioious setst on right hand by thy side.
               With gold hir brests, with gold hir head
               Embellisht, best rich Ophir which had bred.
            
            
               FAIR daughter, now a while attend
               To sage advise; thou happi ear shalt lend:
               Thy contries rites, thy peoples guise,
               Yea fathers house forget: fix sole thyn eys
               On him, who then that beautĕous sight
               Shal deerly love, possess with pure delight.
               He now thy Lord: with pleazing grace
               Bow, fair, to him: so love sweet love embrace.
            
            
               LO neighbour Tyre, great Queen of seas,
               With curious gift ey finest strives to pleaze:
               With home-bred purple, far-fet gold,
               Wil studious seek thy favŏring grace to hold.
               Yea nobles rich, with prezents great,
               Shal pleazd aspect of countĕnance thyn entreat.
            
            
               NOW vieu this Princess, branch of Kings:
               See noble birth what genĕrose presence brings:
               All gorgeŏus, all with grace performd;
               While wealth hath art, and art hath wealth adornd.
               Yet beautĕous robes fair face exceeds:
               But fairest mynd within chief glori breeds.
            
            
               THUS happi King, thy spouse to thee,
               Dezired spouse is led: and Virgin shee,
               With virgin troop, hir sociates deer,
               Attended, all to pleazed eys appear.
               With signs, with sounds of ioy they com;
               Where roial palace yields them grateful room.
            
            
               AND thow, great King, in fathers place
               Shalt children raize, endŭed with fathers grace:
               Whom zelous iustice to maintain,
               Shalt Princes high through all thy Lands ordain.
            
            
               AND I thy name shal make renoumd,
               While heavĕn leads time, where evĕr fair earth hir ground
               Extends; yea whilĕst bothe worlds endure,
               My verse thy praise from peoples shall alure.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 49.
            
               The Psalmist taking vieu of his old age and death approaching; entereth into consideration of the vaniti of worldli mynds, who plot for a perpetuiti of greatnes here, where death and time devour and consume all things: and contrariwise comforteth himself by faith in God; who in the morning of the renüed world, wherein righteous men shal bere dominion, shal redeem him from the power of the grave and death; and translate him to his owne everlasting habitation: when as worldli men shal be remooved from their graves to hell, to be consumed, as beasts, with death euerlasting.
            
            
               
                  YE sons of men, where-evĕr o're earths great globe disperst;
               Both ye of noble race, and ye, whom fathers unrehearst
               In menenes have obscurĕd; ye rich, and poor, attend:
               My mouth shal wisdom stream; which hart from muzings deep dooth send.
               My thoughts on sentence grave, on parable profound
               Defixt, at length my matter dark to harp shal cleerly sound.
            
            
               WHY should unpleazing fears my sadded mynd torment,
               When evil days approach, sweet years of pleasure when are spent;
               When sin with death at heels my wasting life persues?
               See mighti man, whose ey his wealth with gloryĭng trust revieus:
               No one e're brother deer from thralling death redeems;
               Can God the ransom pay: who price too high of soules esteems
               For mortal powĕr to reach: that cease may vain attempt,
               Mans life in line stil on to draw, from iaws of grave exempt.
            
            
               HE seeth great sages dy; evĕn so the brutish fool:
               And leve their wealth th'untimeli thirst of thankles heirs to cool.
               In inward thoughts then count, their houses yet secure;
               Their stateli seats shal undevourd through ages all endure;
               And lands shal bere their names. But man in honour placĕd,
               Like beasts fals doun; his house, his seat, his name, from earth effacĕd.
            
            
               LO ways of fool-wise men: which yet their worldli race,
               As proiects high of wisdom deep with much applause embrace.
               But they in grave doo ly, like sheep in narrŏed holds:
               Where death, as wolf, devoured flesh in gnawing panch infolds.
               There dead, they dy. And when worlds morning fair renues,
               Their yelling crys shal iudging Saints with lordli doom refuze.
               From grave then hell shal seaze, and seaz'd their shapes consume.
               When God, my soule, mee, shall from bothe to him redeemd resume.
            
            
               THEN feare not, grieve not thow, when godles person thrives;
               His house when gloriŏus mounts. For not when death of life deprives,
               He all shal hence transport; ne glori train to grave:
               Though foolish mouth oft cursed soule in life fair blessings gave:
               And though men praize thy mynd stil folŏing worlds delight.
               He hence to fathers race shal pack, ay shut from heavĕnli light
               O man, great woork of price! of wisdom if bereft,
               If beast-like lives, like beast he dys, in dark destruction left.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 50.
            
               This Psalm, beeing made by ASAPH, that Master of Musick, (who was also a Composer of sacred hymns, and a Prophet;) introduceth God revealing himself to the world, by his Creatures, by his Oracles, and by his Iudgements. Then falling to debate matters with his chozen people, God sheweth that it is not their sacrifices wherein he taketh pleasure; beeing a service to him, neither proper of it self, and which in fine should cease: but in the spiritual sacrifices of praise, thankful vows, and invocation. And he reprooveth those hypocrites, that durst talk of the woord of God, denying him and it in their lifes and manners: whose end, vnless they repented, should be helples destruction.
            
            
               
                  THE mighti God, our Lord, from heavĕns first glorious voice hath sent,
               To call earths whole from rizing sun to sun declynd extent.
               And then from Siŏn, (a complete world of beauties all refin'd,)
               By oracle, by sacred woord, more cleer to his hath shin'd.
               To iudgement rests our God proceed. In iudgements he dooth com,
               To teach, reproove; afflict, raize up: then then comĕth final doom.
               Before the Iudge a purging fire corruption shall devour:
               And hidĕous tempest round about from gloomi clouds shal shour.
            
            
               BUT now with his peculiar folk to sweet debate he fals:
               And heavĕns fair eys, and earths rich womb, as conscious witnes cals.
               "Assemble me my chozen race, takĕn up from world forlorn:
               "Who law; who sacred leaug with mee through sacrifice have sworn.
               (O righteous Iudge! thy iustice bright the heavĕns great host proclaims:
               Thow fountain whence all iustice flowes, thy self more iust remains.)
            
            
               "HEAR, ô my people; I wil speak: thou Isrăel; for with thee
               I will contest: Thou knowĕst me God, yea thy true God to bee.
               That sacrifices rare to mee thy scanti hands have brought,
               And sacred fire on altar oft in vain burnt-hosts hath sought;
               Nor charge I thee: nor bull from stall, or goats from fold, wil take.
               Who world of wealth enioys, think'st hee penurious stores should rake?
            
            
               NOT so: for midst the spatious woods what beast untam'd dooth breed,
               What cattle sparst through thousand mounts on budding shrubs doo feed,
               What bird the hils, what savage fierce the desert plains dooth ply;
               Are all myn owne; and in my vieu; at will, serve; liue, and dy.
               If hunger frail (unwoorthi thought) could me assail, would I
               Who world and worlds rich store possess, to thee forfood apply?
               Or when thy sacrifice thow kilst, canst thow so fondly think,
               Base flesh of buls that I should eat, or goats foul bloud should drink?
            
            
               
                  NAY: if thyn humble thankful hart with sacrifice dezire
               The powĕr divine to pleaze, and give what God dooth most require:
               Pure sacrifice of praises bring; the sacred tribute due
               From creature blest to King of bliss: and of thy vows be true.
               Then in thy troubled state, toward heavĕn thy soule perplexed raize:
               Crave help of mee: thy suit I'le hear: thou me eftsoon shalt praize.
            
            
               BUT unto th'impious, thus saith God: How dar'st thou, wretch, presume
               To teach my Law; my gracious leaug in graceles lips t'assume?
               Thy life for thereunto to frame, through hate thou standst agast:
               And woord divine, thy speach promotes, thy facts behynd thee cast.
               A thief thy greedi ey hath seen; thy hand with him conspires:
               Adultrous crue; with them leud hart combines in foul desires.
               Malicious mouth addict'st to rail: sly tong to forge deceipt:
               And envious lips owne mothers son to closely slander wait.
            
            
               THUS slave to passions vyld thou livĕst: and I have silent been:
               Whence, yet more impious, like thy selfe evĕn mee thou didst esteem.
               But I, not like to thee, at length thy iust reproof have sent:
               And ougli sins to fearful eys wil all aray prezent.
               Consider this, ô ye who God, and Gods pure law neglect:
               Least unrepenting harts I rend; when none can them protect.
               Who incense sweet of thankful praise sends up, me right adores:
               And rightĕous life who leads, from fall to bliss my grace restores.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 51.
            
               King DAVID, reprooved from God by the Prophet Nathan for his grievous sin with Bathsheba, leaveth in this Psalm an excellent pattern of an hart truly repentant; returning to the service of God, and care of his people.
            
            
               
                  MY sinful soule, arraind of twofold gilt;
               Of Spouse-bed wrongd, of bloud ah fouly spilt;
               With saddest grief in tears imbrynd repents:
               And wailed crimes at mercies feet prezents.
               O sourse of grace, whence seas of mercies flowe,
               Release my gilt; and love returning shewe.
            
            
               MY gilt releasd, then clenze my soule from stain;
               From stain, which sin behynd stil makes remain,
               And nue sin breeds. But since my pensiue sight,
               Sin, gilt, and stain, stil wound, by day, by night;
               With sour remorse since them I, Lord, deplore;
               Ah cure them, Lord, and rightĕous grace restore.
            
            
               NO mortal law dooth me transgressour make:
               Thy law divine, whose iustice heăvens dooth shake;
               Thee supreme Iudge, sole thee, my sin offends;
               Whose piercing vieu to secretst thoughts extends▪
               
               Ah evĭl I, Lord, in thy pure eys have doon:
               So iust reproof, so iudgement right is com.
            
            
               WHAT shal I plead, of sin defiled mass;
               From sin who com, through sin to death must pass?
               From mould deformd lo form I first receiv'd:
               And mother frail in sin warm life conceiv'd.
               But thow in soules thyn owne true form dezirĕst:
               And wisdom deep it to restore inspirĕst.
            
            
               AND thus I stood: but now orethrowne by sin,
               Deformd, defyld; ah Lord, let grace begin
               Recure to woork: with spring, with hysop thyn;
               So scour this soule, more white then snowe to shyn:
               And comfort, Lord; ô ioy now make me hear:
               That bruz̆ed bones returning strength may cheer.
            
            
               
                  REMOOVE my sins from thy offended ey:
               And cancel all my falts. Hear once my cry:
               Clean hart crëate; right spir̆it in mee renue:
               Then wavĕring mynd with heăvenli stay endue.
               Ah cast not off griev'd breaker of thy law:
               Nor HOLI SPIRĭT soules sovĕrain life withdraw.
               Restore the ioy of thy sweet saving grace:
               And sins bond powĕr with thy free spir̆it displace.
            
            
               THEN erring soules my thankful zele shal burn
               Thy ways to teach: who glad to thee shal turn.
               And then my song, (but bloud keep, Lord, away,
               My saving Lord,) thy iustice shal display.
               Sole thou my lips once open, Lord, again:
               And ioiful mouth shal sacred praise proclaim.
            
            
               IF sacrifice thy powĕr divine might please,
               If offrings burnt thy burning wrath appeaze;
               What would I spare? but nought in heăven obtains
               Beasts life, in man while beastlike mynd remains.
               Mans owne griev'd spir̆it, is Gods best sacrifice:
               His sighs, his tears, doost ne're, iust Lord, despize.
            
            
               THEN ô return: ô bless stil Sion deer:
               
                  Ierusalems stil lingring wals uprear.
               With cleered harts then wee, in legal rites,
               Iust sacrifice, wherein great God delights,
               Shal bring: yong buls at altars side shal bleed:
               And offrings burnt th'undying flames refeed.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 67.
            
               A praier of the Church unto God, to be gracious unto mankynd, and to enlarge his blessed Kingdom over all the world; whence happines both earthli and celestial shall ensue: as hath been fulfilled by the coming of Christ.
            
            
               
                  BE gracious Lord: Let cleerly shine
               The beauties of thy blisful face:
               That earth may see thy ways divine,
               And nations all thy saving grace.
               Let people bless thy sacred name:
               Let people all renoum the same.
            
            
               ALL wo exil'd, let ioy return:
               For thow who right doost still protect,
               Shalt iudge them who for iustice moorn;
               And erring nations here direct.
               Let people praize thy glorious name:
               Let people all adore the same.
            
            
               THEN shall the earth, as fild with love,
               Hir gifts in great abundance poure:
               And God, our God, from heavĕn above
               His choisest blessings richly shoure.
               God shall vs bless: and vtmost lands
               Shal all submit them to his hands.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 68.
            
               King DAVID, having assembled the flour of all Israel to conduct the Ark of God with solemniti to mount Sion, the chozen place of rest; (which was the occasion, and is the argument of this Psalm;) beginneth his march with those sacred woords, uzed by Moses alwaies at the remooving of the Ark in the wilderness. Then with great exultation, celebrateth both the Maiesti, and the Goodnes of God, as toward mankynd in general, so especially toward his peculiarly elected race, drawn from servitude, and placed in great prosperiti. Afterward prosecuting the occasion, he setteth foorth the great honour of Sion, thus chozen to be the onli seat of Gods aspectable presence amongst his people: And upon the consideration of this triumphant ascending of Gods Ark, beeing his Sanctuari upon earth; he breaketh out into a prophetical description of the Ascension of our Saviour, the Lord of that Ark, into the celestial Sanctuari, whereof that terrestrial was a shado and figure; from thence to pour blessings of deliveri from death and of salvation upon mankynd, to subdue all his enimies, and once again to reduce that selected people from dispersion and miseri. Lastly (touching by the way the manner of the marching of the Ark,) he concludeth with a praier to God for the preserving of his people, and repressing of their enimies; that so forain lands may assubiect also themselfs to God: whom finally he exhorteth all the kingdoms of the world to woorship.
            
            
               LET pleaze our God to ărize, that enĭmies his disband,
               And hating foes in hated flight be chas'd by mighti hand.
               As smoke strong wynds doo drive; as fire dooth wax consume,
               So shalt thou sweep them from thy face; so wast them all to fume.
               Then shall the rightĕous mynds, whose hopes on God depend
               Reioice in him; and thankful shouts to heavĕns high coort upsend.
            
            
               SING, ô sing praise to God; advance that glorious name,
               Th'Eternal, Selfbeĕing, Lord; who mounts on heavĕns high arched frame.
               Prepare, make plain his way; who o're alpestrious place
               Coms marching towărd his seat elect: triumph before his face.
               Not hee, neglecting man, despizing mortal care,
               In sacred throne resides; not so: but chyld of parents bare,
               Him Father fynds; him wido, Iudge: he prison̆er, frees;
               To sole, an house; to rebel race, dry parched soil decrees.
            
            
               WHEN Captain thow, ô God, thy troops from Pharaŏs thrall
               Victorious ledst; through deserts wyld when march'dst before them all▪
               
               The mooving sea stood still; th'unmooving earth it shakĕd;
               The heavĕns at presence thyn dropt sweat; fore thee mount Sinai quakĕd.
               All Israĕls God did dread. Thow then with bountĕous rain,
               Didst chozen land enrich, didst strength exhaust repair again.
            
            
               
                  HERE thow a seat for thyn, thy poor despized bands,
               A seat preparĕdst; where ioious dwell, and rule should neighbour lands.
               Thus did thy goodnes shine: thy goodnes, which their foes
               With conquĕrous arm subduing round, large matter did discloze
               For damŏsels at return with ioying note to sound;
               
                  Kings armies fly, they fly; and spoils wee home-left soules haue found.
               
            
            
               FOR though in servile state, like scullions, mongst the pots,
               With soot ye long have lain begrymd: yet now your happiĕr lots
               As dove shal make you shine; who with hir lustring wings,
               Now silver̆i hieu, now golden light, to ey delighted brings.
               For when th'Almighti Lord those Kinglets strawd on ground;
               Like snowe on Salmon black, dark woes bright ioy so then had cround.
            
            
               NOW Sion draws myn eys: whom Bashans peer account:
               Nor Bashans soil, nor stateli clifts, fair Sions praise surmount.
               For why should worldli hils, the earths huge towĕrs so rize
               And vant their might; why hill of God with surli brows despize?
               Here Gods dezired rest; thus ay shal it excell:
               Celestiăl squadrons here attend; here Sinais glories dwell.
               Twise thousands ten, and more, brave host of heavĕnli Knights,
               Gods will observe; receiv'd, perform: hee midst, their love requites.
            
            
               BUT thow, victorious Lord, ascended art on high,
               In triumph great; lead'st thraldom thrald: and there, great gest of sky,
               Hast gifts of grace receiv'd; mongst men which doost divide;
               Yea race rebellious so doost win with thyn to thyn abide.
               Be blest then Lord, our God. With saving graces hee
               Us daily loads. For God's the God that brings salvation free,
               Hath issuĭng ways from death: but enĭmies head shal smite,
               Yea hairi scalp of him in sin who still shal take delight.
            
            
               
                  BUT to his people saith; I th
                     •…
                  m wil bring again,
               From tyrants yoke, from strangers coasts, from land, and Sea, amain:
               As once from Aegypts rod, from deapth of sea, and pride
               Of Bashans Giănt, I them reducè'd made ancient fields divide.
               That thow thy foot maist dip, thy dog his tong embrue.
               In smoking streams of fomi bloud, which enĭmies brests out-spue.
            
            
               
                  AND now Gods march proceeds; thy march, ô God my King,
               Who in thy Sanctuări residĕst; there blessings man do
                     •…
                  st bring.
               A 
                     •…
                  ight of ioy: Before, the singers hold their way;
               Them instruments ensue; in midst yong maids on timbrels play.
               All cry with ioy, Bless God; Praize in assembli high,
               
               
                  Ye Isrăels stream, the Lord. Here first smal Beniamin stands nigh,
               Late Prince; here Iudahs Lords, their troops; and here appear
               
                  Naphthaliăn Lords from far; with Lords who Zebŭlons honour rear.
            
            
               AND now since gracious Lord commanded hath our strength;
               Maintain from sacred house, placĕd o're Ierusalem at length,
               What thow great God for us, what hast for fathers wrought:
               So from subiected Kings to thee shal prezents due be brought.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               RATE doun the reed-shafts beast; the buls and heards so bold;
               With peoples calf-like Lords, who vain in silver plates have rold.
               So woork thy peoples peace, securĕd from Hethen spite:
               O thow who scattrest them on war who set their fierce delight.
               And then Aegyptiăn peers, then Aethiopiăn lands,
               Soon humbly shall with gifts to thee stretch foorth their suppliănt hands.
            
            
               YE kings, and kingdoms all, o're earths fair face disspred;
               With songs and sounds of ioy adore, your God, and supreme head,
               Whence all your powĕrs derive. Hee then on th'heavĕns rides,
               On heavĕns of heavĕns of old, and rocks with thundring voice divides.
               Ascribe all might to God, whose glorious beauti shines,
               On Isrăels head; whose peerles strength, the matchles sky designs.
               O God, thyn Israels strength! what venerable fear
               Thy sanctuaries strike? Be blest. Our soules to thee we rear.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 69.
            
               The Prophet King DAVID, in the time of Absaloms rebellion (for then it should seem this Psalm was made,) by iniurious persecution of his enimies, beeing reduced to extreme distress and miseri; though happi that he was therein a type of our Saviour, who was then also in him, as a Son in his Ancester; together with the historical narration of his owne wrongs and griefs; prophetically also describeth, and that more fully and properly, the passions of Christ, through the envi and malice of the Iues; who cruelly constrained him to pay at a deer ransom the price of that whereof himself in his owne person was not gilti. Thus oppressed reproached and scorned by his enimies, and by his neerest frends abandoned, for no other crime then for his zele toward the service and glori of God; he flieth by a most fervent and argumentative praier to God for succour; devoteth his enimies, (amongst whom first Achitophel, then Iudas had their parts,) to utter destruction; and lastly in his deliveri, sheweth his owne particular thankfulnes; the great comfort of Gods people; and a general propension of all the creatures of God, to praise him for his goodnes toward his chozen Church, consisting of all his loving and faithful servants.
            
            
               HELP Lord, and save, a poor distressed wight;
               Not tost with waves, (though seas against me fight,
               And beat my soule;) but sinking in the mud,
               Where bottom none; and where the surging flud
               With furious stream beres doun and whelms my life.
               Ah save me, Lord, and end my bootles strife.
               I strive, though spent; I cry, when voice is quailĕd;
               For God I look, when eys have looking failĕd.
            
            
               TH'iniurious spir̆its, my not-deserved foes,
               Who hunt my life; with numbers me encloze
               That pass myn hair; and rizing still in strength,
               Press on, til mee (ô wrong!) they force at length
               What nevĕr I took, as taken, to restore.
               Ah thee my falts, my folies ly before.
            
            
               BUT not for mee, Eternal Lord of hosts,
               Great Israèls God, let those, whose humble boasts
               Of thee have been, confounded rest in mynd;
               Nor shame in face, when him forlorn they fynd,
               Who thee with them in patient hope hath sought.
               For thy sake, Lord, to this I lo am brought:
               For thee, I scorns, and sour rebuke endure.
               May service thyn, great Lord, such shame procure?
            
            
               WHAT should I speak of frends unfrendli face?
               My brethren deer, same mothers home-born race,
               A stranger mee, an alien mere esteem.
               And why? The zele, of which I worthi deem,
               
                  Thy sacred hests, thy House, and glorious name;
               (Which godles crues, stil grieving mee, prophane;)
               Hath eăten me up: Reproaches throwne at thee
               From mouths infernal, light have all on mee.
            
            
               IN grief, I wept; and fasting, fed on care;
               My ioyles lims, rough sacweb clothĕd on bare:
               My weed, they proverb; mocks, on fasting pour;
               And laugh the tears, which vexed hart dooth shour.
               In iudgement place, gainst mee the ancients spake.
               Yea balads base, vyld drunkards of me make.
            
            
               AND I, my Lord, to thee now praying bend;
               In needfulst time: Let ô my crys ascend,
               And time accepted fynd. O God, my trust;
               If right thou seest; and if my plaints be iust;
               In plentĕous merci, 'and for thy saving trueth,
               Send ô that help, which life in death renuĕth.
            
            
               OH free me, Lord, from sinking in this mire,
               This groundles mire; and from their fierce desire,
               Whose hate my life persuĕth. Draw from these waves
               Th' orewhelmed soule, thy hand who drouning craves,
               And prays; Forbid this gulf my life t' inglut;
               Devouring pit on me hir mouth to shut.
            
            
               HEAR Lord, with speed; and tender ey reflect,
               Thou Goodnes pure: thy servants not neglect,
               In case extreme who mercies hand implore.
               O spring of grace, I mercies those adore.
               Then, Lord, be neer: yea for my' insulting foes,
               To free my soule once heavĕnli aid discloze.
            
            
               AH see, and iudge: thou knowĕst my sad reproach;
               Fore thee my foes, my shames who shameles broach,
               Stand all in sight. Their wrongs have worn my hart.
               Full chargĕd with grief; I lookt if yet som part
               My frends would bere; no frend condoling found:
               If comfort speak; but none least comfort sound.
               For strengthning meat, yea poizŏning gall they sent:
               And vinĕger tart, my thirst to quench prezent.
            
            
               THERFORE iust Lord, their owne them home repay:
               Their pleazing boord, where ioys before them play,
               Let turn a snare, to catch them in their woords:
               And (that which foli' as lot to fools affoords,)
               
                  Their wishes, hurt; good fortunes, bee their bane:
               Mynds sight obscure; their loins rough valure lame.
            
            
               AND as in furi, man laith lode of blowes:
               So let revenge, which from thyn anger flowes,
               Ad stripe to stripe; and seaze with raging ire
               Their hated heads which mischief sole dezire.
               Void stand their castles: dweller none be found
               To grace the tents where graceles facts abound.
            
            
               FOR thow whom, Lord, with hand severe hast smit,
               They fierce persue; and inhumanely sit,
               With grievous woords t' encrease thy woundeds pain.
               Let sin, so sin; so plague, to plague enchain:
               Thy righteŏusnes that still they wretched miss;
               Nor way e're fynd that leads to heavĕnli bliss.
               Devowd to death, from book of life efface:
               Ne write their names, where iust mens names have place.
            
            
               NOW I stil poor, sole rich in griefs remain.
               Help, saving Lord, and raize me once again:
               That raiz'd, thy grace my song may thankful praize;
               And blisful name to heavĕns fair arches raize.
               This sacrifice more pleazing God shal bee,
               Then cleft-hoov'd steer at Altars horns to see.
            
            
               THE myld of mynd, great comfort hence shal take;
               This sight shal ioy them. O let harts awake,
               To seek the Lord; and so your harts shal live.
               Nor wynds, nor seas, can from his anchor drive.
               For ey of care who towărd mans wants reflects,
               His prisŏners crys sure nevĕr at need neglects.
            
            
               THEN heavĕns, and earth, then seas, and all your gests
               Which spatiate there, conform to supreme hests,
               Ay laud our King: who Sion fair wil save;
               And Iudahs touns repair. There shall they have
               A seat, and lasting state. Thus God shal bless
               His folks true seed, who love towărd him address.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 79.
            
               This Psalm, (which seemeth to have been compozed in the time of Antiochus the persecutour, by som descendant of the famous ASAPH, and who bare also his name, which in that Tribe was frequent,) conteineth a most lamentable complaint unto God, of the ruins of Ierusalem, the defilements of the Temple, and massacre of Gods faithful servants. Then praying first for propitiation for the sins of the people, (the true cause of that calamiti;) he presseth on with most fervent suit, for speedi deliverance, and large revenge upon their Hethen enimies.
            
            
               
                  THE Hethĕn, ô God, who fear not, no nor knowe
               Thy glorious name; into thy land are com:
               And in thyn House, whence blessings pure did flowe,
               With hands impure polluting facts haue doon.
            
            
               DEFYLD thy sacred seat; thy rites profanĕd;
               Thy treasures robd; thy Citti set on fire.
               
                  Ierusalem, earths ioy which earst was namĕd,
               Throwne doun on heaps, sits now in lothed mire.
            
            
               THY servants slain for loial love to thee:
               Their bodies dead heăvens fouls cast out to feed:
               And flesh of Saints, whose faith thyn eys did see,
               To earths wyld beasts ingluvious throats decreed.
            
            
               THEIR bloud, as torrent, streams about the wals
               Of sad Ierusalem: no burriĕr found.
               Opprobrious scorn, us grievous lot befals;
               And laughings proud in neighbours mouths abound;
            
            
               HOW long, ô Lord? shal ever flame thyn ire?
               Can no distress once moove to pitti take?
               Thy iealous wrath, and shal it rage, like fire
               Which water none, no tears, may e're asslake?
            
            
               AH turn it first, gainst those, who nor invoke
               Thy name, great Lord; nor knowe, or seeke thy face:
               Gainst Hethen kingdoms; who with mortal stroke
               Thy Iacob wound; lay wast h s resting place.
            
            
               REDUCE not, Lord, to thyn offended eys,
               Those falts forepast, which, still unthankful, wee,
               And fathers our, have doon: let grace arize,
               Our soules from gilt of sorroed sins to free.
            
            
               AND thou arize; and with thy mercies deer,
               Prevent our instant deaths. Ah, case extreme
               Denys delay. Help, source of goodnes meer;
               And save vs thow, whence safeties all doo stream.
            
            
               
                  RESPECT, great Lord, the glori of thy name;
               Which wee revere; our enimies proud despize,
               Insulting Hethĕn: to say they doo not shame,
               "Where's now the God on whom their hope relys?
            
            
               BVT let our God make noble, in our sight,
               To Hethen eys, his high revenging hand;
               That giltles bloud, pourd out, and not in fight,
               Of servants thyn, may full revenged stand.
            
            
               AND let the sighs and moornings of thy Saints,
               Who grone in chains, to thee access obtain:
               And mighti arm, excited by their plaints,
               Them rescue 'who now to death consignd remain.
            
            
               THUS neighbours scorns, wherewith they thee reproach,
               Sevĕnfold to them in bosom, Lord, restore.
               We then thy folk, and flock, thyn acts shal broach;
               With thanks and praise will evĕr our God adore.
            
         
         
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            PSALM 73.
            
               The Prophet ASAPH, by the sence of his owne afflictions, and by contrari vieu of the exulting prosperiti of godles persons, who pass on a pleasant time, blaspheming God, and oppressing his servants; having endured (like as other of the people of God,) a sore temptation of calling into question the veri Omniscience of God, and his government over this loweër world: at length getting the victori by Gods especial assistance, he sheweth that out of the Sanctuari of God, where his Oracles were delivered, he had learned that it was not the condition of this transitori life, but the end it self, whereby the state of the good and bad was to be esteemed. Seeing then the end of the wicked to be utter destruction, and everlasting happines to attend the righteous; he betaketh himself wholy to the conduct of divine direction; with great assurance to be guided by Gods counseil in this life, and afterward to be received by God into eternal glori. In expectance whereof his soule repozeth.
            
            
               
                  YET surely God benign to Israĕl stands;
               To pure in hart. But I was sore declynd.
               Griev'd vieu of fools, of wicked prospering hands,
               Had welnigh sapt my weak unwari mynd.
            
            
               FROM bands of death, by sicnes, force, or snare,
               They free pass on: live lusti; puft with ioy:
               With humane toils and cares untroubled are:
               Yea publick plagues them least and last annoy.
            
            
               THIS makes with pride, their out-stretcht necks, like chein;
               With violence fierce, as robe, they lims attire.
               Their plentĕous fare red strouting eys proclaim:
               While heaping wealth surmounts evĕn harts desire.
            
            
               FROM poizŏning filth their lothsom talk they change
               Oppressions proud with lofti stile to sound.
               Their tongs through earth in wronging men doo range:
               And hellish mouths gainst heavĕn dead curse upbound.
            
            
               THESE sights Gods folk to grievous thoughts reduce:
               (To whom full cups of mingled bitter geer
               "Are wringd:) Dooth Heavĕn, say they, knowe earths abuse?
               "Or mortals coorse dooth powĕr immortal steer?
               "But vieu these men; the heavĕnli leaug who shun,
               "Earths shame, mans wrong: see how in calmest peace,
               "Devoid of storm, here lengthned race they run:
               "They health stil keep; stil wealth and powĕr encrease.
            
            
               IN vain then I, ah all in vain have sought,
               With careful thoughts my hart from stain to cleer:
               In vain my hands, in worthiĕst actions wrought,
               Themselves to God in purenes washt doo rear.
               
                  For as stern sires their sons of sweet of life
               With sour reproofs, and bitter strokes bereve:
               With mee so griefs, so blowes are daily rife;
               Ne ioy sharp fits of mornli chastment leve.
            
            
               BUT ô my God, should I these thoughts embrace;
               Should mazed soule illusions these entrance:
               Lo, impious wrong, gainst thee, gainst happiĕst race
               Of children thyn, I faithles should advance.
            
            
               PERPLEXED I, then sought this dout t'untwine:
               But ah in vain; stil tangled stood my wit.
               At length I piercĕd the Sanctuări divine:
               There learnd mens ends: then then the knot unknit.
            
            
               SURE wicked men aloft on slippĕri brows
               Thy hand dooth place, with greater noise to fall.
               Doun headlong rush they: vain fly faithles vows.
               How soon, how sore, thy frights their ioys appall?
            
            
               MUCH like as dream unguided fanci fils
               With shapes untrue; which wakened all are gone:
               So when thou stirst, their image Lord it spils;
               Their pompous shews despiz'd from world are flowne.
            
            
               THUS whilĕst my soule on bitter grief did bite;
               While thorni thoughts my fuming hart did wound:
               As brutified, my mynd had lost hir light;
               Yea groveling beast I in thyn eys was found.
            
            
               YET still was thyn: and thyn shal ay abide:
               By right hand takĕn thou staidst me with thy grace:
               Thy counseil mee in beautĕous way shal guid:
               And lastly safe in happiĕst glori place.
            
            
               FOR whom can heavĕn, whom earth save thee display,
               In whom or ioy, or rest, my soule might fynd?
               O spring of life! when flesh, when hart decay,
               Towĕr, partage thow eternal standst assignd.
            
            
               LO Creatures strangĕd, to thee, Crëatour great,
               Alegiance due who faithles soules deny,
               Shal fail; who thee of spouzed love defeat,
               Adultring harts, in ireful vengeance dy.
            
            
               THAT good for mee, estrangĕd from pleazing sin,
               With God sole spring of pure delights to dwell;
               There fixt to rest. My trust then ioy in him:
               His gracious woorks my thankful hart foorth-tell.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 82.
            
               
                  ASAPH vieuing the corruption and insufficienci of Iudges in his time, admonisheth them that God is present in their assemblies, whose office they execute; counseleth, reprooveth, and putteth them in mynd of their ends. And seeing the Land by their falt was now all out of frame, he praieth God to exercize his right of iudging the whole world himself.
            
            
               
                  THE Sovĕrain Lord, whence iustice all derives;
               Who mesur̆ed powĕr to earthli Lords divides;
               His Senate of his presence nevĕr deprives:
               Th'immortal Iudge mongst mortal Gods resides.
               Sith iudgement's his; how dare ye iustice wynd,
               To scurge the good, while miscreănts favour fynd?
            
            
               THE poor ye should, the weak, the orphane free,
               From wicked strength stil bending to oppress:
               But ignorance, (ah, not for high degree,)
               And vainest thoughts your darkned mynds possess.
               Thus ruled coorse of all things turn'd awry,
               Makes trembling earth to heavĕns for iustice cry.
            
            
               ISTYL'D you Gods, who Gods earth-ruling place
               As glorious sons of supreme Lord doo hold:
               But dy ye shal, as men of menest race,
               As foregone Princes now resolv'd to mold.
               And rize, great Lord; thy iudging right resume
               O're nations all, whom tyrants wrongs consume.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 84.
            
               King David, (who in great likelihood was author of this Psalm, and at such time as he was either driven from Sion by Absalom, or withheld by the necessiti of som war far off;) displaieth here his great longing love, toward the Temple, and solemn service of God there performed; accounteth them happiest, who alwaies reside in Gods house to praise him; them happi also, who at the state times, according to the law, held their voiages thether, through what difficulties of way so ever. So, earnestly praying God to be returned to that place of ioy; he ioineth with them in spirit, who profess their true life, safeti, and happines, to be placed in God.
            
            
               
                  THE fair aspect of Tabernacles thyn,
               Great Lord of hosts, how loveli to'absent ey
               It self prezents? my longing soule dooth pine,
               And pining faint, til shee thy Coorts descry.
               Nor earth, nor heavĕn; sole thow lifes glorious spring,
               To hart, to flesh, reviving ioy doost bring.
            
            
               AH, absent I: when yet poor sparro may,
               When swalo wyld, hir house, hir nestlet cling
               Neer Altars thyn, and there hir yonglings lay:
               Yet absent I, from thee, my God, and King.
               Twise blest be they, who in thy house reside:
               Thy praise with them, their loves with thee abide.
            
            
               AND blessed hee, far off who, cheerd in thee,
               On causies thinks which to thy mountain guide.
               Dry vales they pass: sweet springs by art yet see:
               And gracious rain fore-drouth of pools dooth hide.
               From wasting strength, by strength they walk renŭed;
               To Sion fair, where God of Gods is vieŭed.
            
            
               THEN Lord of hosts, then Iacobs God, our shield;
               Ah, ey the face, with favours thyn enduĕd,
               With sacred oil perfuzĕd. Hear Lord, and yield
               Those longed Coorts; where one sole day accrŭed,
               Whole thousand stains. With mee Gods doors excell
               The stateliĕst tents, with impious pride that swell.
            
            
               OUR sun, our shield; whence life, whence light derives;
               Whence sure defence, whence strength proud foes to quell:
               He rightĕous mynds of nothing good deprives;
               They here in grace, in glori'above shal dwell.
               That earth, that heavĕn, Lord God of hosts may cry;
               Thrise blest the man, whose hopes on thee rely.
            
            
               
               TREBLE.
               
                  T
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   He fair as- pect of Ta- berna- cles thyn,
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   Great Lord of hosts; how loue-li t'absent ey it self pre-
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   zents? My long-ing soule dooth pine, And pining faint,
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   til shee thy coorts des- cry. Nor earth, nor heăven; sole thow lifes glorious
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   spring, To hart, to flesh, re- viving ioy doost
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   bring.
            
            
               BASE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               MEANE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               COVNTERTENOR.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               TENOR.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               LUTE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 90.
            
               
                  MOSES here intituled the man of God, beeing in his charge of conducting the Israelites in the wilderness; where for their increduliti and murmuring, the divine indignation brake oftentimes out upon them, til in fine an irrevocable sentence of death was pronounced against that whole generation, from twenti years old upward, which had seen Gods miracles in Aegypt, (two only excepted,) to be executed in that wildernes before their entrance into the dezired land: in this Psalm discovereth his extreme grief of hart for that miserable estate; the Peoples sins provoking God. and Gods punishments consuming them; vnto whom God in all former ages had been a stay and protection. Therfore prezenting unto God the remembrance of his former graciousnes; the confideration of his owne Eterniti, and of humane mortaliti in general (whose life groweing shorter by sundri degrees, was now at length reduced to a period of about seventi or fourescore years ordinarily:) he beseecheth God to have particular compassion upon this his chozen people, sore wasted with the punishments which their sins had called doun upon them; to make them wise by his grace; to comfort them with his returning favour; and lastly so to frame the coorse of their labours, that his promise continuing cleer and hopeful to them, might at length yet in their children have a glorious accomplishment.
            
            
               
                  IN pilgrim life, our rest; in thrald estate, our stay;
               From age to age thou Lord hast been, and savĕd us from decay.
               Thy self, ere birth to hils, to earth ere form didst give,
               Ere world hadst framĕd; from ay to ay alglorious God doost live.
               But man thy creature fallĕn, thy iustice dooth persue
               "To dust: and saith, Ye Adams sons, return whence first ye grew.
            
            
               WHEN thousand years we livĕd, those thousand in thy sight
               Not more appeard then one day past, then watch in shortest night.
               Yet soon encreasing sin those years much shorter makes;
               While vengeance due desiled world to drouning flud betakes.
               Since when, our dreamlike life, as weakest herb, soon dys;
               Which morn makes flour, hote noon bids fade, sad eeuĕn mowes doun and drys.
            
            
               AH men unblest! thy wrath our weariĕd life consumes:
               Thy terrours great our soules affright: so sore thyn anger fumes.
               Our sins, our foul revolts, before thy face hast set:
               And secretst falts to cleerest light or eys displeazĕd are fet.
               What have our toils atchieu'd? through anger thyn, our day
               Black night devours: our fruitles years as thought fly vain away.
            
            
               MANS shortned life, as now, sole sevĕnti years dooth bide:
               Great strength to fourescore may attain. Of these evĕn flour, and pride,
               What is't but toil, and grief; but vain pursuits, and sin?
               Which spent, we hence to dusti home away to post begin.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               
                  OH who dooth duely waigh the powĕr of heavĕnli ire?
               As terrors thyn, so is thy wrath; ô thow consuming fire!
               Then teach us so our days, our wasting years to count;
               That wisdom true our thoughts towărd thee our endles end may mount.
               Return, ô Lord: (how long?) at length appeazd, forgive
               Thy folk: let favour shour in time, that dying harts may live.
            
            
               AND comfort, cheer us, Lord: as chastiz'd long by thee
               Much evĭl our woful eys have seen; like ioy so cauze us see.
               This ioy with life shal last. Then let thy woork growe cleer
               Towărd servants thyn: on children their thy glori make appear.
               And let Gods pleazed face us with his beauties bless:
               And form our woorks; ô thow, our woorks to happiĕst end address.
            
            
               
               TREBLE.
               
                  I
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   N pilgrim life our rest, in thrald e- state
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   our stay, From age to age thou Lord hast been, and savĕd us from decay.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   Thy self ere birth to hils, to earth ere form didst give, Ere world
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   hadst framĕd; from ay to ay al- glorious God doost live. But
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   man thy creaturefallen, thy iustice dooth persue To dust, and saith,
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   Ye Adams sons, re- turn whence first ye grew.
            
            
               BASE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               MEANE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               COVNTERTENOR.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               TENOR.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               LUTE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 92.
            
               This Psalm (consecrated to the Sabbath, as fit for an holi assembli;) exhorteth to praize by voice and musical instruments, Gods goodnes and iustice; apparent in the final destruction of the wicked, now miserably flourishing; and in his constant favour to the faithful inhabiters of his Church; prosecuted even in old age with comli grace, and fruitfulnes.
            
            
               
                  A GOOD, a gracious act it is,
               To praize the Lord, to celebrate his bliss:
               Thy name, ô Highest, to renoum,
               With hymns, which earth with heavĕns high honour croun.
               Thy bountĕous grace, let springing day;
               Let silent night, thy faithful trueth display.
               Let ten-stringd lute, with viole sweet,
               Melodious harp in sacred consort meet.
               Since ioy to me thy woork dooth bring;
               Thy woorks, great Lord, my thankful ioy shal sing.
            
            
               O LORD, thy woorks how glorious great;
               How deep thy thoughts, thoughts shalo to defeat?
               The floting brain of brutish man,
               Not once observes, not once it fadom can;
               That when as grass the wicked growe;
               When sinners proud, doo sprout, doo bud, and blowe;
               In flouring state they shall be mowne;
               And all for ay to sad destruction throwne.
               While thow, ô Lord, most high, most iust,
               Ay happi livĕst, whole worlds sole endles trust.
            
            
               FOR lo, thyn impious foes, ô Lord,
               Thyn impious foes, of heavĕns and earth abhord,
               From earth and heavĕns lo chasĕd away,
               In darknes dire their damned heads shal lay.
               My strength but thow, like stateli horn
               Of Unĭcorn stout, with dread and beauti born,
               Wilt long advance: Oil fresh renŭed
               On me shal stream with gladnes sweet imbŭed.
               And ey shal see, ioid ear shal hear,
               Chance wicked foes, what gilti harts did fear.
            
            
               THE iust mene while, as fenced palm,
               Shal flourish fair, (no storms shal him uncalm:)
               As cedar tall, mount Libans praize,
               His lofti top towărd heavĕns high valt shal raize.
               Men planted midst Gods sacred place,
               In sacred coorts shal spring: yea through his grace,
               In age extreme stil fruit shal give;
               Stil iuiceful, still with greeni boughs shal live.
               To shew that God, my strength, and light,
               Ay iust persists, ay pure from all unright.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 94.
            
               The Author of this Psalm, living in time of ungodli tyranni, under which himself did also greatly suffer; prezenteth the state of the Land unto the vieu of Almighti God; whom he calleth on to be an Avenger against those Tyrants, who oppressing Gods people, atheistically scorned his future iudgements; the veriti of which he establisheth by invincible argument. Then he comforteth the better sort, by assuring them that this chasticement should turn finally to their good; and iudgement should once again return to true Iustice: and encourageth them to make a stand of defence against the wicked: who in wrong-dooing and oppression might execute their owne powër, but could not derive such authoriti from God: unto whose gracious protection he in fin
                     •…
                   betakes himself; with assurance of his owne safeti, and of his enimies destruction. This Psalm is coniectured to have been made by David, at what time he was persecuted by King Saul and his Coortiers: and then, seemeth most fitly to fall into the time, when after that most cruel massacre of Gods Priests, their wifes, children, servants, and veri cattle, in hate of David, he began to think of standing upon his owne defence (beeing anointed by God for successour in the Kingdom;) yet without any purpose of attempt against Saul, in his person, peace, authoriti, or digniti.
            
            
               
                  A VENGER great; who mans presumptuŏus sin,
               Earth righteŏus Iudge, with plagues to chastize doost not lin:
               At length shine out, ô spring of purest light;
               Rize up; pay home the proud in worlds apparent sight.
               How long, great Lord, how long shal godles sect,
               Shal wicked crue triumph, who heavĕnli laws neglect?
               Shal tyrants fierce, impunely fome their shames;
               And grievous wrongs contrive; then vant their hateful names?
            
            
               THY servants, Lord, with iron teeth they grynd;
               Th'elected race oppress: no plea to barbărous mynd,
               Nor widoes eys, nor orphans palms can make,
               Nor humbled strangers knees, their murdĕring rage to slake:
               That doon, thus say; Can this to God be told?
               
               
                  Or Iacobs Lord wil hee from heavĕn our facts behold?
               
               O blynded soules! gainst God ye cloze your eys:
               Look up: why natures light doo brutish mynds despize?
            
            
               CAN soverain cause, whence all perfections flowe,
               Himself not knowe; on man yet knoweing powĕrs bestowe?
               Who plants the ear; shall hee unhearing bee?
               Who ey with sight endues; himself (ye fools) not see?
               Round world who rules; who nations all dooth rein;
               To check, to scurge leud lifes, may careles hee remain?
               Yeas God dooth see; th'eternal light dooth knowe:
               Yea knowĕth in hart of man how vain conceipts doo growe,
            
            
               
                  O BLEST that man, whom thow doost Lord correct;
               And by correcting teach towărd sacred laws respect.
               Midst days of evĭl in rest he safe abides;
               For wicked wretch dead pit while vengeance due provides.
               For sure our Lord his folk wil not forsake:
               Wil not peculiar flock t▪abandon e
                     •…
                  re betake.
               For iudgement shall to iustice pure return:
               And draw all upright harts, which now for iustice moorn.
            
            
               AH who for mee dare gainst malfactors rize;
               What courage take my part? If thow thy gracious eys,
               If succŏring hand, deer Lord, didst not extend;
               My life towărd death, my soule towărd silent place did bend.
               But when I cry'd; My foot, ah Lord, dooth shake:
               Thy pityĭng grace did mee to staid protection take.
               In swarms of cares, midst sad perplexed thought,
               Yet comforts thyn delight in troubled soule have wrought.
            
            
               MAY viŏlent throne, from thee, Lord, powĕrs derive,
               That lusts for laws ordein, and griefs for ease contrive?
               By troops they range, the rightĕous soule to kill:
               Yea iudgement seats abuze, ungilti bloud to spill.
               But God my towĕr, my high retreit hath been;
               My Lord, my rock assurĕd in worlds fair vieu was seen.
               He hee their wrongs, their spite shal them restore:
               Yea God our Lord their pride hew doun for evermore.
            
            
               
               TREBLE.
               
                  A
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   Venger great, who mans presumptuŏus sin,
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   Earths rightĕous iudge, with plagues to chastize doost not lin; At
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   length shine out, ô spring of pu-rest light; Rize
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   up; pay home the proud, in worlds apparant sight. How long,
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   great Lord, how long shal god-les sect, shal wicked crue
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   triumph, who heavĕnli laws neglect? Shal Tyrants fierce impuneli fome their
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   shames; And grievous wrongs contrive, then vant their hateful names?
            
            
               BASE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               MEANE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               COVNTERTENOR.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               TENOR.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               LUTE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 100.
            
               An Invitation to all Nations, to prezent themselves cheerfully in the Coorts of God, with exclaming thanks and praises, for his constant goodnes and merci toward mankynd; whom he hath made and framed peculiarly to be his.
            
            
               
                  WITH raized voice, and cheerful grace,
               Approach, ye Nations all, our king:
               On bended knees prezent his face
               With hymn of bliss, which Angels sing.
               For knowe, Hee formd vs, (God, not wee,)
               His flock, his folk, yea sons to bee.
            
            
               O THANKFUL enter then his gate;
               His coorts high praises make exclame:
               Resound his acts, and glorious state;
               And prostrate bless his sacred name.
               Whose goodnes, great; and favour, sure;
               Whose trueth, like heavĕns unchang'd dooth dure.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 101.
            
               
                  DAVIDS vow unto God, touching the wel governing of Himself, his Coort, and Kingdom: made it seemeth a little before his actual coming to the Croun.
            
            
               
                  OF Iudgements, Lord, to thee I'le sing;
               Where Iustice Merci shall embrace.
               Such thoughts shal righteŏus use make spring,
               Towărd mee gainst pleazĕst to bend thy face.
            
            
               MYN house an upright hart shal guid;
               Which vice shal check, which goodnes grace.
               No pleazing sin shal train aside
               Those eys, which thee before them place.
            
            
               WHO thee forsake, from mee I'le shake;
               Their woorks and them I'le ay detest.
               Nor perverse imp there root shal take,
               Where evil all shal be supprest.
            
            
               THAT sly deceipt, the slandĕrous tong,
               Which iust men heedles may beguile;
               That secret seed of neighbours wrong,
               Severe reproof shal strait exile.
            
            
               THOSE hauti looks of swelling mynd,
               Which Thee neglect, and equals scorn;
               That self-love, hatred myn shal fynd;
               I'le soon pul doun their lofti horn.
            
            
               WHAT woorthi person through the Land
               Myn ey can vieu, what faithful wight:
               He graced in my Coort shal stand;
               His upright service my delight.
            
            
               BUT false, dissembling, flattĕring mates,
               With lying tricks that plot their owne;
               No harbour get within my gates;
               Their tricks and They shal out be throwne.
            
            
               MY kingdom then I will begin
               From foul corruptiŏns clean to pare:
               To hunt the wicked to their gin,
               Shal be my daili earliĕst care.
            
            
               SO shall Gods Citie brightly shine;
               So shall his people flourish ay:
               When damned crues exiled pine;
               And lawles folk are swept away.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 103.
            
               King DAVID with great thankfulnes, and high ioy of spirit, celebrateth here the excelling graciousnes of God, toward himself in particular; the race of Israel in especial; and in general toward all men who fear him and keep his covenant. Where at large he expresseth the goodnes of our heavenli Father, full of compassion and merci; prone to reclaim and forgivo mankynd offending; and contrariwise slowe in punishing. In fine he exciteth the happi Angels of God, with all his loial hosts and ereatures, to bless their great King, who hath placed his throne in the heavens, embracing them all with his supreme dominion. And himself lastly conioineth with them in lauding God.
            
            
               
                  PURE light of soule, thou high-bred mynd,
               Deriv'd from God, and God to praize assignd;
               Adore thy Lord; his beauties bless;
               And glorious acts in praiseful hymns express.
               Bless still my soule with all thy powĕrs,
               That sacred name whence bliss so richly shours.
               No tract of time ô e're efface,
               From thankful hart sweet vieu of bountĕous grace.
            
            
               OF GRACE, which all thy sins remits;
               And all thy griefs, sins pay, with cures befits:
               Thy life from grave which dooth redeem;
               Redeemd dooth round with deer compassions steem:
               With healthiĕst food thy mouth which fils;
               That egle-like youths strength through age distils.
            
            
               HE supreme iudge, whence iustice springs,
               To wrongd on earth from heavĕn iust iudgement brings.
               He ways divine to Moses showne,
               By Moses made to Isrăels ofspring knowne.
               Same Israels race with ioy hath seen
               Those Acts, to foes which terrour dire have been.
            
            
               TH' algracious Lord with pitti'is fraught;
               (How slowe to wrath, how soon to merci wrought?)
               Nor strive, nor chide wil alwaies hee;
               Ne let his ire, though iust, unending bee.
               Not like our flats, his strokes were found:
               Sin wrath provok'd; grace merci made abound.
            
            
               FOR look how high earth heavĕn transcends;
               How far from East to West huge space extends:
               So great his grace towărd servants prooves;
               So far our sins deer Lord from soules remooves.
               As father tendreth feeble son:
               With sonli fear like kyndnes his is won.
            
            
               
                  FOR well he knowĕth our brittle state:
               Remembring whom of clay he did crëate.
               As earth-sprung grass, as flour of field;
               So flouring man; to earth whose days must yield:
               When wynd sweeps o're, fair flour is gone;
               The place earst brave, inglorious stands alone.
            
            
               BUT ay benign, still God the same,
               Towărd them persists, who fear, who love his name:
               Yea rightĕous trueth, to fathers sworn,
               With race observes of childrens children born:
               Sole that his covĕnant they attend;
               And loial harts towărd sacred mandates bend.
            
            
               THE Lord in heavĕn his throne hath placĕd:
               With kingli rule, heavĕns, earth, and seas, embracĕd.
               Ye Angels then, heavĕns happi gests,
               Excelling strengths, obsequious to his hests;
               Ay bless the Lord, adore our King;
               Whose woord ye serve, whose will to men ye bring.
            
            
               YEA all his hosts, through world arrangĕd,
               Industrious troops, servants of faith unchangĕd,
               Bless ay his name; whose glorious will,
               Your sevĕred ways, united woorks, fulfill.
               In sum his creatures great and small,
               Where evĕr disperst throughout his empire all;
               Bless, bless our Lord: bless thankful mynd,
               Thy blessed Lord, whom thow so good doost fynd.
            
            
               
               TREBLE.
               
                  P
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   Ure light of soule, thou high- bred mynd, Deriv'd
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   from God, and God to praize assign'd; Adore thy Lord; his beauties
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   bless; And gloriŏus acts in prais- ful hymns ex- press.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   Bless still my soule with all thy powĕrs, That sacred name whence
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   No tract of time ô e're ef- face, From thankful hart sweet
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   bliss so rich- ly shours.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   vieu of boun- tĕous grace.
            
            
               BASE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               MEANE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               COVNTERTENOR.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               TENOR.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               LUTE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 104.
            
               A Psalm of Bliss and Glori, prezented unto God, as well in contemplation of his glorious estate, as also of the round world, and all the furniture and gests thereof; beeing crëated, governed, and constantly preserved, by the magnificent powër, wisdom, and goodnes of God. A petition is annexed, to consume utterly the wicked and sweep them out of the world, beeing the cause of all the dishonour and calamities thereof.
            
            
               
                  MAgnănimous, mighti, glorious Lord; my soule shal sing thy praise:
               Whose Greatnes greatest heavĕns surmounts; whose Beauti dims their rays.
               Thee, King, imperiăl Glories croun; thee Maiĕsties dread attire:
               Magnĭficence thyn whole world refils; high Bliss transcends desire.
               Great Lord, my God; eternal Life; Perfection; purest Light;
               Unbounded Goodnes; robĕst thy self with beams of glorious sight.
            
            
               CREATOUR high, first cause of all: Hee beeĭng to all things gave:
               Hee Heavĕns like courtains fair disspreds, with stars bespangled brave:
               Grand Lights as lamps illuster all. Those lighter Waters, see,
               As chambers how midst air he rears: thick Clouds his charriots bee:
               On wings of Wynds he swiftly walks: Oft wynds as Angels makes;
               And service dire to flying flames of high-bred Fire betakes.
            
            
               THE Earth midst air hath rarely hangd: yet hangd by rule so sure,
               As nevĕr to moove, while light in sun, while stars in skys endure.
               It first with cristal robe had helĕd: all Sea, no land was seen;
               Deep flouds surrounding highest mounts: no seat for man had been.
               But strait at thy rebuke they fly; them thundring voice dooth chase,
               Up hill, doun vale, by shortest coorse, to their commanded place:
               Vast deep their foming streams receives. Here bounds their surges fynd,
               Proud waves to break; here laws from thee their roring rage to bynd.
            
            
               THUS land from sea ay free remains. Then Springs to land dooth send,
               Tween hils which run; fair vales enrich; encreasd to seas descend.
               Hence moisture sweet draw flouri medes: hence drink myld cattle take:
               Here beasts of field doo quench their thirst; wyld ass dry heat asslake.
               By these wingd birds, sweet gests of air, on native arbours mount;
               And pleazing notes mongst greeni leafs in cooling shade recount.
            
            
               THE mountains from his raized lofts with sweet concocted Rain
               He watreth so, that rich in fruits all parts of earth remain.
               Pure fatnes drops: strait pregnant earth in various robe arraid,
               Sees Grass for beasts, sees Herbs for man, as tribute duely paid.
               Man thus sustaind, assisted thus; by art derivĕd from high,
               By gift of thyn, the earths rich womb t'improove dooth soon apply.
               Here Corn, here Vines, there Olives plants; with bread his hart to cheer;
               With wine his drooping spir̆its to glad; with oil his face to cleer.
            
            
               
                  THE Trees of God like blessing draw: the Cedars, which his hand,
               Not care of man, on Liban plants; there ages long doo stand.
               Here Birds their curious nests doo build: the Storks midst lofti boughs
               Of stateli Fir with parted love themselves half strangers houze.
               Nought useles stands: to Mountains steep, the Shamois make retreit;
               The craggi Rocks, weak Connies shield; thick Woods, give Deer receipt.
            
            
               LOOK up eftsoons; see changing Moon made changing seazŏns to shew:
               The Sun his certain race dooth run; his nightli settings knowe.
               Strait darknes black bids light withdraw: withdrawn, the forest mooves:
               Wyld beasts in woods that lurk, creep foorth; seek food what each behooves,
               Yong Lions rage and roar for prey; from God their meat require:
               And fed, at suns return to dens their cooching lims retire.
               Then foorth goĕth Man, their Lord by thee: hee at his daili toil,
               Deserving so, til eevĕning bides; and earth in earth dooth moil.
            
            
               O LORD, how manĭfold are thy woorks? high wisdom all did frame:
               Thy goods, which earth, which sea doo store, no tong, no thought can name.
               The Sea, a place of vast extent, where cralling things abound;
               Where swimming beasts both great and small past number all are found:
               Here walk the Ships; which worlds whole wealth dispersd by trade unite:
               Stands wondring Whale, there made to play; himself more wondrous sight.
            
            
               THESE creatures all thy care attend, meet food in seazŏn to have.
               Thow scattring, they it spars'd colect; larg'd hand, gives all they craue.
               If gracious face thou once avert; they troubled all doo moorn:
               Their spir̆it withdraw; they breath gasp out, and to their dust return.
               If spir̆it of life thy grace send foorth, which world with beĕing endues;
               Thow recrëatst his wasted store; so face of earth renues.
            
            
               BE then, ô glori'ay be to God: Thow praiz'd from thankful voice,
               Receive due tribute, gracious Lord: So in thy woorks reioice.
               Repair at length worlds great defects; ô thow whose ires consume:
               Whose stern aspect shakes trembling earth; whose touch makes mountains fume.
               I whilĕst my life, while beĕing dooth last, shal still thy praises sing:
               Sweet ioy shal thoughts of thee imbue; ô thow my blisful King.
               Let sinners foul, who earth defile, defilĕd have made abhord;
               Consumĕd from earth pay vengeance due. Soule myn, praize thow the Lord. Allelu-ia.
               
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 107.
            
               A Celebration of the gracious providence of God, and of his merci toward mankynd, in relieving them who in ani extreme distress wholy cast themselfs upon him in praier. Which is particularized in the examples of the Israelites in those times, (beeing times of exile and great calamiti:) whereof som in their return, lost their way in wyld deserts: other in not foloing the advice of God, became prisoners in chains and dungeons: A third sort by their wicked and lascivious life, fell into the usual punishment of grievous diseases: And a fourth, endured sore tempests at sea. All whom having had unexpected deliverance by God, he exhorteth to be therfore grateful, and in solemn assembli of Gods people before the senatours to profess their thankfulnes. An advise foloed by the Iues even at this day in those foure cases. Lastly he sheweth that the calamities which fall generally upon Nations, be it by barrennes of the earth; by oppression of Tyrants; by contempt growne upon a land in their Nobles and Governours, (whence much mischief ensueth;) or by ani other evil or sorro whatsoever; are all brought upon them by their sins and that odious unthankfulnes to God: who yet even in publick miseries preserveth and prospereth his humble servants: and when Nations apply themselfs faithfully to his service, poureth upon them all blessings opposite to those former punishments. Which things wise men will consider and make use of; especially so as to knowe and acknowlege the Crëatours goodnes.
            
            
               
                  YE woorthi mynds, in whom Gods gifts excell;
               Whose persons walk on earth, high thoughts in heavĕns doo dwell;
               Renoum our Lord, ring foorth his glorious name;
               Whose goodnes no time fails, sweet mercies still the same.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               OBLAZE his acts, ye now at rest that stand,
               From hostile powĕr redeemd, redeemd from strangers land:
               Ye late dispersd, now gathered by his grace;
               From East, from West, from North, yea from great Oceăns place.
               In deserts wyld, through uncouth invious ways,
               All tired, all forlorn, they wandred nights and days,
               With fainting spir̆its, through thirst and hunger pin'd;
               And no relief, no steps towărd cultivĕd place could fynd.
            
            
               IN need extreme when lo to God they cry:
               He gracious hears their mone: and help from heavĕn makes fly.
               So strength renues; so straying feet directs
               To peopled wals; and safe from perils all protects.
               O thankful then to God his grace confess:
               His mervĕilous woork to men with ioious tongs express.
               Who thirsting soule with waters sweet refreshd;
               The empti fild; and pace towărd longed home addresd.
            
            
               
                  IN darknes sad, in shade of grisli death,
               With irŏn and anguish bound, who sighd their servile breath;
               (Il-ruled mynds, that this and more deserv'd,
               That Highests woord despysd, from Gods advise that swarv'd:)
               When hart-burst clean, they grovĕling rold in pain;
               Ne hope of better saw, nor place for worse remain:
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               IN need extreme to God their suit they bent;
               Who pityĭng rueful plight, from heavĕn sweet comfort sent.
               He darknes dire, grim shade of death dispels:
               he cords from hands, from feet he fetters burst repels.
               O thankful then to God his grace confess:
               His wondrous act to men with ioious tongs express.
               Who brazen gates made all to fragments flee:
               Brake bars of irŏn, strong Lord, and prison̆ers did enfree.
            
            
               UNGOVERND fools, transported by their lust
               From vertuŏus ways to vice; when God severely iust,
               Their wicked ioys afflicts, such sicnes sends,
               That soule abhorring meat, at deaths pale door attends:
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               IN hour extreme to God then lo they cry;
               Who gracious hears their grones, and ease from heavĕn bids hy.
               Doun comĕth his woord, the per̆ishing soule to save;
               And hasting life retracts from neer approached grave.
               O thankful then to God his grace confess:
               His mercies great to men with ioious tongs express.
               And clensd in hart, iust sacrifice of praise
               Let grateful hands yield vp; renoum him all your days.
            
            
               TO Seas in ships, who (Arts chief woork) descend,
               Adventrous harts, by trade penurious state to mend;
               Or spatious lakes who pass; what wondrous sight,
               Strange woorks of God in deep, their staring looks affright?
               Lo strait his woord tempestuŏus wynd dooth rear;
               And roughest frouns on seas late smiling face appear:
               Anon towărd heavĕns on back of arched wave
               They mount; dismount in trise towărd hels unloveli cave.
               As drunk they reel; then melting harts gin fail;
               Nought toil, nought careful coorse of Masters skil avail.
            
            
               
                  IN case extreme when lo to God they cry:
               Who gracious hears griev'd voice, and help from heavĕn bids hy.
               Strait wynds repose; smooth hieu calmd seas regain:
               Harts ioy; woorks cheer; til safe they long longd havĕn attain.
               Then thankful ô to God his grace confess:
               His merveils great to men with ioious tongs express.
               And let Gods Church, let faithful people hear
               Vowd praise: in senat grave his mercies rare endeer.
            
            
               HEE bubling springs chokes up with thirsti sand:
               Yea rivers rich, accursd, dry desert makes to stand.
               And fertile soil, in plague of owners sin,
               To saltnes damns; whence fruit nor skil nor toil can win.
            
            
               AGAIN his grace dry desert stores with pools:
               Sends springs, and bare burnt earth with fruitful moisture cools.
               There hungri soules their citti sets to place:
               Who sowe their grains; plant vines; years sweet return embrace.
               Abounding food then blest with restful peace;
               To numbers huge themselves, their flocks and heards encrease.
            
            
               BUT harts puft up, soon spurning heavĕnli law,
               (Ah fools,) in chains of sin enchained tortures draw.
               Oppression foul, sad days, unthriving care;
               Their ioyles mynds abase; their branching numbers bare.
               He vyld contempt on woorthles Nobles pours;
               And wayles wasts makes walk, chasĕd out from lordli towĕrs.
               Yet godli poor, raizd up from pressing need,
               As tree makes branch, as flock his branched race to breed.
            
            
               THESE things the iust with reverend ioy shal see:
               And wicked mynds and mouths appald and stopt shal bee.
               Who then is wise, these sights to hart to lay?
               Gods goodnes they shal learn; Gods praises they display.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 110.
            
               The Prophet DAVID foresheweth the everlasting Kingdom and Priesthood of Christ: who after his Ascension, sitting at the Right hand of God, should send out his forces from Sion and Ierusalem, to reduce the world unto him. Which spiritual warfare should take so wonderful effect, that not onli at the veri beginning infinite multitudes should adioin themselfs to the Church: but in short time also the Empire of Rome it self, (then Head of mani Nations,) with other great kingdoms, should be conquered and subdued unto the obedience of Christ and his law. The proof whereof to the later ages did manifestly appear.
            
            
               
                  THE Lord said to my Lord; Thow at my right-hand sit;
               
               
                  While foes their necks I to thy feet as foot-stool make submit.
               
               From Sion, seat of Grace, the Lord thy scepters might
               Through world shal send: midst all thy foes bear rule thou Prince of light.
               What day thy warli ranks shal high exploit begin;
               The people prest, with cheerful strife, to serve thee shal com in.
               Anon, as prime of morn with silvĕri perls of dew
               Al-spreds the world; like troops thy youth in sacred house shal shew.
            
            
               THE Lord, who will not change, hath sworn fair Prince to thee;
               
                  A Priest thou art, Melchĭsedek like, and ay that Priest shal bee.
               
               This Prince, who 'on thy right hand, great King of heavĕn, thus shines;
               Each earthli King in ire shal crush, that gainst his rule repines.
               He Hĕthen with swoord shall iudge; fields, streets with corps shal straw;
               Imperiăl Head whom Nations serve, assubiect to his law.
               As lightning, swift shal run; in way of torrent drink:
               Thus gloriŏus head triumphant raize; while danted foes doo shrink.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM III.
            
               The Psalmist here sings the praises of God, both for his glorious woorks, and for his gracious acts toward the Israelites, in mercifully conducting them from the serviliti of Aegypt, to the happi land of Canaan; and therein chiefly for establishing to their everlasting good his sacred Law and Covenant. In observance whereof true wisdom consisteth.
            
            ALLELV-IA.
            
               MY hart dooth heavĕnli heat enflame,
               To sound high praise to glorious name:
               Th'alglorious Lord, midst rightĕous press,
               In sacred senate shall I bless.
               Great are Gods woorks; and bless their sight
               Whose mynds in knowelege high delight:
               His gracious hand all good hath formd,
               All beautĕous, all with grace adornd.
               Ovĕr all Gods Iustice glorious raigns:
               Which rightĕous ay, unswaid remains.
            
            
               HIS acts which wondring Fathers saw,
               So live, enrold, as guiding law;
               That ages all with ioy recount
               Those graces, thoughts which all surmount.
               Hee gracious Lord, with merci fraught,
               His race elect, from thraldom brought,
               In desert bare, in hungers raign,
               With food celestiăl did sustain.
               Hee, who his covenant still remynds,
               Where righteŏus fear, true faith he fynds;
               To Israĕl deer his powĕr expresd,
               Which them of Hethens land possesd.
            
            
               THUS all his woorks are trueth and right;
               Prints of his hand, sparks of his light:
               His sacred precepts faithful all;
               And dying man to life recall:
               Unchanging rule; unerring guid:
               So Lord and Law stil same abide.
               For when he first redemption sent,
               And feet late thrald at freedom went:
               He law, he leaug with them ordaind,
               Eternal bothe from heăven proclaimd.
               That man should awful thereto frame:
               Sith holi' and dreadful lives his name,
            
            
               
                  PRIME entrance unto wisdom true,
               Gods greatnes is to fear. O you,
               Sole you right understandings bless,
               Who tremble' his mandates to transgress.
               
                  
                     〈☐〉
                  Adore him then; whose praises pure,
               As sun, illustrous ay endure.
               
                  
                     〈☐〉
                  :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 112.
            
               A mixed description, aswel of the vertuous, as also of the prosperous life of a good man: beeing an hart-grief to the wicked; whose desires all perish.
            
            ALLELV-IA.
            
               
                  O HAPPI man; with humblest fears,
               And purest loves towărd God who bends:
               With sweet delight Gods law he hears;
               And heard, through actions all extends.
            
            
               O HAPPI man! thy ioys are true:
               Thy house with plenteŏus wealth abounds:
               Thy iustice yields, and reaps, hir due;
               Hir fruit to thee stil blest redounds.
            
            
               HIS ofspring, noble in their race,
               By noblest vertues so endure:
               Long hold on earth great powĕrful place:
               And world of blessings round alure.
            
            
               YEA evĕn in time of darkest wo,
               To him dooth cheerfull light arize:
               To righteŏus man; who no ma
                     •…
                   fo,
               Stil merciful, stil merci trys.
            
            
               HEE helpful, bounteŏus, lends, and gives;
               Reward from Gods sole grace expects:
               In choisest thoughts stil blessed lives;
               Which prudence rightly still directs.
            
            
               THERFORE he stable ay shal stand;
               Nor storm, nor engin, throwe him doun.
               Yea gracious woorks of vertŭous hand,
               With fame immortal shal him croun.
            
            
               HIS setled mynd on God relys;
               No troublous nues can him affright:
               Firm stands his hart, and fears defys;
               Which on his enimies pates shal light.
            
            
               THUS spends the iust, thus ends his hours:
               Dispersing hand the needi feeds:
               Doun glorious blessing on him shours:
               Reaps endles prize of ended deeds.
            
            
               THE wicked this shal see, and vex;
               Shal grynd their teeth, and pine to nought:
               Sad fears shal duely them perplex;
               Their deer desires to nothing brought.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  ALlelu-ia, ij. ij. ij.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   ij. ij. ij. ij. ij. ij.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   ij. O happi man; with humblest fears, And pu- rest
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   loues toward God who bends: With sweet de- light Gods law he
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   hears; And heard, through actions all ex- tends.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   O happi man; thy ioys are true; Thy house with plentĕous wealth
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   abounds: Thy iustice yields, and reaps hir due; Hir fruit to
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   thee stil blest re- dounds.
            
            
               
               2. TREBLE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   Allelu-ia, ij. ij. ij. ij.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   ij. ij. ij. ij. ij. ij.
            
            
               MEANE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               COVNTERTENOR.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   Allelu-ia, ij. ij. ij. ij.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   ij. ij. ij. ij. ij.
            
            
               
               TENOR.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   Allelu-ia, ij. ij. ij. ij.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   ij. ij. ij. ij. ij. ij. ij.
            
            
               BASE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   Allelu-ia, ij. ij. ij. ij.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   ij. ij.
            
            
               
               LUTE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               Allelu-ia,
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            PSALM 118.
            
               This Psalm is with great reason coniectured to have been made by King David, and at his first coming to the possession of the kingdom of Iuda. It conteineth first his inward great thankfulnes to God for deliveri by divine hand from so mani strong attempts against him: admonishing no assurance to be like unto trust in God. Secondly it reciteth the verse which the People had taken up to magnifi God with, for this victori as it were atchieved in advancing David above his enimies. And lastly it setteth foorth the dueti of a truly noble and religious King, in the example of this King David; who besides his private thankfulnes, maketh here a solemn entri into the Coorts of God; there prostrateth himself publicly in thanks and praier to the Almighti: which doon, he is blest of the Priests of God, and received as beeing sent to them from God to be their Governour. In fine, legal sacrifices are slain and offered up, with sound of triumphing praises, to the eternal Lord and King. In the person of King David, his Son our Saviour is here prefigured: who beeing refuzed by the Archbuilders, the Prelates and Potentates of his time; yet became by Gods grace the head-stone of the corner, whereupon the spiritual Church is builded, and wherein the Iues and Gentiles were united: beeing received of the true Israel, as sent unto them from God.
            
            
               
                  SING, ô, sound out Gods woorthi praise,
               Who goodnes pure, stil grace displays.
               Let Israĕls race agnize the same:
               And thankful now renoum his name.
               Great Aărons house, thou blest to bless,
               Same goodnes, same sweet grace confess.
               Yea, all who fear our glorious King,
               His rich, his endles merci sing.
            
            
               IN streit distress the Lord I sought;
               Who gracious, fair enlargement brought.
               That sith my God dooth mee assist;
               Sith aiders myn his aid hath blist:
               Nor fear I man, doo man his woorst;
               Nor faun on fo, with rancour burst.
               Much better ô in God to trust,
               Then ground on man, whose ground is dust:
               On God yea better to rely,
               Then Princes; lo, evĕn Princes dy.
            
            
               MEE nations all encloz'd, as toil;
               But Gods great help all put to foil:
               As circle, they did mee surround;
               But Gods great help bare all to ground.
               Yea evĕn as cloud of Bees they swarmd,
               With ireful stings against me armd▪
               
            
            
               
                  As cracling fire of thorns soon spent,
               By Gods great help to smoke they went.
            
            
               THOU sore at mee, my fo, hast thrust;
               My wrongful fo: but God, God iust,
               With succŏring hand me staid from fall;
               Thy plots, thyn hopes defeated all.
               He, hee my strength, my verse of praise;
               Sole health, sole ioy for ending days.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               HARK: voice of ioy, triumphing sound,
               Fils rightĕous tents, with safeti cround:
               
                  Sing, God, our God, this fight hath wrought;
               
               
                  Whose right-hand valiant acts hath sought:
               
               
                  Advanced stands that powrful hand;
               
               
                  And powers terrene makes all disband.
               
            
            
               IT'S true, God mee did sore correct:
               Yet still from death my soule protect.
               Then live I shall; (where's death thy sting?)
               O God, thy woorks, thy praise to sing.
            
            
               NOW towărd th'Eternals glorious place,
               With revĕrence bend we ioyful pace.
               Ye sacred Priests, to heavĕns great King,
               Who vows, who praiĕrs, sweet praises sing;
               Uncloze your gates: give praise access,
               At gates which praises all possess.
               Hence crue profane: Gods gates are pure;
               Sole rightĕous mynds, clean thoughts endure.
            
            
               "O KING of Kings; who ear didst bend
               "To iust requests; and safeti send:
               "Lo prostrate here thy servant true,
               "Yields thanks, brings praise, great Lord thy due.
               "What stone th' Archbuilders did reiect;
               "Their folŏers scorn; the world neglect;
               "Same stone now angles fronted head,
               "Thy peoples strength and rest hath bred.
            
            
               "O GRACIOUS Lord, thyn act it is;
               "Great act of merci, act of bliss:
               "Our ravisht thoughts, our wondring eys,
               "Thy woork makes mortal woorks despize.
               
                  "This day thy grace hath made us see:
               "Which ay to ioy shal sacred bee.
               "Then still, great King, thy goodnes raign:
               "Stil safeti, still this ioy maintain.
            
            
               O blessed thow, whom God hath sent;
               And here dooth King in grace prezent.
               We Priests of God, Gods merci seat
               Who ay atend, ay God entreat
               Appeaz'd his people deer to bless;
               Wee bless you: Long Gods bliss possess.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               Hee th' onli God, this light hath raiz'd,
               This ioying light: He sole be praiz'd.
               To altars horns beasts festive bynd:
               Let sacred bloud seal faithful mynd.
            
            
               THOU art my God; I'le bless thy name:
               Our Lord; to heavĕns wee'le raize thy fame.
               Sing then, sound out Gods glorious praise:
               Who goodnes pure, stil grace displays.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 119.
            
               This Psalm, conceived to be Davids, and after a long time of persecution under King Saul, for that God had declared David for his successour; is a treasuri of mani excellent parts of devotion, mani choise things for instruction: each Section beeing not incoherent within it self for matter, though not so in form of speach, by reason of tying the verse to an alphabetical order; (vzed also in som other Psalm
                     •…
                  , but in differing maner;) either in assistance of memori, or to make the matter more remarkable. David then first laieth here the ground of true blessednes to consist in converting our harts to God, by seeking to knowe him in his woord, and by bending to serve him in observing his commandments: which infer an aversion from their contraries, namely lying ways and sin. He sheweth (and often by his owne example) the excellenci, and blessed effects of Gods Law and Woord. Gods woord is a light of heavenlitrueth: It illuminateth the understanding: and bringeth life unto man; conducting him thereunto, as a lamp or star, through the pilgrimage of this cloudi world, wherein we are strangers. The Law also of God comprized in this woord, is a law everlasting; a law of perfect righteousnes, continuing when all worldli perfections shall perish. Wonderful are the treasures of Wisdom, Vertu, and Ioy, wrapped up in this woord and law of God: and which beeing unfolded, bring understanding to the simple: and are directions even for the yong. They advance man in wisdom, above the wit of his enimies, the science of the learned, the experience of the aged. In cases doutful, they are counselers; in dangers, they are hopes; in disgraces, countenancers; in afflicted estate, comforters; in calm meditations, most pure delights and ioys, far exceeding the ioys of wealth and worldli prosperiti. Lastly they place their foloers in so great repose of soule, that no offence from the world can subvert or interrupt it. Contrariwise we beeing all the woork of Gods hands, who hath made the whole world and all parts thereof to serve him, even as at this day they continue; and seeing also our waysly open to the sight of God: what can the proud despizers of Gods Law expect, but the curse of divine vengeance persuing them by divers iudgements to everlasting d
                     •…
                  struction, til as dross they be consumed from off Gods earth? For although it be true that the mercies of God are great, yea and that the whole earth is replenished with them; yet far is salvation from the obduredly wicked. The horrour of whose ends reprezented to prudent mynds, breedeth in them a fear of the iudgements of God; and maketh them more resolvedly to hate the vain inventions of godles persons, whose trics and falshoods are but deceivings of themselves; as also more carefully to consider their owne coorses, and choozing the way of trueth, to make hast to serve God, refraining from everi evil and unapprooved way which might to his divine Maiesti be displeasing. But David now applying these generals to his owne particular, discovereth an extraordinari spirit and admirable desire, toward God, his woord, his law, and iudgements: professing they were his studi, meditation, delight, yea and matter of his speach: that he dezired nothing so much, as to have his hart, and ways so addressed toward God, as to knowe him, and keepe his laws. Seven times a day, did he praize God for his iustice: His praiers to God for assisting grace and protection, were earlier then the dawning of the toilsom day: his meditation on the woord of God and heavenli misteries, prevented the nightli watches: yea all the day long, his loving and longing thoughts, ran wholy upon the law of God: And at midnight also, when other men were at their natural rest, and slept; he wakening roze up to give thanks unto God in contemplation of his righteous iudgements. These were his trust, hope, comfort, and ioy. Love of these bred an hatred in him of all lying and false ways: a care to refrain from transgressing their rules in ani thing: a lothing of the veri compani of ungodli persons: an endevour to make his companions of them who feared God and kept his precepts: a zele that even consumed him with bitternes of grief, to see his enimes not forget only and viclate the law of God, but with wicked desires and the pride of an high hand attempt utterly to displace it; which called on God himself to take his quarrel

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
in hand. Lastly this love of Gods woord and law, cauzed him to speak boldly thereof before Kings. And though Princes traduced him in unprinceli maner; yea and persecuted him without a cause: though the pride of his enimies sought maliciously and wrongfully, to bereave and deprive him, of his goods, by robbing him; of his good name and reputation, by forging lys and dispersing reproaches against him; and lastly of life it self, by lying in ambush to surprize him: yet his hart beeing held in aw by the woord of God, he forbare to repay wrong with wrong, sin with sin: but in silent sorro, even with streams of tears, bewailed their offences, and ensuing punishment. And for himself he confesseth this affliction was for his good; that God sent it him in veri faithfulnes, to reform his straying coorses; which effect it had wrought: and that his delight in the law of God, and hope in his woord, did both preserve and comfort him in all those troubles. This beeing Davids estate and disposition of soule, his praiers are sutable. He praieth God, that looking upon him, and considering he was his, and a lover of his law; he would vouchsafe to teach him it, by inlightning his understanding, and by induing him with good sense and iudgement: that he would give him a sound hart; and so inlarge and quicken it with heavenli ioy and cheerfulnes, as redily to run the way of Gods commandments: That having inclined him to the way of righteousnes, he would disturn his eys, from regarding vaniti; his hart, from beeing caught with covetousnes: that he would deliver him from lying ways; and preserve him in such strength of vertu, that no iniquiti might get ani dominion over him. And where it had pleazed God, by private message, to cauze David to be anointed King over Israel; and on that promise to rely; for which his proud enimies did deride and persue him: he praieth God to be myndful and confirm that woord; that having how to answer the reproaching him with that trust; the shame might redound upon his scorning adversaries. From whose oppression also he praieth now at length to be delivered: that walking at liberti, he might freely apply and exercise the law of God: and good men might freely also associate themselves unto him. And for observance of the divine law for the time to com, he maketh here a solemn vow unto God: whom he humbly withall praieth to accept that and other free offrings of his mouth, vows, praiers, and praises, beeing all he could offer. Finally he concludeth with the sum of his suit, the gift of understanding, and freedom from his enimies: that his life beeing continued, he might praize the goodnes of God: who now beeing chased out by Saul, and wandring up and doun like a sheep that had straied, yet did not, ne could forget Gods commandments; whose favour he again imploreth, to give end to that extremiti. This Psalm (for the woorthines thus largely abridged) remaineth a cleer mirrour of the godli hart of David: which cauzed him to be a man after the hart of God, and to wear the honour of that incomparable title.
            
            
               ALEPH.
               
                  
                     O BLESSED they; who men upright in mynd and way,
                  In Gods pure law delight, his sacred will obey.
                  Yea blessed, who embrace his woord that witnes true:
                  And God their sovĕrain good with flaming harts pursue.
                  Such men sure sin decline; in paths divine proceed:
                  Them careful hold: which held, have high reward decreed.
               
               
                  O THEN, fith thow so strait thy hests to keep hast chargĕd;
                  My ways were so addresd, my feet so, Lord, enlargĕd,
                  As free thy steps to trace: no blot shal mee distain,
                  No shame confound; on thee while fixt myn eys remain.
                  Right hart thy praise shal sound, for law of iustice taught:
                  Which learnd, Ile keep: at length reduce me ô to thought.
               
            
            
               
               BETH.
               
                  VVHEREWITH may careles youth his falti paths amend?
                  If heedful by thy woord he them to guid attend.
                  Ah Lord, with hart entire I thee have truly sought:
                  O let not straying soule with trains of vice be caught.
                  Long I thy precious laws have treasŭred in my hart,
                  To purge out sin: Blest Lord, stil teach that sacred art.
               
               
                  REMEMBER Lord, my lips, and not unthankful tong,
                  How free thy woord have taught, how glad thy praise have song:
                  How deer delight I take in way from heavĕn declarĕd:
                  Vain ioys breeds world of wealth, with these true ioys comparĕd.
                  With muzing mynd I vieu, and still thy law admire:
                  Nor sight gives end to search; nor search to sweet desire.
               
            
            
               GIMEL.
               
                  THIS gift, this favour, Lord, on servant thyn bestowe;
                  That live I may; and live, thy saving grace to knowe,
                  Yea sacred woord to keep. Then thow myn eys unsele;
                  And wonders of thy law to groping mynd revele.
                  I stranger rome on earth; my seat with thee abides:
                  O hide not heavĕnli way which to thy presence guids.
               
               
                  DESIRE my soule consumes, stil muzing on that path:
                  Which pride derides; dead pride, devowd to firi wrath.
                  But thou repell their scorns. Ah zele to sacred law,
                  From Princes seats did griev'd unprinceli censures draw.
                  Yet still, I still thy woord in studious thoughts renue:
                  Sole solace in my griefs, in douts adviser true.
               
            
            
               DALETH.
               
                  MY humbled soule to dust, prostrate on earth, dooth cleve;
                  Remynd thy woord; and up revived servant heve.
                  My hart, my state, and ways, to thee I did unfold:
                  Thou heard'st with grace: then still me precepts thyn, enrold
                  In faithful brest, direct. Discloze thy beauteŏus way:
                  And moorning soule recheerd thy merveils let display:
               
               
                  REMOOVE by-paths of lys: thy trueth hath been my choise;
                  Thy law my mirrour. O, make cleer thy gracious voice:
                  And foloĕr of thy woords grant through that favour high,
                  Be nor asham'd to live, nor Lord afraid to dy.
                  Yea when my narroĕd hart shal noble grace enlarge;
                  Base lets despiz'd, I'le run what race thy mandates charge.
               
            
            
               
               HE.
               
                  GREAT Guid of men, my feet address in righteŏus way:
                  My feet; by thee addrest, which ne're from thee shal stray.
                  Recleer my dimmed mynd, sweet beauti of thy laws
                  To vieu: which vieud, from hart like love abundant draws.
                  Thus hart deiect erect, thy rizing paths to clime;
                  Thy woord, my high delight, in raized thoughts to shrine.
               
               
                  BUT from unwoorthi gain; from vain aspects, which fire
                  Unwari brests; disturn myn eys and frail desire.
                  And quickĕn me in thy way. Ah to thy servant true,
                  Devoted to thy fear, thy roial woord renue.
                  So feard reproach discharge: with iudgements iust recheer
                  The fainting soule which longs thy statutes to endeer.
               
            
            
               VAV.
               
                  LET then thy mercies deer, salvătion, favours high,
                  Foretold by gracious woord, at length great Lord draw nigh.
                  That those who mee reproach depending thus on thee;
                  Confounded quite, their scorns my glori high may see.
                  Mene while let woord so true towărd him not wholy sleep,
                  Who trusts in thy decree, still still thy law wil keep.
               
               
                  AND keeping thus thy law, abroad I'le boldly walk:
                  And of thy woord fore kings undanted freely talk.
                  O King of kings, thou thow my love and sole delight:
                  Thy hests my ioy; on them I still defix my sight;
                  Towărd them my hands I'le raize, to act what they require;
                  Who sole possess my thoughts, command my chief desire.
               
            
            
               ZAIIN.
               
                  THEN myndful of thy speach, thou Lord stil true and iust,
                  Shine foorth; sith in that woord hast causd thy servant trust.
                  Sole this to grieved mynd sweet comfort still derives;
                  This pressed state supports; this dulled sprites revives.
                  The proud both it and mee with scorns profane deride:
                  Nor pride, nor scorns profane, from thee can mee divide.
               
               
                  FOR iudgements thyn of old my muzing thoughts revieu:
                  Which mee secure: but ah stil horror then renue,
                  When ends of lawles men my pityĭng mynd foresees.
                  But I, in pilgrim life, stil singing thy decrees;
                  In silent night, with ioy revolving Lord thy name;
                  Thy statutes keep; which kept, these ioys in mee enframe.
               
            
            
               
               CHETH.
               
                  MY portion, Lord, art thow: my thankful mynd, resolv'd
                  Thy woords to keep, hir cares on thee hath all devolv'd.
                  And hart with fervent suit thy gracious face hath sought:
                  Let then those mercies shine which gracious woord hath taught.
                  For strait my earthli ways, with vieu unpartial eyd,
                  Delay cut off, I glad to heavĕnli coorse applyd.
               
               
                  THIS worldlings hate procures; whose troops make me their prey.
                  Nor hate of world, nor wrongs, me from thy paths can fray.
                  Thou witness, Night; whose midst with thanks me rize dooth hear
                  Gods iudgements iust to bless: thou Day; which God who fear,
                  His laws who love, my deer companions all doost see.
                  Thow then, whose grace earth fils, thow, Lord, my leader bee.
               
            
            
               TET.
               
                  I MUST confess, my Lord, that graciously with mee,
                  As was thy woord, hast dealt: ô grant, from passions free,
                  With sence and science right, thy servant still esteem.
                  For evĕn afflictions all I now thy favours deem:
                  Which straying soule reducĕd; who since beleeves thy law.
                  Thow good, and good who doost; still me to goodnes draw,
               
               
                  THE proud with conscious gilt have lys gainst mee devizĕd:
                  I careful kept thy woord; that kept, their lys despizĕd.
                  Their harts hath tallo' obdurĕd: thy hests are my delight.
                  And since thy chastning hand my humbled soule aright
                  In wisdoms school hath framĕd; more deer thy laws I hold,
                  Then streams of silver fine, then hils of purest gold.
               
            
            
               IOD.
               
                  THY hands me made, and formd: reform thy servant, Lord;
                  And understanding give, which sin may make abhor'd.
                  Thy iudgements all are iust: I knowe, in faithful trueth,
                  And for my good, thy love, thus scurged hath my youth.
                  But now let promis'd grace, with comfort shine: that they
                  Who fear thee, knowĕing my case, thy praise may glad display.
               
               
                  YEA let thy mercies shour, and weariĕd soule refresh:
                  That withĕring hart revivĕd may life from thee confess.
                  Let pride ashamĕd remain to seek my causeles bane:
                  Whose harmles thoughts thy law their sole delight doo frame.
                  Let zelers of thy hests to mee themselves adioin:
                  And clenze my hart; that shames sad scandal none eloin.
               
            
            
               
               CAPH.
               
                  MY long erected soule, stil looking for thy grace,
                  Thy woord stil trusting, now bends doun hir fainting face.
                  Consumed are my spir̆its; consumĕd my waiting eys:
                  Like bottle parch'd with smoke, my self now self despize.
                  Yet still beleeve thy woord; thy precepts still apply.
                  How mani rest my days? when draw thy comforts nigh?
               
               
                  AND when shal I my Lord see swoord of iustice draw,
                  Gainst proud persuing foes; who pits, (not so thy law,)
                  For righteŏus steps have delvĕd? Ah hate the most uniust!
                  Thow then whose hests are trueth, my life neer trod to dust,
                  If still thy law I love, if mercies thyn attend,
                  In merci keep; which kept, I'le in thy service spend.
               
            
            
               LAMED.
               
                  THY woord forevĕr, great Lord, in heavĕns enthronĕd remains:
                  Thy woord, which all did make, and all things made sustains.
                  Thy trueths through age to age with stedfast coorse proceed.
                  Stands peized earth, ne mooves, by thee so Lord decreed.
                  Thus lo, as thow ordainĕdst, they all this day persist;
                  Thy servants all, to act what e're thy iudgements list.
               
               
                  MY woes had mee consumĕd, had solace in thy law
                  Not cheerd that hart, which nought can e're from thence withdraw.
                  For thyn I am: ô thyn preserve from wicked swoord,
                  Which dogs my life; who live in studyĭng Lord thy woord,
                  In tracing Lord thy ways. O ways of widening ioys!
                  When else perfections all see fretting time destroys.
               
            
            
               MEM.
               
                  VVHAT, Lord, what heat my soule with sacred love inspires
                  Of law divine? what powĕr thus rapts my strong desires?
                  All day to quicned cares, to pozed thoughts at night,
                  It self prezents: stil shines high mynds admired light.
                  A light, whose rays infuzĕd, more sciĕnt me make and sage;
                  Then teachers, books; wit, foes; or gray experience, age.
               
               
                  O LAW, my thoughts delight! desire those mandates pure,
                  Lawgiver great, to pleaze, dooth wari feet inure,
                  All sinful ways to shun, thy woords high paths to hold;
                  Makes iudgements thyn observe, which sacred rols have told.
                  Yea sweetest iuice my tast not so with sweetnes feeds:
                  As woord, which wisdom true, vyld falshoods hate, imbreeds.
               
            
            
               
               NVN.
               
                  THY woord, a lamp divine, fair star that leads the day,
                  To paths obscure dooth shine; and guids to heavĕnli way.
                  And I by sacred vow, a vow in heavĕns enrold,
                  Stand bound, and rest resolv'd that woords iust rules to hold.
                  Afflictions mee extreme bere doun: let promis'd grace,
                  Revive me:' ô then, I pray, poor lips frank gifts embrace.
               
               
                  MY soule see still in hand stands prest away to fly;
                  Such snares my life beset: yet still thy hests I ey;
                  Can not thy Law forget. O teach me Lord thy ways:
                  Thy woord since all my state, sole ioy my hart to raize;
                  And thow my sovĕrain good; since soule entire I bend
                  Thy will to doo, in this lifes breth extreme to spend.
               
            
            
               SAMECH.
               
                  THY Law I deerly love; mans vain conceipts despize;
                  Thow refuge myn, and shield; whose woord my waiting eys
                  Stil holds in hope. Avant, avant then crue profane;
                  Gods mandates iust I'le keep: sole thow my hope from shame,
                  (The hope thy speach hath raiz'd,) with life persuĕd, defend.
                  Savĕd lifes so whole delight I'le in thy statutes spend.
               
               
                  AND lo transgressours proud, whose fraud shal self deceive,
                  Thyn earths inutil load, of grace whom doost bereave;
                  As basest mire doun trod, as dross with purging fire
                  Consumĕd, shal sole remain sad marks of heavĕnli ire.
                  Therfore thy woord I love: in love, yet quake with fear,
                  When iudgements thyn I vieu; yea hair dire horrours rear.
               
            
            
               HAIIN.
               
                  IRIGHT and iust have wrought; thy law hath been my guid.
                  Abandon then me not t'uniust oppressing pride.
                  But intercede with help, my sureti' and witnes true:
                  And failing eys with strength of rightĕous speach renue.
                  Thy servant, I: deer Lord, thy servant not forsake:
                  Give sciĕnce, thy hests me teach; and to thy favour take.
               
               
                  THUS I thy will shal knowe. But time for thee, great Lord,
                  For thee to woork: whose laws, of lawles mynds abhord,
                  Quite now they would displace. I, Lord, so much the more
                  Bove finest gold them prize; thee fountain iust adore;
                  Their vertues high admire, in all things alwaies right:
                  And falshoods ways perverse all spurn with iust despite.
               
            
            
               
               PE.
               
                  SO mervĕilous shines thy woord, in powĕr, in wisdom high,
                  In goodnes; that my soule with wingd desire dooth fly,
                  And pant, it to attain. Lo then thy sacred light
                  I folo Lord with ioy: since understanding bright
                  Disclozĕd evĕn simple mynds it gives. Thow mee with grace
                  Aspect, as those who thee in highth of loves doe place.
               
               
                  AND first my steps so guid in path of heavĕnli woord,
                  That sins dark powĕr decay. Then mee with Iustice swoord
                  From mans oppression free: free man thy ways I'le trace:
                  O thow thy servant teach. And with thy gracious face
                  Cheer up my grieved eys: whence streaming tears doo thrill,
                  To see unthankful man neglect thy saving will.
               
            
            
               TZADE.
               
                  HIGH Iudge of worlds, from whom pure Iustice doun dooth flowe;
                  Whose law, worlds perfect rule; whose woord, hid trueth makes knowe;
                  And iudgements all are right: thou these with charge severe
                  Hast man enioind to keep: that mee griev'd zele dooth wear,
                  To see my foes forget thy speach proclaim'd above;
                  Thy speach, which pure as heavĕns, drawth up thy servants love.
               
               
                  I SMALL, and am despizĕd: thy precepts yet apply:
                  Which mirrour true of thee; which rule derivĕd from high
                  Of iustice firmly pitcht, of never changing right;
                  In toils, in grasping griefs, stil yield me sweet delight.
                  Sole thow my dazeling mynd, (pure lights eternal spring,)
                  Illuminate: which light shalt life eternal bring.
               
            
            
               KOPH.
               
                  PROSTRATE with ardent hart, with tear-distilling eys,
                  I call, I cry: ô thow who iust complaints despize
                  Nor doost, nor canst, thou hear; and save him, who thy hests,
                  And witnest will wil keep: if undefilĕd requests
                  Morns dawning oft; if oft my waking thoughts prevent
                  Nights watches, towărd thy woord, their hope, in muzing bent.
               
               
                  LO, fainting voice to thee my still unfainting hart
                  Sends up: send doun thy strength: and Prince of grace who art,
                  Revive me' as is thy wont. See, neer towărd me they draw,
                  Who mischief dire pursue; far they from (Lord) thy law.
                  But thou art neer: whose hests for never-changing trueth
                  Long since thy teaching woord assurĕd my learning youth.
               
            
            
               
               RESCH.
               
                  AT length let pityĭng ey respect afflicted wight.
                  And thow, mans hart who seest, art conscious of my right,
                  And pressing fo observĕst; plead thow my cause; and free
                  Soule cheered through thy woord, addicted whole to thee.
                  Thy mercies Lord are wide: yet far from godles crue;
                  Who seek not thee, nor way to bliss that leads pursue.
               
               
                  BUT mee thy doom revive: whom now persuing foes,
                  Not faithles to thy woord, with swarming troops encloze.
                  O grief! myn ey to see men break thy rightĕous law;
                  Despize celestiăl bliss: in lines of love which draw
                  Thy servants soule: see Lord; and quickĕn them with thy grace,
                  Who iust, eternal woord, trueths sum, with ioy embrace
               
            
            
               SCHIN.
               
                  VVITH causeles hate, ô Lord, and not unwronging swoord,
                  Have Princes mee persuĕd: yet aw of heavĕnli woord
                  My hart restraind from sin. O woord, whose ioys more draw,
                  My ly-detesting mynd, and mynd that loves thy law,
                  Then ioy which Princes gifts, or foes rich spoils can bring!
                  Sevĕn times yea daily I thy righteŏus iudgements sing.
               
               
                  IN throng of worldli waves, which sweet of life devour,
                  Their mynds stil calm abide, no scandal there hath powĕr,
                  Where love of thee directs. Lo then thy saving grace
                  My hoping eys attend: sole thow his love embrace,
                  Whose pure affection seeks thy pleasure to fulfill.
                  I fain not, Lord: my ways, yea hart, thou vieust at will.
               
            
            
               THAV.
               
                  THEN let at length approach, ô Lord, my fainting cry;
                  Vouchsafe my suit access: sole understanding I,
                  And riddance from my foes, (which promized hast,) require.
                  Thus taught thy will, and free; towărd thee my quick desire
                  Shal spring; my lips thy praise, glad tong thy woord shal sound,
                  Where trueth, where wisdom pure, where statutes iust abound.
               
               
                  LET then thy hand now help; if not with cold pursuit
                  Salvation thyn I seek. Vouchsafe me Lord this fruit
                  Of making thee my hope, thy law my choise delight;
                  O let my soule yet live, preserv'd from tyrants might;
                  And it shal praize thy name. Seek then thy straying sheep,
                  Who wandring now, as lost, yet strives thy law to keep.
               
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 122.
            
               King DAVID having reduced the three parts of Ierusalem, that of Iuda, that of Beniamin, and the Mount held by the Iebusites, into one entire Citi; and there in Sion seated the Ark of God: having also according to the Law, established there supreme Coorts iuridical, for administration of Iustice to all Gods people: taking a vieu of this woork performed by divine grace; and of the peoples alacriti in frequenting Gods service: he expresseth in this Psalm his religious ioy for the same: and blessing Ierusalem, and all them that bless hir; concludeth with a promise on his owne behalf, both for the peoples sake, (his brethren in race and religion,) and espeally for the Temples sake of God, to procure studiously the good of that chozen Citi.
            
            
               
                  MY longing hart deer ioy assaid,
               As gracious sound strook grateful ear:
               Religious mynds! Each neighbour praid,
               In Gods fair house let's all appear.
               
                  Ierusalem, our peaceful feet
               Now frequent in thy gates shal meet.
            
            
               
                  IERVSALEM, the earths delight;
               A Citie, three compact in one:
               To thee the Tribes, in legal rite,
               Gods chozen Tribes ascend alone.
               Sole here shines out heavĕns glorious King:
               Here Israel all his praises ring.
            
            
               RELIGION Iustice dooth embrace;
               Who doubled bliss through land derive:
               For iudgement thrones here hold their place;
               And wronged right with aid revive.
               Iudicial thrones, the Kingdoms powĕr;
               Of Davids croun most glorious flour.
            
            
               O THEN Ierusalem respect;
               Hir peace with vows to heavĕn commend.
               
                  Ierusalem! who thee affect,
               Them ioy, them bliss, stil prest attend.
               O peace ay in thy towĕrs reside:
               In houses plenti ay abide.
            
            
               I FOR my frends, my brethrens sake,
               Whom race, whom rites, in love combine;
               Shal alwaies pray; Earths peace partake;
               And heavĕns rich light upon thee shine.
               For Gods fair house, my ioy, I'le sure
               Stil studious, still thy good procure.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 128.
            
               The prosperous and happi estate, both publick and private, of the man, who fearing God, leadeth a life full of integriti.
            
            
               
                  OBLESSED they, whose humble harts
               True fear of powĕr divine endues:
               Religious soule, that ne're departs
               From way which blisful life renues.
            
            
               O BLESSED man! thy ioys abound:
               Thyn house thy cheerful hands shal rear:
               And labours iust, with blessing cround,
               Shal feeding fruit stil plenteŏus bear.
            
            
               THY wife, a vine on wall disspred,
               In fruitful love hast ioious met:
               Thy children sweet, in vertu bred,
               Fair olive plants, thy boord beset.
            
            
               LO thus Gods fear thus gracĕd shal bee:
               From Sion deer thee God shal bless:
               And quiet home shal plenti see;
               And life contented long possess.
            
            
               THAT all thy days delighted ey
               
                  Ierusalems great weal may vieu:
               And wasting life it self espy
               In childrens children to renue.
            
            
               O THANKFUL then Gods love alure;
               Stil rightĕous life with care maintain:
               So happi long maist thou endure;
               So peace with Isrăel long remain.
            
         
         
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            PSALM 130.
            
               The Psalmist in the continuance of som great publick calamiti, wherein he had his part, (not unlikeli in the wearisom captiviti of Babilon) sendeth up his humble cry
                     •…
                   unto almighti God, not to call their falts to a strict account, which the frailti of humane nature is not able to endure; but to express now at length that merci of his, which draweth men to fear and serve him with comfort. So professing his hope in God; and exercizing his patience in that hope; yet continuing still his fervent desire in this patience: he exhorteth all Israel to persevere in like attending trust, assuring them that God would redeem them from all their sins and afflictions.
               
            
            
               
                  OUT from the deep, to thee ô Lord I cry:
               From place far off; yet thow good Lord be nigh.
               Lord hear my voice, and with attentive ear
               Receive the plaints which humbled soule dooth rear.
            
            
               IF strictly Lord transgressions thou shalt ey;
               Lord who shal stand? in sad despair we dy.
               But Iustice thyn stil mercies thoughts displays:
               That Greatnes, fear; and Goodnes love may raize.
            
            
               WITH patiĕnce then on God my soule attend:
               (His woord, my trust:) Hee'le give thee ioyful end.
               As morning rays rere sentinal desires:
               So so, and more, towărd thee my soule aspires.
               And patiĕnt ô await him Isrăel deer:
               His great redemption now wil soon appear.
               He merci is: His merci from their thrall,
               Yea from their sins, shal ransom Isrăel all.
            
            
               
               TREBLE.
               
                  O
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   Ut from the deep, to thee, ô Lord, I
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   cry: From place far off; yet thow good Lord be nigh.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   Lord hear my voice, and with attentive ear Re-ceiue the
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   plaints, which humbled soule dooth rear. If strictly Lord transgres-
               But iustice thyn stil mer-
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   sions thou shalt ey; Lord, who shall stand? in sad
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   cies thoughts dis- plays: That great- nes, fear; and Gooddes
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   pair we dy.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   nes, love may raize.
            
            
               BASE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               MEANE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               COVNTERTENOR.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               TENOR.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               LUTE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 137.
            
               The people of Iuda, and especially the sacred Quires of the House of God, after that great overthrowe of Ierusalem and the Temple by the Chaldeans, beeing now in captiviti within the dominions of Babilon; and having carried their instruments of Music with them: are required in scorn by their insolent conquerers, to make them merri with som song of Sion. Which they refuzing to profane in that sort: make a vow, with execration against themselfs, if ought before Ierusalem, and hope of hir restauration, ascend at ani time to ani highth of ioy in their now most woful mynds. And conclude with betaking unto divine revenge, the insulting malice of the unnatural Edomites, and the cruelti of the Babilonians, in that heavi day of Ierusalem.
               
            
            
               
                  BY Babel streams, exil'd from Contri deer,
               As doun we sate, a sad dismaied crue;
               Ah, Sions wrongs to pensive mynds appear,
               
                  Sions, whom now our eys no more should vieu.
               Wee wept: and trees that saw our tears abound,
               Hang'd up those harps which wont our ioys resound.
            
            
               THEN scornful Lords, who Sions towrs had fir'd,
               Gods Temple raz'd, and vs to thraldom seaz'd;
               In anguish, mirth; in tears, a song requir'd;
               And with som Hymn of Sion must be pleaz'd.
               Should hymns divine to ears profane be song?
               Can Sions Psalms to Babels coasts belong?
            
            
               O SION fair! and Gods elected seat,
               (Where envi earst, but piti now may ground;)
               
                  Ierusalem! If thee I e're forget,
               If in my ioys thow chiefest be not found:
               Let parched tong to withĕring palat growe;
               And skilful hand no more his science knowe.
            
            
               BUT thow, ô Lord, whose right-esteeming ey
               
                  Ierusalems last traveils did behold;
               Let Edoms malice never covĕred ly,
               Which cruel mouths did strangely then unfold.
               Their cursed cry record in heavĕnli ear;
               
                  Raze, raze hir clean; till loweëst stone appear.
               
            
            
               AND Babel, thow, who Sions bane hast wrought;
               Ne sacred Temple spar'dst with fire to burn;
               Shalt see thy self to same destructiŏn brought;
               And blessed they, who thee the like return.
               Yea blessed they, who take thy cursed seed,
               With dasht-out brains the crying stones to feed.
            
            
               
               TREBLE.
               
                  B
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   Y Babel streams, exil'd from
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   contri dear, As doun we sate, a sad dismai- ed crue; Ah
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  Sions wrongs to pensive mynds ap-pear; Sions, whom now our eys no
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   more should vieu. Wee wept: and trees that saw our tears a-
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   bound, Hang'd vp those harps which wont our ioys re- sound.
            
            
               BASE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               MEANE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               COVNTERTENOR.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               TENOR.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               LUTE.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 139.
            
               
                  DAVID in this divine meditation, addressed to God, acknowelegeth at large Gods knowelege of all things, even before they have beeing; and in particular of all the thoughts and ways of man: rendreth a reason of this Omniscience, from the creation of all, and particularly from the merveilous fabric of man: which ravisheth his mynd into such admiration, that breaking into most affectionate praises of the manifold woorks and ways of God; he professeth also that his thoughts are no sooner after sleep awakened but they first are seazoned with this sweet contemplation. Contrarily falling into extreme detestation yea and imprecation against those wicked ones, who blasphemous toward God, vainly extol Gods enimies: he concludeth with fervent praier, that himself may be purified by the grace of God, & so conducted through the ways of this world, as to attain finally his everlasting rest.
            
            
               
                  ETERNAL Light; gainst whose al-seeing ey,
               Mans thoughts, his cares, and ways, doo all transparent ly:
               Lo here my soule; which thow with piercing vieu,
               Hast searched, and doost knowe; so livĕst hir witnes true.
               Great Iudge of harts; who secret pleights unfold'st;
               Who past with future things all present ay behold'st:
               Thow knowĕst my coorse, when doun I sit, when rize;
               Yea thoughts unborn far off thy foresight strange descrys.
            
            
               BY day my walks, at night my silent rest
               Thow doost envĭron, with skill to all my paths addrest.
               Observĕst my tong: no woord unwaigh'd doost leve:
               Yea, lips ere woords produce, or thoughts hid speach conceve.
               And grasp'st me so with thy al-guiding hand,
               Behynd, before, as prest at pleasure thyn to stand.
               Science profound; of strange transcending law!
               That man nor it can sound, nor self from it withdraw.
            
            
               FOR whether go, how should I bend my flight,
               Thy spirit Lord to balk, or cloud me from thy sight?
               If sore towărd heavĕns; in heavĕn thy throne resides:
               If flag longst earth; lo earth thy footstool lowe abides:
               If stoop to hell, and iaws which gastly gape;
               Nor hell thy vieu, nor feends thy thundring stroke escape.
               If Eastern steeds, and Mornings crimson wings
               I timely mount, which round to utmost Ocĕan brings;
               Thou Easts great coorse, and Morns fair wings doost guid;
               Nor utmost Ocĕans gulfs from thyn aspect can hide.
            
            
               PERHAPS might say, yet darknes mee may hele;
               Shee with hir sable robe from searchingst ey concele.
               And canst once think, weak shade which Sun dispels,
               Should Light of lights eclipse, who thousand Suns excels?
               Fond, base conceipt! To thee, ô Light divine,
               Both dark and bright are like; grim night as day dooth shine.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               
                  FOR iust and right, that thou Creatour high,
               Who all hast framĕd, thy frame shouldst naked all descry:
               And who my hart, my reins in womb didst form;
               With lims support; attire with skin, with sence adorn;
               Shouldst hart and thoughts, shouldst sence and ways posses.
               Stupendious woork! which ay great Architect shal bless.
               A little world; yet world of wonders great:
               Which well my mynd conceipts, and tong of it shal treat.
            
            
               MY bones in weak, in place obscure my sight,
               In earth beneath my mynd, fair spark of heavĕnli light,
               Thou didst produce: embroidĕring evĕrie part
               With woork so rare, that use with beauti strives in art.
               And dout we yet if thow thy woork didst knowe?
               Or can our tongs forbear thy glorious praise to shewe?
               Yea, tender mass, while formles it remaind,
               And day by day nue shape through vertu thyn aggaind:
               Thyn ey saw all, enrold in book divine;
               Where all thy woorks to com, as present, cleerly shine.
            
            
               BE blest, great Lord: thy wisdoms beautĕous ways
               How precious, deerly sweet, to thee my soule doo raize?
               In skill, mans wit; in count, they pass the sands:
               That still my wakened mynd, with thee first present stands;
               Admiring all thy woorks. O righteous King;
               At length then pleaze thy world 
                     •…
                  o first estate to bring.
               Extermin race defil'd. Ye men of bloud,
               Whose base flagitious mynds despize th'eternal Good;
               Who grace his foes; of him profanely prate;
               Avant from mee; your selfs, and damned ways I hate.
            
            
               AH sovĕrain Iudge, to thee my soule appeals,
               My witnes true; whose spir̆it mans secretst thoughts reveals.
               That love of thee, gainst them griev'd hatred breeds,
               Whose venŏmous hate gainst thee breaks out in hostile deeds.
               Thy foes are myn: with them I leaug forsake:
               And firm in perfect hate to vengeance iust betake.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               THEN thow, my Lord, to whom I stand, or fall;
               Who rightĕous mynds approov'st, yet none canst perfect call:
               Revieu my hart, explore my thoughts again;
               And waigh what grieving coorse dooth in my life remain.
               
                  
                     〈☐〉
                   Refine my soule: purge out corrupted vse:
               And safe through worldli waves to thy sweet rest conduce.
               
                  
                     〈☐〉
                  :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 141.
            
               This Psalm of DAVID seemeth by the matter thereof to have been made, upon som occasion of an accident hapned out in Sauls third expedition against David: when persuing him with three thousand of his choisest men up in the rocks of Engedi: and having there withdrawn himself a side into a cave, he had a skirt of his robe secretly cut off by David, without offer of ani violence to his person. At which time Saul in shew reconciling himself to righteous David, yet afterward renued sharp persuit against him: hoping (how vainly, and from how blynd desire?) at som time or other to effect his destruction, whom God had declared successour in the kingdom. David therfore in this Psalm, prezenting his humble praiers as a sacrifice to Almighti God, beseecheth him to preserve him in woord thought and deed from sin: preferring the severe reproofs of a iust man, before the delicacies and pleasures of the wicked. Then closely intimating how kyndly he had dealt with Saul; and how cruelly he was requited: he praieth God to continue still his gracious protectour; and that the snares laid by his enimies, might entrap their owne gilti selfs, whilest he with his innocenci did happily escape them.
            
            
               
                  TO thee, ô Lord, to thee my humbled mynd,
               Hir humblest voice prezents: ô let me favour fynd:
               And hast my God; let ear benign be lent,
               To pitious cry, to suit, from grieffull hart upsent.
               O let my praiĕr, perfumĕd with heavĕnli grace,
               So stand, and sweetly smoke, before thy pleazed face;
               As incense pure midst holiĕst altars fire;
               And hands let stretcht, to thee like eevĕnings gift aspire.
            
            
               MY speach so, Lord, my thoughts, and deeds compoze,
               That nothing thee offend. A watch assign, to cloze
               My mouth on woords unmeet; the gate to heed,
               That two-leafd gate of lips, whence life and death proceed.
               Retire my hart from poizŏned baits of sin:
               Renforce my mynd, that no provokements mee may win,
               Untrue to thee, with men that mischief breed
               To ioin; their coorse to run; on dainties their to feed.
            
            
               LET iust mans zele me yea severely beat;
               I kyndnes shall it deem: let his religious heat
               Reproove my life; as precious balm, my head,
               Not break, it shall perfume: And thankful hart imbred,
               When change of times with sorroes him may press,
               For comfort his to thee shal fervent suit address.
               :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
            
            
               
                  NOW these mens Iudges, who with chozen bands
               My harmles life persue; withdrawn, were left in hands
               Of horrent rock: where terrour none from mee,
               But pleazing woords they heard, from dout their soules to free.
            
            
               BUT not they so requite. When wee again
               Into their claws are light, nought cruel they refrain.
               But as in woods, when stateli trees to ground
               Are hewĕd; the chips, and stics ly sparst on all sides round:
               So bones of men, devoured by their ire,
               At graves sad mouth ly strawd, and earths first womb dezire.
            
            
               NOW then, ô Lord, myn eys since look to thee;
               In thee I trust alone; and succour none else see;
               My God, my Lord; ô not my suit reiect;
               Nor bare my soule of shield that sole can it protect.
               My chased life from snaring net withdraw;
               Which men who love their lusts, not love thy sacred law,
               For it have pitcht: destroy deceiptful grin,
               Which men compact of fraud have set t'entrap me in.
            
            
               AND thow iust Iudge, whose ey our mortal ways
               With right esteem beholds; and snare with snare repays;
               Let impious heads owne tangling nets infold:
               While I with myn break through, of thee who safeti hold.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 145.
            
               King DAVID now flourishing as it seemeth with prosperiti, applieth most woorthily his thankful soule to sound out the high praises of the Author thereof. He celebrateth therfore most excellently in this Psalm, the incomprehensible Greatnes, and glorious Maiesti of the Eternal King. Then he singeth Gods Goodnes, his Iustice, and Merci, embracing all his woorks with all favorable benigniti. All which therfore he exciteth to return praise to their Lord and Maker: And chiefly the true servants and Saints of God, that by their menes the glori of the kingdom of God, may be made knowne over all the world. Himself then in example, describeth the boundles extent and amplitude of Gods everlasting kingdom: his assistance where need is: his fatherls providence, ministring food duely to all things whose lifes are therby susteined: his iustice, and holines, in all his ways and actions; especially in his gracious attentivenes to the iust petitions of his servants, ever saving all those that love him; as contrarily in his provoked severitie toward the wicked, retributing to them their iust and deserved destruction. For which he inviteth all men to ioin with him in ever praizing God.
            
            
               
                  GREAT Lord, my God, and glorious King;
               My soule triumphs thy bliss to sing:
               While heavĕns shal last, with grateful praise
               Bove heavĕn of heavĕns thy name I'le raize.
               When Sun with Eastern rays up-springs;
               And when doun West his flames he brings;
               In toils of day, at nightli rest,
               Ay praiz'd, and ay shalt thow be blest.
            
            
               THY Greatnes first my mynd admires;
               (Whose right like praises great requires;)
               Thy boundles beĕing: which gulf to thought,
               In bounds each creature fit hath wrought.
               Thy woorks each age with praise recounts;
               And powĕr, which puĭsance all surmounts:
               And I, with wondrous acts, that light
               Of glorious state will glad indite.
               They prowĕs and valures strange confess:
               I beautĕous Maiĕsti would express.
            
            
               THY Goodnes next prezents sweet vieu:
               Where bounties rich stil gifts renue.
               Glad hands receive: and thankful tongs
               Shal sound what praise such grace belongs.
               Here who thy Iustice can forget;
               Where hymns, where ioys are sweetly met:
               Thy iustice fair, with merci cround;
               Of glorious bliss th'al-gracious ground?
            
            
               O LORD benign, of best desires,
               To piti▪ ay prone, unprone to ires,
               
                  Towărd all, thou good, thou full of grace;
               Thy Mercies all thy woorks embrace.
            
            
               THERFORE Great Sire, shal all thy woorks,
               In heavĕn what shines, midst earth what lurks,
               What e're disperst through worlds great frame,
               Ay blaze, ay bless thy gracious name.
            
            
               THEY chief, who deer of thee esteemd,
               Live Saints on earth, from earth redeemd:
               Thy kingdoms glories they shal teach;
               Thy peerles strength they fearles preach.
               That powĕr magnĭficent, bliss divine,
               And beauties there which glorious shine,
               May sons of men, to all made knowne,
               All win to love and serve thy throne.
            
            
               THY Kingdom, Lord, nought Kingles leves;
               Nor mĕsure of things, nor times receives:
               Dominĭon boundles; evĕri place,
               Each time, all things, dooth round embrace.
               Here reigns our Lord, our bliss to breed;
               Stil true of woord, stil iust of deed:
               Who gracious, fallen man erects;
               The sliding stays, the staid protects.
            
            
               HERE eys of all thy care attend;
               Thy care, due food which still dooth send:
               Thou plentĕous hand o're world doost spred;
               Whence each thing livĭng rests largely fed.
               Thus all thy pleasure, Lord, partake;
               Thy pleasure, still to good awake:
               In righteŏus ways thus ay doost raign;
               Ay kynd in all thy woorks remain.
            
            
               AND lastly, Lord, thou dwellĕst on high;
               Yet still to iust requests art nigh:
               Thy servants suits fynd gracious ear;
               Their safeti shewth thy aid is neer.
               For impious race wilt all destroy:
               And all who love thee seat in ioy.
               Wherfore my mouth incessant praise
               To thee shal pour: and all my days
               My tong excite all humane flesh
               Ay ay that sacred name to bless.
            
         
         
            
            PSALM 146.
            
               The Psalmist 
                     •…
                  owing perpetual praises to God, advizeth not to fix our trusts or hopes on perishing Princes; but upon the unchanging trueth and fideliti of God, the Creatour of all things: who is the Protectour and reliever of all that are in distress; the overthrower of the wicked with all their ways and counseils; and the King of his Church for ever.
            
            ALLELV-IA.
            
               
                  MY soule, with ioy thy self address,
               The mighti Lord, thy God to praize:
               My tong his sacred name shal bless;
               My hart towărd him I'le alway raize.
               While life dooth last, the glorious King,
               Yea whilĕst I am, his praise I'le sing.
            
            
               NO Towĕrs of hopes on Princes raize.
               What aid can mortal man perform?
               Whose breath departs; and ended days
               From dust derivĕd to dust return.
               His thoughts and proiects dy withall:
               Your towring hopes to ground doo fall.
            
            
               BUT blessed they who chooze his name,
               Whose hopes and helps with him abide,
               Who heavĕns and earth and seas did frame,
               And world of gests which there reside.
               His thoughts no wavĕring can assail:
               His woords are deeds, and never fail.
            
            
               THEN thee our Lord and God we sing;
               Thow Iacobs God stil blessed bee:
               Who iustice to the wrong'd doost bring;
               The hungri feed, the prisoner free.
               Who blynd with ioious fight doost cheer;
               And curbed lims doost upright rear.
            
            
               THE iust he loves; the stranger gards;
               He wido shields, and orphane guids:
               But mischief dire iust wrath awards
               To wretch who rightĕous way derides.
               The Lord eternal King shal raign;
               And Sions God ay so remain.
               Allelu-ia.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE TABLE.
            
               PSALM. 1. O Blessed wight!
               
                  To the 12. tune. or to the 6.
               PSALM. 2. What graceles fears,
               
                  To the 2. tune.
               
               PSALM. 8. Eternal Lord,
               
                  The FIRST tune.
               
               PSALM. 15. Lord: who shal
               
                  To the 5. tune.
               
               PSALM. 16. Then thow preserve me,
               
                  The SECOND tune.
               
               PSALM. 17. High Iudge of world,
               
                  To the 8. tune.
               
               PSALM. 19. The Heavĕns declare
               
                  The THIRD tune.
               
               PSALM. 20. In day of troŭble,
               
                  To the 1. tune.
               
               PSALM. 21. The King (Lord)
               
                  The FOVRTH tune.
               
               PSALM. 22. My God, my God;
               
                  To the 11. tune.
               
               PSALM. 25. To thee his faithful soule
               
                  To the 2. tune.
               
               PSALM. 32. The blessed man!
               
                  To the 5. tune.
               
               PSALM. 34. The Lord for evĕr
               
                  To the 3. tune:
               
               PSALM. 36. The bestial mynd,
               
                  To the 3. tune.
               
               PSALM. 37. Let not unpleazing vieu
               
                  To the 2. tune.
               
               PSALM. 40. Long patiĕnt hope
               
                  To the 11. tune.
               
               PSALM. 42. As chased Hart,
               
                  The FIFT tune.
               
               PSALM. 44. Our pleazed ears,
               
                  To the 12. tune.
               
               PSALM. 45. A noble act,
               
                  To the 9. tune.
               
               PSALM. 49. Ye sons of men,
               
                  To the 7. tune.
               
               PSALM. 50. The mighti God,
               
                  To the 3. tune.
               
               PSALM. 51. My sinful soule,
               
                  To the 11. tune.
               
               PSALM. 67. Be gracious, Lord,
               
                  To the 4. tune.
               
               PSALM. 68. Let pleaze our God
               
                  To the 7. tune.
               
               PSALM. 69. Help Lord, and save,
               
                  To the 11, tune.
               
               PSALM. 73. Yet surely God
               
                  To the 5. tune.
               
               PSALM. 79. The Hĕthen, ô God,
               
                  To the 5. tune.
               
               PSALM. 82. The soverain Lord,
               
                  To the 12. tune.
               
               PSALM. 84. The fair aspect
               
                  The SIXT tune.
               
               PSALM. 90. In pilgrim life,
               
                  The SEVENTH tune.
               
               PSALM. 92. A good, a gracious act
               
                  To the 9. tune.
               
               PSALM. 94. Avenger great,
               
                  The EIGHT tune.
               
               PSALM. 100. With raized voice,
               
                  To the 4. tune.
               
               PSALM. 101. Of Iudgements, Lord,
               
                  To the 10. tune.
               
               PSALM. 103. Pure light of soule,
               
                  The NINTH tune▪
                  
               
               PSALM. 104. Magnănimous,
               
                  To the 3. tune,
               
               PSALM. 107. Ye woorthi mynds,
               
                  To the 8. tune.
               
               PSALM. 110. The Lord said
               
                  To the 7. tune.
               
               PSALM. 111. My hart dooth
               
                  To the 1. tune.
               
               PSALM. 112. O happi man;
               
                  The TENTH tune.
               
               
                  PSALM. 118. Sing, ô, sound out
               
                  To the 1. tune.
               
               PSALM. 119. O blessed they; who men
               
                  To the 2. tune.
               
               PSALM. 122. My longing hart.
               
                  To the 4. tune.
               
               PSALM. 128. O blessed they, whose
               
                  To the 10. tune.
               
               PSALM. 130. Out from the deep
               
                  The ELEVENTH tune.
               
               PSALM. 137. By Babel streams,
               
                  The TWELVTH tune.
               
               PSALM. 139. Eternal light,
               
                  To the 8. tune.
               
               PSALM. 141. To thee, ô Lord,
               
                  To the 8. tune.
               
               PSALM. 145. Great Lord, my God,
               
                  To the 1. tune.
               
               PSALM. 146. My soule, with ioy
               
                  To the 4. tune.
               
            
         
         
            
               THE Music beeing applied (as was sit) to serve the matter; and the matter beeing divided into his seueral parts by beginning with a woord in Capital Letters: it foloeth that in the same place the Music dooth also begin again. Howbeit where the length of Music did conveniently extend it selfe to two branches of matter, by reason of their breviti: it is signified in the margent by this mark {. Where a branch of matter continueth on beyond the length of the Music, whereby som strains of the Music are to be repeated: the verses on which that repetition dooth fall, are noted by a mark of the same fashion, but larger size. And lastly, where the matter ends before the Music, it is expressed by these prict lines 
                     〈☐〉
                   at which the Music is to break off: and beginneth (as from the head) at the verse ensuing. And it hath been so provided in composing the Music, that the same may be doon without disgrace vnto it. Som other small varieties are not difficult to be perceived.
            
         
         
            Falts escaped.
            
               PAge 2. line 15. perplex, read perplex. l. 19. thee, r. thee. p. 3. l. 26. renound r. renoumd p. 9. l. 13. plaugs r. plagues p. 26. l. 6. Inone r. I none l. 36. malfactours; r. malfactours p. 27. l. 35. run: r. run. p. 28. l. 16. embrace, r. embrace. p. 32. l. 32. dicharge r. discharge p. 33. l. 13. deprives, r. depriues: p. 35. l. 7. I'TS r. IT'S p. 37. l. 12. gracĕd. r. gracĕd, l. 19. which r. with p. 38. l. 4. Entresured r. Entreasŭred. p. 39. l. 25. SEE r. SEE, l. 27. fals r. fals, l. 43. fynd r. fynd, p. 40. l. 2. stream r. streams. p. 44. l. 11. razch'd r. rach'd l. 31. beloved r. belovĕd p. 46. l. 9. frame. r. frame: p. 51. l. 19. extends r. extends. p. 54. l. 23. depend r. depend, p. 55. l. 33. embrue. r. embrue, p. 60. l. 31 hs. r. his p. 65. l. 32. swell r. swell. p. 70. l. 29. evĕn r. eevĕn p. 76. l. 18. fadom r. fathom p. 77. l. 18. Earth r. Earths p. 80. l. 1. shal wicked r. Shal wicked p. 92. l. 27. glori r. glori' p. 108. l. 5. O blessed r. O BLESSED l. 11. Hee r. HEE p. 111. l. 38. perfue r. pursue p. 113. l. 20. draw r. draw. p. 122. l. 3. des pair r. des- pair p. 125. l. 36. brought; r. brought: p. 131. l. 30. reveals. r. reveals:
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   