
      
         
            
            
            THE Quintesence of Wit, being A corrant comfort of conceites maximies, and poleticke deuises, selected and gathered together by Francisco Sansouino. Wherin is set foorth sundrye excellent and wise sentences, worthie to be regarded and followed.
            Translated out of the Italian tung, and put into English for the benefit of all those that please to read and vnderstand the works and worth of a worthy writer.
            AT LONDON Printed by Edward Allde, dwelling without Cripple-gate at the signe of the gilded Cuppe. Octobris. 28. 1590.
         
         
            
            
            ¶ To the right Worshipfull Maister Robert Cicell Esquire, one of the Sonnes of the right honorable the Lord high treasurer of England.
            
            
               
                  IN reading and reuiewing the manifolde discourses and famous works of sundry worthie writers, (right Worshipfull) some translated out of French, Italian, and some reduced into our English tung, by learned Latinestes and Grecians, (whose studies and labours benefites a multitude) I happened on a book written to Rodolphus the second, (a mighty, graue and wise Emperour) which book treated on so many matters, and touched with quick conceites and sentences, such a number of rare arguments and politicke deuises, that it seemed not only a register of wit, but a naturall quintesence of knowledge, gathered and collected out of the highest and deuine spirites of Philosophie, the value and varietie of the worke is so excellent: that it argues of it selfe to be a rich store-house of precious compoundes, fraught and furnished full of deep insight and profound reasons. Then to hide or keep secret the same worke, were an vnpardonable error, and a wilfull offence and fault committed against the common societie of men, that dayly and hourely are nourished and fedde with the sweet and sugred taste of Histories, and vnderstanding of true nouelties, penned out with painefull studie, and printed to exercise wise iudgements with matters of great moment. So vnder your fauour good Sir, the hope of your  towardnes and good bringing vp, and the desire I suppose you haue to aduaunce learning and good letters, (the sensible sap of life) commaunds me by a bond of causes, to honor you with a work not only worthy the reading, but likewise worthie the noting and bearing in minde, a burthen so pleasant to embrace and delectable to carry in memory, as shall vnload and make light a heauie hart, and discharge a waighty imagination of disquiet thoughts. For the dissoluing of doubts, and discouering o
                  •
                secret sentences: breedes a lightsomnes in man, and puts away the wearines of time, and labour of the spirites, such care and foresight of our commoditie had our fore-fathers and auncient writers, that alwaies they filled the Printers shops full of great vollumes, and maintained the worldes knowledge with an innumerable number of bookes, and neuer in any age bookes were more sought for and better esteemed (if the authors therof be of sound iudgement) then in these our florishing daies, where flowing wittes abound and reapes the reward of well dooing and vertuous disposition. The praise, preferments, great fame and good fortunes they haue found: is such a gazing glasse to looke in, that thousands therby seek after vertue and learning, to shun the rebuke of vicious idlenes and sloath, none more disliked then ignorant Idiots, nor more admired then the worthie wits of our world. Who is not abashed to follow a painted shadowe? and who takes not great glorye to waite where some substance is looked for? though the wise for their wisedome are enuied of the foolish, yet the fond for their folly are derided and pointed at by all kinde of people, wisdome is honoured in his meanest attire, and fondnes is but scorned in his brauest garments, the bare presentation of the honorable, brings gladnes to the beholders, and the proud pomp of the vain-glorious, are both irckesome and disdained, golde is more made off for his goodnes then his cullour, and men look more into the perfectnes of things then to the outward apparance, this book though it be printed in common paper, yet was it not penned in ordinarye discourses, it spreadeth it self like a tree that hath many braunches, whereon some bowe is greater then another, and yet the  fruit of them all are alike in taste, because no soure crabbes were graffed where sweet Apples should growe, nor no bitter Oranges can be gathered where sweet Powngarnets are planted, the excellency of this fruit, must be sencibly felt and tasted with a well seasoned minde and iudgement, and the delicatenes therof must be chewed and chawed with a chosen and speciall spirite of vnderstanding, not greedily mumbled vp and eaten as a wanton eates Peares that neuer were pared. Philosophie and farre fetched knowledge may not be handled and entertained like a Canterbury tale, nor vsed like a riding rime of sir Topas, (this spoken to the generall iudgements of men) for I know to whose hands this woork is commended, and I doubt not the vsage therof, because I see some good sparkes of a noble Father, shining in the eyes of a happie Sonne, wherefore this booke needes not feare (as I hope and beleeue) who barketh against it, nor the writer thereof (if he were aliue) neeeds not to doubt who looketh on his labours, for generally and absolutely (in a most louing phrase and manner) he bountifully hath imparted his secrets te a multitude, and bestowed a great deale of thankeful paines on the wise, if the worlde be not ingrate and forgetfull of a good turn offred, he setteth foorth to sale, no speeches farssed full of fables, but presenteth to our viewe (in an open manner) heapes of hidden secrets, that none but noble and venerable aucthors did euer open before, and in a manner leaues neither peace, warre, pollicy, practice nor any thing vntouched, that is fit for a publike state or common weale to knowe, his golden booke beautified with a thousand graces, is translated out of the Italian tung, though not in such beauty as becomes the grauitie thereof, yet stripped gentlye out of his gaye garments, it is clothed and plainely apparelled in such comely weeds and cleane roabes, as euery parte and proportion of the booke may easily be seene and well perceiued, and albeit that a fine Italian in an English groce gaberdine is not fashioned in all formes to please euery strangers fancye, yet the personage may be passable when all comelines is vsed for the setting forth of the same. Thus presuming that Francis Sanssouino is no whit  disfigured to walke openly in such English habit as is found fitte for him (crauing fauour that he may speak his owne minde) I hope you of curtesie will let him passe through our Countrey, that all kinde of people may see and heare what opinion he was of, in matters of state and mighty affaires of this worlde, the booke is dedicated vnto you, for many good considerations, one is that by your meanes a second life may be breathed into Sansouinoes collections through your good liking, and being reuiued (or awakened out of a long sleep) when it lay dead from our common knowledge, it may shewe some such singular spirit: as shall reioice both men of greatest capacitie and meanest iudgements, so committing the worthines of the matter to your censure and protection, (alwaies hoping my good will and good meaning shall be well accepted) I take my leaue, leauing you to the blessing of God, and to iudge fauourably of my boldenes, and wishing you encrease of woorship and credit, euen such as your selfe can desire.
            
               
                  Yours at commaundement in that he may. Robert Hichcock.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Francisco Sansouino to the Emperour Rodolph the second.
            MOst happie and fortunate Emperour, there is nothing more necessary for a Prince in this world thē Histories, for so much as being the mirrours & maisters of our life: they shew and teach vs what the gouernment of a cittie and Prouince ought to be, what lawes we ought to institute & cause our subiects to obserue, in what manner to increase & maintain diuine worships, in what sort to exercise morall vertues, and how to reape benefit of counsell in our affaires of importance: heerof it came to passe, that histories were called of wise men most noble, for their antiquitie, for so much as by them we receiue the creation of this huge worlde, and the originall of mans generation. For their perpetuitie: because they haue endured with the world, and shall continually endure, alwaies writing vp humaine Actions, for the benefit of our posteritie. For their dignitie: in respect they befit to be read and known, as the proper art and science of Emperours, of Kings, of common weales, and of great Lords and captaines, for their generalities: considering that in histories we finde written, in euery tung, in euerie Prouince, and in euerie age, those things that haue falne out either well or euil. For their iustice: because they do honour and dishonour, whosoeuer doth merite & deserue the same: giuing due praise to the excellencie of vertue & valour, and dispraise to the vile filth of vice and idlenes. For their subiect: for that they do entreate of great things, the acts of great men which they haue accomplished to the intent to enlarge, to preserue, and to sway rule. For their end: because the same is no other, thē to sacrifice trueth to eternitie. For their profit: for the making vs to beholde thinges past, we may prudentlye by their meanes foresee that which is to come, and therfore it came to passe in former & auncient time, many excellent Princes and Emperours not content with the glory they had gotten through their wise and valiant acts: did greatlye desire also to ioyne vnto their name this other glory, that is: eloquently to haue written histories, as did Augustus, after him Adrianus, and finally Gordianus the predecessours of your Maiestie. To this therfore hauing applied my studie, not to obserue onely what the cuntries, the mountaines, and  the riuers and flouds of this world are, or to haue knowledge, how embassages were sent, of Parlaments, of the managing and handling of affaires, or to vnderstand the voyages of armies, their order in ranging battailes, their encamping, their Stratagems, their beseegings, their expugnations & their victories, but rather to drawe and suck out of all these particular things, the sap, the sweete and marrow, reducing them into precepts, for the commoditie of great persons, that being otherwise busied, neither haue they time, neither can they well, continually apply thēselues in reading of histories, which was the onely motiue that made me take in hand this book, wherinto if any prince or gouernour will looke, he may (as though it were in a bright christal glasse) incontinently beholde the substance that fully is contained, in the volumes of the most commendable auncient and moderne writers. And for so much as so worthie and noble food appertaines vnto Princes, and for that amongst Princes, your Emperiall Maiestie is of highest degree and dignitie: therfore comming toward your Maiestie with no lesse affection of minde, then that wherwithall I was enflamed, when I applyed my selfe about this profitable enterprise: I present the same most humbly at the feete of your Maiestie, to the intent, that with your sacred name, due & perfect honor may be giuen to this worke, since it shalbe vnder the protection of your Emperiall maiestie, who carying in his noble person, the greatnes and felicity of so many famous Emperours and Heroes, of that worthie house of Austridge, which through a long course of worlds, haue gouerned and shall gouern heerafter the sacred Empire, who being no lesse benigne and affable, then high in blood and honour▪ I assure my self, that he will not disdaine to look vpon the same, for although it be little in quantity, yet notwithstanding it is very great in qualitie, since it containes in it self a Quintesence of those thinges that haue been written for the profit and commoditie of men, gouernours and Princes. Venice the 24. of February. 1578.
            
               
                  The most humble and dutifull seruant of your Emperiall Maiestie, Francisco Sansouino.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The Author to the Reader.
            I Could imparte vnto you many thinges touching this my present trauaile, excusing my selfe, for that I haue not called the same rather experiments, aduertisements, maximies, axiomies, precepts or sentē
               ces, thē cōceits: And therin to haue entermixt some morall and priuat matters, if I had not been assured that I should not preuaile. For I know very wel, that it is almost a general rule (by that I haue obserued in things past) that euery writer what good intent soeuer hath moued him, or what trauail soeuer he hath endured for the vniuersall profit of all, yet is he euer taxed of criticall persons: forsomuch as our tunges being moued and stirred through enuie or hate, or through a certaine corruption which is brought in amongst vs, not to haue any taste but onely in our own proper matters we are much more easie drawne to speak euill, then the wisedome of him that is moued, is prompt and readie to doo well. Therfore referring all my excuses to your vpright iudgement (when it is not driuen forward with any passion) I will onely say this that I holde for a certain, that this worke howsoeuer it be, will be of great helpe and aide to those that be studious, for that I imagine, it will enriche the priuat discourses, and the publicke actions of those that shall chaunce at any time to vse and handle these conceits in humain actions, which almost haue been euer the selfe-same in all times and amongst all men: and for that in the working and negotiating of affaires, as wel in publick as in priuat, they will minister vnto them many conditions and partes, the which conceites although they be somewhat generall, yet neuerthelesse they will giue no  small light partitie: how to knowe the partes and conditions of greatest aduauntage in particular things, as well of publicke actions, as of priuate affaires. And although these accidents, which doo at vnawares chaunce vnto men in their affaires, and vpon the deed dooing, are so many and so vnknowen, that they cannot be comprehended within the compasse of precepts: therefore some vulgare persons do reprehend the studie of them: neuerthelesse, for that I presuppose I shal helpe and yeeld aide to men of accomplishment, as my intent was, when I tooke this matter first in hand, drawing the substance (the finall end of this studie) foorth of histories, therby to take away from others, the length, tediousnes of reading and toyling themselues: I perswade my selfe, that although all accidents cannot be brought vnder precepts, yet that man that hath any meane assistance of diligence, & that in working & perfourming of thē, he be not moued nor altered more then is conuenient (either by his nature, or by any other newe accidents) to dispose otherwise then well and aptly these actions which he meanes to bring to an end; he by great reason may receiue many benefits and commodities, by hauing his minde fullye replenished with these aduertisements and conditions, which he in any parte hath exercised in other operations, or rather studiously read in some good and chosen writers, and stirred vp in his memory, only in this matter this hath been somewhat noisome vnto me: that I could not finde any full or perfect meanes (by reason of the varietie of the subiect) to put them vnder firme and infallible titles for your commodities: and although I haue oftentimes conferred this difficultie  with those excellent Gentlemen, Maister George Gradenigo and Maister Alui di Michele, as of great learning, who did enter into the same, and did discourse vpon it with great prudence, of Histreographie, and in matter of state, and of whom I haue receiued great counsell in this enterprise, neuertheles they could not resolue me according to my desire. And although the foresaid gentlemen put me in memorie, that it would do well if I did place them vnder six titles, vnder which are accustomed to light the consultations which are made in the counsels of common weales, and are drawn therinto by the lawgiuers, and wherof Aristotle writ in his Rethorick: although they did not immediatlye come vnto the same, but as it were in consequence: at any time when the vnderstander therof would apply thēselues to their places, neuertheles I did dispose my selfe to make the table heereunto annexed, as a thing more perfect, and perchaunce more easie and short: The which although vnto some it seemes not able to serue the turne, to finde out sufficiently the particulars of those conceites that are fit for him, or wherin he hath need about his affaires: neuertheles, it will shewe you a way how to attain to your intent, if not in all things, yet at the least in some parte. Receiue therfore with a beneuolent minde this my good wil, to the intent, that perceiuing your ametie, I may with a feruent desire, bring ende to the second and third book of conceits, which I still am about to gather.
            Farwell.
         
         
            
            The names of those Authors and writers, forth of whom the conceites of this present booke be gathered.
            IT would no doubt very much haue preuailed to those that are studious, that I should haue placed the names of the Authors at the foote of euery conceite, but for that it was not my meaning, when I first begun this worke, to publish the same, I did not remember in that my studie to vse the foresaide diligence. Therfore if any one will serue his turne with these conceites, he maye saye: to giue force to his reason, by alleadging some of these or such like woords, as wise men say, as antiquitie haue written, as prudent men declare, and such other manner of speaches, neuertheles, I assure ye, that when I returne againe to read ouer the same Authors, perchaunce in the second impression they shall be added according to your desires. Notwithstanding, I haue thought good to put in this place, the names of the writers, which I haue vsed in this my first book, and these be they that followe.
            
               
                  Aristotle.
               
               
                  Appian Alexandrine.
               
               
                  Ammiano Marcellino.
               
               
                  Antonie Gueuarra.
               
               
                  Bernard Iustinian.
               
               
                  Caesar the Emperour.
               
                  Cornelius Tacitus.
               
               
                  Cosmo Bartol.
               
               
                  Dione Casio.
               
               
                  Francisco Guiciardini.
               
               
                  Galeazzo Capello.
               
               
                  Giouanne dalla Casa.
               
               
                  Gabriello Fiamma.
               
               
                  Gian Battista pigna.
               
               
                  The historie of Florence.
               
                  The Historie of Naples.
               
                  Iosephus the Hebrewe.
               
                  Iustine.
               
               
                  Leonardo Aretino.
               
               
                  Marc. Antonio Sabellico.
               
               
                  Marcus Tullie Cicero.
               
               
                  Niceta Aconiate.
               
               
                  Philippe Argentone.
               
               
                  Polibius Historiens.
               
               
                  Plutarchus Cheronensis.
               
               
                  Paulus Emilius.
               
               
                  Pietro Bembo.
               
               
                  Paulus Iouius.
               
               
                  Plato.
               
               
                  Procepius.
               
               
                  Remigio the Florentine.
               
                  Salust.
               
               
                  Suetonius.
               
               
                  Thucidides.
               
               
                  Titus Liuius.
               
               
                  Zenophon.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Politick conceites and sentences, Gathered by M. Francisco Sansouino, out of the most famous writers in the Greek, Latin, and Italian tongues, to benefit those that commaund in matters of State and Ciuill gouernment.
            
               
               
                  IT is the wunted Nature of  men chéefelye to doubt those dangers that be nearest at hand, to estéeme more then is conuenient, those thinges that be present: and to haue in lesse account then they ought, those that be farre off: by reason that in these last we may hope for many remedies, by the meanes of Time and other sundry accidents.
            
                WHen we suspect our confederates or those yt we credit  & trust, it is requisite we excuse vnto them those things that be apparent, deny those that be doubtfull, and indeuour our selues with great diligence to mittigate the most mighty of them: and so by flatteryes and promises, please and assure sometimes one, sometimes an other, aswell to make them more negligent, as to hope, that by such sortes of practise they being seperated, there may growe and arise amongst them suspicion, breach & discord.
            
                THat curious prudence of minde, which ouerstrictly cōsiders & desiphers matters to come, is often discōmendable,  forsomuch as worldly affairs are subect to so many & so sundry accidents, that sildome times those things succéed,  which wise men haue imagined ought of necessitie to fall out. And therfore, he that dooth for-goe present benefites, for feare of future perrilles (when in such cases the danger is not most certain and neere at hand) plainely perceiues that he hath lost sundry occasions full of profit and glorye, for feare of those perilles which after fall out to be vaine.
            
                WHen a wise man for some occasion, is drawn by any person whosoeuer, to a iust disdaine and anger: yet ought he to moderate the same asmuch as he is able with his mature iudgement, hauing respect not to his perticular right and benefit: but to the profit and right of the common wealth: specially, if by his wrath and anger, he maye become hurtfull and domeageable to the gouernement and state.
            
                THe deliberations of Common-wealthes require no base and priuate respectes: neither that all things shall be referred to profitte, but to most magnanime and hautie endes, wherby their glorie may be augmented, and reputation kept: the which nothing dooth so much exstinguish and deface, then that men should enter into conceit, that they haue neither ye minde or power to perceiue and remember iniuries, neither to be prompt and ready to reuenge them. A thing chéefly necessarie for to perform thē, not so muche to take pleasure in reuenge, as that the punishment of those that offend: may be such an example to the rest, that they shall not dare to prouoke them againe. And so consequently it will come to passe that glory shall be lincked with vtilitie, and that those deliberations which proceede of generositie and magnanimitie, shall arise to be full of profite and commoditie.
            
               
               A Great power vnited wholy together, is much more to be feared, then the powers & forces of many yt are disseuered, the which as they haue sundry mouings and proceedings, so haue they seuerall & disagréeing operations.
            
                ALthough some hold for a maxime. That these cōmon-wealths which are not gouerned by one mans appetite  but by the consent of many, procéede with more moderation and with greater respects then a Prince can doo: neither doo so out of reason depart from that which hath some appearance of honesty, as oftentimes they doo, yet dooth it fall out to be a farre better gouernment when the common-wealth makes the bodie and the members, and the Prince the head, so that being incorporated together as one bodie, the dignitie, maiestie and state of the common-wealth, falles out to be of a farre greater perfection.
            
               
               A Wise man ought alwaies to draw commodities out of occasions, therfore a Prince should not cast away  the instruements of encrease, neither slack them when he hath the fauours of fortune propetious.
            
                COuncelles not well measured of Princes, are pernitious not onlye to themselues, but also to their people,  when as hauing only before their eyes, either vain errours, or present ambitions, not remembring the often change of fortune, and conuerting into damage the power of others, graunted them for common commoditie: they are made, either through want of prudence, or through ouer-great ambicion, the authors of new troubles.
            
                PRinces are to their great domage disceiued, when in making election of persons, vnto whome they commit  the execution of important affaires: they haue greater cō
               sideration to the fauour of them they choose, then to their valour and vertue.
            
                GReat Princes thinke themselues iniured when they are denied that thing they desire, and become displesed  against euery one, which followe not their willes, and that together with their fortune, doo not put forward to them, their owne proper fortune.
            
                SUch as the custome of Princes be, such likewise be the gouernment of their affaires. If the Prince be of small  discretion, and lesse estimation they runne into ruine. If good and valerous, they florish, for God doth prosper alwaies the good, and for the most part doth throwe downe  headlong those that b
                  •
                wicked.
            
               
               A New Empire not well ordered, nor prudently gouerned, doth rather burden then make more mighty him that hath gained it, besides that, no man hath at any time born himself well in gouerning a state which hath béene euill gotten.
            
                EUen as in the sustenance of the body, it is not only necessary  that the head be well and in good state, but also it is requisite that the other members do their duety, so it is not enough that a Prince be faultles, if his officers do not proportionally doo their dueties with diligence and vertue.
            
                THe nature of great Princes, cannot easily resist their appetites like priuate persons: for being accustomed  to be reuerenced, vnderstoode, and obeyed by signes, they become not onelye hautie and insolent, but also they cannot beare nor tollerate to be denied or not to obteine that which séemes iust vnto them: and in their sight that appeares iust which they desire, perswading themselues that they are able to smoothe and make easie all impediments, and to ouercome the nature of thinges, with one onelye woorde or looke.
            
                PRinces and common wealths ought to consider in  their enterprises, what difference is betwixt making warres against others, or exspecting that they come to be made against them: to practice and worke the deuision of an other mans state, or abide vntill his own be deuided: to be accompanied against one alone, or to remaine post alone against many that are knit in league togeather. And after the consideration héereof, to determine which will turne best to his particular profit.
            
                IT is a note of high prudence and reputation, in a great Prince, to procéed in such sorte in all his causes: that of the actions he workes, those that obey him haue not any cause to enter into suspect, either that he doth it cunningly to disceiue, or feinedly for some other sinister end.
            
               
               WHere many Princes that pretend to be equalles doo consort and kéepe company together, there dooth easilye  spring vp amongst them suspitions and contentions, by reason whereof, those enterprises which they haue begun with great reputation, doo fall into many difficulties, and finally become vaine.
            
                TO giue good hopes to augment as much as is possible  the fauours and reputations of an armye, with arte and with industrie: to remain ready to make agréements and concords according to occasions, are affaires fit to be perfourmed of a Prince.
            
                TO gouerne and raigne: dependes onely on fortune, but to be a King that doth preferre for his finall end,  the safetie and felicitie of his people: doth onlye depend of him selfe and of his proper vertue.
            
                IT appertains to wise Princes in their difficill and dangerous determinations, to approue for easie and plaucible  those that be necessary, or that are subiect to lesse difficulties and perilles then the rest.
            
                BY how much more a King is great and mightye, by so much more is it glorious for him to shewe his power,  for the maintaining of iustice & faith, nothing being more vnworthie for him, and for his 
                  •
               ommon-wealth, then to want and faile in faith.
            
                ALl people by nature imitate ye customes of their princes, and follow his footsteps, and according to his procéedings  doo either hate him or loue him: but when once he begins to be odious, whither his actions be good or bad, all things be accounted euill, but if once he haue begun to get the loue of them, euery thing how euill soeuer it be doon, is attributed to vertue: as though he would not goe about to doo euill, if he were not occasioned vpon some groū
               ded reason.
            
               
               A Prince in duetifull causes must hang in suspition and  reserue to himselfe so much as is possible, the meanes and facultie to take these deliberations, that by the procéeding  of generall and vniuersall causes, he dooth discern to be his best.
            
               
               A Prince can haue no greater felicitie, then that his deliberations  (wherof dooth arise his own greatnes and glory) may be accompanied with such consequences & circumstances, that they may appeare that they are doone, no lesse for an vniuersall safetie and benefite, then for the exaltation of the whole Christian Common-wealth.
            
                IT is the custome of Princes, artificiallye to entertaine one another, with vaine hopes and dissembling practises, besides that, they be couetous and greedy to embrace counterfeite cullours, to the intent they maye with more apparant honestie disturbe and vexe (although oftentimes wrongfully) the states and dominions of others. And if a man goe about to perswade them that which is good, he renues molestation and trauaile: but when he dooth flatter them, and dooth vse a contrarye course, he maye doo it without any trouble in the world.
            
                THe counsells of Captains oftentimes fall out to be full of fallacies, vnlesse they be fauoured by the force of fortune: And although they be diligent and prudent, yet for all that they become vnprofitable, when the execution of their enterprises, procéedes with negligence and imprudence.
            
               
               A Politick Generall and Captain, wil rather (to the intent he may with securitie obtaine the victorie) haue little or no respect to the length of the time, neither to the taking of too much toyle and trauaile, either to proceed in the spare of expences, without much prouision, rather thē by obteining glorye by ouercomming with facilitye and speed, to put in perill and hazard together with his armie, the euent of his quarrell and action.
            
                IT almost comes euer to passe through the corrupt iudgment  of men, that prodigalitie is more praised in a King (although thereunto rapine be annexed) then sparing ioyned to forbearing from other mens goods.
            
               
               NO sollicitations, no benefites, no knot of coniunction  is sufficient to remoue from the brest of Princes the smal confidence and mistrust they haue one with an other: and although it be fit and proper for them, alwaies to preferre in their deliberations, profit, and beneuolence, before hate and other couetous humours, yet neuerthelesse, it is the office and duety of a wise Prince, to the intent he may shame the greater, to imbrace for profitable, for good, and for the very best, the election of the lesse euill: neither ought he to frée him selfe from one perill, and one disorder, to run into an other, of more importance, and of greater infamie.
            
                HOnestye maye sometimes and in some respectes giue place to profit, rather then by maintaining with obstinate  pertenacie, the giuen faith to perseuer in molestations.
            
                Men kéep longer in memory an iniury, then a receiued benefite, for when they call to minde the benefite, in  their imagination they make it lesse then it is, reputing themselues to haue merited much more. The contrarye doth arise of iniuries, for it gréeues euery one more then of reason they ought to be agréeued: therefore where the bad estate and degree is alike, keep thee from doing those pleasures, which of necessitie worke displeasures to auoid losse and damage.
            
               
               A Tirant doth enforce himselfe to performe thrée things to maintain his estate, the first is to kéep down, and to  kéep the mindes of his citizens weak and feeble, for he that is of smal courage doth neuer rise vp against a tirant. The second is to procure that the most mightye Citizens doo liue in discorde amongst themselues, to the intent they shall not conspire against him, being vnited together. The third, is to kéepe them disarmed and in idlenes, for he that neither can nor knowes how to doo any thing: will not be enflamed, neither once enter into thought to assault him that is of great power.
            
               
               THat place is not called a Cittie, which hath a great  number of men to inhabite it, but rather that which is furnished with such Citizens which are of sufficiencye to liue well and happily, for Lordship and Signorie is maintained with prudence and with valour, and with him that is a good man, and a good gouernour: and good he cannot be vnlesse he be prudent.
            
                ALl these things for the which men do toyle themselues  in this world, are reduced and drawne into two heads and titles: that is to say, to profit, and to honor, vnder the title of profit is to be vnderstood all that which appertains to the body, vnder the title of honor: al that which belongs to the minde.
            
               
               A Prince ought to be graue, not in hautines of countenance,  but in the order of his life: gouerning him selfe moderately in all his affaires and actions, and obseruing those promises he hath made: let him be rather affraide not to doo euill, then that euill should be doon vnto him, and let him remember, that being a man as others are, he hath graunted him by God almost deuine power, to the intent he may place in his gouernment thinges that be iust and honest.
            
                THat Citizen that dooth begin to manage the affaires  of the Common-wealth, dooth liue according to the customes vsed of the other Citizens, and dooth accommodate himselfe to their nature, and with art and prudence doth leane to those things that are wonted to bring pleasures and delight to the people, and by the which they are accustomed to be taken into a snare, to the intent, that by so doing, gayning an opinion of valour and faith, he maye obtaine authoritie.
            
                THose that manage the affaires of a frée state: ought to  haue in minde two precepts of Plato, the one, that they defend and maintaine the profit of their Citizens in such sort, that whatsoeuer they doo may tend to that end, setting aside their own commodities: the other, that they  haue an eye to the whole body of the Common-wealth, to the intent, that whilste they haue care of one parte, they doo not abandon another: for euen as in the Tuter of a ward, so the gouernment of a Common-wealth is to be handled and ordered, to the benefite of those for whome it is committed and recommended, and not for thē to whom it is committed.
            
                IT is the proper charge of a Magistrate, to vnderstand that he carries vpon him, and dooth exercise the person  of the Cittie: and that he ought to maintain his decorum and his dignitie, to obserue the lawes, and to be mindefull of those things that are committed to his fidelitie, and not only to look into that which is doon, but also to prouide for that which ought to be doone, and to vse all possible indeuours to prouide that the Common-wealth after his death may be no lesse rightly administred, thē it is during the gouernment of his life.
            
                LIberty is nothing else but full power, to doo as a man will. And that man liues as he will, the which doth  follow those things that be right and well doon, and which dooth reioyce in him selfe to doo pleasures and benefites to others, and that in his liuing is aduised and prudent, and that dooth obey the lawes, not through feare, but doth honor and obserue them like others, and who neither dooth think nor doo any thing, but fréelye and with a good will, whose councelles and whose operations, doo arise and take end in him selfe, not hauing any thing that maye accomplish more in him then his will and his iudgement, and vnto which likewise fortune her selfe may giue place.
            
                THat warre is iust that is necessarye, and those armes  and weapons are godly and happye, in the which there resteth no other hope thē in the said weapons and armes. And that warre is iust which is commaunded of ye Prince, either in respect to recouer that which is lost, or to defend himselfe from other mens iniuries: but that is an vnhappy and wicked warre, in the which it is necessarye, that he

                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
                to liue in seruitude, since that amongst all worldly things the best is liberty: whose name is a note of vertue, as seruitude and bondage is a note of infelicitie.
            
                WHen a noble personage dooth degenerate from the vertuous actions of his predecessors, let him remember, that how much the more famous the life of his Auncestours hath been, so much more shamefull & slaunderous shal his be: forsomuch as the glorie of our fore-fathers, is as it were a light to those that discend from them, the which doth discouer thē to the eyes of others, that vertue or that vice which they haue.
            
                IT is a goodly thing in a victorious Prince, when as calling  him selfe to memory, he dooth rather goe about that which is worthie of him selfe, then that which he may with reason doo against his ouercome and vanquished enemy.
            
                HE dooth assuredlye liue and enioy a staide and perfect  minde, who being intentiue about any busines or action, doth procure himselfe a fame of woorthy Princes, of good art or letters.
            
                ALthough flatterie be reprehended of wise men, as a  wise contrary 
                  〈◊〉
                woorthy wit: yet did Cicero saye, it is necessary in the obtaining of office and gouernment in a free Common-wealth.
            
                THe life and behauiour of the people is corrupted by the customes of the Prince: who beholding his licentious lecherie, despise the merites of his chastetie, Indeuouring thēselues to imitate his vices, as most vertuous actions: for that it séemes vnto them that they cānot commend the deedes of their Prince, if they themselues doo not likewise practise and vse the same.
            
                IT is a manifest thing, that he that is mighty is alwaies  accompanied and followed with enuy, not of the least, for those cannot much harme him, but of his cōpetitoures, carriualles and his péeres: therefore to shun the same in my opinion, he should aduise himselfe well, if in matters  of importance he did vse that parte and meanes of procéeding, which dooth most asswage, and is contrarye to enuye.
            
                HE that is not altogether aleuated from peace, is neuer hindered or kept from making the same by multitude  of complaintes and damages, for so much as these differences and debates are cut off (although they be many) by the force and vertue of vpright iustice, or by means of recompencing, waying one iniurie with an other, or by counterpesing and ballancing this reason and right with that, or else (for a lesse domage, or to giue end to the greater trauailes or troubles) let the one yéelde vnto the other some parte of his right, as vnto these wise men by consideration of the importance or subiect of the cause, it shall séeme conuenient.
            
                IT is fitte for euery well gouerned Common-wealth, to take order that all the causes, or at least the greatest part  of them if it be possible, may be de
                  •
               i
                  •
               hered and discided by the lawes, rather then left to ye 
               
                  〈…〉
                of the Iudge: for there be very fewe to be found that haue good and mature vnderstanding, knowledge and abilitie, to minister and ordaine lawes, and to giue right iudgement in doubtfull causes: for so much as lawes through the long vse of thinges, and through many and sundry considerations, are brought to full perfection, but the iudgementes of man by his own nature, being apt to bende either to loue or hate: is corrupted, spoyled, and made partiall, vnlesse it be vnder propt with the strong piller of Lawe.
            
                THose which haue iudgement falling into consideration  of the riches and power of any other State, doo not meruaile, neither at their power, neither at their riches: but admiring the good forme of the order of the saide State, vnder which such power and riches dooth florishe, desire the good gouernment of their Common-wealth, by being and suffering their Prince: and be very vigilant to kéepe themselues from offending him at any time, neither  with déeds nor with woords, to the intent not to imitate him.
            
                AMongst the rest of these goods that fortune bestowes  vpon vs, he dooth gaine most worthy praise, that being rich doth not aspire to rule and Signorie: that is not insolent by reason of his money, that dooth not preferre himselfe before others arrogantly, and that doth behaue himselfe in such sort, that others may iudge, that that aboundance of riches haue giuen him meanes to become sober and modest, and not malepert and hawtie.
            
                EUery one knowes that those discordes which arise amongst the people, are occasioned by inequalitie of goods and riches: for those that be of meane estate would make thēselues equall with their betters, but those which spring vp amongst noble and great men, be occasioned by meanes of honours: for those ye be equalles would make themselues greater then the rest.
            
                MEn when they draw néere to their future mischéefes do principall 
                  〈◊〉
                their discourse, discretion and prudence with the which they might easily bring impediment and hinderance to their destinies.
            
                IT is a great impudence for a man to binde himselfe to a perpetuall perrill, vpon foundations not perpetuall: and through vncertaine hopes to begin an assured warre with an enemy more mighty then himselfe.
            
                NOthing is more necessarie in hard and difficult deliberations  then counsell, nothing on the other side more perillous then to demaund counsell: and it is no doubt, but that counsell is lesse necessary to prudent men, then to those that be imprudent: and yet notwithstanding those that be wise do reap much more profit by counsel thē the ignorant, for who is he yt is so perfect in prudence, that doth alwaies consider & know euery thing of himselfe, and in contrary reasons, doth euer discern and cull out the best parte? but what assurance hath he y• doth demaund counsell, to be faithfully counselled? forsomuch as he that dooth giue  counsell, if he be not very faithfull and much affectioned to him that doth demaund ye same: moued not only through notable respectes of profitte, but for euery small commoditie, or euerye light satisfaction: dooth oftentimes direct his counsell, to that ende that dooth turne most to his purpose, or that wherein he dooth take most pleasure, and therefore these ends and tearmes being for the most parte so much vnknowne to him that séekes for counsell, he dooth not remēber nor perceiue if he be not prudent, the infidelitie of the councell.
            
               
               A Prince that by the means of his embassadour would deceiue an other Prince, must first deceiue the Ambassadour,  to the intent that he may woorke and speake with greater efficacie, perswading himselfe and beléeuing that such is the mind
                  •
                of his prince, the which though he would not nor could not doo, if he did imagine himselfe to be a dissembler, and this practise euerye one dooth vse, that by the meanes of an other, would perswade that which is false vnto an other.
            
                IT is proper to fortune so often as 
                  ••
               ctorie is not made assured with moderation and prudence, to blot and stain  the glorie that is gained, with some thing vnlooked for: therfore it is not requisite in the managing of matters of moment, to suffer things to be carried away and marshald by chaunce.
            
                HE that will hang in suspence, and ballance thinges amongst Princes, and become a newter, it is necessary  for him very circumspectly to abstaine not only from déeds but from all those demonstrations that maye bring him into suspect of his greater inclination, more vnto one part then vnto an other.
            
                TO doo and not to doo an action although it seeme to bee of small effect, yet oftentimes there dooth  depend vppon the same moments of matter of importance: And therefore in the managing of thinges that be more profitable, he must alwaies be well aduertised,  and haue many good considerations.
            
                THe nature of the people is, to incline themselues to hope more then they ought: to be of lesse telleration, to take alwaies against hart thinges that be present, and to attribute vnto themselues not to desire and challenge that which they ought rather to attribute to their disabilitie: besides this, those that be fearefull, and which determine not to oppose themselues against perils, but to flie: fall to consolations, but to people that are warlicke and hardy: it appertaines to charge and to present themselues to the enemy, so soon as they haue had sight of him.
            
                AS there is no age which doth naturally more abhorre  infamie, and is more couetous of honor and prowesse then is youth: so there is no age that is so apt neither of more power and force to tollerate trauailes, to supporte discommodities, difficulties and wants, that of necessitie are suffered in warres. And if we doo rightlye enter into consideration of the matter, men doo not differ one from another, by reason 
                  〈◊〉
               : but through pollicie in wit, through quicknes in iudgement, through their study, their industrie, their experience, and their vertue.
            
                IT is follye to become angrye with those persons against  whome, by reason of their greatnes thou canst not hope to reuenge thy selfe, therefore if it seeme vnto thée that thou hast receiued iniurye at their handes, dissemble and suffer.
            
                IN matters of warfare, there springes vp from time to time, infinite varieties, therefore we must not put vpon vs ouer-great haughty hate for late prosperities, nor ouergreat abiect mindes, for aduerse calamities: for oftentimes there dooth arise mutations. Therefore héereby we must learne, that when occasion dooth present it selfe, let vs not lose or let slippe the same, for she is of small continuance.
            
                WE ought well to consider that, which the beginnings of things may be able to bring foorth, and to obserue  and beware at the first to giue place to vniust and pernitious demaundes: for so much, as when once any one hath obteined their desired things, they doo not deminish at all, but doo alwaies encrease our determinations and desires with a greater better will, and with greater conceites then before.
            
                HOw much more any accidents comes at vnawares,  and vnlooked for, by so much more it dooth amase and put men in terrour: and therefore a wise man ought to be aboundantly stored with able meanes, to prouide that discordes doo not ensue, or that if they should ensue, that they doo not continue: and he must foresee euen from this present state, all future perilles, remouing them with prudence and with counsell: not suffering thinges to runne headlong.
            
                IN ciuell States and conuersations, an offence cannot be  chasticed, or a vertuous action rewarded: but that the Citizens shall receiue that common profit that dooth therby arise: neither was there any 
                  ••
               medye found better, more apt, nor of greter effect to maintain a cōmonwealth in good and happie estate, then a counterpose of punishmēt and reward vsed vprightly.
            
                ALl the Securitie that may be had of an enemie, either  of faith, either of fréends, either of promises, and of other, some bonds are good: but through the wicked condition of men, and through the varying of times, there is nothing thought better and more firme, then so to accommodate our selues, that the enemy cannot haue power to offend vs.
            
                THe maner of procéeding in moderne warrefare is far  vnlike to the antiquitie, who did not suborne secret murtherers, but did discouer vnto the enemy, if any such wicked treason was wrought against him, hauing confidence to be able to ouercome with vertue.
            
                IT is a more secure & glorious resolution, with asmuch equalitie of hope as may be: to make experience of fortune,    then by flying and leauing the same to consume by little and little, and to giue to the enemy the victory without blood and without perrill, forsomuch as in thinges that fall out contrarye, the feare and difficultie of him that is ouercome, dooth become euerye day greater.
            
                IN difficulties a man must sometimes, not denying but prolonging, indeuouring himselfe to cause others to accept and imbrace hope in stead of effects.
            
                IT is a most true and commendable Prouerbe amongst the antiquitie, that Dignities disciphers mens qualities, for through experience and measure thereof, is not onelye knowne by their weight, what ability or insufficiencie is in them, but also by reason of the power and libertye they haue, are discouered the affections of their mindes and of what nature they are: by how much the greater a man is, so much lesse respect hath he to suffer and keep himself from being guided according to his own nature.
            
                INdeuour thy selfe not to be euill thought of by him that is thy superiour in the Countrie, neither put trust in the good gouernment of thy owne life: but let it be such, that thou maist imagine not to fall into his hands, for there arise infinite causes, not thought vpon, wherein thou maist haue need of him, and Et e conuerso.
            
            
                IF a superiour haue desire to punish or reuenge himselfe against his inferiour, let him not doo it in a headlong and rashe manner, but let him expect time and occasion, the which without doubt shall in such sorte fall out that not discouering himselfe for a passionate and malignant person, hee shall be able to satisfie his desire.
            
                TOuching the managing of warfare, the counsell of the olde dooth little helpe, if in putting the same in execution, the courage, the valour, and the gallant lustines of youthes doo not set their handes to the dooing, who for the moste parte are of a very quicke vnderstanding,  and haue their spirites and wittes in such a readines, that oftentimes they ouercome the difficulties of the affaires, with greater discretion and prudence then others can beléeue: for we must not expect the processe of yéeres, when the vertue of valour and force is to be shewed: for so much as the race and course of force and vertue is much more swift, then that of age.
            
                IT is requisite that Gouernours doo rather followe the  substance then the appearance of thinges, measuring more with prudence then with proper will, and not giue ouermuch faith or credit to themselues, for it is a great infamie to States, when ignorance is accompanied with losse.
            
                THe order of occasions to obtaine any high matter, is necessary to be taken when things are in reuolucion neither is it good for a man to stand to looke about him so oftentimes as he knowes it more perillous to stand still, then to aduenture.
            
                MAtters of warrefare consist rather in obedience then  in will: intruding themselues to knowe the circumstances and reasons of the Generall & Captains affaires, and that army aboue all other is of greatest valour, in perilles, at the encounter and charge, that before the encoū
               ter and stroke of the battaile, is more then any other in tranquilitie and quiet.
            
                ALl they that would determine and resolue themselues vpon any thing of importance, ought to consider whither that which they enterprise and take in hand to doo, is to fall out profitable to the Common-welth, honourable to himselfe, and easie to be brought to passe: or at leastwise not very difficill.
            
                IN all enterprises it is necessary to haue an eye & be aduertised  if any one perswade, beside giuing of counsell, whether likewise he put himself in peril, & whē fortun hath brought ye enterprise to an end, who it is ye ought to haue  the principall degrée and honour.
            
                IN discordes and tumultes, those haue alwaies most force and power, that amongst all the rest be most wicked, In peace and quietnes those are of most valour, that doo shine and are decked with good and commendable disciplines.
            
                ALl men naturally are good when they reape no profit  or take no delight in euill, but so greatly dooth varrie the corruption of this world & their fragilitie, that easilye and very often for their owne profit they encline to euill. Therefore the rewarde of vertue and punishment of vice, was found out and inuented by wise Lawe-giuers, for the foundation of Common-wealth, not to destroye men, but to the intent they might followe the inclination of nature.
            
                HE that hath to gouerne Citties & peoples, and would  haue them corrected: let him punishe the offenders in them, after the rate of thirtéene pence halfepeny, and let him in effect chastise all faultes, he may very well vse mercy, but not in hainous causes, for in those it is requisite to giue example to the rest.
            
                GLorie, for that it is the proper and true reward of humaine  trauails, is that which doth enflame and prick forward woorthye mindes to honourable enterprises, neither can we finde out any thing that is of greater effect to cause any man to raise vp his mind, to quicken his vnderstanding, and to make sharpe his industrie, then the desire to obtaine glory, and the hope of immortallity.
            
                SO long as men shall be in the world, so long shall there  be found vices, these neuerthelesse, not alwaies, nor continually, but the good and the euill shall come in their turnes: and by the comming of better thinges, they shall recompence and redresse themselues amongst themselues.
            
                EUen as discord in a Cittie doth discouer and giues occasion  to those that lye in waite to betray, to perform their practises well: so vnitie dooth knit together the diuersities  of opinions, and of many making one body alone doth kéepe gouernments and States vncorrupted.
            
                NO lesse doth a kingdom take her beginning of a King, then a king of a kingdome: for the King giues lawes and orders to the kingdome, and not the kingdome to the King: the pardons, the gifts, the warres, the peace, the punishments and the rewardes, doo procéede from the King to the kingdome, and not in contrary course, for onely vnto an emperiall maiestie appertaines to commaund, and the Common-wealth to obay.
            
                AS in a building of importance there is greater perrill when a stone falles foorth of the foundation, thē fifty tiles from the roofe: so it is a greater faulte once to disobaye iustice, then to commit a hundreth errours against the Common-wealth: for we haue oftentimes séene, that there hath sprung vp scandalles of great importance in a Common-wealth through a very small disobedience.
            
                IN doubtfull causes we cannot haue recourse to any better thing then to counsell, for the piller and remedye of  doubt is counsell, but in trueth leauing counsel aparte, we ought to put ende to the execution thereof: and with so much greater speede followe and performe that thing that is assuredly determined, by how much more we perceiue it to be frée, and secure from all perilles, and to serue to the purpose, and is apt and good for our intention.
            
                WE ordaine and commaund that to that man, which doth not rule his life aright, which doth not gouerne  his house well, which dooth not administer well his owne affaires, and which dooth not vse discipline towardes his famulie, liuing in debate with his neighbours, shall haue giuen vnto him a gouernour, which may haue charge ouer him like a foole, and that he be chased from amongst the people like a vagabound: for Common-wealthes are neuer disturbed, but by those that haue no methode and maner of rule in their life.
            
               
                AMongst mortall men there is nothing more common and therewithall more perillous, then to giue place to that imagination, wherby wee beleeue that the state of one man, is better then that of an others, and heereby it comes to passe, that humain malice dooth so blinde men, that they rather seeke to haue that with trauaile, which appertaines vnto another, then to enioye with rest and quietnes that which is his owne. The state of a Prince assuredlye is good, if of them it be vsed to a good end: and the being of the people is likewise good, if they be content with the same. So in like sorte, that of religious men is best, if they reape that profite thereby which they ought: To be rich is very good, if therein they vse temperaunce: in like manner, the poore man, if he haue patience, his es
                  •
               ate falles out to be good: for to merrite, doth not consist in suffering many trauailes and discommodities: but by hauing in them great patience.
            
                TO threaten and manace a mightye enemye, and to make him mindful that thou aboundantly retaines in memorye, the iniuries receiued of him▪ is no other then to inuite and stir him vp to a greater offence, for either thou art such a one, that thou hast to be ashamed, that thou art inflamed to contend with him and cannot suffer it, or thou art such a one that he maye in what or whensoeuer be afraide of thy power, And if he be wise he will neuer expect that time, so all those threatninges shall fall out to be to thy damage.
            
                IF Subiects did know what it costes the Prince to commaund and rule, or if the Prince did knowe how sweet a thing it is to liue in peace, the meaner sorte would haue more compassion towardes the greater, and the greater would not beare enuye towards the meaner, for much lesse be the pleasures that Princes inioye, in respect of the displeasures they suffer: but as the state of a Prince is greater then all others, can performe more then all others, is  more woorth then all others, doth support more then all others, and to conclude, doth ouerpasse and excell the gouernment of all others. So is it most necessarye that the Court, the person, and the life of a Prince, be ordered and corrected more then that of all others: for euen as with the length of an elme all the whole goods of a Marchant is measured, so with the life of the Prince all the whole common-wealth is measured.
            
                PRinces that are wise indéed, doo neuer glorye in any  thing more then to kéepe about them valiant men, to defend their state, and prudent men to gouerne their common-wealth.
            
                THose which are to counsell, to instruct, and to giue rule to the life of Princes: ought to haue their iudgement,  their vnderstanding, their woords, their doctrine, and their manner of liuing very cleare, very vpright, very sound, and without blot or any suspition at all: for to goe about to handle and discourse of great thinges, without hauing experience▪ is no other then that a man that is starke blinde should goe about to guide an other that dooth see verye well.
            
                WHen a man is brought to those tearmes, that either standing still or going forward, he remaines in the  selfe perrill he ought to apply himself to practise or woorke somwhat, for whilste he standes lingering: the same accidents which doo holde him in perrill, doo stand in the same state, whereas by endeuouring himselfe to practise some actions, either he may finde out somewhat that may saue him, or at leastwise, not finding the same, he hath shewed that he hath carried a minde and courage, to knowe how to seek for his safetie.
            
                HE is very presumpteous yt dooth dare to giue counsell to a prince, for as princes in many matters carry lofty  imaginations, and many of them giue libertie to ye reines of their own will & desires: so we finde them, (thinking thē 
                to haue them propitious) more incensed against vs: for counsell is rather more damegeable then commodious, if he that giues the same be not of excellent iudgement, and he that receiues it of very great patience.
            
                GReat is that worke of Fortune, whē a notable man  dooth rise vp more at one time then at an other: for if a valiant man come in the time of a couragious Prince: he shall be holden in great estimation, and shall be sent to performe worthie enterprises, but if he come in the time of a doutfull and fearefull Prince, he will make more account of him that dooth encrease his rents, then of him that dooth ouercome a mighty warre, or makes his honor great and famous. The very same falles out, in respect of wise and vertuous men, who if they chaunce to come in the time of a vertuous and wise Prince, they shal be estéemed and honoured, but if they spring in the time of a vitious Prince, small account is made of them: for it is an auncient and olde custome amongst vaine men, not to honour those that be profitable to the Common-wealth, but rather those that are most gratefull and acceptable to the Prince.
            
                PRinces that desire much to be good, ought liuelye to know euen at the fingers ends, what the procéeding of good Princes hath beene: for we must not despise all that which is blamed of wicked men▪ neither accept all y• which is spoken of men abroade in the worlde.
            
                AS there be certaine lawes sometimes made for other occasion then to punishe vice, so there be some rather chastised to the intent that they may receiue losse, then for any desire that the lawes which condemnes them should be obserued: the which is easily knowne, when it is discerned and séene, that neither the Prince his fauourites o
                  •
                
               
                  ••
               gnius, doo leaue off that vice, the which they chastice in others, and héereof in time doo spring such pernitious effects, as scarse are to be credited, besides that it is of it selfe a thing of most wicked example.
            
               
               NO man ought to be more carefull of any thing, then  to searche out those that maye aduise and counsell him how to gouerne the Common-wealth well, and how to maintaine his estate with iustice, the which is not to be perfourmed with woordes that terrifie, neither with déedes that scandalize, but gentlenes and curtisies that may embolden their harts, and with good woorks that may edifie them, for a woorthye, noble and gentle hart cannot make resistance, if he that commaunds be of good life and behauiour.
            
                AS in the head of a man are placed the sence of smelling  and hearing, so a Prince which is the head of the common-wealth must giue eare to al those that are oppressed, and know all those that serue him, to the intent to reward them for their seruice.
            
               
               I Haue many times séene large experience of one thing in  this worlde worthie to be noted, that as there is to be found one amongst the good, which is of marke for his singuler goodnes: so amongst the wicked there dooth appeare one extreamely wicked, but the wurst is, that the vertuous man doth not obteine so much glorie for his vertue, as the wicked through his wickednes, possesseth impudence: for vertue makes a man naturally discreet, and vice makes him dissolute.
            
                AMongst wicked men the tippe and height of their euill  is, that forgetting themselues to be men, and treading reason vnder foot, they wander farre astray from ye trueth and from vertuous men, and let slacke their raines with liberty to followe vice: for if it be an euill thing that one should be wicked, it is much more euill to procure that an other should not be good.
            
                PRinces in aduerse times ought not to become terrified, amased or ameruailed, but rather resist their  enemies, alwaies with the firme and staide counsell of mature men, and with the counsell of those that be olde and wise.
            
               
                THat man which is oppressed, dooth ordinarily cry after the change of Fortune: And there is nothing more abhorred of a man in felicitie, then to thinke how full Fortune is of mutabilitie: for the oppressed doth imagine, that by changing oftentimes, his state may growe to be better: but the man that is in felicitie, dooth think y• one change of Fortune, may throw him down headlong into ye deapth of disgrace and miserie.
            
                CErtaine wise men giue this rule, that when the Common-wealth  will choose a Gouernour, let them haue care, that he haue béen before hand at the least tenne yeeres in the warres, for he only is able to maintaine the desired peace: who by experience hath tryed the toiles and the troubles of warrefare.
            
                THere is no doubt but that a Prince when hee measureth his forces, dooth playe a very wise parte, for if he possesse but small and consumes much, he shall be assured either to loose his principalitie, or else become a Tirant.
            
                IT dooth much consist in the handes of the people, that their Gouernours be good or euill: for there is no Prince that is so humble or lowlye, that he can alwaies dissemble his euill and wickednes, neither any such a tirant, but that sometimes hee will take notice of that which is good.
            
                THere is nothing in this worlde which dooth more make Common-wealths to runne into ruine, then when the prince giues consent or permits that nouelties arise in his kingdome, and yt those which ought to obeye, liue in greater securitie then Princes and great Lords.
            
                PRinces doo not gaine honour for going enuironed with wicked men, for heaping vp treasures, for killing the innocents, for taking from others their goods: but for being conuersant with those that be good, for straite familiaritie with the wicked, bringes the life of a good man  to be suspected. For spending his riches in good woorkes (it beeing a thing by proofe verye manifest, that that man which makes account of his fame, estéemes little of mony) for routing out tirants, (for that the good hermonye in the gouernment of a Prince dooth consist in chastesing of the wicked and rewarding the good) and for the giuing fréelye of that which is his own, for nothing dooth make more notable the maiestie of a Prince, then to shew his greatnes in helping of others, and not to be gréedy to be ouerpassed, and aduauntaged by others.
            
                TWo things makes a cittie safe and secure, and brings  vnto those that gouernes the same, praise and honour: the one is, when it is garded by the most mighty, and kept and conserued with due defence: the other is, if the Gouernours doo ioyne and knit themselues together in amitie with their neighbours, without the which they cannot fréely conduct victua
                  •
               les and other necessarye thinges from one place to another in safetie.
            
               
               A Prince or Lord that desires to be obeyed, it is necessary  that what he commaundes be first obserued to be in his owne person: for no Lord or Prince can well withdrawe or exempt himselfe from vertuous opperations, for so much as a Prince being an example to others, is bound to vse such actions and opperations, that he may become a woorthye and notable example to those that he gouernes.
            
                IF a Prince would knowe for what end he is a Prince,  I would tell him to gouerne well and to be patient when he is tolde that men murmure at his dooinges, forsomuch as finallye they are men, and become handled like men, neither can they shunne the miseries of men: and neuer was there any Prince in this worlde, but that he was touched yea and torne with the tunges of wicked persons, for they are subiectes to those two euents, that if they be wicked: they incurre the euill will of those that be good, and if they be good:  soddainly all those that be wicked murmure.
            
                THere be two thinges amongst the rest that woorke great effectes against the State: the one is ambition, the other is desperation, neuerthelesse, the second is much woorsse then the first: for so much as ambition may expect occasion and oppertunitie, but so cannot desperation: it being a Subiect vnto the which there beeing no time permitted or graunted it, neither can nor is able to graunt it to others.
            
                TO receiue losse, is neuer good of his owne nature, yet it is very true that it may sometimes accidently helpe and benefite when it is receiued and dooth chaunce vnto men that be of good vnderstanding: for it is an occasion to bring them to be of great experience, since there is a fewe if once they haue not proued the euill, will enter into conceite or beléeue that the same is such as it is: whereof it ariseth that those that be vnexpert and ignorant in their affaires, doo euer procéede either with ouer-great rashenes, wheras if once they haue tasted the wrath of fortune, they become more warie, carefull, and prouident.
            
                PRinces ought to studye to indeuour themselues to vse such conuersation with their Subiects, that they may make choise rather to serue them for their good wills, then for wages and rewardes, for when money begins to deminish, their seruice likewise beginnes to diminish, and a thousand troubles dooth folowe them, which doo not serue with a good hart, for he that dooth loue with all his whole affection, dooth not become arrogant in propertie: doth not withdraw himselfe in aduerse fortune, dooth not complain of his pouertye▪ dooth not grudge at ye small fauour which is vsed towardes him, neither dooth departe from him in time of persecution, and bréefly that course of life and loue  doth neuer take end vntill the houre of death.
            
                PRinces without doubt haue greater néede to haue about them more wiseand prudent men, (to the intent 
                  〈◊〉
                preuaile by them, and to vse their counsell) then any other  whosoeuer: for since they are to stand in centernell and watch to beholde and discouer what the dooings of all others be, they haue lesse liberty or licence then their subiects haue to commit errours, for euen as they haue liberty to beholde and iudge of others, euen so are they behelde and iudged of others: without any licence or liberty granted them so to doo.
            
                EUery state ought to desire peace, and thereof to make demonstrations both with déeds and with woords: but  for al that they ought to shew themselues in military preparations and prouisions most warlicke, for a disarmed peace is weake and féeble: neither dooth there séeme to be contradiction betwixt the desiring of peace, and to arme our selues: since there is nothing more fréend to ease and peace, then knowledge and specculation: to the antiquitie it did seeme conuenient that the image of Pallace which is the Goddesse of science, should be portraited and figured armed.
            
                DUetie requires that a fréend doo indeuour him selfe to yéeld helpe vnto an other freend, and must not expect  and tarry vntill he be requested, for he that dooth so, dooth not only offer it thankfully, but dooth also cause it to be receiued as thankfully: preuenting and taking away in his fréend a certaine shamefastnes and feare which dooth alwaies accompany ye demaunder, wherby it comes to passe that he receiues it with a more gratefull minde, and with greater disposition to yéelde the like againe in exchange.
            
               
               A Prince dooth playe a verye wise parte, when he dooth procure to haue prudent and valiant Captaines for  the warres, but without comparison it is much better to kéepe in his Courte wise men, for the victories of battailes dooth finally consist in the force of many, but the gouernement of the Common-wealth sometimes is referred and credited, to the aduise and iudgement of one alone.
            
                THat particular loue that princes very often shew more to one then to another, is a thousand times occasion of   gréeuous alterations in kingdomes, for by reason that one is in disgrace and out of fauour, and another in loue and credit: there dooth spring vp harmefull hates, pernitious thoughtes and great enuye, the end whereof is wicked woordes, and finallye wicked déedes. And therefore that Prince that dooth make any difference in conuersation with those that be equall, dooth kindle and set fire in his Common-wealth.
            
                AMongst all other offices, there is none wursse, then to take charge to chastise other mens vices▪ and therefore a wise man ought to flée this care, like the infection of the plague, for to reprehend vices: dooth spring greater hate against him that dooth chastice, thē there doth grow amendment in him that is chasticed.
            
                PRinces and wise men ought to prohibite that seditious  persons doo not disturbe the quiet of the people, for whē the people doo rise, the desire of riches is wakened, couetousnes doth encrease, iustice doth fall of it selfe, wicked persons preuaile, good men are reprehended: and finally, euery one dooth reioyce to liue to the preiudice of others, to the intent they may set forward their déeds to prefer their own proper commodities.
            
                ALthough we excuse ordinarilye the fault of any man  that hath cōmitted the same, notwithstanding there is no man found faultie, nor any fault which dooth not merite punishment: for if he did commit the same in his rage vpon the suddaine, it was a great euill and offence: but if he committed the same, pondering the case before hand, and with deliberation, it was much wursse.
            
                IT is very good that we goe about to doo all thinges with reason, and it is good that we doo guide all our enterprises in order▪ but yet in this there falles out to be great difficulties. For wise and staid men in perfourming their affaires, doo consider, reuolue & compasse with such diligence those inconueniences that may spring in ye same, that they neuer almost determine to resolue vpon any finall end.
            
               
               REason requires, that that Cittizen which is in the  state of a priuate person, is affable and curteous with his frends when he doth arise afterwards to beare the title of a Magistrate, that he should maintaine himself with them in the selfe-same degrée of humanitie: for euen as to become proude through the obtaining of perpetuall honours newly gotten either by Fortune or by valour: is a demonstratiue signe of a vile & abiect minde. So to become hautie through the office of a Magistrate, which is shortly to take ende: is the signe of a minde that dooth possesse small modesty and vertue, for although honours do change manners and humours of men, yet for all that they ought to change them not into wursse, but into better.
            
                ALl persons of iudgement that desire to obtaine any  thing that is difficile to attaine vnto, procure to haue meanes to be able to obtain it, for many things are broght to passe if a man haue any great or good facility & dexterity in thē, which we lose whē we go about to get thē by force.
            
               
               A Man must (so farre as is possible) kéep himself from emulations  which are of most naughty nature, and endowed with apparēt customes, which haue in their mouth the contrarye to that which is their minde: and must double their tung, not suffering it vnaduisedlye to breake the bonds and the two bulwarkes of the teeth and the lips, amongst which nature hath shut vp the tung as in ye midst of a strong and double Fortresse.
            
                HE that doth inuade & occupie a state, must gain the fauour  of the souldiers with rewards and gifts, the good willes and grace of the people with the abundance of the Cittie, the beneuolence of the vniuersall cuntrie, with ease and with peace, and afterwards draw vnto him the affairs and actions of the old gouernment, that of the magistrats, and togither with the same: the authoritie of the lawe.
            
                TO a general & captain besides his knowledge in the art  of wars, it appertains to him to be indewed wt magnanimity, temperance, fortitude, liberality & prudence, to him it is requisit to carry authority in his déeds, grauity in his  woords, and to kéep faith in his promise, moreouer he must disgest and discourse vpon his affaires with great aduisement, deliberate vpon them with mature iudgements: and execute them with great celeritie. In his countenaunce he must shewe himselfe vnto his Souldiers wilde, alegre and sterne, he ought to be pleasant, humaine and benigne towards men, neuertheles, obseruing alwaies together with that manner of behauiour, his degrée and ye decorum of his dignitie: that he neither with his ouer-much familiaritie and homelines make his armye become dissolute and of small obedience, neither with ouer-much severitie bring them to be his enemies: and for so much as the beneuolence of the Souldiers is the most certaine hope to obtaine victorie, he must so frame his actions, that not onelye they may carry towards him a due respect and reuerence, but that they may more-ouer loue one another greatlye, and him especially, therefore he ought alwaies to reward and honour those that merites and contrariwise reproche and punish those that are faultie.
            
                THe power of Fortune is very great in all humain operations, yet greater in military affaires then in any other, but vnstable, vnmeasurable and infinite in the deedes of armes. Where a commaundement euill vnderstoode, an appointed order euil executed, one rash temeritie, one vain voice euen of the meanest souldier, dooth oftentimes carry the victorie to them which appeare to be ouercommen, where at vnawares doo rise innumerable Accidents, which are impossible to be foreséene or gouerned by the counsel of the Generall or Captaines.
            
                HE dooth most easilye deceiue others, who is reported  neuer to deceiue, and which dooth couer with falshood that which is true.
            
                ONe Iudge alone dooth very well and easily discearne matters, as well those that be true, as those that be sinisterly enterpreted, for so much as hate and enuy where they are many, may perfourme much more.
            
               
               HOw much greater, and how much more important  things are: so much more they are spoken of, and so muche lesse we doo gather and groape out the trueth, in respect that one sorte of men beleeue and declare for true, those things that they haue heard, whether they be true or false: othersome, although part of those things be true, yet alwaies they reporte them otherwise thē they are, and so with time they encrease, and those that come after to those things that they haue heard of their Auncestours, do alwaies adde and ioyne some-thing more.
            
                THe heauens doo seldome times graunt that ye greatnes  of priuat persons neare vnto Princes, doo endure perpetually, for that the one or the other dooth washe them away, hauing thē graunted the whole: there rests no more for them to gape after.
            
                AT the hands of the Prince is alwaies expected something  more high and greater then of others: And as euerye one in particular dooth receiue a good parte, those thinges that be well doone of him: so contrariwise, the Prince is onely the man vpon whom doth fall all the hate and euill will of vniuersall errours.
            
                TO procure fauours and authorities, sometimes with pompe and libertye, somtimes with watchfulnes and  industrie, are harmfull and pernitious meanes when they are vsed fainedlye, to open the way to principalitye, and therfore it is the sayings of wise men, that the pathes that leades other men to principalities is very rough and difficil, but when once a man is entred and slipt into them, the fauours and helpes of many doo concurre on all sides.
            
               
               I Oftentimes doubt in my selfe, whether it be giuen to Princes from their birth (as in other thinges it is) to become  propitious and fauourable towards these, and froward and cruell towards these others: or that is infused and placed in our industrie, by means wherof it is graunted vs to walke in a meane path, to the intent that ouer obstinately we doo not oppose our selues against those that  rule: and yet neuerthelesse, we are not to suffer our selues to fall headlong into a shamefull flatterie and seruitude, but we ought to procéed in such sorte, that neither through ambition, neither through ouer great couetousnes of glory, we yéeld our selues ouercome, and therfore with greater security we doo leade our liues, and with lesse perrill, if we make our selues subiect.
            
                THe number of those was alwaies verye small, that knew how with prudence to distinguish & discearne the good from the euil, or the profitable from the damageable, but are accustomed for the most part by other mens euēts and chaunces to become better and more prudent.
            
                THings that are not premeditated, doo hurt much more  without comparison, then those yt are foreseen, therfore I call the mind of him great, couragious & experte, which doth wel gouern himself, and is not astonished at these perils & accidents which chaunce vpon a sodain & vnawares.
            
                THat common saying which is in the mouth of wise men of our time, did neuer please the antiquitie, if it be true: that is, that we ought to enioye the benefite of time, for that they did choose rather to enioy prudence and vertue, for so much as time dooth choose before it al things, and may come with it aswell the euill as the good, but prudence and vertue doth bring foorth nothing but that which is good.
            
                ALthough to know the particular thoughts of man, be a  thing proper to God: neuertheles, to know in generall the naturall inclination of a people or of any other Prouince, is a most easie thing, for the workes and operations therof being publike, it is requisite that they shew of force their mindes and desires, forth of the which afterwardes wise men doo gather either more or lesse then perticular draughts and determinations, according to the capacity of him, that hath the charge to penetrate and enter so farre.
            
               
               I Was of opinion that I could not perseuer and discouer  with often reuoluing and thinking vpon yt which I could  not discearne at the first sight: but I knowe by proofe that how much the more a man doth think vpon his affaires: so much the better they are vnderstoode, and so much the better they are perfourmed.
            
                PRinces haue soddainlye and spéedily that which comes in their appetite to desire, and therefore onelye this aboue  all other things, and without any stay they ought to procure, that their praise and glory maye at all times and specially if their posteritie be celibrated: for if there be any one that dooth goe about to dispraise the fame and memorye of the posteritie, he makes shewe that he is not studious in that vertue by the which the same is obtained.
            
                PRiuat men in their determinations ought to haue consideration of that which may be profitable for thē, but  the condition and qualitie of a Prince is of an other sorte, for in their actions they are to haue respecte to their fame and good name.
            
                PRinces were not first created to benefite themselues: for by that means no man should be put to so gréeuous  seruilitie, but to profit the people, to the intent they might be wel gouerned, therfore when a prince hath more respect to himself thē to his people, he is no more a Prince but a Tirant.
            
                SUbiects are better content to haue the prince néer hand  then far off, for desiring to be good they haue more occasion to loue him, and delighting to be wicked more occasion to feare him: besides that there doth arise an other benefit that whosoeuer goes about to assault ye State, doth remain therby the more duetifull, and if he should resolue vppon the same, yet can he very hardly ouercome▪ for the presence of the prince doth woorke greater & more liuely effect in the mindes of those that obay, then the memory together with the hope yt is had of his comming can be able to performe.
            
                GReatnes of State is better kept with discréete and  moderate counsell, then with ouer-braue rash & headlong handling of our affaires.
            
               
                
               A Generall or Captaine that dooth take glorye and honour for his full scope and finall ende, ought to indeuour himselfe to obtain fame: not with the toyle and with the perrils of others (as many are vsed to doo) but with the sweat and danger of his own person, and by the means of his proper vertue: and since it is a déed worthy of no lesse praise to extinguishe ye warres with counsel, then to end it by armes: he must goe about sometimes to doo ye one, somtimes to doo the other: and let him carrye well in minde that the first successe of things, are those that doo make him fearefull to the enemy: and contrariwise, to be despised, and to be had in small consideration: for such as is the beginning, such oftentimes is the end accustomed to be. Let him likewise be circumspect in vsing of artificiall deceites, for small sinceritie or faithfull procéeding is suspected of him, that men once haue conceiued in opinion to be wunted to gouerne himselfe with doublenes and artificiall meanes.
            
                WE ought euer to carry this consideration in all causes to maintaine our dignitie, the which we oftentimes loose with haste to shew to be resolute in any thing, for those that haue to resolue vs doo estéeme (beholding our instance and care) that our necessitie is greater, then perchaunce it is, wherby it comes to passe, that the standing vpon their punctor, and make shewe to doo vs a pleasure, as though it did proceed of great frendly curtesie, although indéed it fall out to be for their profit, many times there ariseth a certain pertinacie in them, of whom those things he demaunded, which indéed dooth woork their owne losse, for by reason of our haste, and of the great instance made to them, they become more proud, and doo not take the offered occasions.
            
                AS it is a thing most certain, that warres are ouercome by preuentions & by diuersions, so it is most true that he receiues naughty counsell, that wtout euident necessity, makes an other mans warres, his own proper quarrell.
            
               
               
               A Capable wit that knows how to make choise of time hath no occasion to lament him selfe that his life  should be shorte, for he that can applye himselfe to infinite things, and spend his time profitably dooth gaine time.
            
                MAny preache liberty, that if they did hope to haue a benefite more of a State that is straite, then of a  free: they would run thither in poaste, for euery one hath respect to his owne proper profit, and fewe are to be found that haue knowledge of glory and honour.
            
                EUery one in this worlde commits errours, forth of the which doth arise damage either more or lesse, according  to the accidents and chaunces that dooth followe the same, but those haue very euill hopes that abase and intangle themselues in things of small importance, wherof succeeds small losse and as small dishonour.
            
                HE that desires, to be beloued of his Superiours, it is  requisite that he shewe himselfe to vse respect and reuerence towards them▪ For nothing doth more offend the mindes of our betters, then that it should séeme vnto them that we doo not carry that respect and that reuerence towards them, that they iudge dooth appertaine vnto them.
            
                WHosoeuer hath the charge of a Cittie that is to be besieged or assaulted, ought to make most mightye  foundations and grounds vpon all those remedies which prolong the time, and to estéeme very muche euerye thing (although it be verye small) that takes away time from the enemy: for oftentimes one day, one hower of aduauntage doth bring foorth some accidents that may set thē frée and at liberty.
            
                HE deceiues himselfe that resolues vpon the firste aduertisementes that come and are brought him touching  his affaires, for they alwaies ariue with greater heate and with greater terrour, then they fall out to be, when they grow to effect: therfore he that is not constrained by necessitie, let him alwaies expect the second aduertisements, and the rest one after another.
            
               
                IT is almost impossible, but that he which with a great and wonderfull efficacie dooth affirme a thing: should raise some ambiguitie, to beleeue the contrary, yea in the mindes of those that are resolutely determined.
            
                WHen we proceed to giue beginning to the execution of any new, great and difficill thing although it be already thorowly determined vpon: but diuers reasons present themselues vnto the mindes of men, which in contrary sence may be considered.
            
                IT is very perilous to gouerne our selues by examples,  if the selfesame reasons doo not concurre as well in the generall as also in the particular pointes, if the affaires be not ruled with the same prudence, and if besides that, in all the other grounds and foundations the verye selfe fortune doo not play his parte to woorke the like effects.
            
                EUen as to suffer our selues to be ouercome by our affections, is a seruile act: so to restraine our rage & ire which is an impediment to our counsell, to vse victorye temporatly, which of it owne nature is proude and insolent: to rule our selues and appetites, which is the parte of a staide and woorthy hart, and to be humaine, benigne, and liberall towardes our enemie: is truelye a most famous and princelye qualitye, woorthye of diuine and eternall memory.
            
                THere is nothing more proper, more conuenient, more necessary, or more profitable to a Prince, then to be iust, liberall and benigne, for it appertaines to their power and greatnes: to be mindefull of the oppressed, and to releeue other mens calamities, and speciallye for Kinges who are the liuely images of God.
            
                WIcked and naughty persons haue power to doo euill,  and although they doo it not, it is not so gratefull to behold that they doo it not, as it is noisome to thinke that they may doo it: and therefore without doubt it is a miserable thing to haue before our eyes that person that without any feare, alwaies when he will maye harme. And it  most séems an impossible thing that he dooth not hurt, For knowing that the good cannot keepe companye or consorte with him, it is behouefull for him to beare them hatred, and knowing that they are followed and fauoured of all the rest that be good: it behoues him likewise to stand in feare of thē. Now therfore to escape from him that hates, that feares, and that hath power to doo euill: dooth arise more of aduenture then reason.
            
                MY opinion is, that if nobilitie and grauitie (I speak of  that, wherof men superficially make such estimation) doo not consist in any other thing then in the long succession of our auncestours beginnings and euents, and of good counsel: He may be called most noble & most graue, whose knowledge and whose counsell doth spring from these accidents that are borne from the beginning of the world euen vntill this present time.
            
                EUen as it is a great offēce for vs to praise those things  that are of wicked and pernitious example: so it is no lesse sinne and shame to burye those in obliuion the which through their merites of vertue, deserue to be most highly celebrated.
            
                THat Common-wealth where iustice is found for the poore, chastisement for those that be insolent & tirants,  weight and measure in those things that are solde for the vse of man, exercise and discipline amongst yong men, small couetousnes amongst olde persons: can neuer perishe.
            
               
               A Prince ought not to beléeue, that to make choise of a good maister for his sonne is of small importance, for  if in this point he doo not vse very great diligence, he dooth burden himselfe with a great fault: my opinion therefore is, that he ought not to giue the office of instructing his Sonne in such sort as other offices are giuen, that is either for requestes, either for giftes, either for importunitie,  either for ametie, either else in respect to reward some seruice, for although some of his subiects haue béen Ambassadours in strange and forraine Countries, or the Generall of his armye, or that he hath borne in his royall Courte great offices, yet for all that it followes not, that he should be apt to instruct the Sonne of his Prince. For to be a good Generall, it is requisite for him to be ful of valour, and verye fortunate: but to be the maister and instructour of a Prince, it is necessary that he be indowed with great vertue, ioyned together with a setled and staide minde.
            
                IN the aduerse chaunces of our life, and in the persecutions of fortune, where industrie and force dooth a little helpe, it is the best remedy to esteem of them like men, and to disseemble them like prudent persons.
            
                HE that takes in hand to performe any enterprise, and  afterwardes dooth not know how to issue foorth of the same, or to bring it to an end, either he shall faile in Conscience, or it is ouer troublesome and tedious, for he that is afraide of shame, and dooth possesse a worthie & noble hart, either must make an end of that enterprise he hath taken vpon him, or else declare the occasion that moues him to giue it ouer.
            
                THis difference is discerned betwixt one Prince and an other, that he that is euill is onely obeyed, but he that is good, is both obeyed and loued, and besides that a good and vertuous prince, makes hard enterprises to séem light but with a tirant those that be light are made most hard, through their pernitious naughtines. Happy is he therefore that is obeyed, but most happy the other that is both obeyed and loued, for the bodie becomes weary to obeye, but the minde is neuer wearied, neither euer satisfied wit
                  •
                louing.
            
               
               A Good Prince ought neuer to laye handes vpon an
                  •
                man, for what iniurie soeuer he hath doone him, for hi
                  •
                hands ought neuer to be exercised in the reuenging of in
                  •
               iuries doon against him, but in defending and reuengin
                  •
                
                the iniuries of those that obey him.
            
                ONe of those things yt a wise Prince ought to haue an  eye vnto: is, that his Gouernours or iudges, doo not consent, that in their Common-wealth ye auntient lawes be broken: and that they induce not new and strange customes, for the people is so variable and light, that euerye daye they would haue a newe Prince, and change newe lawes.
            
               
               A Prince ought to make reckoning of his reuēn
                  •
               es, but  if he forget to redresse those offences and faultes that are committed in his Territories, and makes no account of them: he is woorthy of reprehension, for the people paye their tribute to the Prince, to the intent he may set them frée from their enemies, and defend them from Tirants.
            
                THose things that terrifie procure enmitie, and against  the encrease and proceeding therof, euery one dooth oppose himselfe, but the prowesse of the hart and the bountye of the minde, and these things that are magnificently doon, with their shining quallities and beautie▪ doth moue euen our aduersaries and enemies to loue vs, and meruaile at vs, or rather to worship and reuerence vs.
            
                NOthing is more easie, then in our thought and imagination  to drawe and set downe in what manner it is bettter to doo a thing after one sorte, then after another sorte, but to put it in execution is not so light a matter, for that there be many things, the which empeche, disturb and draw back those that execute the same.
            
                IT is an honest parte to pardon those that be poore when they doo erre, and to examine himselfe to see if in his  minde any di
                  •
               fect peraduen ture dooth lye hid, to the intent he giue not to others that blame which he dooth merite himselfe: for oftentimes it comes to passe, either through lightnes or ouerthwartnes, or through ye haste or rage of our superiours, that those thinges that be well ordained, are spoyled: and those enterprises, that with diligence and discretion are put in execution: fall out  to the contrarye.
            
                THose that doo sharpe and bitterly commaund, and for euery small foreseeing that falles out, become furiouslye angrye and in no case can be pacified, besides that they doo vniustly▪ they must think that they are enuironed with more enemies then fréends.
            
                THere is great difficultie placed in endeuouring our  selues in all things, not only to obserue measure: but also to establish in our thoughtes what measure is, for so much as offices and dueties doo change according to the persons, the times, the age▪ the nature, and the customes of men: the vse of places, countries, and according to other things, which are almost without matter: the which varietie he that would on a sodaine see and vnderstand, it is conuenient that he be of a sharp wit & quick consideration.
            
                CErtainlye the substance of riches makes him verye proud and insolent, that possesseth the same as Aristotle doth say in his Rethorick, but he that doth wiselye beholde this parte, wil say with Senecca, that none is more woorthy or neere vnto God, then he that despiseth and scoffeth at riches: The which I doo not denye saith Senecca, that thou shouldest possesse: but I would haue thée to possesse it not fearefullye, the which thou shalt doo by this onely meanes▪ if thou perswade thy selfe to liue happilye and in felicity without it, and if thou dost hebolde it with eyes, which are alwaies to faile thee.
            
                THe antiquity doo hold, that wise men onely can do that which they desire, and ye wicked that which they haue appetite vnto, but not that which they desire, for they doo all thinges whilste by these thinges in which they delight they think to quiet them selues in that good which they desire, but they cannot obtaine it, for those that are wicked can neuer arise to fortitude.
            
                WH
                  •
               n any man doth go about to bring a wrathfull and furious person into the tearms of reasō and iustice▪ he doth shew himself that either he is not very wise, or ouer  diligent: forsomuch 
                  •
               s when ire is enflamed and that it hath blinded the vnderstanding of many, he cannot be quieted through any consolation that he can haue: neither through any reason that can be tolde him.
            
                WHen men of base qualitie doo approche and ioyne in amitie with the chéefest of the Cittie and contrariwise  when the riche and the mightye receiue those persons that be base and poore into their house: it seemes that both of them doo not care for the perfection of vertue, but onely intentiue about profite or pleasure: the which may be knowne by this, that they doo not goe about to procure themselues the seruice of honest men, iust, well mannered, and full of valour▪ but those that be liberall and rich, if the one and the other may be found: the rich in contrary sorte do not search for others, but such as be painefull, craftye, diligent, profitable and sparing, commending such more then any vertuous quality.
            
                EUen as the pride of any person with familiaritie, with  often discourses, and with pleasantnes, is asswaged and made more modest: so with hautines, with melancholye and with taciturnitie it is made more lofty and rude.
            
                FRéends of base qualitye ought to dispise themselues in such sort with their bettters, that not only they doo not  touch and iniuriously moue the ouer-great familiaritye of the mightye in their iestes: but also confesse that they are bound vnto them for that they are so domestically vsed.
            
                LEt no man estéem so much his own proper counsel, but that he suffer himselfe sometimes to be gouerned according  to the aduice of others: for that man which dooth despise and make no account of other mens opinions, and will onlye followhis owne: let him hold himselfe assured, that he shall commit errours in many things.
            
                IT is no prudence to iudge things by their effects: for many  times affaires that haue been well managed in counsell,  haue had no good end: and those that haue béene euill counselled haue had a good end. And if we should commend pernitious counselles, for their good end: we should doo nothing else, but giue courage to men to erre, which dooth greatly turne to the damage of Common-wealthes, for alwaies euill counsell falles not out happily, so should we erre if we did reprehend a wise determination, which hath not a ioyfull ende: for that it takes awaye the courage of Citizens to giue counsell to the Cittie, and to speake that which they vnderstand.
            
                WHen it dooth chaunce vnto vs to denye anye thing through necessitie, to assure the person that dooth demaund the same of his good will, it is requisite immediatly to set an other abroache (if you haue one) to offer him and that largely: in such sorte, as he may knowe that you make account of him, and that you desire to pleasure him▪ and by this meane vsed with respect, he is sooner satisfied, if he haue any ioynt of humanitie, then by any other means, by the which should be graūted him that he did demaund. So men doo suffer thēselues to be ouercome by the nature of curteous woordes, and become angrye at those actions which are not accomplished with curtesie.
            
                DEtraction and flatterie are two vices to be shunned of euery honest person, but much more of those that make profession of good & of exemplar life: for that in such, euerye small diffect that is discouered, is sufficient to perswade, that their other good operations haue béen alwaies doon fainedly, and for any other end then to doo good▪ but in others that are not bound to so straite a life, but haue alwaies remained in a certaine honest liberty: it seemes that they are noted for lesse vitious, when speciallye they are directed to doo good, for when we goe about by flatterie to make any one the more our freend, and not that he by the meanes of our flatterie should become wicked: it is more to be borne withal. So detraction or speaking euill of any person, when it is doone against any one, which dooth  manifestlye empeche principall determinations: and then when any vice of his is di
                  •
               couered, and speciallye of those that doo harme vertue, wherof he of whome euill is spoken doth greatly make profession as should fall out: if of a good profession, he make some naughty and wicked practise, if of liberall, some signe of couetousnes: For all that it is necessary it should be doone with so great modesty, and in things so manifest, that it may appeare rather that occasion doth force thée, then that it dooth arise of thy owne will and pleasure.
            
                IT may be saide with reason, that there is no diffect, but  that occasion may cause it to be accepted for lesse euill: for time is the head and foundation that makes vs able to conclude euerye qualitye of busines, how difficile soeuer it be: as contrariwise, to woorke any thing out of time, is an occasion that those that be easie, become almoste impossible.
            
                PEople ground themselues vpon vaine hope and fallible  determinations, hardie when they are farre off from perrilles, fainte harted and weake minded when perrilles are neere at hand: doo obserue no moderation in their dooings.
            
                IT is very hard to answer or concur with the conceites of  men, wherfore the most parte are not of a due & mature consideration: neither measuring things with their right proportions.
            
                IN publick affaires we ought diligentlye to consider of the beginnings, for that it is not after in the power of  men, to part from the deliberations alreadye made, and in the which they haue perseuered long time, without dishonour and perrill.
            
                THe hope of forraine persons measured rather with desire then with reason, doo almost alwaies fall out to be  fallible and most vaine.
            
                THe authority of those that reprehend things that haue  succeeded vnluckelye, would be oftentimes lesse: if in  the selfesame time we could know, that which would haue faulne out if we had proceeded diuerslye.
            
                WArres are made with the weapons of Souldiers  and with the counsell of Captaines, they are accomplished by fighting in Campania, not with the draughtes which those men that are vnexpert in warfare do set down vpon papers, and doo paynte out with their Pencilles, or with their fingers or a rod in the dust.
            
                THat which is desired of many dooth seldome times succeede, for the effects of humaine actions doth commonly depend vpon the willes of fewe, and the finall end and intention of these, being almost alwaies diuers and varying from the ends and intention of many: the things can very hardly succéed otherwise then according to the intention of those, that giue them their first motion.
            
                IT is a rash temeritie to determine to enter into warres by the which if it fall out vnfortunately, we are to participate of parte of all ye euills, more then our rates comes to: but succéeding prosperouslye, not to haue any portion therof, euen of the least parte of the benefites.
            
                NEwtralitie in the warres of others, is a commendable  thing, and by the which molestations and expences are shunned, when thy forces are not so weake that thou art to feare the victories of euerye one of the parties: for then it brings vnto thée great securitie, and verye often their greatnes, meanes for thee to encrease thy state.
            
                Manye beleeue that death is a thing to be desired of those that are in the height of prosperitie, but it is a most happie death of him that dyes, hauing gained a glorious victorie.
            
                WIse men doo not alwaies discearne and iudge perfectly: it behoues that oftentimes that there be shewed signes of weakenes in humaine vnderstanding.
            
                HE that hath to make lawes to sundrye persons that haue sundry endes not conformable to his owne: can  no long time make foundation in ye confederations made with them, forsomuch as the affaires in confederations, may be by aduerse and sundry chaunces reduced into many difficulties.
            
                CElestiall predictions in prosperity are smally credited,  but when aduersities begin to appeare, they are ouermuch beleeued.
            
                IT is a greater difficultie without comparison, to kéepe  and conserue from the lesse perrils that which remaines when once we begin to decline, then it is to him that dooth enforce & endeuour himselfe to maintain his own dignity and degrée, if he turne himselfe spéedilye against him that dooth go about to oppresse him, without making any signe that he is willing to giue place.
            
                IN those warres commonly made of many Princes, against  one alone: is accustomed to arise greater feares then effectes: for the firste furies are soone spéedily asswaged, whilste there dooth spéedily beginne to spring varietie of opinions, which dooth amongst them weaken their leage of faith.
            
                IN the action of armes, the condition and partie is farre  better of him that stayes and expectes to be assaulted, then of him that dooth goe about to assault an other.
            
                THe clemencie of Princes hath alwaies brought them beneuolence and reputation. Cruelty (where it is not  necessarye) hath alwaies wrought contrary effectes, neither as many dooth vnprudently beléeue, hath it remoued the impediments and difficulties: but encreased them, and made them greater.
            
                IN the armyes of leages, prouisions do neuer concur together in one selftime: And amongst so many wills, whē  there is sundry interests and sundry ends, there dooth easily arise, disorders, discords, displeasures & mistrustes, and  neuer is there found any prompt spéedines to execute gallantly when the fauour of fortune dooth shew her selfe benigne and fauourable, neither of disposition to resist constantly when she dooth li
                  ••
                to frowne.
            
                IT is a most perrilous parte, to consorte our selues in any warre, in the which the mighty prouisions of the confederates may as well hurt as benefit.
            
                IT is a more prudent and a more easie counsell to goe about to establishe amitie with him that vnwillinglye would become thy enemye, then with him that at no time can become thy freend.
            
                HE is to be blamed that through ouer aboundant suspition and mistrust, dooth depriue himselfe of those great occasions which he with difficulties and perrils hath gained, but much more he is to be reprehended which doth it through a fearefull and base minde, then he that doth it through generositie and greatnes.
            
                IT comes by nature, that a
                  •
               ter suspect followes hate, after  hate followes harmes, after harmes followes the familiaritie and confederations with the enemies of him that hath offended, and the determination not onely to assure himselfe, but to gaine: Moreouer, with the ruine of the endamaged, the memory of the iniurye, greater without doubt and more displeasant in him that dooth it then in him that receiues it.
            
                THe principall grounds in determining vpon any enterprise  be, the iustice and right of the cause, the facilitie and easines to ouercome, the fruit and commodity of the victorie.
            
                THe desire of liberty almost a thing naturall in al men  ought to consist in the equall proportion of the conditions, artes, and qualities of the Citizens, a most necessary foundation in populare gouernment.
            
                AS the distribution of Magistrates, and the determination of the lawes dependes vpon the arbitriment of fewe: the Citizens then being intentiue, not about publike  profites, but about couetous and priuate affaires, there dooth arise particular sects and conspiracies, with the which the deuisions of the Cittie doo ioyne themselues, a most assured plague and death to the Common-wea
                  ••
               h
                  •
               s of empires and gouernments.
            
                IT was neuer accounted wisdome to determin vpon any matter of moment, without long consultation and without  reuoluing and disgesting the same in our mindes, 
                  •
               n infinite number of times.
            
                OF his owne nature nothing is more shorte, nothing  doth liue a lesse while then the memory of ben
                  ••
               ites, and so much the greater they be: so much the more they a
                  •
               e paid with the partes of ingratitude, for he that cannot nor will not blot them out with requitalles: dooth oftentimes goe about to deface them, by perswading himselfe that they haue not been so great as they were, and those which become ashamed that they were brought into such tearms that they haue had néed of benefites, growe to be displesed that they haue receiued them: in such sorte that hate is of more effect in them, through the auntient memory of their necessitie, into which they did fall: then the bond of the obligation through the confederation of the curtesie which hath béen vsed vnto them.
            
                WHere insolence is: there is blindenes, where vaine  lightnes is: there is no knowledge of vertue, no iudgement to discearne the actions of others, neither no grauitie to measure that which is conuenient to him selfe.
            
                THe practises, the preparations, and the opperations of confederates: are differred, interrupted broken off,  and varied, according to the forces, according to the ends, and according to the counselles of Princes, whereby it is not easie to make an assured and firme knotte and vnion, where there be diuersities of mindes, variety of wils, and change of conditions and qualities:
            
               
                PRinces that bend of their owne proper inclination to preferre vtilitie before fidelitie, are easilye perswaded the selfesame that other Princes are.
            
                THe common people of his nature is couetous alwaies  of new things, who are easie to be filled 
                  〈…〉
                errours and with false perswaisions, euen as 
                  〈◊〉
                waues of the Sea are rouled forward with the blast
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                winde.
            
                AS of an vnexpert and vncapable iudge, we cannot look  for a right sentence: so of a people that is full of confusion and ignoraunce, we cannot look for but by meare chaunce, an election and deliberation of reason and discretion.
            
                IT is the nature of men when they departe from one extreme in the which they haue béene holden violentlye, to runne voluntarily without staying in the meane, into other extremeties.
            
                THe successe of warres depend for the most parte of reputations:  the which when they decline, the valour and vertue of the Souldiers likewise decline, the fidelitye of the people deminishe, the reuenues appointed to sustain the warres grow to be nothing, & contrariwise the minde of the enemies encrease, doubts are nourished, and al sorts of difficulties doo augment infinitely.
            
                IN all humaine actions it is oftentimes requisite to accommodate and frame our counsell to our necessitie, neither for the desire we haue to obtaine that part which is ouer difficile and almost impossible to put all to the hazard of manifest perrilles.
            
                THose leages wherin there chaunceth to be many potentates,  are not so firme or of such concord, but that we may hope that they wil become colder, or some of them to dis-vnite himselfe from the rest.
            
                IT is the nature of men, that those things which in the beginning present themselues verye teriblye: doo in  such sorte can
                  •
               ell and diminish the same from day to day, that if no newe accidents doo arise that may make freshe and quicken the terrour and feare they haue: They make themselues in the processe of small time, almost assured.
            
                EUery one that dooth perceiue and smelles out, that there is no account made of him: becomes angry, anger  makes him bolde, or else somtimes to applye himselfe to thinke moste perrillous thinges the which oftentimes comes to passe: and cheefely if to audacitie, any authority be ioyned to some singular quality that is in the person of him that is growne so audatious.
            
                PErrillous determinations and practises, so much the more they are considered of, so much the vnwillinglye  they are taken in hand: wherupon it dooth alwaies come to passe, that those commorations and rebellions that giue space of time to the execution of them: are discouered.
            
                THe name of liberty is so woorthy a thing, that no force  can tame it, no time can consume it, and no merite can counterpese it: in so much as to go about to maintain seruilitie in a frée Citie: forrain forces are not sufficient, and of those within the same, a man can put no confidence, for those that be now freendes, and comfort others to take vpon them the Signorie: when they haue by the authoritie of their new Lord ouerthrowen their enemies, they go about afterwardes as they can or maye, to thrust out the Prince, and make themselues Lords.
            
                TO one that is accustomed to liue lose and at libertye, euery  chaine is waighty, and euery bond dooth pinch, although to finde a violent state with a good Prince, is almost impossible: for of necessitie it is conuenient, either that they become like, or else that spéedilye the one or the other doo ruinate.
            
               
                THat Cittie that would maintaine it selfe more by sects and factions then by lawes: when one sect doth remain at home without opposition: of necessity it comes to passe, that it deuide it selfe, for from these priuat meanes it cannot defend it self, the which for her safetie she had firste ordained.
            
                TIme is not euer altogether commodious to woorke a thing in, in such sort, that whosoeuer doth expect all the commodities, or else dooth neuer attempt any thing: or if he doo attempt it, doth performe it for the most parte to his disaduauntage.
            
                AS Er
                  •
               onices which otherwise should be smal, become  in warres capitall, hauing against him a prepared enemy, which giues no time to vnderstand them, but dooth indeuour himselfe to encrease them with industrie, searching alwaies to drawe the victorie wholye vnto him: so in like sorte, small errours made in demaunding of honours, become most gréeuous and heauye, and a small mutation of our willes dooth engender in vs great effectes.
            
                IT is apparentlye séene, that when anye resolution is made, either with ouer spéedye or wich ouer great affection: alwaies we doo that which is euill, for so much as the one dooth not giue vs time to finde out and discipher those things that ought to be cōsidered of before we conclude: the other dooth so busie and occupy our mindes that it doth not suffer vs to know any thing, but that which doth vrge at that instant. To these two sorts of men two other may be ioyned, and that is that we finde some, that although they haue sufficient time to be able to consider and are voyde of affection: neuerthelesse, through a certain naturall folly or incapacity, or through a continuall negligence they vse in their affaires: do neuer perform any good thing or accomplishments to the purpose.
            
                WHen our affaires are reduced into such tearmes, that there remaines no other hope then the prouidence  of God: to hazard and aduenture, enter in, to supplye the place of reason and of prudence, in such sorte that we ought not to leaue off to attempt those thinges that séeme vnto vs to be of small foundation, in respect of humaine prudence: for so much as our most blessed Sauiour and God, many times, to the intent to make the wisedomes of the worlde appeare vaine, suffers a some certain sorte of people, to runne into great calamities: for that he dooth giue and send vs his mercie, in those causes in the which the grounds of reason dooth faile vs.
            
                EUen as melancholly and heauines of the minde vnder  which Ielosie is comprehended: euen as suspition, feare, and such other humours chaunce vnto men and to their mindes: so likewise dooth the very same fall out in the negotiation of our affaires, for so much as after beginning is giuen to any enterprise, the minister & executor therof be not patient to conserue it whole: then will arise vnto him infinite accidents, which will be apt to bring him into infirmitie, and moreouer to make him dye. Therfore it is necessary before things are moued, to consider well of all those contraries that may fall out, as well of the Ambassadours parte, as of his Princes parte, and as well of those with whome he shall negotiate, as of euerye other person.
            
                IT is a wonderful and very perilous parte for him that  goes about to set at liberty any people, that in any case desires to remaine in seruitude and slauerie.
            
                IT is a perillous matter to nourish one that hath great reputation vniuersallye, for as it is easie to oppresse and  withstand disorders at the beginning, so suffering them to encrease, it is a more hard matter to yéeld remedye.
            
                GOod Citizens, in the gouernment of Common-wealthes, ought to take so much as is giuen them of  men and the lawes: and in so dooing they shall neither incurre perrill nor enuie: for that which a man dooth take, and not that which is giuen vnto a man, dooth cause him  to be hated, and such persons shal obtaine more then those that going about to get other mens portions lose their own: and before they lose the same, liue in continual gréef and sorrowe.
            
                FOr that seruilitie dooth drawe after it the effectes and  humoures of feare, and that by so much the more, by how much it is violent and base, it falles out of necessitie, that no lesse the Tirant then he that is tirannised, should be full of terrour and feare: for he that commaunds ouer seruile persons is not frée, and a Tirant being such a one, it followes that he should be seruile as well as his people: and so both of the one side and the other dooth arise forcible actes and great indignities, in such maner that feare dooth alwaies spring and encrease.
            
                ARmes, Lawes, and diuine honours in a wel gouerned  Citie or Common-wealth, can neuer be seperated but with destruction of euery one of them, for that being vnited together, they are maintained entire ruling one an other, and so soone as they are disseuered: that which peraduenture without his two companions, did séeme by it selfe to be sufficient: dooth speedilye fall if it be not succoured, wherfore it is requisite that they haue the three qualities of the soule or minde of man: which is Uigilatiue, Sensatiue, and Intellectiue: which are not to make three soules, but one onlye act by the operation of thrée powers, and so consequentlye we are of no value in humaine perfections: without reciprocall aide and helpe.
            
                IN warfare, valour and art are of great woorthines, but  their perfection consistes in knowing how to vse morrall vertues: and vnderstanding poleticke affaires: and in treading the footsteppes of ancient and good Captaines.
            
                IN the times and cases important in warfare, we ought to giue intire authoritie to him that dooth merite the  same, and to put in him the full managing thereof, yet with this prouiso, that he haue about him Counsellers of good vnderstanding, with whome he may conferre all the whole course of his enterprises.
            
                IN the accidents of humaine chaunces, doubtfull causes  are alwaies consulted vpon: for it appertaines not to make any consultation vpon those that be certaine: for doubts doo spring of that which is within the compasse and power of chaunce, and not of prudence: wherefore we ought to consider how many partes there is within the one and the other: for in consultation when a man is not constrained by necessitie, and his beginning dooth depend wholye of his owne will, which is altogither frée: he dooth tosse in his minde touching the succession of his enterprise, whither is greater, his hope or his feare: and takes resolution not to attempt the same, when mear
                  •
                chaunce is to haue greatest force: and contrariwise to attempt the same when prudence ought to haue the greater swaye.
            
                HE that is meanelye wicked, and likewise he that is  meanelye good, dooth euill in the handes of one that is verye mightilye wicked, but the verye mightye good person, dooth ouercome the very mighty euill person.
            
                WHen Common-wealthes are well administred, the persecutions of the enuious which through our  good woorkes they practise against vs, doo fall out to be to our greater aduauncement: for being constrained by the trueth, to bring foorth and perfourme actes contrarye to their motions and procéeding: they doo that against vs, which a Racket dooth against a tennice ball, the which by how much the more it is stricken, by so much the more it doth rebound in height, and therefore in stead of abasing vs, they doo exalte vs.
            
               
               IT is no doubt but that other mens continuall seueritie,  dooth exasperate our mindes, but euen as the ouer-much fatherly pardoning suffers the childe to runne astraye to a licentious and a disobedient life: euen so the ouer-great abundance of pleasures in a Prince, dooth spoyle his Citizens and his Souldiers, and is yet an occasion of greater domage, when it is vsed with persons of account & degree: for those that be heads and principalles by offering things not lawfull, take possession and become maisters of their administrations: and besides that by little and litle to be their superiours: And moreouer, their insolence maye woorke more pernitious effects then can that of the multitude, it being very easie to knowe, whither many persons gathered together bend themselues, as it is a thing of difficile vnderstanding to discipher the secrets of one man alone.
            
                WE may graunt vnto our fréends and vnto good Princes, the entire possession of our goods & of our liues, but not of our soule: if they cause vs to doo vniust and dishonest actions.
            
                WHen the multitude are not well pleased with their Prince, by beholding the like slacknes in others, and that they all remain in ye selfesame tearms, they are much lesse afflicted, and likewise for that not without great cause they vnite themselues to rebell against a good & legitimate Prince, they supporte and beare his displeasure: After through the aboundance of people in a state of sundrie and diuers humours, and that for the most part are of a weake vnderstanding, by little and little they forget the same: But when a man of great account dooth not rest satisfied touching any his important request, he retaines the disdaine in the deapth of his minde: and according to the occurrence, may conuert it into a pernitious execution.
            
                WHen a Prince is sought vnto by any great personage,  for any thing of importance: and that he will  not graunt the same: he ought to consider of two things. The one is the necessarye circumstances, that is to saye, those things wherof dooth spring euill satisfaction, the person that is euill content, and the time wherein the same dooth occurre: the other is to be aduertised and haue in memory, to counterpease one benefite with one that hath been refused and reiected.
            
                THe administration of a peaceable state, is that which  dooth conserue those things that are gained in time of war, & as the studies of peace yeeld ciuil prudence, yt which dooth accommodate our discourse touching the maner how to make warres: so likewise they maintaine them, after we haue brought backe victorie: For the facultie to exercise warres against our enemies, foiling those men that are not good, but in the same: come to hands together, to contend and to exercise in some sort their wittes and their forces, in the which they are of value, being constrained by their nature and discipline, to woorke according to their knowledge, and according to their abilitie.
            
               
               A Good Souldiour is like vnto bright Stéele the which  dooth keep his bright shining glosse whilste it is in continuall exercise, but being not wrought withall takes rust: rust bréeds to an eating cancker, and cancker makes contagion, in such sort, that right Souldiours which are not good: to any other end then to manage and handle weapons, in times of peace they suffer great damage in themselues: and cause others to be pertakers therof.
            
                CIuilitie and warfare, ought necessarily to be ioyned  together: for constraining the wicked to take armes, if we be not well prouided and of good vnderstanding either the common quiet will be continually disturbed, or else we must chase them out of the Citie and State: although the same be ruled with a very good gouernment.
            
                IT falls out often in cōtentions that he which seeth himselfe  excluded, or that is fauoured of himselfe, doth runne headlong (setting aparte all respects) rather to some third  person, then to giue place vnto him that dooth oppose himselfe against his intention.
            
                MEn haue no greater enemies then ouer-great prosperities,  for that it makes them impotent of themselues: licentious, and bolde to commit euill, and desirous to desturbe their proper benefites and goods, with new deuises.
            
                THe infamie of timeritie: hurtes Generalls and Captaines, more then the glory of victorie dooth benefite them: for temeritie commits many errours, and is attributed wholy to the Captaine, but the prosperous successe in matters of warfare at the least, according to the opinion of men, is communicated to many.
            
                IT is the office and parte of a wise Generall casting in his minde, how often it is necessarye in warres to varie deliberations, according to the varietie of the accidents: to feare and accommodate from the beginning so much as lyes in him, prouidently for all chaunces, and for all counselles, for euen as the happie successe of enterprises, gaine to the Generall the beneuolence of ye Armie: so those that are vnfortunate get him hate and euill will.
            
               
               A Prudent man ought not to suspect that smal credit and faith is giuen vnto him: and if he suspect the same, he must so order the matter, that the wicked doo not knowe that he hath suspition of thē: to the intent that through feare, licence doo not increace in them, and that they take not away their diligence & promptnes from others.
            
                TOuching newe doubts, it is either good to faigne not to  knowe them, or else cloake them, not confirming them by beléeuing them: for so much as for the most parte either they are altogither false, or else much lesse then that which is beleeued of them.
            
                THose which exhort vs to doo any thing in the night, are  oftentimes moued to commit some licētious errours,  for that the night couers in them that which the daye doth discouer, which is either feare or shame.
            
                PRinces in the hands of whom, God did place for no other end, rule & empire, but to the intent men might  haue recourse from the vnmoueable and dead lawes, vnto the quick and breathing: if with the adorned woorke of charitie they doo not searche to imitate them: they are not onely gréeuouslye reprehended of euery one, but they doo deseruedlye incurre the displeasure and hatred of his deuine maiestie.
            
                WArres at home are much more difficille and perrillous  then abroade: for defence is made more easilye abroade and a farre off, then at home by our owne doores: but if it be at home, it is no sound counsell to remoue it further, before that which is néere and at hand be exstinguished.
            
                THe malignitie and the imprudence of ministers and  officers about Princes, maye doo muche that other through negligence doo not apply their affaires, or through wante of capacitie doo not discearne of them-selues good counsell from euill.
            
                THe euent of things is commonlye had in consideration of men, by the which sometimes with praise sometimes  with infamie, according as they be either happye or ouerthwart, doo alwaies attribute to councell that which oftentimes procéeds of fortune.
            
                THe first and the cheefest praise in militarie discipline,  consists more in not putting our selues in perill without necessitie, in making the indeuours of our aduersaries vaine: by industrie, by patience, and by arte: then by fighting most couragiously or furiously.
            
                THe multitude haue béene accustomed to take pleasure in swéete and delicate counselles, rather then in those  that be mature and ripe, and oftentimes account them for woorthie persons that doo not measure their affaires prudently.
            
               
                TO doo benefites to him that doth perswade himselfe, to haue receiued many iniuries: are not sufficient to cansell out of his euill disposed minde the memorye of the offences: cheefely when the benefite is doon in such a time, that it séemes it proceedes more of necessitie then of any voluntary desire.
            
                THe counselles and the secret grounds of Princes affaires & actions, are dispersed abroade for ye most parte in a farre disagreeing sort from that which is true in effect: for it falles to be commodious for them to doo one thing, whilste the worlde doth beléeue another thing.
            
                PEace is a most desired and sacred thing, when it dooth assure vs from suspitions, when it dooth not augment perrilles, when it doth induce men to be able to rest, and to lighten them of expences: but when it brings foorth contrarie effects, and pernitious warres vnder the name of a traiterous and disceitfull peace, it is a pestiferous venome vnder the name of a hoalesome medicine.
            
                AMbassadours are the eyes and the eares of States, and the other offices the eyes of Princes, but woe be vnto that Prince, that sometimes doth not sée without those eyes.
            
                THere is great difference betwixt hauing of the Subiects  desperate, and the hauing of them mal-content: for the first doo not thinke vpon any other thing then vpon the change and the mutation of the State, the which they goe about to performe, with the hazard of many perrils: the second desire newe thinges, but they doo not stirre vp occasions, but expect the comming of them by themselues.
            
                WE ought to look for effectes and not for demonstrations, and superficiall showes and proceedings in causes: and yet neuerthelesse it is an incredible thing, what grace & fauour, curtesie and humanity doth obtaine vs amongst men, I iudge the reason is, for that euery one doth beleeue and estéeme himselfe to merite much more then he  doth deserue or merite▪ and therefore he becomes displeased when he perceiues, that that account is not made of him that seemes to appertaine vnto him.
            
                SUubiects can not be well gouerned without seueritie,  but it ought to be mixt with dexteritie; by making great demonstrations, to the intent the people may beleeue that crueltie doth not please thée, but that thou doost vse it of necessitie, for the commoditye of the Common-wealth.
            
               
               A Man must alwaies kéepe and restraine himselfe from those things that doo hurt or not benefite: therefore he  ought not to speake any thing that dooth displease, neither in presence nor in absence, without necessitie: for it is a great follie to make people our enemies without purpose.
            
                HE that enters into perrilles without considering of  those things that may importe, is to be called beastlye; but he that dooth knowe them before hand, and dooth enter into them franckly, either through necessitie or for some honourable occasions, is to be called a most couragious man.
            
                HE dooth erre and is much disceiued that dooth say that  letters and study spoile the braines of men, although perchaunce it be true in those that haue weak and vnstayed heads: but where learning findes a good naturall wit, it makes it perfect: for a good nature ioyned with a good accident, makes an excellent composition.
            
                THat glory is to be accounted vaine the which is gained or sought out by the iniruie of others: but that is the  true, honest and immortall glorye, which is gained not by the destruction of people, and the ouerthrowe of Citties: but by ye knitting and vniting them in good concord, dooth giue them assured quietnes, and dooth deliuer them from the sorrowes and miseries that dooth afflict them.
            
                NEw and vnaccustomed counselles, at the firste sight séeme to be good and glorious, but they fall out afterwards   without doubt, to be more fallible and more perrilous, then those that reason and experience hath approued in all ages, and amongst all men.
            
                ALl the fruite that is reaped by hauing ouercome, consistes in the well vsing of the victorie, and not to vse the same well: the infamie is so much greater then not to ouercome, by how much the more it is a greater faulte to be deceiued of those thinges that are in the power of them that are deceiued, then of those that depend of Fortune.
            
                THe common people neither haue nor vse any mean, for when they doo not doubt, they endeuour themselues fo make others afraide: and when they are afraide themselues, then they may without perrills be managed.
            
                DOubtfull and headlong determinations, appertaine  vnto him that hath difficile and sinister state, or vnto him that is pricked forward with ambition and couetousnes to make his name famous, and dooth feare that he shall want time.
            
                IT is fit for prudent men, to consider the perrilles which lye hid vnder hope and couetousnes, and much more the end then the beginning of any thing.
            
                WOrldly affaires are all of them subiect to many perrilles, but wise men know that all that which is euil and may chaunce, comes not euer forward, for either by the benefite of fortune or of chaunce, many perils become vaine, many vanishe awaye through prudence and industrie, and therefore we ought not to confound feare with prudence.
            
                THose are not to be reputed for wise, that presuppose for certaine all those perrils that are or séeme doubtful, and being afraide all thinges rule themselues in their determinations, (as if all were to succeed and come to passe) or rather in no case, can we call those prudent and wise, that are more affraide of future things then they ought: For to deserue the name of wise and to be had in praise, appertaines  muche more to those that be couragious. For knowing and considering the perrilles, they discourse and reuolue in thēselues, how often men sometimes haue by chaunce, sometimes by force, valour and vertue, made free themselues from many difficulties.
            
                WIse men, that in their deliberations doo call no lesse into counsell, hope then feare: neither presuppose  and take for certaine, vncertaine euents: doo not so easilye refuse and reiect profitable and honourable occasions, as rash men doo.
            
                WHen as the desire to enlarge, or the ielousie to maintain, or the feare to loose, dooth once enter into the  minde of a Prince, he neuer thinkes vpon, either the circumstances of giuen faith, the bonds of freendship, or receiued benefites: an example heereof may be taken of Lodowick S
                     •
                  orce, who in change to shewe himselfe gratefull to Charles the eight, for the benefites receiued of him: not onely, did not defend him from the perrill of loosing the state, but did helpe to chase him out of Italye, by violating the faith of amitie: breaking in sunder the league, and ioyning himselfe to his enemies, only in respect to kéepe and preserue his estate, and for feare of the ouer great rising, might and power of King Charles.
            
            
                IT is an imprudence and a pusillanimitie, where the  health and safetie of all persons is touched and had in discourse, to bring indignities into consideration: and not to knowe how to force himselfe to performe the consideration of the State, before his proper will and affections.
            
                IN taking of counsell, many thinges are to be had respect  vnto, but principallye two, prudence in him that hath to receiue counsell, and fidelitie in him that is to giue counsell: for so much, as counsell being nothing else but a well considered discourse of certaine thinges, whither they are to be doone, or not to be do
                  ••
               e: if he that  is to receiue counsell be not prudent, he will not receiue that which shalbe offered him as for the best: but will followe that which is most agreeable to his owne minde: for if he be not prudent, foolishe thinges will please him: and not being capable of that which is good and true, he will followe that which is naught and foolishe: and so peruerting all order, it will neuer be possible for him either to performe woorks, or giue end to any action that will fall out well. And on the other side, if he that giues counsell be not faithfull: he will so cunningly with a thousand cullours, couer and shadowe the truethes, drawing him back to his intent, end, and purpose: and winding in the receiuer with counsel, that he beléeuing him, in the ende shall finde himselfe to be disceiued: and so hauing taken and tas
                  •
               ed wicked and naughtye counsell, for that which is good: he will call to memorye, but ouer-late, the vnfaithfulnes of his Counsellour.
            
                IMportant consultations in matters of state, are contained vnder fiue subiectes and rules, about the which Gouernours make discourse. That is, either touching the reuennues of the State or Prouince, or touching peace or warres, or touching the garde of Prouinces, or touching victua
                  •
               les that are to be brought into or taken out of the saide Prouinces, or touching the lawes, vpon which affaires he that dooth consult, cannot doo it well, vnlesse he be well informed therof: and moreouer, of all the circumstances touching which he is to giue counsell.
            
               
               A Man ought to take care, not onely: not to take counsell of him that hates him, but also of those persons that carrye hate to others: although they were the enemies of him that is counselled. To the intent, that he by accepting such counsell, it chaunce not vnto him to chastice any one of his enemies, or peraduenture more then he that counsells him, that he fall not into some inconuenience, not able to be remedied.
            
               
               AFter that any potentate hath well consulted vpon  the affaires and prouisions for warres, he ought not to varie from his purpose, but ought to be resolute in his enterprises: for so much, as to remaine in a doubtfull minde and to hang in suspence, bending himselfe somtimes to doo one thing, sometimes another, doth cause many disorders, but yt which doth greatly importe, is: that he giues time to the enemy, not so much to thinke vpon the waies how to defend himselfe, as to make preparations to endamage and offend thée.
            
                IT is necessary, that he that sets forward or doth moue any warres, remaine alwaies prepared and watchfull,  and intentiue in his minde, to euerye accident or chaunce that ariseth: and be making of prouisions for all such things as may chaunce to occurre, and for his first intention, he must beware he moue not warres vniustlye: and that he prouide he be not alone, to consider against what Potentate he dooth moue the same, that is to say: that the enemy haue not the protection of a Prince that is more mightye then he that makes 
                  •
               he warres: to examine the forces of his aduersaries, and of his own: and moreouer of those that may be induced to vnite themselues with the one parte or the other.
            
               
               A New Prince in making prouision of monye, hath greater difficultie then hath a Common-wealth: forsomuch,  as it is not possible for him that his ordinarie reuennewes, should suffice to maintaine him in his estate, as well for the new expences that are necessary for him to make, and for the preparations and fortifications to defēd his State, as in respect that he must entertaine many captaines in time of peace to serue him selfe withall in future warres: and moreouer, to maintaine himselfe towards great princes, of whom a new Prince is constrained to depend: and to intertaine other Princes, wherin besides the conuentions that is made with them, there dooth occurre sundry other expences: for so much as the officers of great  persons, think that they may be able alwaies reasonablie to enrich themselues by meanes of the giftes of new princes: whilste it seemes vnto them, that to draw from those is not so much profitable to them, as it is vnto the Prince they serue: but in a Common-wealth many doo willingly contribute infinite thinges: carried forward with a desire to procure themselues greater honours, the which oftentimes falles out, by receiuing due and woorthy rewardes: and if it chaunce they impose and appoint necessarie taxes and paiments to be made: It séemes that euery one dooth supporte it easily, whilst it appeares vnto them, that they disbursse the same for their own proper profit.
            
                WHen the charge and care of the Common-wealth is set vpon the shoulders of one person alone, it séemes vnto euery man that it is reasonable, that a prince abounding in riches, make all the costs and expence that chaunce out of his owne store, considering the profite of the enterprise ought likewise to redownde to himselfe alone: and the mindes of men are naturally most prompt and readie to examine with extreame diligence, all the reuenues of the Prince, and to magnifie them, without making computacion or defaulting the expences, and very often in reprehending many of these things as ouer-aboundant: and not knowing many of their causes, neither examining well the degrée or the necessitie of the Prince, become in their paiments recusants and slowe, besides that many doo beware and kéepe themselues, some for that the fame shall not go abroad that he is rich, and othersome for that they wil not haue their prince to grow into suspition.
            
                AMbition in the Generall of an Army, dooth oftentimes ruinate whole States and Prouinces, for yt they giue no end to their warres, whilste with their honour or with thier aduauntage they may make them: to the intent he may endure the longer in his Generallship, or else sometimes they doo demaund such honours or such authorities that it is farre ouermuch: And verye often if they doo not  obtaine the same, they become displeased, and doo nothing that is good, or else, obtaining the same, they become ouer proud or damageable to the States they serue.
            
                THere is nothing more perilous, in respect of what potentate soeuer, then the contention, emulation and  the strife for first and chéefest preferments amongst many Captains, or to send his souldiers to any enterprise without a head: for so much, as in warres it importes to haue a head that knowes how to commaund, and officers that will obay and put in execution those things that are committed vnto them: for that the one or the other of these thinges being taken away, there ariseth confusion, able not onely to driue in disorder what armie soeuer, although most valiant: but also, what other thing soeuer that were more mighty.
            
                ONe of those principall thinges that a Generall ought  to haue next vnto force and valour, I would wishe it should be fidelitie: that which is to be preferred aboue all other things, who ought not neither for displeasure, anger, or for anye thing else, faile of that which is looked for he should doo: and chéefely towards that Prince or potentate which he serues, to the intent nothing may come vnto him that should be his ruine or his shame.
            
                MEn ought to haue care to doo their thinges well and  vertuously, if they will become glorious and woorthy praise, for so much, as of glory, vertuous actions doo not arise: but of vertuous déeds, dooth spring glory.
            
                THe desire of goods dooth spring of a base and euill compounded  minde: if it be for any other consideration, then that we may enioy ye same, but the life of men in this world being so corrupted as it is, whosoeuer desires reputation, it is necessary that he desire goods, for that by them vertue dooth shine and is had in estimation, whereas in a  poore man it is smally knowne and lesse estéemed.
            
                MAny doo agrée that the state of one man alone is better when it is good, then that of many or of fewe, although likewise good: so in like maner, we maye conclude that, that of one alone maye become more easilye wicked, then that of many: and when it is wicked, then becomes it wurst of all▪ and so much the more wicked is i
                  •
               , by how muche it goes forward in succession, for it comes verye ra
                  •
               ely to passe, that vnto a good and wise Father doth succeed a Sonne like vnto him. Therfore I would that those that make profession of pollicie and gouernment, would resolue me of a doubt, (all the conditions, qualities, and perrilles, being considered) which state is most to be desired in a Cittie or a Common-wealth, either to fall vnder the gouernement of one alone, or of many, or of fewe.
            
                IT is no great matter for an Emperour or King, vsing  oftentime the sharpenes and effect of seueritie, to make himselfe redoubted: for that Subiectes become easilye afraid of those that be able to force, ruinate, and ouerthrow them with any easie execution: but I commend those muche, that with little sharpenes and executions, knowe how to obtaine and to maintaine the name of terrible and seuere.
            
                THose selfesame enterprises, which being attempted  out of due time, are most difficile and impossible, whē they are accompanied with time and occasion, are most easie to be doone: therefore they are not to be attempted but in their due times, for by dooing them out of their time: they doo not onely not succeed, but it makes the matter perrillous to fall out, in that they haue beene attempted, that they should spoyle that time, in the which they might easily haue béen perfourmed. Therfore those that be patient are accounted for wise men.
            
                THese remembrances or records are not alwaies to be  obserued indistinctlye, for that in some particular causes, that haue sundry reasons they should fall out not to  be good, and what those cases be, cannot be comprehended vnder any rule, neither can there any booke be found that can teach the same: but it is necessarie that this light be first had of nature, and afterward of experience.
            
                TO finde out notes and records for the profit of one person,  is a hard and difficull thing: but it is much more difficile to execute the same: for that oftentimes a man knowes them, but knowes not how to put them in action and execution: therefore whosoeuer will vse them, let him force his nature, and therin to make a habite, by ye meanes whereof he shall performe so much as is taught him: and besides that there shall fall out to be perfourmed and doon, without trauaile, all that whatsoeuer reason dooth commaund him, or that experience dooth teach him.
            
                THere be two times that are cheefely good to doo our affaires in: the one, when we sée the enemye occupied in  other affaires: and the other when he is afflicted, as I haue oftentimes comprehended by experience.
            
                AMbition doth enforce many Persons to become false, to shut vp one thing close in their breast, and to haue  an other prompt and ready in their tung to iudge of amity and of emnetie, not by the measure of effects, but by profit: And to cary greater bountie in their countenance then in their mindes.
            
                AMbition is a vice néerer to vertue, then couetousnes:  for that men of valour and men of vile disposition, doo desire and encrease equally, glorye, honour, and signorye, but the first dooth direct his pace to the true way, and this other, because he wants good arts, dooth woork by deceites and fraude.
            
                THe amitie of the Common-wealth, ought to preserue it selfe, rather in publick then in priuate: leauing off,  to giue gifts or presents to any one: for not without perrill, that is bought of fewe, which appertaines to many.
            
                MAny by fraude and by theftes rather then by good artes enforce themselues to attaine to rule, empire   and honours, as though supreme and chéefest offices are of themselues cleare and magnificent, and not reputed to be such, as the vertue of those be that sustaine and beare them.
            
                MAny doo seek for the offices of Maiestrates, not after one maner and one selfe arte: and in like sorte after they haue obtained the same, they gouerne the same: firste they are industrious, suppliant, modest, and after with pultronorie and in pride doo lead their age.
            
               
               A Generall or Captaine, dooth attend and take respect with prudence and with carefulnesse to his affaires, and to the enemies, and dooth know that which is good, or that which is pernicious in the one and the other: he spies out his proceeding, his counselles, and dooth preuent his trappes and deceites: neither suffer any thing negligently about himselfe, nor assured about them.
            
               
               A Generall or Captaine ought to prouide for euerye thing, no otherwise thē if he had not giuen in charge any of his affairs, not so much in respect yt he should mistrust or doubt that his commaundemēt should not be executed: but to the intent his Souldiours should willinglye séek to match and imitate his, in trauaile and paines taking.
            
               
               A Generall or captain, although death were present before his face, yet ought he rather to stay himselfe resolutely. Then betraying and abandoning those that he dooth leade, giue pardon to his vncertaine life with a shamefull flight.
            
                VNto a Generall comes greater sorrowe and gréefe through the wicked customes and behauiours of his Souldiours, then helpe or good hope through their multitude, the which is confirmed much more by shunning then by chas
                  ••
               sing of errours.
            
                ALl thos
                  •
                yt are to giue counsell vpon any matter, ought  to be 
                  •
               oid of hate, without amitie in that respect, without anger & without mercy, I may saye that the like is to be obserued when iudgement is to be giuen vpon the cause of any one.
            
               
               IT is a thing truely very difficile to be full of valour in  battaile, and good in counsell, for the one is accustomed for the most part to bring feare through prudence, and the other small consultation through audacitie.
            
                SOuldiers if fortune do enuie, their valour ought not to  faile in hart and courage without reuenge, neither suffer themselues, being taken like beasts, rather to be cut to peeces, then fight like valiant men, and leaue vnto their enemies the victorie, lamentable and bloodye.
            
                HE that is to prognosticate and diuine of other mens determinations, ought if he will not to deceiue himselfe,  to haue in consideration not so much that, that a wise man would think meet to be doon, as what the braine and nature of the person is which hath to determine.
            
                ENuie is a sorrow and gréefe that we haue at the goods  which other men possesse, and cannot be shunned but of those that be miserable, yet neuertheles it may be much diminished, and sometimes altogither exstinguished, with the vsing of humanitie and curtesie, as contrariwise, with ouermuch and proude ostentation and bragging, it is infinitely kindled and encreased: but hate which is a desire that an other man should incurre damage, is auoided either with remaining altogether solitarily and quiet apart (which appertaines not to a noble personage, borne in the Common-wealth) or by obtaining that which to our power we ought to indeuour our selues to obtain, which is the good grace and beneuolence of all persons vniuersally.
            
                THe Earle Francisco Carmignuola was accustomed to saye, that ye principall rule that men ought to obserue  towards Princes, was not to beleeue verye easilye that which they speake with their mouth, and that which they make outward apparance of: but it is necessary to cōsider and to discipher that which with all reason they may imagine they think in their mindes, that is, that which will turne most commodious for their profit, and vpon this they maye make the foundations of their desires and thoughts more then vpon their woords: and likewise we  ought not to haue regarde to the ametie, to the emnitie, to the parentage, or to any thing else whatsoeuer amongst them: for when they perceiue any future profit to arise, they forget all amitie, they quiet all disdaine, and make small account of any brotherhood or parentage, and do permit euery respect, so yt therin may be found some small colome of honestie sufficient to salue ye apparent shew therof.
            
                EUen as a good Phisition, when he hath to cure the  infirmitie of any particular member, it is conuenient that he haue care that, that medicine be not hurtfull to an other member: Euen so a man of State ought alwaies to put his Prince in memory of those things which wil serue the Common-wealth for the preseruation therof.
            
                WHat great diuersitie and difference there is betwixt those déeds that spring of feare and of errour, and betwixt those that are moued of fraud and of euill intent, is manifest to euery one.
            
                THe liberty of Citties do chéefely please God, for that in them more then in any other sort of gouernment, common benefites are conserued: wherein iustice is administred more without destinction, and much more kindles and inflames the mindes of the Citizens, to vse honourable and vertuous actions: and finally they haue more respect to obserue religion then other gouernments.
            
                HE is an vnprofitable Citizen, that for any occasion dooth withdrawe himselfe to perswade vnto others that which in himselfe he dooth féele to be the benefit of the Common-wealth.
            
                FOr a man to moderate himselfe and to ouercome those proper desires his hart couets: is so much more woorthy of praise, by how much it is a rare thing to be able to do it, & by how much the occasions are more iust wherwithall the anger and appetite of men is stirred vp and moued.
            
                THe silence of a Prince giuen to demaundes and requests: is tollerable, when it is not doone or procéedes in a despising maner: and moreouer oftentimes doth help,  for that the lawes, amities, and such other like things, are nourished in him: moreouer, it dooth helpe ouer much whē a naughty answere is fearde, and it is taken for a despising of the Prince, and if it be a iust quarrell, armes is taken, and dooth flie the fault, in that he hath not demaunded the thing, to abtaine it.
            
                THe coniectures of all elections, the which depend of the free will of many, is difficile and incertain: forsomuch  as nothing is more difficile, then to penetrate and enter into the willes of men, altogether shut vp from all persons, and open onely to God: and nothing more vncertaine, then to establish and set downe, in so great a motion and reuolution of mindes, vpon what they wil settle their determinations: neuerthelesse, so farre as mans wit may attaine vnto, a wise officer ought to indeuour himselfe so much as he is able, to doo his duetie, and not become terrified with the greatnes of the act, to the intent to make him selfe knowne for prudent, the busines taking effect: or of a willing minde or diligence, by not abandoning any due meanes to obtaine the end of his desire.
            
                THe opinions of men are so sundrye and so contrarye to  things: And we haue besides in vs a certaine necessity which doth force vs to attempte fortune, although we perceiue that there rest in vs a small foundation in demaunding of the thing: neuerthelesse, drawne by a certaine inspiration, we put our selues in perrill to demaunde those benefites that we are not woorthy to obtaine. This thing besides the examples of histories, hath likewise his reason, if not through the iniurie of him that demaunds the same, to those vnto whome the requests are made, through their nature, carrying a resemblance of God: whose mercye is poured vpon those that séek for it: many times in our own demerites, in our own infelicities, in our miseries, a certaine spirit which is called of the antiquitie Genio, doth prick vs forward to attempt thinges contrarie to all humaine prudence: And they fall out in such sorte as we are  not able to finde out the reason therof.
            
                IT is no infamie to retire our selues, when it is doone by prudence, neither is it pusilanimitie when it is doone to refuse and shun to put in doubtfull tearmes, those thinges that be certain: when as the approching end of the warres hath to shew to all the world, the mature ripenes of counsell: forsomuch as no victorie is more profitable, more famous, or more glorious, then that which is gained without losse, and without shedding the blood of Souldiours.
            
                EUen as the minde which cōmonly ought to be mistresse ouer the body, should become a Tirant ouer the same: and knowing the excellency of her selfe, should onlye think and care for herselfe, and would graunt no parcell of the time to the body, he would become weak and féeble: euen so contrariwise, those that make their bodies Lordes ouer their mindes, in satisfiyng their appetites, not graunting any parte thereof to their minde: they can neuer become vertuous, neither haue any valour in them.
            
                COuetousnes without doubt is a thing more to be detested in a Prince then in a priuate person, not onelye for that hauing more liberty to distribute, he dooth depriue a man thereof, so muche the more: but also, for that, that which a priuat person hath, is all to his own vse, and may be disposed as it pleaseth himselfe, without the iust complaint of any person: but that which a Prince hath, is giuen him for the vse and benefite of others. Therefore if he retaine it for him selfe, he defraudeth men of that which he dooth owe vnto them.
            
                THe affaires of this worlde are so variable, and depend vpon so many chaunces and accidents, that very hardlye, we shall be able to giue iudgement of that which is to come: and therfore it is séene by experience, that almoste alwaies the coniectures of wise men are vain and fallible. I doo not therefore commend the counsell of those which leaue off the commoditie of a present benefite, although lesse for feare of a future euill although it be greater, vnlesse  it be very néer and very certaine, for that, those things not falling out oftentimes, which thou diddest doubt of through a vaine feare, it comes into thy memorye, that thou hast left off those things that did please thée, and therfore that is a wise Prouerb which saith: Di cosa nasce cosa et il Tempo le gouerna, Affaires spring foorth of affaires, and Time dooth gouerne them.
            
                THose which giue iudgement in matters of state, I  haue séen oftentimes to erre, for that men doo with reason examine that which a Prince hath to doo, but not that which he will doo.
            
                WEll ordered Common-wealths doo not vse to suffer that their confederates, who together with them  haue well plaide their partes in their occasions, should be abandoned in their necessities.
            
                MIghty Common-wealths be accustomed not only to  desire and will that their confederates and freendes doo not loose any thing: but yt euerye day they may encrease and make themselues greater in fauours, in mightines, and in honours.
            
                WHen a Prince dooth followe vertue, he dooth merite to be praised: for that Princes more then any other  persons are inclined to their appetites: forsomuch, as they hauing béene nourished with small chastisement in their Childehood, most men endeuour themselues to please thē, and to follow them in their waies.
            
                PRinces for the most part are more suspitious thē other  men, for yt they are giuen to vnderstand sundry doubts and aduertisements, and very often are 
                  •
               lattered.
            
                THat Prince that can gaine persons with well dooing, besides his being in the grace of God: he shewes that  he is not blotted with the vice of pride, the which procu
                  •
               es hate to follow the vertues of persons.
            
                WHen in a Common-wealth any dooth obtaine & take vpon him the name of Singuler in what matter  soeuer (although therein he be ignorant) it is a very hard  thing to remoue that opinion, for that men naturallye conceiue and become grosse with the first impressions, the which waxing olde, cannot so easilye be defined and plucked out.
            
                HE that is sent to entreate of peace, ought to be faithfull  vnto his Prince, and of a meane age: to ye intent that his weakenesse induce him not to doo things that are not fit, or at his returne to terrifie his Maister, more then is necessarie: and that man is rather to be imployed therin, which hath receiued fauours and benefits of his Prince then any other.
            
                TO know the natures and dissimulations of those that  are in election to haue great honors, as it is a thing very easie, so is it a thing very wise: therefore the inclinations and the discourses of such persons ought alwaies to be obserued, hauing neuerthelesse an eye, not so much to affection as to common profit.
            
                WHen any persons doo departe from thy enemye to  come to enter into thy seruice great profit is reape
                  •
                by them, if they be faithfull: for that the forces of thy aduersarie are diminished much more with those that flie from him, then by those that are slaine: although ye name of a fugitiue to the new freend be suspitious, and to the old odious.
            
                IN warres for the most parte the good fortune of a victorious  Prince is nothing else but the euill counsell & base minde of his aduersarie: and therfore very hardly may he be 
                  •
               uercome that can measure and knowe both his owne and his enemies forces: besides that, the valour and vertue of the Souldiours is of more valewe, then the multitude: and the cituation of the ground doth somtimes more help their valour and vertue.
            
                HE that is most vigilant in warres to marke and obserue  the determinations and plattes of the enemie, and can endure greatest trauaile to exercise his people: shall incurre least perrilles, and may the more hope for victorie,  but it is requisite in warres to know how to discern occasion, and to take héede of her, for that she dooth helpe more then any other thing.
            
                THe ambition of honor and glory, is a thing commendable and profitable to the worlde, for that it giues  men occasion to woork great and high effects: but the ambition of power and greatnes is not so, for that she is taken of others for an Idole, and will in any case obtaine all things, either lawfullye or vnlawfullye▪ and is the occasion of many euils: and therefore we apparentlye perceiue, that whosoeuer dooth possesse ambition to this ende, haue no stay of themselues, and makes their life and their goods equall.
            
                ENterprises and other affaires that are to fall in decay, not through fury and force, but are first to consume thē
               selues,  draw out more in length, then would haue béen reléeued at the first: for that when men growe obstinate to suffer, they suffer and supporte much more then we would haue imagined. Therefore we see, that any warres which is to take end through famine, or through any other discommoditie, drawes out further in length then we would think.
            
                HE that first gaue vnto the people this woord Popolo,  would verily haue tearmde it vn Pazzo, A Foole, for that he is a monster replenished with confusion and errours: forsomuch as his opinions are so farre off from the trueth, as according to Tolome, the East Indies is from Spaine.
            
               
               I Can neuer flatter my selfe, to make shew of those things that are not so in effect: neuertheles, it should be much  more profitable to doo the contrarye, for it is an incredible thing to be spoken off, what benefit the reputation and the opinion that men haue that thou art great, will woorke, then for that onely by the means of this rumour they run after thee, without needing to clime to the height to make showe of thy selfe.
            
               
                THe libertie of a Common-wealth, is the administration of iustice, for that the foundation therof is laide to no other end, but that the one be not oppressed of the other: Therefore he that might be assured that in the state of one alnoe, or of many, Iustice would be obserued: should haue no occasion to desire liberty. This was the occasion wherfore the wise men of olde time did not praise the gouernement of those that liue in liberty, more then the rest: but those in which there was best prouision made for the preseruation of the lawes and iustice.
            
                MEn, Iron, Money, and Bread, are Sinewes of the  warres, but of these foure the firste two are most necessarye: for that Men and Iron will be able to get mony and Bread, but money and bread doo not prouide so easily for Men and Iron.
            
                NEw and soddaine thinges make afraide and terrifie  Armies, those that are accustomed and sloe, are smallye estéemed of them, therefore a Generall ought to practise and make knowne to his Army, with light & small encounters, a newe enemy, before he come to a day of battaile with him.
            
               
               A Prince when he hath about him his familiares, dooth  distribute his fauours amongst them that are most gratefull and most conformable to his honour, but when a time of necessitie and occasion of affaires falles out: then the diuersitie and difference that is amongst them is apparently known.
            
               
               A Wise personage, which hath the meanes to entertain  ten thousund Footmen, is more to be feared and estéemed, then ten confederates together, which haue euerye one of 
                  •
               hem sixe thousand: for that very sildome agréeing togither, by reason of their sundrie and diuersitie of ends: the one halfe of the time is lost and spent, before they resolue vpon any thing.
            
               
               IF a man would serue a great person, let him rather choose  him wise then ignorant: for about a wise man there be many meanes to be found, by the which his fauour is obtayned, but about one that is ignorant: there can no way be found that is good, for that he hath no vnderstanding.
            
                THe true note of the ruine of a Prouince, dooth appeare  when those that ought to vnite themselues together, become deuided amongst themselues, and doo band themselues, to be abandoned.
            
                HE that gaue this rule, that a wise man cannot commit errour in speaking, had no iudgement: for that  either because he is affectioned to the matter which is spoken off, either for loue, either for hate, or for that he would be contrarie to another: and sometimes through the indisposition of his person, he is subiect to commit errours in his woords.
            
                THe affaires of the world doo not alwaies remain stable and firme: but are euer in continuall motion to  go forward into that way and path into the which by reason they are to goe, and where by their nature they are to take end: but oftentimes they make longer staye then we would beléeue, for that we doo measure them according to our life, which is shorte: and not according to their time which is long, for that their féete be more sloe then ours be, and farre sloe themselues by nature, for although they moue, yet oftentimes we doo not perceiue their motion, by meanes whereof it dooth arise, that those iudgements, which we make: fall very oftentimes to be false and fallible.
            
                IN matters of importance, he that dooth not very well  knowe all the perticulars, can giue no right iudgement, for that one circumstance although it séeme very little, dooth change and varie all the whole cause that ought to be iudged, yet is it true that oftentimes  he may giue good iudgement, that hath knowledge of no other then of Generalities, and knowing more perticulars, giues woorsse iudgement, forsomuch as he that hath not his braine very perfect, and cleane and free from passions, vnderstanding many particulars, dooth verye easilye varie and confound himselfe.
            
               
               A Man ought aboue all thinges in this worlde to desire  and to attribute to his owne felicitie, to see his enemie stricken prostrate to the ground, and brought into such s
                  •
               ate, that he may vse him at his discretion: but by how much the more happie he is vnto whom this aduēture doth befall: by so much the more ought he to make himselfe glorious, by vsing the victorie commendable, in pardoning and in vsing of clemencie: a thing proper and perticular to great and woorthy mindes.
            
                AN inferiour Prince ought neuer to put his state in hazard of one battaile, for if he ouercome, he gaines nothing but glory, and if he loose: he is spoyled.
            
                GReat personages are often much enclined to their  own willes, without hauing any respect at all to reason, and that which is woorst, they are for the most part environed with men that cast their eyes vpon nothing else, then to praise and congratulate their good and euill déeds, whither soeuer they be, and if there be any that would doo the contrary, he findes him selfe deceiued.
            
                THose Princes which are equalle in power, (although  they be not young, for at such times they thinke onely vpon pleasure) doo not well to meet and come to speak personally together, forsomuch as, besides that they doo not without perrill, euil wil dooth spring vp betwixt them, and enuie growes to be greater.
            
                ALthough the issuing and fallying foorth of Souldiers,  out of a Cittie besiedged, be necessarie: yet neuerthelesse, they be perrilous for those within: for that it improts them much more to loose ten of their infantrie, thē it is for them without to loose an hundreth.
            
               
               IT is a manifest thing to euery one, that he that dooth alwaies  holde his Prince in tearmes of suspition, and feare, with aduertisements stuffed with feare and suspition: either will become to be mortallye hated of him, or in the ende shall fall into some other euill inconuenience.
            
                HE that dooth possesse authoritie and rule, maye likewise  exstend the same ouer his owne forces, for that his subiects doo not measure exquisitlie, that which de can doo, but rather imagining his power to be much more then it is, yéeld to those thinges vnto which the Prince can not constraine them.
            
                IT is to be discerned in those differences, that doo arise with vrbanitie amongst Citizens, and in those malicious  humours, into which men do incurre, alwaies to haue recourse to those iudgements or to those remedies, that of the antiquitie haue been ordained: for that the ciuill lawes is nothing else, then Sentences giuen by the ancient lawgiuers, the which being brought into order, do instruct our present Lawyers how to iudge: and Phisicke likewise is nothing else, but the experience which hath beene made by auncient Phisitions, vpon which the Phisitions in these our daies doo ground their iudgements: neuerthelesse, in the ordering of a Common-wealth, in the maintaining of States, in the gouernement of Kingdomes, in the militarie institutions, in the administration of warfare, in iudging the Subiects, and in the encreasing of the Empire and State: There is to be found, neither Prince, neither Common-wealth, neither Generall or Captaine, neither Cittizen, that haue recourse to the examples of the antiquitie.
            
                THere be infinite persons that read Histories, and take pleasure to hear the varietie of accidents, that are contained  in them, but they neuer thinke vpon the imitation of them: for they imagine and iudge the imitation, not onely difficile, but also impossible, as if the Heauens, the  Sunne and Starres, the elements and men, were changed in their mouing, order, and power, from that that they were in auntient time.
            
                MEn doo woork their affaires, either by necessitie or by choise: and for that it is séene, that vertue is greater where choise hath least authoritie: it is to be considered, whither it should be better to choose a barraine place for the building of a Cittie, then a fertile: to the intent that men being tonstrained by industrie, being lesse subiect to idlenesse, may liue the more vnited togeather, hauing by reason of the place lesse occasion of discorde: This election or choise might be accounted wise, if men would be content to liue of their own, and would not goe about to commaund ouer others: and forsomuch as men cannot assure themselues but by power, it is necessary to shun those barrain places, and to plant our selues in a most fertile Cuntrie, where they may be able through the aboundance of the ground, to enlarge their bounds and limits, to defend their bounds and limits, to defend themselues from those that assault them, and oppresse them, whosoeuer would withstand and oppose themselues against their greatnes.
            
                MEn doo neuer agree to any newe Lawe, which bring a  newe order into the Cittie, if it be not apparentlye shewed vnto them, that of necessitie it is requisite it should be doon: now then, that necessitie not being able to come without perrill: that Common-wealth dooth easily runne into ruine, before the Lawe be brought to the perfection of a right order.
            
                EUen as amitie betwixt particular Gentlemen is contracted by a mutuall agréeing of their mindes, and by the similitude of their good customes: so amongst Princes amitie is wrought, either through their owne correspondence of nature, or through the iudgement they haue, that  it falles out to their commoditie to be fréendes, or else through necessitie and Fortune: which againste their own willes, constraines them to remaine vnited.
            
                MY opinion is that aduersse fortune, is the touch-stone of our fréendes and followers. For that those that remaine, are such as are good, faithfull, and full of constancy.  The rest that fall away: are vnprofitable, naught, and an example of lightnesse, and I beléeue that of aduersitie this profit is reaped: That without vsing a staffe, a man may driue away from him, the whole trayne of those men that are base of minde and body, replenished with cou
                  •
               tousnes and ingratefulnes. And those only remaine with vs: that desire to showe by the vertue and valour of their minde, that they cannot be ouercome by aduersse fortune.
            
                ALl those that discourse of the manner of Ciuill life, and all Histories are full of examples: That he which  hath the disposing of a Common wealthe, and dooth ordaine Lawes in the same: it is necessarye that he presuppose, that all such men as be wicked: will euer apply themselues to be malignant, so often as occasion is offred. And when any malignitie dooth remaine hid for a time: it dooth procéed of some occasion, the which because experience hath not beene séene to be made of the contrarye, comes not to be knowne, but time dooth afterwards discouer the same, which is the father of all trueth.
            
                MEn doo neuer perfourme any action well, vnlesse it come through necessitie, for where choise doth abound and that liberty may be vsed: suddainly all things is filled  with confusion and disorder. Therefore it is saide that hunger and pouertie makes men indus
                  •
               rious: and the Lawes makes them good: and where any thing of it selfe dooth wexe well, there is no necessitye of Lawe,  but when that good custome dooth faile, immediatly lawes are necessarie.
            
                EUen as Saylers haue for their guide, the South and the North, who sometimes do trauerse and crosse their way, and yet for all that do not altogither lose their guide: Euen so in matter of State, it is necessarye to haue for guide, and for principall and chéefe foundation, the knowledge how to pearce into the nature and endes of those with whome we haue to entreat: for that by this means a man very rarely shall rest deceiued, and without this ground he takes his iourney at auentures, and all the diligence he dooth vse is vaine.
            
                THe nature of neutralitie is such, that she is most hurtfull  and full of perrilles: for she offends both the parties, the Superiour for that he iudgeth that we ought to sustaine and fauour his greatnes, the inferiour for that he is not defended, reputes himselfe offended: therefore the one doth neither assure vs from our enemies, nor the other dooth maintaine freendship towards vs.
            
                ALthough it appeares that newtralitie makes a man secure and quiet amidst other mens trauailes, yet trulye it dooth not fall out so afterwards: for that she dooth feed others with a false securitie and quiet, considering that in short time the damages therof doo discouer themselues, no otherwise then it is accustomed to chaunce, to those who haue taken money to vsurie, for although they enioy the same well for a certaine time, not tasting any bitternesse at all, being afterwares consumed, and the day and time to restore them being come: they make apparent proofe of that greeuous damage which they haue procured with so short a commoditie.
            
                AT all times wise Princes ought to discourse of their affaires, with mature counsell, and prudentlye to resolue ther-upon: but when they are in yéeres and times that be full of trauaile and troublesome, then haue they much more néed therof then in times that be ful of rest and  quiet: for that in these the greatnes of his principalitie dooth gouerne and holde him vp, without muche trauaile and toyle: in the other they are enuironed with many perrilles, and supposed with infinite difficulties, from the which to defend and keepe themselues, dooth for the most parte procéede of the rare and hye vertue of a prudent Prince, who can with a good and resolute execution shunne the euill, and cleaue to that which is good, but no good execution can be made, without good prouidence: neither that without a good resolution, neither can resolution be made without good counsell, the which is the head, fountain, and originall of all good operations.
            
               
               A Man ought not to departe from the first purposed plot  and forme of his life, without euident and most necessarye occasions, as did Cato Vticenses, who did rather choose to kill himselfe, then to fall into the hands of Caesar, therfore a wise Prince ought to doo the very same, holding alwaies firme and fast his first and his good resolution.
            
                THat Prince which dooth remaine a neuter, euerye one dooth goe about to imbrace him: and to drawe him to  their partie, for that the desire they haue to haue him for a freend, causeth euery one to make account of him and to honor him, thinking to gaine him with benefites, and so by the meanes of neutralitie, he dooth enioy great securitie: wheras if he should declare himselfe, he should make one of them his manifest enemie, and should thrust himself into expresse perrilles.
            
                MEn doo more easily remember iniuries, then receiued benefites, therfore that Prince which dooth declare  himselfe, dooth much more harme then helpe himselfe, for that he with whome he doth confederate himselfe, is neuer so whot to defend him, as he against whom he is declared, shall be redy to endamage and offend him: it being a naturall effecte that men should become muche more stirred vp and moued with iniuries, then with benefites: besides that, in receiued benefites euery one dooth attribute them  a parte of his enemie, but iniuries are all attributed to him that hath been iniurious.
            
                IT is a most certaine thing that warres draw after them  many difficulties, and most great expences, which are occasions of many euils: in respect, that first of all it empties the princes pursse, and makes him weake. Since moneye is not onely the sinewes and strength of the warres, but of all other humaine actions, next after it constraines them, so much to oppresse the people with new and sharpe exactions, that it dooth bréede them extreame hate: from which euery wise prince ought to kéepe him selfe. For that the hate of the people is the roote of that which bringes rulers to ruine.
            
                IT is disputed amongst some, who is most ambitious: either  he that would maintaine, or he that would obtain: for that both the one and the others appetite, maye be an occasion of great Tumultes, and it is concluded that for the most parte those tumults are caused of them that possesse, for that the feare they haue to loose dooth engender in them, the selfesame will that is in those which desire to gaine: for that men think they cannot surely possesse any thing, if they make no newe gaines: And moreouer, by possessing much, they maye with greater power and with greater motions and stirre make alterations and change: besides all this their corrupt and ambitious behauiours, kindling vp in the brest of them that haue possessions, a will and desire to possesse, and to reuenge themselues of them, by spoyling them, makes them to be able also to enter into those riches and those honours, that they perceiue to be euill vsed of others.
            
                IN all humaine causes this is perceiued (whosoeuer dooth  examine it well) that we can neuer race out one inconuenience, but that an other dooth followe: And therfore if we desire to make a people to encrease to great numbers, and to be armed: to the intent to set vp a great empire,  we make it of such qualitie, as we shall not be able to manage it after one discretion and maner: and if we maintaine it small and disarmed, to the intent we may guide it the better: if we gaine any dominion, we are not able afterwards to kéepe it: or else we shall become so vile, that we shall fal to be a spoile & pray to whosoeuer doth assaulte vs. Therfore in all our opinions and determinations, we ought to consider, where the inconueniences are least, and to make choise of the best partie: for that they be neuer found to be altogither cleare, altogither secure, and altogither without suspition.
            
                IT is requisite that those that are principall and publicke  Maiestrates, haue thrée things in them: One is, that they loue the state of their Cittie and Common-wealth, another is, that they haue authoritie as may be sufficient if neede require to force men: the third is, that they be knowne for persons that be iust and full of valour, but it is necessarye to haue in minde, that if such as these would beare rule and commaund, it behoues them whilste they are young, to learne to be gouerned and commaunded of those that be olde.
            
                WHilste Princes are at hostilitie together, and spend  out of all measure in their warres: he that remaines neuter, maye gather together a great summe of money, and strengthen himselfe in such sort, that ye warres being ended, they shall become weake through many exspences, and be gallant and mighty. The consideration of which thing maye be an arbitrament of their difference and discentions.
            
                ALthough to remaine neuter is not a thing verye frée, yet at the least it cannot be denyed, but that  the resolution of the contrarye is verye doubtfull in this case, the wisest parte is for vs not to moue at all, for that when there ariseth a doubt whither any new deliberation be good or not: we cannot doo better then followe the olde  determinations, and chéefelye when the other are found to be hurtful, in summe, the old and woonted way is rather to be followed, then the new and vnaproued way.
            
                WHen a Prince is instantly required to vnite himselfe with the one of any two that makes warres, and that he makes refusall both to the one and the other: he enters into suspition with them both, that he hath secret intelligence with some one of them: and eche of them both doth imagine & esteeme him to be against himselfe. In such sort, that which soeuer of them doth ouercome, makes a pray of the newter, wherupon it will arise, that he shall holde both of them for suspect, and neither of them for fréend.
            
                IN that Prince which dooth declare himselfe, it is conuenient that one of these thrée thinges doo followe: Either that he with whom he ioynes himselfe remaine vanquisher, or that he loose, or that the matter be managed in such sorte, that he neither loose nor winne: in the first case he proceedes to expresse gaine, by entring into parte of the victorie, in the second he encurres perrill to lose, but yet therin is this difference, that at the least he hath a fréend for his colligate and confederate, who although he haue losse, his case is not such, that he cannot or that he ought not to minister helpe, and it followes not, that his fortune may not rise vp againe: in breefe, it is better to hazard our fortune with a good fréend, then to remaine in feare to be offended and iniuried of both of them: In the third case, more is to be gained then to be lost: for that we obtaine a good fréend that may much profit vs: and he that we make our enemye, dooth harme vs no more then that he did him whilste we remained neuter, although apt occasion did offer it selfe.
            
                IN all the resolutions of the world, both good and euill is mixed amongst them, ordained of God, to the intent to shewe foorth the imperfections of humaine causes, but prudent counselles ought to compare the euill with the good,  and counter pease them in equall ballance, and on that side where the least euill is and the most good, to cleaue to that parte.
            
                MEn hauing for finall end goodnes, and the conseruation of their good, they cannot by any reason be called  inconstant: for so much as when affaires doo change, it is conuenient also that a man doo change his thoughtes, for all that foreseeing the selfesame finall end, euer remaines firme: And in this case it is necessary we imitate the good gouernour of a Ship, who ordering and setting the sayles after one sort, to bring him to a determined place, when afterwards the time dooth change, and contrary windes arise: he also dooth change his firste order, hauing alwaies for finall ende the good and the benefite of the Ship.
            
                THat rule which is giuen to remaine neuter, to the intent  to weaken other, and to strengthen our selues: for the most parte dooth not fall out to be true, for that the victorie of one of the parties doth draw with her so much reputation, so many partakers, and such a train of fauourers, that alwaies the ouercommer shewes himselfe to be strong and gallant, whereby he maye rather iniurye his companion, then that he should be afraide of other mens threatnings.
            
                IT is euer good to ioyne & knit our selues with those that haue the heauens benigne and fauorable vnto them, for  that therby a man doth alwaies perticipate of ye qualitie of his companion, whither soeuer it be good or euill.
            
                FOr that humain affairs are almost all subiect to chance and haue no assured stay in them: a wise man ought to  cleaue to that which carries most apparent likelyhood, and therin to take order with all due meanes, for that for the most part it will fall out to be well, and shalbe besides accounted prudent, and if it should haue an vnlucky end: yet in such a case it would appeare to wise men, that fortune had greater power therin, then prudence.
            
               
               GOod Souldiers haue néede of a good Generall Captaine,  who may be their guide in all things, of whose actions dooth depend for the most parte, the exaltation and ruine of an Armie: therefore the Gréeke Prouerb did say, That an armie of Hartes that hath a Lyon to their Captaine, is more terrible then an armie of Lyons which is guided with a Hart. But it is requisite that in an Armye there be both good souldiers and a good Captain generall, to the intent yt like may not be spoken therof, that Caesar spake: who going against Pompei saide: he went against a Captaine without Souldiers: and afterwardes going against Afranius in Spaine, saide: that he went against an Armie without Captaines.
            
                MOney without doubt is the nourishment of an army,  the which giues measure to euery thing, and is conuerted into euery thing: therfore that wise auntient man saide, the Captaines, the souldiers, their armes and weapons, the instruements and engines of warre, the artillerie: and excluding money, were like vnto a bodye which had a head, armes, neck, brest, legges, feet, but no belly, for euen as the bellie giues nourishment to all the bodye: so mony dooth giue substance to an Armye. And that King of Sparta did call it the sinewes of warre, for euen as the Sinewes giues mouing to the bodye, so monye giues life to an Armie.
            
                TO doubt of the fauour and good grace of our Lord and Prince, although a man haue not faulted against him, is a thing common to manye, neither is it necessarye that, that feare which is had of our Lord & maister should be attributed to basenes of minde, neither much lesse to the lightnes of nature, for that the diuersitie and crueltie of our desire caused through the diuersitie of accidentes, (whilste our woorkes and actions, dooth manifest a certaine courage and constancie) ought either to be reputed for the signe of a bolde and constant person.
            
               
               IN my opinion he hath no great reason to lament himself,  that at any time hath béene contented to make himself equall to others, referring himselfe to chaunce: The which for no other respect, hath béene induced and brought into a Commonwealth, but only to take away, all sortes of concurrences & inequalities: and to content equally euery one.
            
                MEn doo very rarely complaine of themselues, but very  often of others: and for the most parte, doo willingly rage against Chance. Forsomuch as since euery day there doo succéed newe and strange chaunces, and not vnderstanding the occasion, neither the meanes by which they are wrought: Sodainlie we giue the praise or the blame vnto Fortune.
            
                THe Affaires of men being in reuolution & motion, and not béeing able to stand firm & stedfast: it is conuenient  that they arise vp, and discend downe. And to name things that reason dooth not induce vs, necessitie dooth induce vs: In such sorte, that hauing ordered and fashioned a Commonwealth, apt to maintaine it selfe without enlarging of it, and that if we were constrained, by necessitie to enlarge it: It would come to passe, that we should remooue our foundacions, and make the Common wealth sooner to ruinate. So on the other side, if the heauens were so beneficiall vnto vs, that our state should haue no néede to make warres: It would ensue, that idlenes would either woorke deuision amongst vs, or make vs effinate. The which two thinges together, or either of them by her selfe, would be an occasion of our ruine. Therfore since we cannot (as I beléeue) ballance these thinges, neither precisely kéepe the middle path: it is necessary that in the directing of a Commonwealth, we should think vpon the most honorable partie, and order it in such sorte: that when through necessitie we should be brought to enlarge it: we may be able to kéep that which we haue gotten.
            
                THe offence and damage of a priuate person againste a priuate person: dooth engender feare, feare séekes for   defence, defence dooth procure partakers. And immediatly parties and factions arise vp in a Citie or state, and such partakings doth ruinate the same.
            
                WHen it appéeres or is perceiued that forrayne forces  be called in by parte of those men that liue in one selfe Citie or state: It may be thought, that it springeth of the naughtie orders therin vsed, for that there is no orders that can (without extraordinary meanes) extinguish those malignant humours that arise in any person. Therfore we ought to prouide by the way of accusation, but as accusations be profitable to a Commonwealth: so detractions are damageable.
            
                DEtractions or calumnies haue no néed of testimonies  or any other perticuler circumstances to prooue them, In such sorte that euery one may be detracted of any: but not accused. Forsomuch as accusations haue need of proofes and of circumstances that may showe the trueth of the accusation.
            
                WEe ought to obserue this generall rule, that neuer  or very seldome it dooth chaunce: That any Common weale or Kingdome, is at the first well instituted, or at all, beeing made newe and reformed out of the olde constituted Lawes, if it be not set in due rule and order by one alone. Therfore it is necessary that one alone, may be the man that may set downe the manner, and of whose minde may depend what institution or ordinance soeuer. For a prudent commaunder of a Common weale, which caries a minde to benefit, not himselfe but the comminaltie: ought to endeuour himselfe to sw
                  •
               ie alone the whole Authoritie, and a wise man would neuer reprehend him, that to constitute a kingdome or Common weale: did vse any extraordinary action.
            
                WE ought to reprehend him that is violent to spoyle,  but not him that is violant and of a forward nature to adorne and polish: For that the violence to adorne be comes 
                  •
                vertue, and to destroye: a vise.
            
               
               MEn are accustomed to iudge largelye of themselues, and of their proper merites, and beholding the succession  of thinges as we doo for the most parte, and séeing some out of all expectation and peraduenture without merite, without reason, or at the least without proportion: and by contrary waies & procéedings, to be placed in high degrees and estate: their hope doth awaken in such sorte, and they proceede so far in their thoughts, that measuring with their eyes the height whither they determine to ascend, suddainly they flye thither with their imagination, and doo place themselues vpon the tipe and height thereof, but afterwardes being entred into the troublesome & crooked path, and the way euery day encreasing, they become afflicted, fall into lamentations, and sometimes also dispaire to be able to attain vnto the same.
            
                NOt onely the good being, but also the simple being of  things doth principally depend vpon the conseruation of the forme and finall ends: and the one and the other is maintained in the Common-weale by two means, that is to say, by the lawes and by Magistrates: And therefore where these things are not obserued, and wheras in these cases such men as are not fit for such like charges are vsed in maneging the same: it falles out of necessitie, that there must follow great alteration.
            
                MEn doo for the most part settle and staye themselues in things present, as well for that euerye one dooth  not pearce and enter with the eyes of his discretion into the nature and future state of things, as also for that the remedies of damages are not endowed with glory, when they are neither doubted nor knowne: and few there be to be found that in publick causes wil recompēce their present trauailes with common commodities that are to come: or rather which at the least do not suffer themselues to be deceiued with the great and large hopes, which future accidents doo promise.
            
               
                THe very same dooth chaunce vnto Common-weales, which is accustomed to fall out in the body of man, vnto whome his euill minded appetite is an occasion of disorders, wherof after spring infirmities, with the trauail and greefe of the body and of the minde together: so it falles out, that a certaine sensualitye (to tearme it so) hath produced and dooth produce many defectes in a Common-weale.
            
                TO giue without reputation, is a losse without gaine,  it being estéemed a paiment that proceedes of duetye, and not a gift comming of curtesie: so that it rather giues courage to him that hath receiued ye same, still to demaund other thinges, rather then to recompence those he hath receiued.
            
                WHen for what occasion soeuer alterations is once made in the States, and that they s
                  •
               raye aside from their finall ends: infinit difficulties rise vp togither with the same, and alwaies goes forward, encreasing amongst the gouernements: Example heereof was giuen by the Common-wealthes of Candie and Sparta, which were instituted and instructed in warrefare The very same did the Romane Common-weale, who for the remedie of their troublesome state, were constrained to goe abroade continually to make warres: to the intent that those euill humours might be consumed, that with rest did spring vp amongst the Citizens: at the ende when they had no more to ouercome, ouercomming and ruiniting themselues: they reduced themselues vnder another forme of state, forsomuch as the end being once changed, it is an impossible thing to stand firme and fast, in the obseruation of ye mean and of the auntient institutions.
            
                THe way how to manage States although it ought to  be somewhat the more open, because it is to receiue into it the greater number of persons, neuerthelesse, in the beginning (for that much trust is required) the entraunce thereof is very difficile, and it is much more conuenient for  vs to be called vnto the same, then presumptuouslye to intrude our selues therinto, if a man doo not make profession therof, he is neither knowne nor reputed for sufficient, and if he make profession therin, the same is on the one side odious, and the other side is also hurtfull to his owne iudgement: and he that makes this profession, doth oftentimes discourse so much, that he dooth ouer-passe his bounds, and dooth foreshewe many false propositions: and finally is reputed of wise men, like vnto those souldiers that braue and bragge it out in the time of peace.
            
                HE that doth serue a Prince a farre off, hath very hard meanes to satisfie him: for that those errours which  are committed are of the greater importance, and cannot be so easi
                  •
               ye remedied: besides that, in the managing of them we cannot comprehend all the particuler actions of the instructions, by reason that the state of thinges doo change vpon a soddaine: besides that, this maner of being is a life very full of discommodities and perrilles, and lesse néere vnto rewards▪ the which be for the most part preuented and obtained before hand of those that remaine about the presence of the Prince.
            
                THe way and path of the goodnesse and bountye of exemplare  life, hath her difficulties, for that it hath néed of a firm and great staiednes, and of one perpetuall forme and order: with bond of obligation to sustain at all times and in all actions, one selfe person: forsomuch as if a man be not vnfainedly good, he leads a troublesome and an vnhappye life aboue all others, dooing so many thinges and abstaining from so manye other, against their owne proper apetite: and to faine long is an impossible thing, for yt euen as a lame person by any equall encrease which he procureth to those partes that are shorter then the rest, or through any other rel
                  •
               efe vsed to the same, can neuer couer the matter so closely, but that in going he shall discouer his diffect: so those persons in their procéedinges, cannot go in such measure, but that with some exteriour signe  they will shew their wants and inward lamenesse.
            
                EUery one that placeth himself to serue in Courte: ought  not so much to trust in his prudence, that he should presume to be able to ouercome euerye aduersitie. Neither so much neglect his affaires, that he altogether cōmit himself to chaunce: but let him think yt the same is a voyage vpon the Sea: in the which although prudence may doo much and makes the greatest parte of the windes fauorable, neuerthelesse, he cannot prescribe any determined or certaine time to ariue safe there, whither others haue directed their course. Forsomuch as some in the midst of Sommer, in a gallant and well furnished ship, doo sincke, or else forsloe very much: others in winter, in a weake & vnfurnished Bark goe speedily and safely.
            
                HEe which hath the onely authoritie: ought, to be so exactly  prudent and vertuous: That, that authoritie which he hath obtained, be not left vnto an other as an Inheritance. For that men beeing more prone to euill then to goodnes, his successor may vse that ambitiously, which was of him vsed vertuously. Besides this, although one be apt to order the thinges instituted and ordained, yet is it not to endure long, when it dooth remaine vpon the shoulders of one alone: but otherwise it falles out to be well, when it remaines vnder the care of many, and that it appertaines to manye to maintaine the same. For that euen as many are apt to order and rule one thing, for that they doo not knowe the goodnes of the same: occasioned through the sundrie opinions that are amongst them: So when they once knowe it, they do not easily agrée to leaue it.
            
                AMongst all those men that are had in commendation,  those are moste worthy commendation, which are the chéefe heads and institutors of Religion. Next vnto these, those that haue laide the foundacions of Common weales or Kingdoms. After these, those that haue enlarged them, and next vnto them, those that be learned. Contrarywise, those men are infamous and detestable, which haue béene  the destroyers of Religion, that haue disseuered kingdoms, and are enemies to learning, vertue, and valour.
            
                THere was neuer any institutor of extraordinary lawes amongst any people, but that he made his refuge to the  helpe of God: For otherwise they should not haue béen accepted, forsomuch as of a prudent person, many good things are knowne, who haue not in themselues any euident reason, able to showe and perswade the same to others. Therfore wise men that will take away this difficultie, doo remit the whole to God. So did Licurgus, so did Solon, and so did that most holy and diuine Moses.
            
            
                REligion causeth good orders, good orders bring good fortune,  fortune makes good successe to arise in all enterprises. Therfore the obseruing of deuine honours and deuine woorships: is the occasion of the greatnes of the Common wealth. And where the feare of God doth fayle: it is conuenient that, that kingdome be sustained with a Prince that with feare may supplye that defect where there is no Religion.
            
                THat people which is vsed to liue in bondage, béeing set  at libertie: is like in all respects to a sauage Beast, the which hath béene nourished in a grate or close place. The which béeing by chaunce afterwards set at libertie abroad in the Féeldes: not béeing vsed to séeke for his owne prouision, not knowing whither to flie: he becomes the praye of the first, that goes about to entrap or entangle him.
            
                THat common vtilitie that is drawne of liuing feare: As to enioy fréely that which is our own without suspicion  not to dout of the honour of women and of our Children, not to be affraid of our selues, is not knowne of any whilst that we possesse the same. For that there is no man that will euer confesse to be bound to him, that he doth not offend.
            
                HEe that takes in hand to gouerne a multitude, either by waye of libertie, or by waye of principalitie, and   doth not assure himself of those that doo oppose themselues against this new order and institution: makes a state of small endurance. True it is, that I iudge those Princes vnhappie, that to assure their state, are constrained to hold extraordinary waies, hauing the multitude for enemie, for so much as he that hath fewe for his enemies, easilye and with little scandale dooth assure himself, but he yt hath an vniuersall people for his enemy, shall neuer be assured: and by how much the more he vseth crueltye, by so much the more his principalitie becomes weake.
            
                WEe must presuppose it to be a most true thing, that a corrupted Citie which dooth liue vnder a Prince, although that that Prince with all his stock be exstinguished, cannot reduce it self into liberty, but rather it is conuenient that one Prince exstinguish another, and without the creation of a new Prince it neuer ramaines in rest: if alreadie the bountie of the one, together with his great vertue, doo not kéep it frée, but the liberty is to remaine so long as the life of him dooth continue.
            
                WHere the ground and subiect of the matter is not corrupted, tumultes and other scandales cannot bring vs any damage: but where the subiect is corrupted, there Lawes well instituted doo not helpe, if it were not already set forward by some person, that with extreame force did cause it so well to be obserued, that the subiects should become good: it is true, that this may fall out whilste his life dooth indure, but when he is dead, it returnes to his olde and former state, and the vertue and force of the vniuersall subiect being alreadye corrupted, we cannot sustaine good orders.
            
               
               A Man cannot be of so long a life, as shalbe of sufficient  time to accustome to goodnes, a Cittie that hath a long time béene accustomed to euill. And if a man that is of long life, or two vertuous successions togither dooth not prick them forward, when one of them begins to faile, it  dooth ruinate, if that with many perrilles and much blood, he doo not cause it to arise againe, for that such corruption and so small aptnes of free life, dooth spring of an inequalitie which is found in that Cittie or State: and desiring to reduce it to equall tearmes, it is necessarie to vse great extraordinaries the which fewe other knowe or will vse.
            
                WE ought to praise all persons modestlye, for by  how much infamie and slaunders doo offend those against whome they be spoken: so much more doo the praising of any one (besides that we commend with great perrill to the iudgement and bountie of him of whome we speake) dooth oftentimes offend him that dooth heare the same: in respect that through the selfe loue that dooth gouerne vs, the good or the euill that we heare reported of others, is immediatly reuolued in our mindes, and is compared to our selues: wherupon it ariseth, that euerye one that is of such defects or merites, calles to memorie, and is agréeued that his praise is past ouer with silence, or else dooth feare that his defects be not discouered: and it often comes to passe, that we offend man, onely with carrying lesse respect to one of the same, or one of greater quality, he iudgiug that asmuch or perchaunce more shalbe doone to him.
            
                WHen a Prince hath fortified himselfe with confederates, with good Captains, with valiant souldiers, with weapons, with money, and with strong places: it followes  that he endeuour himselfe to weaken the force, and to interrupt and break asunder the aduersaries determinations: the which thing may be perfourmed speedilye or late, according as occasion shall offer it selfe, the which is the fountaine and originall of all glorious acts.
            
                AS good customes to the intent they may be maintained haue néede of the lawes: so the lawes in respect they   may be obserued, haue need of good customes.
            
                THose institutions and lawes that were made in a  Common-weale, in the beginning thereof when men were good: doo not serue after to the purpose, when they are once become wicked: and if lawes doo varrie in a Cittie according to the accidents, the institutions thereof doo sildome or neuer varie: the which thing makes that the newe lawes doo not suffise, by reason that the institutions that stand firme, doo break them.
            
                AMongst the Romanes the chéefest degrees of the Cittie were not giuen but to those which did demaund them: this order at the beginning was good, for that none did demaund them but those Citizens which were iudged woorthie: and to haue the repulse was an ignominious thing, wherupon it did arise, that to the intent they might be iudged good, euerye one did perfourme good actions.
            
                IN the institution of a Cittie or State to a politicke life, presuppose in your minde a good man. And to become a Prince by violence, presuppose in your minde a wicked man: By this meanes you shall sildome finde that it falles out that a good man becomes a Prince by wicked meanes although the end were good: and that one that is wicked being become a Prince, will performe good actions, & that it will fall at any time into his minde to vse the authoritie well, which he hath by euill meanes obtained.
            
                HE that succéeds in state, although he be not of so great  valour and vertue as his predecessour, yet maye he maintaine the saide state through the force and vertue of him that gouerned the same before him, and maye enioye the fruites of his trauailes: but if it should come to passe that he were not of a long life, or that after him there did not spring vp another, which dooth put vpon him the valour and vertue of the first, that Kingdome is constrained to fall into ruine: So in contrary sorte, if 
                  ••
               ery one after the other, are of great vertue, it oftentimes appeares, that they accomplish great things and that they mount vp  with their fame euen to the highest heauens.
            
                IT is a thing most certaine, that if where there be men  there be no Souldiers: it dooth spring through ye fault of the Prince, and not through the defect or any want in nature, or of the scituation of the Countrie: for that, a wise Prince doth vse in time of peace the orders of warfare and militarie discipline.
            
                THere be two sortes of flatterie, the first ariseth of a malicious craft: the second of an vnaccustomed vse in conuersation:  the first with purpose to profit, is pricked forward artificially, and doo vse all studie to deceiue: the second, hath for his purposed end, a care and feare not to offend, and therfore dooth vnwillingly follow the other, who for all that becomes his guide, but yet he is drawne by her as though it were by feare, with putting in obliuion certaine humilitie, certain seruile respects and most vaine titles, which are made proper and fit, and such as are required of all sorts and qualitie of persons, in such sort, as they cannot be shunned euen of vertuous men, and such as remaine written in these tearmes of vse.
            
                IT was neuer iudged a wise resolution, to put in perrill  all thy fortune & not all thy forces: those do fal into this inconuenience, which determine when ye enemie comes, to defend ye difficile places, & to kéepe the passages: forsomuch as it is a thing of great damages, if in that difficilplace we cannot cōmodiously place all our forces: and in y• case we ought to take that resolution, but if the place be rough and ragged, and so strait that we cānot plant al our strengths: our resolution is naught: therefore if we loose that passage which we did presuppose to kéep, and in the which the people and our armie did put their confidence: there dooth enter for the most parte into the people, and into all the rest of the armie so great terrour, that without making triall or experience of their valour and vertue, doo giue ouer thē
               selues to loose all. And so it comes to passe that we forgoe all our whole fortune, and ouerthrowe parte of our forces.
            
               
                NO well ordered Common-wealth dooth at any time cansell out the demerites of her Citizens, with their merites, but hauing appointed rewardes, for a good deede, and punishments for a wicked: and hauing rewarded some one for that he hath doone well, if that the same man do afterwards commit any thing that is euill: he is to be chastised without any respect of his good d
                  •
               eds, for that if vnto a citizen that hath performed and doone any famous thing for his Cittie, be ioyned (besides the reputation that such a one hath gained) a certaine audacitie, confidence & trust, to be able without feare to doo any thing that is not good: he will in time become so insolent, that he will dissolue all the order of ciuill life.
            
                HE that would reforme the state of a Cittie, desiring to haue that reformation accepted, and to haue it  likewise maintained with the satisfaction of euery one: It is necessary that he retaine at the least the shadowe of the auntient customes, to the intent that it may not appeare to the people that he hath changed the olde orders and institutions, although in effects the ordinances were newe, and altogither alienated from those that were before: for that the vniuersall mindes of men is so fed with that outward shew which it séemes to carrie, as if it were the very same indéede, so that they are muche more mooued with th
                  •
               se things of outward appearance, thē with that which they are in effect.
            
                THe vice of ingratitude dooth spring either of couetousnes  or of suspect, for that, when any people or any Prince doo send foorth any Generall or Captaine, into what importunate expedition soeuer, where he gaines sufficient glorye: that Prince or people is afterwardes bound to rewarde him, and if in change they dishonour or endamage him, moued thereunto by couetousnes: they commit an errour which cānot be excused, but rather they loade their backs with a perpetuall infamie.
            
               
               THe nature of men is ful of ambition and suspition, and  cannot giue any staye or meane to none of their Fortunes: therfore it is an impossible thing but that, that suspition which dooth arise in a Prince immediatly after the victorie of his Captaine Generall: should be caused by the encrease of some maner or fashion of behauiour vsed insolently in the said Captaine: so that a Prince can enter into no other thought, then how to assure himselfe, either by putting him to death, or by taking from him his reputation, or to make shewe with all industrie, that that victorie did arise not by his valour and vertue, but by Fortune, or through the vile basenes of his enemie, or by the prudence of some other of his Captaines, that were in that faction.
            
                SUspition is so naturall in Princes, that they cannot defend  themselues from the same: wherupon it is impossible that they should shew gratefulnes to those that haue vnder their Ensignes gained victorie, and that which a Prince cannot defend himselfe from: it is no miracle although the people doo not defend thēselues from: for that a Citie which haue lawes frée, hauing two finall endes, the one to settle commodities, and the other to maintain their freedome: it falles out of necessitie, that through ouermuch loue, they should erre both in the one and the other case.
            
                THat Captaine which will auoide ingratitude, it is necessarie that he doo one of these two thinges: either  that immediatly after the victorie he put al into the hands of his Prince, or that he kéepe himselfe from committing any insolent or ambitious act, to the intent that the Prince being made voyde of all suspition, he may haue no occasion either to punishe him, or to doo him any hurt, but when the Generall dooth not so: let him couragiouslye take holde of all those meanes, to make those thinges that he hath gained, hisowne.
            
               
               FLatterie is chéefelye found in Courtes, Pallaces, and  
                  •
               ouses, and also in Common-wealthes, and in euerye place, touching the person of him that dooth flatter, and of h
                  •
               m that is flattered: the flatterer hath néede or desire of something the which may be for his gaine, or else to conserue, to obtaine, or not to loose, by the meanes of him that he dooth flatter: forsomuch as the person that is flattered is alwaies more mightye then he that flatters, or at the least such a one as in some respects may fauour him: And therfore it is vsed in Common-weales amongst those that be equalles, and also of the superiours towards the inferiours: only it rests, that those that be miserable and base men, which are not thought to be able in any case either to harme or helpe, doo not flatter and in like sorte as well those that are endowed with magnanimitie, and are in happie estate, as those that be presumptuous, and those that content themselues with their estate, be not flatterers.
            
                MEn to obtaine their intents vse their meanes, that is  to say: either force, either recompence, or the amiable willes of others: the two first doo not appertaine to flatterers: for, he that will vse force, or giue due recompence, dooth neuer flatter: besides that, force belonges to the mighty, where flattery appertains more to the weakned. And recompences makes men, at the least in that act, equall amongst themselues. Where flatterie makes them vnequall: amitie remaines, the which is gained with beneuolence, and is maintained with fréendship, or with the similitude of the one and the other.
            
                THe reputation of dignitie the which doth spring of vertue  & valour of magnificence, of studies, of thoughtes, of woords, and of such customes, that they doo not disagrée from the state wherein a Gentleman dooth remaine, and that togither they are not farre seperated from that vnto which he maye attaine: the which thing ought to be alwaies 
                  •
               efore the eyes of a Gentleman, as well for that he  may neuer be reputed vnwoorthie, as also for that he neuer come to be suspected that he is not apt to become a Maiestrate.
            
                WHosoeuer dooth possesse a state, ought to consider before aduerse times doo chaunce, that he maye haue  néede of sundrye men, and after this consideration to liue amongst them in such sorte, that he shall iudge (whensoeuer that time shall fall out) that he of necessitie must liue: and he that gouernes himselfe otherwise, and after when the perrill comes vpon him, dooth think to gaine men with benefites: he is disceiued, for he cannot only, not assure him selfe, but dooth rather hasten his ruine.
            
                WHen any inconuenience dooth arise in a Common-weale, caused by inward, or outward, or for vain occasions,  is become so great, that it begins to strike feare in the hartes of euery one: it is a more sure resolution, to temporise ye same, thē to attempt to exstinguish it, for that those that goe about to choake and kill it, doo almost alwaies make the forces therof greater, and doo hasten that euill which is suspected of the same.
            
                IF there be seene to arise in a Common-weale, a noble person, that hath extraordinarie vertues, the eyes of the  Citizens turning their sight vpon him, doo concurre and runne without any respect to honour him, in such sort, that if there be in him any ambition at all, those fauours that nature and these accidentes haue giuen him, being vnited together, comes immediatly in place: that when the Citizens perceiue their errour, they haue small remedye to resist the same: and going about to doo so, they performe naught else but to hasten forward his power.
            
                IF a Citizen would be able to endamage and to take vpon him extraordinarye authoritie: it is requisite he  haue many partes and qualities which he can neuer haue, in a Common-weale not corrupted: for that it is necessarie that he be very rich, that he haue sufficient store of pertakers and adherents which he cannot haue where the  lawes are obserued, and although he had, yet such men are so timerous, that those frée fauours doo not concurre in them.
            
                WHen the auntient gouernours of State, did sée the Common-weale quiet and in good case, they did alwaies finde out something although feinedly to the intent the Citizens might be afraide: for that by this feare they might arise to be more carefull, and the more watchful for the preseruation of their safetie: forsomuch as those wise aun
                  •
               ient fathers did very well know, that ye vniuersall defect of men, is willing to become idle and negligent, & neuer by their good wils to apply themselues in a life yt is indu
                  •
               trious, but only when necessitie constraines them.
            
                LEagues are accustomed not to endure long, whose  force and fury is at the beginning: therfore it necessarily falles out, that they take in hand enterprises that endure but a small time.
            
                IT is a manifest thing that the force of Leagues not vsed  in their heate, doo soone vanish away: for that immediatly suspition makes entry, which doth coole and dissolue thē, and as at one instant they are disseuered: so they cannot be knit againe togither, without a long space of time.
            
                AMbition is of so mightye power in the brest of men,  that it neuer doth abandon them: the occasion is, for that nature hath created men, that they maye desire all thinges, but not obtaine all thinges: in such sorte, that alwaies our desires being greater then our power to obtain: it doth turne to the euill contentation and small satisfaction of him that dooth possesse. Of this doth arise the varying and changing of fortune, for that men desiring, some to haue more, and some fearing to lose that they haue alredy gotten, fall out to vse iniuries, and finally warres, wherof the ruine of one prouince doth arise, and the exaltation of another.
            
               
               A Prince in the managing of his estate, doth not onelye  seek to redresse present scandales, but also those that  are future, and to prouide for the same with all industrye, for that prouiding for the same a far off, he may easilye remedie them, but expecting vntill the euill drawe neere: the phisick comes not in time, forsomuch as not being known, it both growes olde and to be without cure.
            
                WHen a Prince would maintain his state in a Prouince,  disagreeing in customes and lawes, from his nature: finding therin much difficultie, it is requisite that he haue great fortune and great industry but the most assured way is: that he goe to remaine there in person, to the intent ye possession may be assured, and those disorders maye be discerned, vnto which remedye maye be giuen, besides that, the subiects hauing their Prince néere at hand, and carrying willing mindes to be good, they haue greater cause to loue him, and being the contrary, to feare him: and he that goes about to assault him, shall remaine more doubtfull, and although he determine to doo so, yet he ouercomes with greater difficultie.
            
                HE that is in a Prouince with his regiments or colonies that consist of many footmen, and of many inhabitours  therin: ought to make himselfe the head and defendour of his neighbours that are of lesse power then he is himselfe, or rather to indeuour himselfe to weaken the most mighty of them, and he ought to haue care and regarde▪ that for no accident no Strangers doo enter into his slate, forsomuch as they are euer hunted after of those yt are mal-contents in that Prouince, either through ouergreat ambition, or through ouer-great pouertie.
            
                IMmediatlye after a mightye Stranger is entered into a Prouince, all those that are of meanest power in ye same,  doo ioyne themselues vnto him, moued through the enuye that they haue had against him that hath beene mighty against them, by reason that in respect of these small powers, the stranger hath little trauail to gain ye same, that assemble thēselues incontinētly about him, he hath only this to thinke vpon, that they take not vpon them ouer much  force, or ouermuch authoritie, the which he may easily doo, debasing with his forces the most mightye, to remaine altogither the arbitratour of the Prouince, and he that doth not gouerne himselfe well in this part, he shall soone loose that he hath gotten.
            
                THey doo not breake their accorde and compact, who  when they are not aided and succoured, confederate themselues with others: but rather those that yeelde no succours to them with whome they haue made cōuention and are in consorte. And he merites no blame who because he will not fall into perrilles that be exceeding great, castes his eyes with diligence vpon those things that are profitable vnto him: rather thē vnto those, which for other mens caus
                  •
               s are damageable vnto him.
            
               
               A Wise man knowes easily the generall inclination of  any nation, and the actions therof being publick: it is necessarie that the same shewe perforce her minde and desires, foorth of which afterward are drawne perticular determinations either more or lesse, according to the capacitie of that wise man: which hath charge to perce and desipher the same.
            
                THe great and mighty Northern Princes, which haue  many Children, carrie alwaies their mindes apt and prone to make warres as well in respect of glory, as also to obtaine state for their Children, and to deliuer their owne Kingdomes, from those disturbations, which for the most parte, the first begotten amongst many brethren, is accustomed to bring, and if vnto these respects wrath and glorie be ioyned, without all doubt they exalte very much that Kingdome, which according to their imagination is most easie to be conquered: or in the which they haue some 
                  〈◊〉
                or pr
                  •
               tence of right, to the intent they may in eche cas
                  •
                that dooth chaunce either of Leages, either towardes their aduersaries, or in any iustifications: salue the appearance thereof to the worlde.
            
               
               
               SOliman the Emperour of the Turkes saide, that Princes ought not to vse the help and aide of a Seruant oftner  then once: forsomuch as, in that first fact his desire to obtaine the good grace of his Prince: and the greatnes of the demaund, dooth make him to resolue in himself to obey his request, hauing no space to think either of the perrill or of his owne aduauntage: but when after he comes afreshe to request him, he thinkes no more of the fauour alreadye obtained, but dooth imagine to make frée himselfe, with the perrill of his Prince, and to aduauntage himselfe by some meanes, to the damage oftentimes of his Prince, and the falsing of his own faith.
            
                IT oftentimes comes to passe, that when we demaund a thing and are not able to obtain it: for that we haue not  in a readines the reasons that may be opposed, we lose reputation, and he that doth deny the same: besides that, he dooth repute vs for presumptuous and imprudent, imagining that he hath offended vs, by reason of his deniall: and growes to hate vs. Heerof it ariseth, that ye gate is shutte vp against o
                  •
               r obtaining of any other thing, which easily would haue béene graunted vs, the which we do not now procéed to demaund, because the first hath been denyed, wherupon he knowing our néede and necessitie, dooth not offer the same, supposing that we are displeased.
            
               
               A Wise Officer or seruaunt ought after the maner of an excellent Phisition, foresée that which he may hope for, or that which he maye feare, neither hoping nor fearing  more or lesse, then so much as is conuenient, and he may very easily know in the beginning, if that his hope be in augmentation, in estate, or in declination: and knowing the same, he may make his prognosticate, to the intent he néede not altogither to expect his sorrowe, and he ought to aduertise his Prince or Maister, thereby to shewe himselfe prudent, kéeping alwais his iudgement in hand, not suffering him to be exalted through hope, neither fall downe to  the ground through feare, and so affaires are handled with prudence, and come to passe to his honor, that dooth negotiate for the profit of his Master.
            
                WHen Princes doo not graunt, or are correspondent to  other mens demaunds, it growes vpon these occasions, either that their silence giues them time to resolue vpon some thing that is doubtfull, or else with their silence they deny the same: iudging the demaund to be vniust, or else they despise him yt hath made the demaund, although it be vniust, either else despise the seruaunt that doth demaund ye same, or else exspects new aduertisements, ye better to resolue himselfe, or otherwise in this case giue good woords to their Seruants: therfore the prudent negotiatour ought to make his considerations, in which estate of these foresaide cases, he dooth finde himselfe, and takes his expedition in hand with the better deliberation.
            
               
               PLato would haue the duetye of a good Citizen to consist in these fower thinges, for the benefite of the common-weale:  that is, that he be prudent in discearning those things that be present, and preuent those that are to come: iust in distributing to euerye one according to his demerites, strong to ouer-come feares, which are an impediment to the operation of vertue, and temporate in our desires.
            
                IF we desire to gouerne secretlye and surelye in any  State: there is nothing more necessarie then to haue knowledge of the determinations and designes of great Princes: and in what sorte they are of abilitie to be executed: for that a man maye preserue himselfe in time of peace, which whosoeuer he imagineth may aide or profit him through their amitie, and maye prouide himselfe in case of any disturbance, to the intent to auoide harme.
            
               
               THe knowledge of matters of state, is sifted out of Princes by sundrie meanes. Forsomuch, as some procure to  knowe the same by way of reporte, some by way of discourse, some by the meanes of espialls, some by stipendary intelligencers, and some by the disposition of this man, and some by yt man. But there is no way so certain: as by the meanes of Ambassadours, & especially of those, that either through the greatnes of their Prince, or by his owne proper vertue, is in reputation: for that dealing alwaies with greate persons, and pondering diligently, their customes, their woords, their counsell, the valour, the maner of euery one and of the Prince himself: they may with a more surer grounded foundacion, then those that write Cronicles: knowe by reporte, thinges that are past: neither like exploratoures, rest onely vpon the consideration of thinges present: But with a certain and assured consideracion drawne foorth of these and those thinges: make iudgement of that which is to come.
            
                THose Common-weales that were well instituted, giuing out Authoritie any long time, appoynted vnto  the same certaine guardes and watch men, that the wicked vnto whome such authoritie did belonge, should not be able to vse it naughtily: and in this case, it helpes not that the matter and substance should not be corrupted. For that an absolute Authoritie, dooth corrupte in shorte time the matter and substance, and makes them partakers and freendes. And to such a person it hurtes not that he is poore, or that he hath no kins-folkes. For that riches and other fauours, doo run immediatly after him.
            
               
               A Common weale, maye haue more confidence in a  Citizen, that from a highe degrée, descendes to gouerne one that is lesse: then in him, that from a small degrée ascends to a greater. For that in reason this man  cannot be credited, if he haue not good men about him, who are of such reuerence and vertue, that those nouelties he raiseth, maye be moderated with their authoritye and counsell.
            
                THose men that would put any thing in execution, ought  firste to prepare themselues with all industrie, when occasion commeth, to remaine in good readines, to satisfie and performe that, which they haue determined to put in execution, and for that when preparations are made politickly and craftily they are not known, he cannot be accused of any negligence, if first it be not discouered by occasion, in the which if afterwards it woorke not effect, it appeares that either he made not such preparations as were sufficient, or that he thought of no parte of them before hand.
            
                TO desire to take away a disorder sprung vp in a Common-weale, and for this respect to make a Lawe that may looke a great time backward, is no good resolution: for that we procure naught else but hasten that euill vnto which this disorder doth conduct and leade vs, but by temporising either that the euill may goe forward more slolye or that by it selfe (before it take effect) it may be exstinguished in time.
            
                THe woorst qualitie that a weake Common-weale can  haue, is to be irresolute, for that all the resolutions they take, they take thē by force, and if they doo any thing that is good, they doo it by force and not by prudence, forsomuch as their weakenes, will neuer suffer them to consult where there is any doubt, and if that doubt be not cancelled, by some violence that dooth pricke it forward: they hang alwaies in suspition.
            
                THe distribution and diuision of the politick iustice, life and gouernement, would be ruled with a Geometricall  proportion, that is, according to the qualitie of the person: otherwise it is no ius
                  •
               i
                  ••
               . As for example it  appeares, that punishment by infamie is a small punishment to one of base degree, whereas to a noble personage it is of great detriment. Therfore those Officers and ministers that procéede in merites and demerites, in fauours and disfauours, in one maner and with one measure, having no consideration to the diuersity, that nature and fortune hath put betwixt the one and the other, so that they cannot be changed vnlesse the nature and custome of the whole worlde be changed: doo not vnderstand the same as it ought to be: for that the nobilitie growe into dispaire, perceiuing themselues to be debased, in like equall sort to those that be their inferiours, and perceiuing that those which are of base degrée to be entreated and ordered like the nobilitie: it makes them become insolent.
            
                THe forces of Princes, if they be not gouerned with reason, and with good counsell: doo not onely become weak and vaine, but for the most parte are damageable to those  that possesse them: but if they be ruled by prudence and good iudgement, they woorke meruailous effects, and giue vnto our fréends hope and securitie, and bringes vnto our enemies confusion and feare.
            
                THe reputation and credit of a well ordered common-weale, is preserued with ne
                  •
               tralitie, with abstaining from entring into league with any Prince, with remaining  in amitie with all, and by kéeping all Princes in hope by shunning all occasions to suffer damage or iniury of any whosoeuer, by entertaining many Captaines of valour and of experience, by making good and forceable preparations of warfare by Land: and by not abandoning with negligence his Nauie for the Seas, by kéeping and maintaining the people in loue and fidelitie, and by giuing vnto the Nobility honours, to those yt be of base degrée many commodities: and finally by giuing vnto euery one securitie and iustice, hauing chéefe care that all men obserue, obey and reuerence deuine institutions.
            
               
               IT is easilye knowne by those that consider well, those  thinges that are present, and those things that are past in auntient time: how that in all Cities and amongst all people, the same desires and the same honours, that euer were amongst them doo still remaine: in such sorte that it is a very easie thing to him that dooth well and diligently examine things past, to foresee in a Common-weale those thinges that are to come: and to vse those remedies that of the antiquitie were vsed, or not finding those that haue been vsed to think vpon new, through the similitude of the accidents: but for these considerations, are either neglected or not vnderstoode of those that read, or if they be vnderstoode, they are not knowne of them that gouerne, neither are they followed, for that the selfesame scandalles are to be found in all ages.
            
                WHen the people are brought into this errour, to giue  reputation to one sole person, which dooth ruinate and reuenge himselfe against those he hates, and that the same man be not wise: it will euer chaunce, that he being become a Tirant, will endeuour himselfe together with the fauour of the people, to roote out and exstinguishe the Nobiliti
                  •
               : neither will he euer turne himselfe to oppresse the people, but when he hath destroyed all the Nobilitye.
            
                ALthough those that be noble desire to be Tirants, neuerthelesse  that parte of the nobility which kéep them selues foorth of the path of tirannie, are alwaies enemies to a Tirant, who can neuer gaine to his parte all the nobility, through the ambition & great couetousnes which remaines in him 
                  •
                forsomuch as the Tirant is not able to haue such store of riches, and so many honours, as would satisfie all the whole members of them. Whereupon it comes to passe, that those Tirants which haue to their fréendes the vniuersall multitude of the people, and for enemies  those that be great personages, are more secure, for that their violence is sustayned with a greater force then those be that haue the people to their enemies, and the Nobilitie to their freends.
            
                HE that in shewe hath appeared for good a certaine time, and will at his fantasie and pleasure become  naught: must procéede in the same with due meanes, and guide himselfe in such sort with occasion, that before the change of his nature, take away from him his old fauours: he may haue obtained so many new, that his authoritie be nothing deminished at al, otherwise when he is discou
                  ••
               ed and without fréends, he runnes into ruin & is ouerthrown.
            
                IT is hurtfull to a Common-weale, with continuall harmes and damages, to holde and kéepe the mindes of  the Subiects in continuall feare and suspence: for that those men that begin to doubt that they shall incurre any euill, doo in any case assure themselues from those perrils, and become to carry lesse respect and to be of more audacitie to attempt newe things: therfore it is either necessary neuer to hurt or offend any person, or to vse al our harmes at one instant, and afterwards assure those men, and giue them occasion to quiet their mindes.
            
               
               A Common-weale in her institutions and orders ought to be watchfull that the Citizens vnder the shadowe of  good, doo not woorke euill: and that they carye and haue that reputation, which may helpe and not harme the libertye thereof.
            
               
               A Prudent man ought neuer to refuse the popular iudgments, in particular things about the distribution of  degrées and dignities, for that in this onelye the people do not deceiue themselues: and if they be deceiued, it is rarely: but those that be fewe in number, which haue to make such distributions, doo much more deceiue themselues.
            
               
                ALl those Contries and Prouinces that liue in libertie▪ make great increase, and procéed much more forward then those that liue in slauery and bondage. For that in a free state is found greater store of people, because mariage amongst them are more frée and more desired of men: forsomuch as euery one dooth willingly beget those Children, which they think them selues able to nourish: not douting that their Patrimony shall be taken from them: and that they are borne free and not slaues, and that they may by means of their vertue and valour become great.
            
                THose which determine in them selues to haue a Citie of  great empire and rule: ought to endeuour them selues with all industrie, to replenish the same with inhabitants: the which thing is perfourmed two wayes, by loue and by force. By loue, by kéeping the way open and secure for all strangers, that dispose them selues to inhabite therin. By force, by destroying the next Cities and by bringing the inhabitants of them to dwell in their owne Citie.
            
               
               A Weake and small Common weale cannot inuade and  occupy neither cities nor kingdomes that are stronger and greater then it selfe. And if for all that she doo inuade and possesse the same: it chaunceth vnto her, the same that dooth vnto that Trée which hath her bowes greater then the body of the Tree, so that sustaining and holding vp her branches with great toyle and trauaile: euery small wind dooth bend the same.
            
                TO take the charge and care to gouern a Citie with violence,  chéefely those which are accustomed to liue free: is a difficile and troublesome thing, and if we be not mighty in armes: we can neither rule nor commaund the same.
            
                THe intent of him that makes war by election or by ambition:  ought to be, to obtaine and to maintaine the thing gotten, and in such sorte to procéed in the same, that he make him selfe rich, and not impouerish the Country
                  •
                and his owne Common weale.
            
               
               TO obtaine empire and not force: agrée well together, and he that obtaines Empire and not force both together,  it comes of necessitie, that he must fall in ruine. And he cannot obtaine force, that is impouerished by warres, although he be victorius: for that he dooth disbursse more then he receiues in by the gaine therof.
            
               
               A Prince or a Common-weale: ought first to take euerye  other resolution, then to haue recourse to conduct and bring into his state for his defence, Forraine succours, although it is necessary for him to put confidence in them, for that any parte, or any conuention that he makes with the enemie: wilbe lighter vnto him, thē any such resolution.
            
                AN ambitious Prince or Common-weale, can haue no greater occasion to inuade any Citie or Prouince: thē  to be requested to send his army to the defence therof.
            
                THat person that is so ambitious, that not onely to defend himselfe, but also to offend others: calles vnto him like coadiutours and helpes, goes about to obtaine that  which he cannot holde, and that the same which already he hath gotten: may be easily taken from him.
            
                THose Cities which are vsed to liue frée, or accustomed to gouerne themselues by their Prouincialls: remaine  content (together with other quiet) vnder a Dominione which they see not, rather then vnder that which they see euery day: Wherin it seemes that their bondage apéeres alwayes before their eyes.
            
                AMongst all those States that are full of infelicitie and infortunate: the state of a Prince or Common-weale is most vnhappy, which are reduced into such tearmes, that  they can neuer receiue peace, nor sustaine warres. Unto which tearmes, those are reduced that be ouermuch endamaged with the conditions of the peace, and on the other side, when they would make warres: it behoues them either to make themselues a pray to those that help them: or remaine for a spoyle to the enemie.
            
               
               THe estate of a gouernment is no other, then to rule thy  subiects in such sorte, that neither they can, or by reason ought to hurt or offend thée. This is doone by this meanes either by assuring thy selfe sufficiently in all thinges, cutting off all those wayes wherby they might harme thée: or else to benefite them so much, that they cannot by any reason be more to desire to change Fortune.
            
                WHen we are to Iudge mightie Cities that are accustomed  to liue free: it is conuenient either to extinguish them, or curteously to imbrace them, otherwise euery iudgement will fall out to be vaine, and we must altogether shunne the meane waye, for that it is pernitious.
            
                TO vse woordes againste the Enemye, of small honour:  spring for the most part of an insolencie that giues vnto men either victorie or a false hope of victorie. The which false hope dooth not onely cause men to erre in woordes, but also in déedes, for that this hope makes a man to passe his boundes, and causeth him often times to loose the occasion he hath to obtaine an assured good, hoping to haue a better which is vncertaine.
            
                PRinces that are assayled (when the assaulte is made  by men that are more mightie then they) can commit no greater errour, then to refuse any agréement, chéefely when it is offred vnto them. For that there can neuer any such b
                  •
               se condition be offred: but that in some parte of the same there is contayned, the benefite and good béeing of him that doth accept the same: and therein shall be parte of his victorie.
            
                IF a greate personage be greatly offended or endamaged,  with the publike state, or with anye priuate person, and hath not reuenged him selfe according to his own satisfaction, if he liue in a Common-weale: he dooth goe about with the ruine therof to reuenge himselfe. If he liue vnder a prince, and haue within him any generositie and corage: he  neuer dooth quiet him selfe, vntill such time that in some sorte, he dooth reuenge him selfe against him, although he perceiue his owne proper damage shoulde fall out in the same.
            
                MEn may alwayes followe Fortune, but neuer oppose them selues against Fortune. They may weaue the  web therof, but not breake the same. They ought neuer to abandon Fortune, for that not knowing the end therof: and besides that she alwaies goes through vnknowne and crooked pathes, we ought alwaies to liue in hope of her, and hoping not to abandon our selues, in whatsoeuer Fortune or in whatsoeuer trauaile we do finde our selues.
            
                AMongst those Signes whereby we knowe the power and might of a State: the one is, to beholde how she  liues with her neighbours. For that when she gouernes her selfe in such sort, that her neighbours to haue her their fréende doo make them selues her Pencionares, then is it a certaine signe that, that State is mightie. But when the saide Neighboures (although inferiour vnto her) drawe money of her: then it is a greate signe of her weaknes.
            
                IF thou be a Mal-content againste any Prince: measure and ballance thy forces, and if thou be so mightye, that  thou art able to discouer thy selfe to be his Enemie, and to make warres against him openly: enter into this path, as least perilous and most honourable: but if thy forces be not sufficient, indeuour thy self with all industrie, to make him thy fréend, and enter into the path that thou doost iudge to be necessarie, following his pleasures, and making showe that those thinges please thée, which thou seeest delightes him: for that this domesticke familiaritie makes to liue secure, and without feare of any perrill make thee to enioye and be pertaker of his good fortune, and bringes vnto thée all good meanes and  commodities for thée to satisfie thy minde.
            
                WE ought not to remaine so néere vnto Princes, that their ruine ouerwhelme vs: neither so farre distant off, that being ouerthrowne, we maye be able to ariue in time to leape vpon the ruine.
            
                THose Princes begin then to loose their state, when they  begin to breake the Lawes, the maners, and those customes that be of antiquitie: and vnder the which men haue liued a long time, for that these doo want commodity: those doo abandon them, and their willes and desires is alike, for that the desire of dominion, is as great or greater then is the desire of reuenge.
            
                THe greatest enemy that a Prince hath, is conspiracy,  for that whensoeuer it is made, either it dooth destroy him or defame him. If they take effect: he dyes, if they be discouered, and that he dooth kill the conspiratours: it will alwaies be thought to haue béen the inuention of ye prince, to satisfie his couetous desire, or to asswage his crueltie in the blood and goods of them which he hath executed and put to death.
            
                WHen a Prince dooth discouer any conspiracye, let him  vse all endeuours to vnderstand the qualitie thereof: and to measure well the condition and nature of the conspiratour, and of his owne: and when he dooth finde them great and mightye, let him not discouer them, if firste he be not prepared with sufficient forces to oppresse them. For if he doo otherwise, he discouers his owne ruine.
            
                MEn for the most parte in their procéedings, and much  more in their actions of importance, ought to consider and to accommodate thēselues to the time. And those which by making naughty elections, or by natural inclinations disagree from the time: liue for the most parte vnfortunately, and their operations haue a naughty end.
            
               
               
               A Man may begin with his practises & with his naughty  orders to corrupt the people of any Cittie, but it is an impossible thing that the life of one alone should be sufficient to corrupt it in such sorte, that he himselfe may be able to reape fruite thereof: and although he did performe it through the long progresse and drawing out of time, yet it is impossible in respect of the proceeding of men that are impatient, and cannot long deferre their passions.
            
                HE that will take vpon him authoritie in a Common-weale,  and to plant therein naughty orders: it is requisite that he finde the substance and matter therof disordered by time, and that by little and little, and that from generations to generations, it be brought into disorder: the which of necessitie falles out to be brought so, when she is not oftentimes refreshed and supplyed with good examples, or with newe lawes drawing towardes her firste principles.
            
                THe Citizens which in a Common-weale make any enterprise  in fauour of libertye, or in fauour of tirannie: ought to consider the subiect they haue, and therby to iudge the difficultie of their enterprise, for it is as hard and as perrillous to make frée any people that would liue in seruitude, as it is to make a people bound that would liue frée.
            
                THe cause of the good or of the euill fortune of a man, is in his order of proceding to match and light right with  Time. For that it appeares that men in their actions and déedes procéed, some with extremitie, some with respectes, and some with cautions: and for that in the one and the other order they passe their conuenient tearmes, not being able to obserue the true way: they erre in the one and the other, but he doth commit least errour, and hath most prosperous fortune, that dooth encounter and match the time with his order of procéeding.
            
               
                
               A Prince that hath an army together, and dooth perceiue that through the want of money or fréends, he cannot long hold the same together: is of small discretion if he doo not attempt and make triall of fortune before the armie be dissolued, for if he tarry and exspect: he is sure to lose, but if he attempt the same: he may ouercome, and if he lose, yet he dooth obtaine glory: for more glorie it is to be ouercome by force, then by anyother inconuenience, which may cause thée to loose.
            
                HE that desires to haue a Cittie to defend it selfe obstinately,  or that would haue an armie in the féeldes obstinately and resolutely fight: he ought aboue all things to indeuour himself to print in the mindes of those that must 
                  •
               ight, necessitie.
            
               
               A Wise Generall that goes about to winne & expugne any Cittie, he ought to measure the facilitie and difficultie that he shall haue to winne the same, by knowing and considering what necessitie dooth constraine the inhabitours thereof to defend themselues: and when he findes sufficient necessitie that constraines them to defend themselues: let him iudge ye expugnation for difficile, otherwise: let him holde it for most easie.
            
                TOwnes and Citties after their rebellion, are more difficile  to be obtained, then they are at their firste winning: for that in their beginning hauing no occasion to feare any punishment, for that they haue made no offence, they doo easily yeeld themselues: but after rebellion, they iudging themselues to haue offended, and therfore fearing punishment, are most difficile to be expugned.
            
                ORders are not so much necessarie for an armie to be  able to fight in due order, as they be: for that euerye small accident, should not disorder them, for the populare multitude, are not vnprofitable in warres for any other cause: but for that euery rumour, euery woord and sound,  and euerye noyse dooth amaze them and makes them to flye.
            
               
               A Wise Generall, amongst other things, ought to appoint which those be which must receiue his woordes  and carrie them to others: accustome his Souldiers that they beléeue none, but only those Chéeftains and officers, that speake or appoint nothing but that which is commaunded by him: for that if this parte be not well obserued, it is oftentimes séene, that disorders of great importance hath followed.
            
                EUery wise Generall ought to indeuour himselfe to cause some newe thing to appeare whilste the Armies  are in fighting, to the intent he therby may giue aid to his owne, and take the same away from his enemie: the which accident maye be verye effectuall to giue him the victorie. And besides these aduertisements, he ought to doo two things, the one to make proofe with newe inuentions to amase the enemye, the other to stand prepared, that if the same be practised of the enemye against him, he both maye be able and knowe how to discouer and make frustrate the same.
            
                IT is much better to send into an expedition, a man alone that is of ordinary prudence, then two woorthy personages  together, with the very same authoritie.
            
                HE that commaunds ouer subiects, to the intent they may not become insolent, and that through thy ouer-great  felicitie, doo spurne at thée: thou ought rather to applye thy selfe to punishe then to execute: but neuerthelesse with such moderation, that thou maist shunne that hate which euery Prince ought to keep him from.
            
                SOmetimes an act that is replenished and full of charitie, dooth woorke greater effect in the minde of a man,  then one that is cruell and violent. And it comes oftentimes to passe, that, that Prouince and that Cittie, that the weapons, the warlicke instruements and euery  other force hath not béene able to open, one example of humanitie or of pietie, of chastitie, or of such other vertues, hath been able not onely to open, but also to make subiect.
            
                HE that desires ouermuch to be beloued: euerye small  step wherby he stra
                  •
               es out of the true way, makes him despised, and he that desires ouermuch to be respected and feared, euerye lea
                  •
               t parte wherein he excéedes the meane, makes him odious: and to kéepe the meane and middle way, cannot be iu
                  •
               tly perfourmed, for that our nature doth not consent vnto it: wherfore it is necessarie to mitigate both the one and the other with an excessiue vertue.
            
                WHosoeuer desires to be obeyed, it is necessarie he know how to commaund, and those know how to commaund, that make comparison of their own qualities, with that of those ouer whome they are to commaund: but when they perceiue they are out of proportion and frame they ab
                  •
               taine: and if they commaund ouer-hard and violent thinges, it is conuenient with violence and hardines to cause them to be obserued, otherwise he shall finde himselfe deceiued.
            
                TO keepe a Common-weale with violence, it is conuenient that there be a proportion of him that forceth the same, with that which is forced: and sometimes there is such a maner of proportion, yt it may be thought, that, that violence may endure, but when he that is forced is stronger then he that forceth him: it is to be doubted that this violence will cease euerye day.
            
                TO commaund ouer strong thinges, it is conuenient to be strong, and he that is of this force, and that dooth commaund them, cannot afterwards with gentlenes and curtesie, cause the same to be obserued, but he that is not of this fortitude of minde, ought to kéep himselfe from extraordinary rule and commaundings: and in those that  be ordinary may vse his humanitie: for that ordinarye punishments, are not imputed to the prince, but to the lawes and to the other institutions of the Citie.
            
                IF we desire that an armie shall ouercome any battaile:  it is necessary to make it enter into such an opinion of assurance: that they may beléeue that in any case they shall ouercome. And to make them assured, it is necessarye to arme them and to make them cunning in military orders, and woorke so that they may haue perfect knowledge and counter-sig
                  •
               es one of an other. And this assurance and order cannot arise, but amongste those Souldiers, that are borne and haue liued together. It is conuenient also, that the Captaine Generall be estéemed of qualitie, that they trust in his prudence: and they will alwayes trust in him, when they see him order things well, to be carefull, bolde, and that doth hold wel and with great reputation, the maiestie of his degree: the which he shall always maintaine, when he dooth punish them of their errours, and dooth not toyle or trauaile them in vaine: and that he obserue vnto them his promise, and showe them, that the waye to ouer come is very easie: and to kéepe secrets hid, and make mery in such maner as may show that the perrills are remoued. The which thinge being well obserued: they are a great occasion that the armye should enter into an opinion of assurance, and beeing assured: to obtain the victorie.
            
                EUery Prince that makes warres, ought to take honour  for his beg
                  •
               nning: and profit for his finall end. Neither that can be reputed a profitable warre: which dooth obtain State or money. I haue made mention of honour and profite. For that although ma
                  •
               y times honour mooues Princes to make warres: yet for al that, for the most parte, his state is gayned, that against reason hath showed him selfe thy Enemye. And that warre wherein there is as muche sp
                  •
               nt as there is gotten therein: is a damageable warre.
            
               
               HE that determines to obtaine the degrée of a Magistrate,  let him dispose himselfe to supporte the hate and euill will of many, and let him neuer imagine to become angrye with any one, for any thing that shall chaunce vniustly against him: euen of those that he hath holden for most freendlye, neither let him leaue of so lightlye, by reason of the first denialls and withstandings that are made him, his hopes are muche lesse his owne defences: for that he that doth su
                  ••
               ain certain vehement assaults, and chéefly the first, the which are accustomed to be made, neither suffers himself to fal into manifest ouerthrow, either through wrath or ouer much haste: maye hope to finde many good occasions to fauour his election.
            
                TO be olde, giues great helpe to him that desires honours,  for that olde age dooth carry with it ordinarily hope of short life, yet it is true, that olde age is not sufficient, but it is necessarie withall to haue other qualities, and the first is bounty: forsomuch as men are neuer so wicked, nor by admiration so vnciuill, that they can altogither suppresse the desire of good things, that nature hath giuen to euerye one, wherupon it dooth arise, that the good be honored euen of the wicked.
            
                THose thinges by the which men are moued to fauour  any one, to obtaine the degree of a Magistrate, it is necessarie that they be encreased in all their operations, or at least-wise not deminished from the fauourite: and let him beléeue that continually the eyes of euery one is vpon him, & that he is to make iudgement of euery little thing, of his will and desire. Forsomuch as the selfe sam
                  •
                freends, will faile him in affection, when they discouer the contrary of that which they haue imagined of him.
            
                THe people when they beginne to giue anye degrée to anye  Citizen, grounding them selues vpon the fame, vpon opinion and vpon his workes: make no euill foundation. But when afterwards the sundrye examples, and his  many good déedes makes him better knowne: they ground it better, for in such case they are neuer deceiued.
            
                THe People in the election of maiestrates, iudge according to those countersignes, that men do holde for  mos
                  •
               e true: and when they may be counsailed as Princes are, they erre lesse then Princes doo. And that Citizen whic
                  •
                will beginne to get the fauour of the people: ought to gaine the same with some notable fact.
            
                THose that giue counsell to a Common-weale or vnto  a Prince: are set amongst these straites, that if they giue no counsaile to those thinges that vnto them appéere profitable, either for the Citie or for the Prince, without hauing any respect: they faile in their dutie If they giue counsaile: they enter into perrill of their life and of their state, all men béeing blinde in this case, to iudge the good and the naughtie counsailes by the end.
            
                TO shunne or flie either infamie or perrils, by counsaile  I sée no other waye then to take the thinges moderatelye, and not to take any by enterprise: telling his opinion without passion, and without passion defend the same with modestie, in such sorte that the Citie that is counsailed or the Prince doo followe the same: that he may followe it willingly, and that it séeme not that he be drawne therunto by the importunitie of him that giues the counsaile.
            
                IT seemes yt there is found in humaine actiones, in going about to bring things to their perfection: alwaies néere  vnto the good, there is adioyned some euill, the which (together with the same goodnes) dooth easily spring, that it séems vnpossible that we can want the one, if we desire the other.
            
               
               A Wise Generall, when he comes to encounter with a new enemy that is of reputacion: is constraned before he giue battaile, to make his souldiours proue the enemy  with light encounters and Skirmishes, to the intent that beginning to manage and to knowe them, they maye loose that terrour which fame and reputation had giuen them.
            
               
                ALthough to vse fraude in any action, is detestable: neu
                  ••
               thelesse in the managing of warres, it is a laudable and glorious thing: and he is aswell commended that ouercomes the enemy by fraude, as he that dooth ouercome him by force.
            
                WHen determinations is altogither to be made touching  the safetie of our Countrie, we ought not to fall into any consideration either of iust or vniust, of pitifull, or cruell: of laudable, and 
                  •
               gnomie: but hauing set aside euery other respect we ought to follow altogither that resolution, which dooth maintaine our liues in safetie, and our Countrye in libertye.
            
                HE that would sée what shall fall out, let him consider  what hath beene: for that all things in this worlde, in all ages, haue the same euents they had in auntient time.
            
                WHen a Prince desires to obtaine a thing of any other:  let him not giue him space to d
                  •
               li
                  ••
               rate vpon the same (if occasion doo suffer it) and woorke in such sorte that he may see the necessitie of the speedie deliberation: the which is when he that is demaunded, dooth sée that by denying or by differring doth arise a perilous and suddain indignation.
            
               
               A General ought neuer to giue credit to any errour that  is euidentlye made by the enemie: for alwaies vnder the same there is some fraude, since it cannot stand with reason that men should be so vnwarie.
            
                THere is nothing more difficile to be handled, neither  more doubtfull to come to passe, neither more perillous to be managed, then to make our selues chée
                  •
               e to bring in newe orders: for that he which is the bringer in of them, hath vnto his enemies all those which haue sped well vnder the olde orders, he hath for meane and moderate de
               
                  •
               enders, all those that by the new orders shall spéede well:  the which medeocritie dooth spring partely for feare of the aduersaries that haue the lawes to benefite 
                  •
               hem: part
                  •
               ly through the incrudelitie of men, which doo not giue place to any new thing, vnlesse they doo see firme experience.
            
                HE that dooth beléeue that newe denefites dooth make  great personages forget olde iniuries, is deceiued: and iniuries ought to be made altogither, to the intent that ta
                  ••
               ing lesse, they may offend lesse: but benefits ought to be made by little and little, to the intent they may sm
                  •
               ll better.
            
               
               A Prince ought to haue no other obiect, nor any other  thought, neither take any other thing for his art, then warres, orders, and lawes, and the discipline of them: for that is the only art that is to be required of him that commaundes, and is of such great vertue, that it dooth not onlye maintaine those that are borne Princes, but oftentimes, makes men of priuate fortune to arise vnto that degrée.
            
                IT is apparently séene, that when we make any resolution,  either with ouer great haste, or with ouer great affection, it dooth euer fall out to be euill: forsomuch as the one giues vs no time to finde out those thinges, that ought to be had inconsideration, before conclusion b
                  •
                made: the other, do
                  •
               th occupye our mindes in such sorte, that it dooth not suffer vs to knowe any other, saue onlye those which dooth touch vs at that instant.
            
                ONe pleasure or displeasure, doth moue vs more which  is doone in our present action, then those great benefites that haue béene doone in times past: so for the most parte the sence of thinges present, dooth woor
                  •
               e more in men, then the memory of things past, or the prouidence of things that are to come.
            
                IT is an easie thing to know the euill satisfaction of the  minde of euerye one: for that euerye one dooth recount  willingly the merits or demerits of their fréends, and that which our aduersaries can doo, or cannot doo: so that we will haue patience to giue eare, the which patience is the foundation for vs to doo euery thing well. And he that hath greater desire to speake then to giue eare: dooth instruct much more then he dooth learne.
            
                WHen any thing will not take effect, it is necessarie to  consider whither that did arise of their owne disorder, or of the enemies abilitie or power, if they spring of disorders, that may be amended, we ought to doo it: if for that the enemy proceedes in good order, it is requisite we should change opinon, and doo that which is least euill: the which will come to passe, when there dooth aduaunce any small time in the consideration of our owne State, and if that he will discend to reasonable and iust compositions and partes.
            
                AMongst the manye occasions of euill, that being disarmed  dooth bring vnto a Prince: one is, that it causeth him to be dispised: for of one that is armed, in respect of one that is disarmed, there is no proportion: and reason dooth not require that he which is armed, should willinglye obey to him that is disarmed, and that the disarmed should remaine secure amongst armed seruitours, for that whilst in the one there remaineth disdain, and in the other suspect: it is not possible that they should agrée and match well together.
            
               
               A Prince which hath no vnderstanding in Warrefare  besides his infelicitie, he can neither be estéemed of his Souldiers, neither put any confidence in them: he therefore ought to exercise himselfe more in the time of peace, then in the time of warre, two waies: The one in action, the other with his minde: in action, by kéeping his people w
                  •
               ll ordered and well exercised, alwaies to vse himselfe to the chase, and by the means therof, to accustome his bodye to trauailes and discommodities, and in parte to learn  the nature of the scituations. With his minde to read the histories, and in thē to consider the excellent acts of men, to beholde how they did gouerne themselues in warre, examine the occasion of the victorie, and of the losse thereof: to the intent that the one maye be shunned and auoyded, and the other imitated: and aboue all thinges, to imitate those that before him were glorious and of woorthye praise.
            
                HE that dooth leaue off that which he dooth, for that  which he ought to doo, dooth rather learne his ruine, then his preseruation, for a man that in all respectes will performe the profession of a good man, it falles out of necessitie, that he be ruinated amongst so many good men.
            
                THat Prince that cannot vse liberalitie without his damage, in such sort that it come to knowledge: he ought  if he be prudent, not to care for the name of miserable, for that in time he shall be alwaies accounted more liberall, perceiuing that by his spare, his reuenewe shall be so sufficient, that he maye be able to defend himselfe, against any that makes him warres, that he may take enterprises in hand without oppressing the people: whereupon it will come to passe, that he shall vse libertye to all those from whome he takes nothing, which are infinite: and be miserable to all those to whom he giues nothing, which are fewe.
            
                NOthing doth more consume it selfe then liberality, the  which whilste thou doost vse it, thou losest the meanes to vse it, and thou shalt become either poore, either vile, or else to shunne pouerty: rauenous or odious.
            
                IT is greater wisdome to kéepe the name of miserable, then to bring foorth an infamie without hate, for  to desire the name of liberall, is to incurre of necessitie the name of rauenous, which brings infamie ioyned with hate.
            
               
                
               A Prince ought not to take care to be accounted cruel, so that he may maintaine his subiects in fidelitie and concord: for that with a fewe examples he is more pitifull then those that through ouermuch pittie, suffer disorder to ensue: whereby spring vp rapines and slaughters: for that these are accustomed to endamage the vniuersall state, and those executions which procéede from the Prince, doo hurt but one perticuler person, and it is altogither impossible for a newe Prince to auoide the name of cruell, for newe states are full of perrilles.
            
               
               A Prince ought to be slowe in beleeuing, and slowe to be  displeased, neither ought he to make a terrour of him selfe, but to proc
                  •
               ede in such a temperate sorte with prudence and humanitie, that his ouer great confidence do not make him vnwarie, and his ouer great distrust doo not bring him to be intollerable.
            
                MEn haue lesse respect to offend one that makes himselfe to be beloued, then one that makes himself to be feared and redoubted: for that loue is holden with a bond or obligation, the which for that men be wicked, fall out to be broken: as euery occasion of our own proper profit, but feare is maintained with the terrour of punishment, which neuer dooth abandon it.
            
                WHen the Prince is abroade with an armie, and hath in gouernment a multitude of Souldiours, he ought not to care to be named cruell, for that without this name an Armie is not holden together vnited, neither apt for any faction.
            
                MEn doo vniuersallye iudge more by their eye then by their hand, for that it falles out to be euery ones lot to see, but to fewe to touch, euerye one dooth see what thou seemes to be, fewe doo feele what thou art: and those fewe dare not oppose themselues against the opinion of many or which haue the maiestie of the state to defend them, and in the actions of all men, and chéefly of Princes, where there  is no iudgement vnto which they may appeale, beware of the end.
            
                PRinces béeing forced of necessitie to know how to manage beasts: ought amongst thē to make choise of ye Fox  and the Lyon: in respect that the Lyon dooth not defend him selfe from snares: nor the Fox dooth not defende him-selfe from wolfes. Therfore it is necessary to be a Fox, to know how to discypher snares: and a Lyon, to make the wolfes affraide.
            
               
               A Newe Prince, cannot obserue all those thinges by the  which men are accounted good: béeing often times driuen to necessities, to maintain his state, to wincke against his promised faith, against charitie, against humanitie and against such like vertues. And therefore it is necessary he haue a mind ready to turn it selfe, according as the windes and the varying of Fortune dooth cōmaund: but he ought not to departe from that which is good (if he be able) but to knowe how to enter into that which is euill, when he is enforced.
            
               
               A Prince ought euer to endeuour him-selfe how to liue and to maintaine his State, and the meane is euer  iudged honorable and commendable of all men. For that the common Uulgar people are taken with that which appeeres, and with the euent of thinges. And in the Worlde there be none but such as be Uulgar: And those that be fewe haue place, when those that are many haue no where to settle them selues.
            
               
               A Prince ought to possesse two feares, one at home in  respect of his Subiectes: the other abroade, in respect of forraine Potentates. From these he may defende himselfe with good weapons and w
                  ••
               h good Fréendes, and alwayes if he haue good weapons: he shall haue good Fréendes. And continually the state of thinges will remaine firme at home: when those rest firme that are abroade.
            
               
               
               A Prince ought not to make estimation of conspiracies,  when the people is beneuolent, but when they be his enemies and hate him, he ought to be afraide of euerye thing and of euerye one, how simple soeuer he be, for there is no man of such pouertie, that he wants a knife.
            
               
               A Prince that would maintaine his state, is constrained oftentimes not to be good, for that when the people, the Souldiours, or other great Personages, be corrupted, of whome in his iudgement he hath néede to maintain himselfe: it is requisite that he follow their humours and that he satisfie them: and then his good woorkes, are his enemies.
            
                WHen occasion dooth present her self vnto thée, of any thing thou doost desire, take holde of her without loosing time: for that the affaires of this world doo so soone varie and change, that we cannot assure our selues to haue any thing, vntil such time as we haue it in our hands, who when therfore any thing is propounded and offered vnto thée that dooth displease thée, deferre it so long as thou art able, for that it is often seene, that time brings foorth accidents, that will carrie thée out of those difficulties.
            
                WHen a Prince is more afraide of his owne subiectes  then of forraine forces, let him make fortifications: but he that is more afraide of forraine nations then of his owne people, let him cast those at his backe, but to the intent he need not to be in doubt, but rather to make himselfe esteemed: nothing is better then to take in hand great enterprises, and giue knowledge to the world of his notable examples.
            
                WE neuer goe about to shunne one inconuenience, but  that we incurre another, but prudence dooth consist in knowing how to discearn the qualitie of the inconueniences, and not in taking a naugty course for a good.
            
                THe Prince ought alwaies to receiue counsell when  he will, and not when others will: but when he is  not wise of him selfe: he cannot receiue good connsell, if he do not remit whole to the chance of one alone (which may gouerne all) and such a one as were a wise and prudent man. But good counsells from whome soeuer they come, it is requisite that they arise through the prudence of the Prince, and not the prudence of the Prince to arise of good counsell.
            
                HE that will negotiate, ought not to suffer him selfe to  be taken out of possession: for that of one thing dooth arise anotherthing, as-well by the accesse that the first giues vnto the second: as by the reputacion he dooth carrie to be found in negotiation. Unto which purpose this Prouerbe may be applyed. Di Cosa nasce cosa, et il tempo le gouerna. Of thinges: thinges arise, and time dooth gouerne them.
            
                WE ought to obserue with diligence, thinges past: for that they giue light to those that are to come, forsomuch  as the Worlde was alwayes one, and all that which is at thi
                  •
                present and shall be, hath béen at other times. For that the selfe same thinges returne vnder diuers sundrie names and cullours, wherefore they are not knowne but of those that are wise, and that consider them with greate diligence.
            
                THose possesse a better time in this Worlde, a longer life, and after a certaine sorte a more happy, which are  of a base and meane wit: then these hye and scrutinous wittes. For that a Noble wit is for the moste parte a trauaile to him that hath it. Neuertheles the one in practising dooth participate more of a brute creature then of a man, the other ascending aboue the degrée of man: dooth aproche néere vnto the heauens.
            
                THe nature of the people, is like vnto the nature of priuate persones, that is, to desire alwayes to augment  in degrée, more then they are of them selues: Therfore he is wise, that denyes anye thinge before they demaunde it. For if he doo graunte it: hée dooth not staye them,  but dooth inflame them to demaund more, and with greater instance then before, for by giuing them often to drink: the thirst is made greater.
            
                HE that is the follower of a great person, and doth serue  him, & dooth desire to be employed of him: dooth apply himselfe to be alwaies present before his eyes, for that occasions doo arise from time to time, to commit some affaires to the handes of those he dooth sée, or vnto those that are néerest him: which if he did séeke for or looke for, he would not commit them vnto him: and he that doth loose any beginning although very small, dooth oftentimes loose his accesse and introduction to great things.
            
               
               I Would imploye my selfe to séek the mutation of states,  if I alone were able to change them: but when I call to minde that it is requisite I should first make head with others, and for the most parte with fooles and with malignant persons, which neither can kéep secret, neither know how to perfourme any thing, there is nothing that I flée and shunne more then this.
            
                HE that would procure in any accident, a wise man to  iudge the effects that would come, and write his iudgment: he should finde (returning to sée the progresse of times) fewe thinges verified, for that the affaires of the worlde are euer variable and full of change.
            
                HE that is conuersant with great persons, should not  suffer himselfe to be set on horse-back, with curteous embrasements, or with superficial demonstrations, wherwithall they make men daunce as they list: for that by how much more is it difficile for vs to abstaine from this, so much the more ought we to restraine our selues by kéeping our head free and at liberty, not suffering any to carry vs away lightly.
            
               
               A Good Citizen that loues his Countrie, ought not onely  to temporise and maintain himselfe in the good grace of a Tirant for his securitie, for that he is in perrill when he  is holden in suspect: but also for the benefite of the Cittie, for that gouerning of himselfe, after this sort, he shal haue occasion to fauour with counsel and with d
                  •
               eds, many good men, and disfauour many wicked.
            
                IF thou be not well pleased with any one, indeuour thy selfe so much as thou art able, that he doo not perceiue it:  for that he dooth soddainly alienate himselfe, and for that in time manye occasions doo fall out, that maye serue thy turne, and they will serue thée if thou hast not lost them by making account of them: dissemble then and hold him for thy freend.
            
                HE that perceiues himself to be of good luck and fortunate, may weaue the webbe of his enterprises with  greater courage: but let him knowe, that chaunce & luck be not only from time to time ful of change, but also in one selfe time and in one selfe thing. And whosoeuer will obserue the same, shall finde many that haue béene fortunate in one kinde of thing, and in an other kinde haue been vnfortunate.
            
               
               I Haue desired as other men haue: profit and honor, and  my draught hath alwaies succeede, neuerthelesse, when I haue obtained what I would: I haue not found in the same any of those satisfactions I imagined before, which thing if it be well considered, ought to suffise to exstinguish much of that thirstie humour that men haue of honours.
            
                DOo not determine vpon that thing which thou hast  not, neither spend vpon any future gaines: for that many times they doo not succéede, and thou findest thy selfe entangled. And it is oftentimes seene, that great Merchants doo faile, when that vnder the hope of a greater future gain, they enter into exchange, the multiplying wherof is certaine, and hath a perfixed time, but ye gaines which he looked for, oftentimes doo not come, or else drawe out in length more then he made account off: in such sorte, that  those enterprises which he had begun to his profit, fall out to be damageable.
            
                IN the particular accidents of warre, fortune dooth rule more then in any other humaine actions, forsomuch as euery arte that hath his subiect changeable, is in some sorte subiect to the occurrence of chaunce: but most of al the art militarie through the great difficulties, brought by the varietie of the change of chaunces, which are and fall out vpon the way, in scituations of grounds, in seasons, in the inequalitie of the aire, in infirmities, in mony, in victua
                  •
               ls, in the munition, in artillerie, in the bagage, in the spyes, in the guides, in the vaulcorrours, in the principall officers, and in the proper Souldiours.
            
                WArrefare cannot be vsed for an arte, but of a common
                  •
               weale, or of a Prince: and the one and the other of these when they are well ordered, wil neuer consent that any Citizen or subiect shall vse the same for art.
            
               
               A Well ordered Cittie ought to desire that the studie of  warrefare be vsed in time of peace, for an exercise: but in the time of warre, for necessitie & for glory, suffering the same to be vsed for art, onlye of publick & common-weale.
            
                THere is no sorte of Souldiers to be found so perrilous, as those which are compounded of them that make warres an art, for thou shalt be forced either alwaies to make warres, or to haue them alwaies in paye: or else to stand in perrill that they doo not take away thy kingdome from thee, but if a King will liue in securitie, he ought to haue his footmen and souldiours compounded of such men that whē time requires to make warres: they wil willinglye for his loue goe vnto the same, and when afterwardes peace doth fall out, they doo most willingly return home to their houses, forsomuch as the end of him that will make warres, is to be able to fight with any enemy in the féelde, and to wi
                  •
               ne the battaile.
            
                WEapons put in the hands of Citizens or subiects by  the lawes or any other ordinance, did neuer do hurt:  but are alwaies profitable, and maintaine the Citie more immaculate by means of these weapons then wtout them.
            
               
               A Captain of the sea, which is accustomed to fight with the windes, with ye waters, and with men, will more  easily become a captain on land, where we fight only with men: then a captain of ye land become a captain on the sea.
            
                ALthough those which attribute all to vertue or all to prudence, vse their endeuours to exclude fortune: yet  can they not deny that it is a great chaunce to be borne in some one time, or to practise in those occasions in the which those partes or vertues, he dooth feele himselfe to be of valour and abilitie, are in estimation.
            
                THe officers and fauourites of the Prince, are bound if they be wise, to maintaine their maister in loue & charitie  with other Princes, and to molifie with their woords their ire, when it will fall out to be hurtfull, not onelye to themselues, but also to the people: for that they being for the most part headlong & violent in their wills, so much the more they become furious, by how much they are inflamed with ire, by those that ought to reconcile and asswage thē: and he that dooth otherwise, is no other then a naughtye seruant, and vnwise officer.
            
                EUery souldiour and euery man, although he be valiant and strong, dooth only defend himselfe and his owne life,  but a Prince whilste he shewes himselfe iust & benigne to all, is more ententiue about other mens safety thē his own and let him know that the safetie of his people is his own security, and therfore he ought ioyfully to take holde of all those remedies that fortune and occasion doth yeelde him.
            
                WE doo not only gain glory by ouercōming that enemy  which doth fall armed in y• feelde, but also it is a much more glorious victory which is obtained without sound of trumpet: and in the which thy enemy is made thy prisoner willingly.
            
                TO slye (which very rarelye or neuer dooth saue a man)  doth shew the basenes of his minde, & his folly to punish  himselfe in the hazard and perrilles of warrefare.
            
                THe greatnes of state is vniuersaly desired of euery one, for that all the goodnesthereof dooth appeare outwardly, but the euill remaines hid within the same, the which if it were séene, we should haue no such great desire thereof, for that without doubt it is full of perrilles, of suspitions, of trauailes and of toyles, but that which dooth cause a well purged minde to desire the same, is the appetite that men haue to become superiours ouer others: the which thing is truely a goodly and blessed thing, considering that in this case they resemble God.
            
                EUery one that is forced of necessitie, dooth require helpe  of others, where there is no boud of benefites receiued or straite knotte of freendship: it is a iust and reasonable thing ye he showe in what sort his request aboue all things is of great profit, or at the least dooth bring in damage to any person, if the same be freely graunted vnto him, and after make manifest that he shall be euer bound vnto him: and where demonstrations can be made of none of these foresaid thinges: he ought to be displeased if he doo not obtaine that which he demaunds.
            
                IN all thinges it is necessary first to aide our selues with reason, and then with force: and therefore in matters of warrefare, it is much better to entrappe others, then to defend our selues from the factions of others: not suffering through our basenes of courage the enemies forces to be encreased with those things that we ought to serue our turnes withall: for that by how much more a man dooth vphold himself with reason in any thing, so much the greater profit will follow.
            
                EUen as in naturall things the multitude of perticular  causes are knit vp in fewe, by ascending vp to y• height and from fewe, so long vntill they end in one alone: euen so likewise the multitude of those, that doo handle publick affaires, are restrayned and knit vp through sundry occasions  and waies, into fewe bodies and sectes, and those into other fewe, vntill such time as they conspire and be incorrupted, whither it be by chaunce or of purpose, in one onely body and head.
            
                PRinces may by education and by election, make themselues good voluntary, wherin their proper conscience,  or at the least shame may doo that in them that the lawes cannot doo in a frée state and power, but when the lawes do serue vnto a well compounded minde, not for a spur, but for a bridle: that person truely is worthy of all honour, and ought to be reputed excellent.
            
                MEn doo lament more when any wrong is doon them, against reason, then when violence is vsed against  them by force, for that the wrong makes shewe, that he that dooth doo iniurie, and he that is iniuried be equal, but force is a token, that he that dooth force is of greater power then he that is forced.
            
                EUen as similitude enclines the maister to estéeme déerly of his seruant, and to giue him aide, and to admit
                  •
               e  him into his grace: euen so continuation almost against the will of the maister, dooth in ende ouercome and open the passage, through those occasions which necessarilye doo occurre, aswell through the indisposition, as by the absence of him, which either through auncient seruice, or through the fauour of his maister, being assured of his grace, dooth leaue off his diligence: and dooth attend about some of his owne commodities, the which if it goe any time forward, it is an easie thing, for that the new seruant in a smal time to make him selfe more estéemed of his maister, then the auntient: forsomuch as the new dooth study alwaies to obtaine his good grace, and honour him more then the other, as he that perchaunce hath not known him in wursse fortune or of lesse age, whereas the auntient seruaunt many times by those reasons that are contrarye to these, and by his continuall practise, dooth vsurpe an odious equalitie, or  at the least doo not serue with such a reuerence and respect.
            
                PUblicke and perticular accusations maye easilye be exstinguished:  but an vniuersall warre, taken in hand by all at the instance of some perticulars, (they not knowing what shall be the issue thereof) cannot easily abandon the same with their honour.
            
                WHen we prepare our selues against our enemies, we ought to think and imagine that their displeasure is like vnto ours, and we ought to apply our selues to déedes and not to woordes: not putting any trust at all in the errours which our enemies commit, but rather let vs presuppose that alwaies they being of sound iudgement, haue aswell prouided for their affaires, as we for ours.
            
               
               A Wise man ought not to kéepe secret any good counsell  that is profitable for his Countrye, for doubt that the same should be put in effect: for that the end will cause other mens temeritie and folly to be knowne: and likewise will cause the bounty and prudence to appeare of him that hath giuen thee counsell.
            
                IT is conuenient for wise men to remaine in peace, not  being molested with other mens iniuries, but towards men of valour (being offended) it is conuenient to take notice thereof, making his recourse from peace to warres, and if things doo succéed towards them prosperouslye: they ought to returne to peace, and not become proud through the happy successe of warres: or rather enioying the rest of peace, suffer thēselues to be iniured. Forsomuch as he that through the delight of peace is sloe if he remaine quiet, in a small space of time he is depriued of the delight of that idle rest which made him sloe. And he that through the happy successe of warres becomes proude, dooth not perceiue that his is raised vp with an vncertain audacitie: for that many things naughtily determined, incountred by the enemy more foolishlye counselled then he, haue had happye issues, and many of those which with prudence did seeme to  be de termined, cōtrariwise haue had vnhappy successe. For so much as things are very sildome executed according to their draught, but euery one with a certaine securitie, doo iudge of future things, and after in the action faile.
            
                WArres very seldome fall out in such sort as the plot is set down, for that she findes of her selfe many thinges  besides the occurrants: and therfore he that is couragious in the same, proues to be secure, but he that is fearefull in the same, commits greeuous errours.
            
                THe falling out and issue of things are accustomed to be  fallible, no lesse thē humain determinations, & through that occasion, when there dooth come vpon vs any disgrace at vnawares: we vse to burden fortune with the falte thereof.
            
                MEn submit themselues vnto seruitude it self, yéelding obedience in small things, vnto which they should be  subiect, being obedient in great things.
            
                AN armie vpon the Seas, is artificiallye handled like vnto the other, in the which it is not necessarie with  sloth once or twice to exercise our selues: but he that will entirelye learne it, it is requisite that he continually make profession of nothing else: forsomuch as the issues of warre be doubtfull, and from small thinges they come to great, and many assaults are made through ire and rage, and the lesse multitude fearing, hath oftentimes ouercome ye greater number, who not estéeming the enemy, haue made no account of order.
            
                IT is necessarie that all those that doo enter into other  mens territories: to be ready and prompte of minde, and firme and staid in their déeds, for that in such sort ye souldiours become most valiant to giue the assault, and more assured in resistance, alwaies imagining yt they doo not fight against a citie yt is impotent and weak of defence, but furnished with all thinges necessary: wherfore they ought to presuppose, that the enemye will méete them in the face,  if not at that present at the least, when they sée that they are entred into their Countrie, beginning to destroy and to ruinate the same.
            
                ALl those that doo sée any vnwoonted damage to be  done, before their proper eyes: are moued by the same immediatly vnto disdaine and ire, and vsing small reason, pricked greatly forward with fury and anger, enforce thē
               selues to vse blowes.
            
                MOnye is gathered and kept to spend honourably, and  that is the vse and finall ende thereof: therefore a wise Prince ought not to giue himselfe to gather the same together, to serue his turne withall: but to make warres, forsomuch as in warres money is not spent in vain, when there is hope of greater gain: and although the people are very vnwillingly made contributarye: notwithstanding, when they know that it is doon for the common safetye, they supporte it peaceably.
            
                MAny times we see created of purpose in Common-weales,  the successour differing in nature to his predicessours, and this is doone: forsomuch as the qualitie of the firste (how good soeuer he be) through a certaine naturall glutting of mens appetites, dooth displease: and so much the more, by how much there is nothing found in this worlde, that is altogither good, and which hath not in it some parte of euill, through the hate wherof, we go about to set vp one of contrarye customes, whose order of life and woorking, may be almost directlye opposite to his predicessour, aswell for that he is one alone of the number of them that iudge after this sort, and is reputed for such of others: as for that he can doo nothing more acceptable then the contrary of that which a little before was hated, neither any thing more apparent or glorious, then that which is néere vnto perrill.
            
                THose things that may appeare vnto many little and of small moment: be like vnto the signes, by the which  Phisitions doo foresée plagues, and Saylers the tempests at the Sea: but rather vnto the good, and those of vnderstanding, they are peraduenture of greater importance, then oftentimes are the demōstrations of greater things: for that as a certain wise man saith, in small things wherin men vse not to faine, and doo not vse studie of apparence, neither are afraide to be punished: the habite of vertue is easily comprehended together, with the secret inclination and disposition that a man hath towards vices, forsomuch as hauing at that time not any eye and care to please vniuersally, but himselfe: he remembers himselfe (drawn by his particular humour) of that errour into the which he may runne, but to satisfie his appetite.
            
                BY great reason men doo iudge, that he is woorthie of reprehension, who through timorositie doth faile in the  glorie, which at that present hee dooth possesse, euen as they likewise iudge him to be woorthie of euill will, who dooth rashly séek for that, which neither is conuenient, nor doth not appertaine vnto him.
            
                COnfidence for the most parte dooth arise of an vnhoped  for aduenture, and may likewise be in a timerous person, but an assured firmenes appertaines onely to him, who knowes certainly, that he by the counsell which is in our selfe is to ouercome his aduersarie: and prudence which springeth of the greatnes of our courage in equall fortune, doth make him that hath audacitie, more secure, not putting his trust in hope, whose power is fallible: but in that counsell which is taken vpon thinges present, the fore-seeing of which is more stable.
            
                TO be enuied, and to be vsed, falles out of necessitie to be in all them, who think themselues woorthye to gouerne  ouer others: and euerye one that in great thinges doth obtain hate, he is well counselled: for that hate endure
                  •
                but a small time, but the present fame and the glorie to come, shall remaine perpetually.
            
               
                IN perrills where there is no courage: no art dooth help, for feare makes men to forget knowledge and Science: and practise without generositie, dooth bring with it no profit at all. Let therfore an Army be couragious although it be but small: for that, that Armye which is greate, and dooth trust more in their number then in their counsell and in their courage: it may be said that the same Army is full of fooles. And let him knowe that order and silence, whilst Armyes are in fight: are great helpes to obtaine victories. And that those which be once ouercome in any enterprise, finding them selues againe in the same perrill: are not verye assured.
            
                AMongst priuate persons there is no stable amitie, neither  amongst Cities confederations of any moment: if there be not betwixt the one and the other an interchangeable opinion of sinceritie, and if in other thinges, they be not of like customes: for where mens mindes disagrée, likwise their operations disagrée.
            
                WEe ought to praise moderatelye, for by how muche  more ignominies offend him, against whom they are spoken: by so much more the manifolde praises oftentimes offend him that dooth heare them, besides that, the praise▪giuer runnes into the perrill of the iudgement and of his bountie which is lesse: for so much as through his proper loue that dooth gouerne him, the good and the euil which is spoken of others, is sodainlye reuolued and enters into comparison with our selues: where-vpon, euery one that dooth féele in him selfe such merites or defectes: either is greeued that his prayses are kepte secrete, or else dooth feare that his defectes shoulde be discouered. And it oftentimes comes to passe, that we may offende a person onlye with bearing greater respect vnto an other of the same or of a greater quallitye, the same person iudging, that as much, or perchance woorsse shall be doone to him.
            
               
               MEn of grosse and slowe wittes, doo gouern a Citie better,  then those that be of a quicke and craftie braine, for wise men will showe, that they know more of lawes, and be superiours in eloquence to others, of things deterned in commune, as those, that cannot make demonstration of their prudence in greater matters: wherupon oftentimes they bring great damage to the Cittie, but those that put no confidence in their prudence: esteeme thēselues of the least in the lawe, and not being sufficient to obiect against the spéeche of him that dooth discourse, but rather being better iudges then many of those that speake like cerimonies, for the most parte doo with great felicitie gouerne their Cittie.
            
                WHen those that haue receiued any offence doo prolong the time of reuenge: they correct the offendours  with much more modes
                  •
               ie, but when reuenge is immediatly made after a receiued iniury: those that haue béene the offendours, receiue due chastisement.
            
                IN Common-weales, good things so soon as they are told  abroad, engender suspect, no lesse thē those as be naught: Therefore it is necessarie, that he which will perswade any thing that is hurtfull, let him moue the multitude therein with disceit: and he that doth giue out thinges profitable, likewise by lying and dissembling shalbe be beléeued, neither can he openly profit his Common-weale, if y• by such fictions he do not deceiue: for he that doth openly to yt sight of the world performe any benefite in ye behalfe of his citie: suddainlye it comes to be suspected, that he goes about by some secret and hid way to reape the same againe.
            
                POuerty makes some men full of audacitie, others by  riches & couetous store are made ambitious and proud: and to others doth chaunce other occasions, according as euery man doth possesse, either ire, or some other vnbridled accident y• doth moue him, the which doo all of thē make vs to put our selues in perill, & aboue all things hope and loue  dooth greatly prick vs forward: the one going before, and the other following after: and the one despising deceites, and the other propounding vnto vs the prosperitie of fortune: doo bring great damage.
            
                IT appertains to Princes and Common-weales, to take  care that their Captaine Generals do nat fall in suspect, and if the same doo chaunce: they ought by cutting the occasion spéedilye off, to prouide and prepare for those damages, and for those ruines, that therby might hang ouer their State.
            
                SUspition dooth spring vp sometimes in our mindes, either  of those thinges that be likely, or of any violence that hath falne out, or else through a certaine folly and ignorance of men: that which doth arise of likely-hoods, it is necessarie to examine it well, forsomuch as it behoues to haue iustification, and he that dooth iustifie himselfe, dooth merite no punishment. That which dooth arise of any violence that is doon or that is to be doon: ought not so stricktly to be examined, for that already it is rather an offence, then a suspition: & offences ought to be punished. The last which dooth arise of follye and ignorance, ought not to be admitted of any person of qualitie, but rather reiected and left aparte.
            
                WRath & disdain being nothing else, but a passion  conceiued in the minde either through anye iniurie receiued, or through that which it séemes we shall receiue either offew or of many, no person of qualitie ought to giue place vnto the said passion, without reasonable occasion: and chéefely in those iniuries which it séemes he receiues of many, one perticular man being more apt to erre then any vniuersall people.
            
                PRinces ought to haue care, not to prouoke, to disdaine  their vassailes: but aboue all things a multitude or an vniuersall people, forsomuch as such a violence is much more headlong, is of greater importance, and dooth cause  more spéedie and perrilous effects for Princes.
            
                MEn that are strong and of great magnanimitie, are not to be afraide of their liues in glorious enterprises:  but rather ought to account death for most glorious, whē either for the benefite of their Cuntry, or for their Prince, the same should chaunce in some woorthie and hautye enterprise, desiring rather to dye gloriouslye, then to liue beastly.
            
                ALthough the actions of men are grounded not onelye vpon honour, honesty or iustice, but also vpon firme  and stable faith, wherewithall they are pricked forward to put things in action, in such sorte, that they may be approued and found good, by the consent of all: and to the intent when they be doon, we growe not to repent vs, forsomuch as by repentance what action soeuer, although it be well doone: is spoyled and defamed.
            
                FOrtitude is truely the supportation of great thinges, wherein there is perrill of death, but not in respect of  himselfe alone, that dooth put himselfe into the same, but in respect of the vniuersall and publick benefit either of his country or of his Prince whome he dooth serue.
            
                TRue fortitude, is to moderate feare and audacitie, and to be not able to be ouercome with trauailes, stout and  strong in perrilles, seuere against pleasures, and to be an enemye to couetousnes: is proper to a man that possesseth right fortitude. And to be such a one to defend our country and our Prince from barberous inuations, and at home the weak and not able, with weapons: or abroad, his companion from théeues, or the hye waye from rapines: is as I haue saide to accomplishe an ample and full iustice.
            
                THe fortitude of minde is knowne two waies, the one  is when being in perrils, he dooth no otherwise estéeme and repute of the partes of the body, but as superfluous and to be despised: the other, is when he dooth perseuer to follow those things which are most principall in the enterprise,  and in them goes forward still pursuing of honour, and following that which doth leade to the true and honest way, with an vnspotted and excellent intent and minde, vntill such time as he hath obtained the effect, or the desired end.
            
                IF Fortitude do principally appertaine vnto man as his  proper due: and the principall partes & dueties of Fortitude, is not to be afraid of death neither of gréefe. Whosoeuer desires to be a man, ought likewise to consider well of the true properties of a man, and to haue in memorye, that to suffer himselfe to be possessed with feare, to be ouercome by his owne will and pleasures, or drawne by a couetous desire to gaine money and riches: be partes of lightnes and instabilitie, contrarye to all fortitude.
            
                THose thinges which are vniuersallye desired, doo sildome  come to passe, the reason is: for that there be fewe that giue beginning or motion to those thinges: at the ende whereof there be sundry contrarye, to the appetites of many.
            
                THe arte of clemencye and of pardoning, although for  the most parte it benefites: neuerthelesse, sometimes it is hurtfull and damageable, but this comes to passe, when thou doost pardon a perticular person, equall or like vnto thy selfe, whereas to pardon or to vse clemencie towards a multitude, for the moste parte dooth benefite, for that it is almost impossible that a multitude which hath receiued any benefite, should all of them be willing to be malignant or ingratefull, whereas a perticular person, either through his euill nature, or through some other vnreasonable desire, dooth oftentimes fall into this vice of ingratitude.
            
                THe true intent of good men, and men of iudgement,  ought neuer to be other then to endeuour themselues to obtaine fame, glorye and honour, in the sight of men:  for that all perrilles, toyles, trauailes, discommodities and gréefes, which we beare in the exercise, or in the managing of great causes, is doone with this principall intent, to benefite so many as we can or are able, and to be hurtfull to none.
            
               
               A Wise man ought too consider, that he is borne not somuch  for himselfe, as to benefite others, and by how much he findes himself in greater degrée then others, or by how much he knowes himselfe to haue more knowledge, more vertue, or more gifts of God then others: by so much he ought to iudge that God hath graunted him the same, to the intent he may imparte the same to the benefite of others, and in this we ought infinitely to reioyce, that he hath opened vnto him so large, so plaine, and so apparent a way, to make him selfe immortall.
            
                SOddaine determinations, when as commoditie is not  left to consulte, they drawe perrilles oftentimes after them: and oftentimes also when a man for feare of a great perrill dooth turne himselfe towardes desperation, they issue foorth of those greefes and trauailes wherein they finde themselues intangled: forsomuch as the conuerting of feare into desperation, makes men furious and bolde: and those that be bolde are for the most parte aided and fauoured by fortune.
            
                IN free Citties where feare and renowne is entered  into the mindes of the vniuersall people, that is to say: of all the Citizens, or into the minde of any particular person, when it is vniuersally it causeth two effects, either the vniuersall people doo take their resolutions very slolye, or else dooth take them spéedily and desperatelye. When they take their resolution slolye, it ariseth for that a multitude can verye hardlye perswade themselues, that any other can so spéedily harme them: and to resolue desperatelye and spéedilye, dooth spring for feare of the imminent  damage, or much rather through the present harmes, and for doubt of wursse, but that feare which is in the minde of a perticular person, when he is mighty dooth oftentimes deuide a fr
                  •
               e Cittie into partes, and dooth dis-vnite the same.
            
                THe feare of a greater euill dooth sometimes deliuer a  man from the care and the thoughtes of a lesse euill: forsomuch as those things that appeare more terrible doo cause vs vpon a sodaine to forget the lesse terrible, and setting aparte all care of the one, makes vs applye our selues to the other.
            
               
               A Man that is of a frée and of a good minde, ought to consider that iustice is maintained, that the faultye are chastised, and the good rewarded, for no other occasion but only by so dooing it is good and iust.
            
                AMongst the actions of men that are glorious, by the meanes of weapons or c
                  •
               unsell, or that by one waye or by another, they ascend vp to honorable degrees: it is a thing of great importance to knowe how to defend our selues from enuie, for that there is nothing that can sooner and more easilye cause them to fall downe from their height into a base degree, woorthy of compassion then enuye: and to such persons it is a thing pernitious in particular to be conuersant with men of the common sorte: for that great men perswading themselues that they are to be in Courte, in Pallaces, in the streetes, and in euery place, holden of greatest reputation, in y• same maner they were, when they did manage armies, or states, or publicke affaires: there is nothing that appeares more strange to be supported, then populare equalitie, the which not onelye in f
                  •
               ee Citties, but also in those that are subiect to Princes, it remaines firme and fixed in the mindes of the vulgar sorte (as those that haue no other principall intent) then to pull downe and debase such great persons, because they would  not sée them before them, neither more honoured or of greter reputation then they be.
            
                MEn of vertue and reputation haue nothing that doth more helpe to maintaine their greatnes and reputation,  and to auoide enuie: then to remaine seperated and withdrawen from the conuersation or traffique with the common sorte.
            
                IT is not to be doubted but that enuye dooth not onelye  hurt those that are enuied, but oftentimes blinding and debasing the vertue of those men that are of great counsel, of valour, and of Prudence: doo keepe them for a certaine time hid and not exercised, whereby those that are mighty and the Common-weales very often doo suffer detriment in their occurrences.
            
                IT is the parte of prudent and great counsellours, to prouide so much as they are able, that those that be vertuous  and good, be not oppressed with enuye: and to woorke so farre foorth as their abilitie will stretch, or is permitted, that enuie be exstinguished and rooted out in their Cittie.
            
                WHen others are to be found superiour in vertue and  knowledge: we ought in no respect to giue▪ place and permit those persons that are not worthy should be admitted or enter into y• gouernment of publick causes, and that the chéefe affaires of importance, should be put into the handes of Citizens that are not capable, for when those Citizens that be of greater counsell and bounty, and more profitable to their Countrye, be afraide either of the audacitie of troublesome and ambitions Citizens, or are in doubt of enuye, or are terrified in the trauaile of great and difficile enterprises, and draw themselues back: a large way is opened to negligence and sloath.
            
                EUery one ought to defend himself as much as he is able  from enuy, and if for all that through some accident a man cannot defend himselfe: let him imagine that it is much better to be enuied of others, then to beare enuie to  others, for that enuie is nothing else but a gréefe and a sorrowe taken to see the good hap and glory of others.
            
                THere is nothing that dooth more easily turne vp-side  down Cōmon-weales and states: then to vse change in the gouernment of them, at euery beck and desire of the vulgar people. As though they were voide of people, they doo abhorre and 
                  •
               lie alwaies, without euer taking rest as it dooth chaunce to the Sea, when it is in subiection to sundrye windes.
            
                WEe ought neuer to put any hope in the vulgar people, for that there is no stayednes, firme mindes, or remembrance of receiued benefits: but rather do euer turn them selues for euery little and sodaine accident, applying alwaies their minde, from that which from hower to hower, dooth present it selfe before them, as a thing profitable or delightfull: hauing neither respect to that which is past or that which is to come. But like an vnreasonable beast, dooth folllowe that onely appearance of profite, that in euery instant or moment of time, according to the necessities or willes which appéere before their eyes, or in what other sence they will.
            
                THe perticuler Citizens or officers of a Common weale,  doo not onlye suffer damage or shame, by meanes of the instabilitie of the vulgar & common sorte: but Princes also when through any necessitye they are brought to make experience of the amitie & stabilitie of the vniuersall sorte. A thing which euery Prince ought greatly to haue in memory & take care of, that if it be profitable and good, to be beloued of the people: yet it is a thing not only pertayning to a prudent & wise Prince, not to haue occasion to make experience therof, but assuredly necessarie, to him yt will maintain his state and establishe it for his successours, to be prepared in such sort, that besides the loue of ye people he may haue money, all sorts of prouisions and Souldiours, to be able moreouer to defend himselfe by force.
            
               
               THose which loue and those which hate likewise, are accustomed  to honour & reuerence their Prince, but the one through loue & naturall fauour: and the other through feare and terrour. Therfore a wise Prince ought to apply his indeuours to procure vnto himselfe, not by any of those waies, Titles, statures, honours and dignities, which the people would attribute vnto him without merite: but apply himselfe to those actions, that truly are woorthy of true praise and of great honours, which are to be attributed to him, not of the vnskilfull and light multitude: but of vertuous men that haue consideration of his quallitie, & that doo not change (as for the moste parte the multitude dooth, following after the fouours of Fortune) for that true vertue is that which dooth confirme and establish States: by the which Fortune béeing ouercome, is constrained in the end to goe with him in companye.
            
                IT is necessary that he that will rule, do not put any confidence  in the multitude: but in his proper vertue, and in his owne prudence and force, or else deposing himselfe of his dignitie and Scepter: he spoyle himselfe of all the popular fauours, and retire himselfe to quietnes and rest, content with that glorye he hath gotten, by dooing so greate a benefite for his Countrye.
            
                THe sinewes of Prudence is not to beléeue fondely and speedily: Therfore before we beléeue, we ought to consider  well, the circumstances of the thing, the accidentes, the person and the cause. The which whosoeuer will examine well: shall not so easily fall into the errour to beleeue ouer lightly.
            
                VNiuersall thinges is the mother and originall of perticular thinges, and euerye perticular thing is to be  found in the vniuersall, as part in all. And the true knowledge in vniuersalities, dooth make vs more easily resolue in our iudgement of perticularities.
            
               
                MEn in peace doo not supporte iniuries, and although manye times they forget them: it seldome falles out, but that when occasion serues, the displeasure of receiued iniuries: dooth awaken and quicken againe within their mindes. And few are to be found, that although they know they are in the wrong, and that, that punishment that for some of their offences is put vpon them: they repute it as though it were iust.
            
                FOr the most part a man doth neuer accuse him selfe, or neuer doth perswade himself to merite any punishment and chastisement, but rather reputing himselfe for good: doth holde it for an assured thing that iniuries is doon vnto him, when he is accused. The which beleefe very rarelye or neuer is cancelled out of his minde, but alwaies remaines watchfull, apt to bring foorth effects at euery occasion that doth offer it self when they are able to stand them in stead.
            
                THere is nothing that is more hurtfull to a Prince, or to those enterprises that are to be accomplished: thē to beléeue ouer easily, and specially to beleue those, that fayning them selues to be escaped from our enemies: endeuour thē selues with their fictions to deceiue 
                  〈◊〉
               . For the truthe of the thing is hid from that man that giues credit vnto such kinde of persones: which is the capitall enemye that those haue, that desire that their enterprises should succéed vnto them, accordinge to their draughtes, determinations and desires.
            
                WHilst we goe about to practise peace: it is necessarye we be vigilant and carefull, and knowe how to kéep our selues from the deceites which the enemye may set abroche and practise againste vs. And this is to be obserued not so much of those that beseige others: as it is for those that be beseiged.
            
                WHen Princes can not put trust one in an other, the thred and order of Iustice and of the right maner of liuing being broken betwixt them: it falles out of necessity,  that they vse the force of armes, and indeuour themselues to shewe their errour one to the other: either to reuenge themselues of their broken faith, or reduce them that are issued foorth by force vnto their duetie, and right path of iustice: and he that dooth not performe this, shall become not onely an enemye to the people that are subiect to him, but also to himself: for that besides his not defending thē, from the inuasions and damages that they haue receiued, the Prince will become in short time ignominius, of small account, & to be despised of other Potentates, and for that he neither knowes, neither was of abilitie to preuaile through those receiued iniuries, by means of the faith broken towards him, he shal loose al his reputation and credit.
            
                IT is the propertie of a man that carries a good minde,  not to break his faith: but not to know how to preuaile against those that haue failed in faith against them: is a thing that is proper to a man of small value, and it is requisite for what Prince or potentate soeuer, sharpely to chastice those that doo not obserue faith, if he be desirous to maintaine himselfe in his state, with 
                  •
               ame and with reputation, the which is lost wh
                  •
               n he is in the derision and dispraise of others.
            
                IT is requisite that the Captain Generall haue in minde  and know, that he doo not so much make his Souldiours obserue their faith towards him, as also how to knowe to obserue towards them: speciallye when he dooth promise the same publicklye, to a multitude, wherby the same may gather profit or riches, forsomuch as they become incensed in their mindes, to perceiue them-selues depriued of the promise, and of their merited recompence, conuerting their loue into disdaine, and their disdaine into hate: and it seeming vnto them, that they are punished for that, which they ought to be rewarded for: they seeke meanes to reuenge themselues, breaking their faith against their superiours, of whom they sée the same vniustly to be broken,  since they perceiue themselues depriued of the iust reward of their trauailes.
            
                THe finall end of those that moue any warres, is to enrich  themselues, and to empouerish the enemy▪ neither for any other occasion, victorie is so much sought after, neither the gaining and conquest of thinges is desired for any other end, then to make our selues mighty, and the aduersaries weake: wher-vpon it followes, that sometimes either thy victorie dooth impouerishe thée, or thy conquest make thée weake: it falles out of necessitie, that either he dooth ouer-passe, or dooth not arriue to those tearmes and ends, for the which the warres are made: but that prince and that Common-weale is made rich by victories of warre, which destroye the enemye: and become Lords ouer the spoyles, taxes, and impostes: those are impouerished through victories, that although he ouercome cannot destroye the enemyes: and that the spoyles and the taxations fall not to his share, but appertain to his souldiours: such a one is vnlucky in his losses, and vnfortunate in his victories: for that by losing, he supportes the iniuries the enemies haue made against him, by ouercomming he supportes that which his fréendes doo against him, the which for that they are lesse reasonable, and lesse supportable, specially perceiuing that of necessitie he is constrained to burden his subiects with newe offences and with taxations, and if he haue in himself any humanitie, he cannot entirely reioyce in such a victorie: for the which all his subiectes are made sorrowfull and become agréeued.
            
                THose are accustomed (that desire to obtaine any thing)  to assault with praiers, with requests, with rewardes, and with menaces, to the intent they may be moued to doo so much as they are desired and condiscend to our request, either through mercy & pitie, or through profit, or through 
                  •
               eare: but y• thrée foresaid waies hauing no place amongst couetous and cruell men, which are mightye according to  their own opinion. Those toyle and trouble them selues in vaine, which beleeue either with requests to humble them or with rewardes to gaine them, or with threatinges to astonish them.
            
                THose Cities are infortunate, which are to defend their  libertie againste the ambition of those that would oppresse them: but those are much more vnhappye, yt are constrained to defende them selues with the mercenarye and vnfaythfull weapons of forraine succours.
            
                THose that are in hope that a Common weale may be entirely vnited: are very much deceiued by that hope,  true it is: that some deuisions do harme a Common weale and some doo benefite. Those which doo harme: doo arise of factions and of partners, banded & vnited together. Those doo benefite: that without factions and without partialities and parteners doo maintaine them selues. Therefore the first institution of a Common weale, not béeing able to prouide but that there will be discordes and enmities in a Citie: he ought at the leastwise to prouide that there be no factions. And therfore he ought to knowe how Citizens do obtain reputation two māner of waies in a Citie, either by publike meanes or by priuate meanes. Publikly they are obtained by ouercomming a battaile, by winning a Citie, by accomplishinge an Ambassage with care and with prudence, and by counselling the Common-weale, wiselie and happilye. By priuate meanes it is obtained, by benefiting these and those other Citizens, by defending them from seueritie of Magistrates, releeuing them with money, aduancing them vndeseruedly to honours, and with feastes and with publike gifts to gratifie the people. By this maner of procéeding, springe vp factions and partners, and by how much reputation, gained in this sorte dooth offende: by so much it dooth helpe and benefite, when it is not mixed  with factions, for that it is grounded vpon a common benefite, and not vpon a priuate benefite, and although that amongst such Citizens we cannot by any meanes so prouide, but that there will arise gréeuous hates, neuerthelesse, hauing partners, that through their own proper profit, doo follow him, they cannot be hurtfull to the Common weale: but rather it will fall out, that they shall benefite: therfore it is necessarie to ouercome their attemptes, that they turne themselues to the exaltation of those, and perticularly holde certain obseruations one to another, to the intent they doo not ouerpasse the ciuill tearmes.
            
                THe Generall that would make his Souldiours obstinate  in any charge and onsette, he must not permitte them to send home to their houses, any of their spoyles or riches, or to lay them vp in any place: to the intent they may vnderstand, that if flying away doo saue their liues, yet will it not saue their goods, the loue whereof no lesse then that dooth make a man obstinate, to stand to his defence.
            
                IT is very easie to perswade or disswade one thing to few  for that if woords doo not suffice, we may vse authoritie: but the difficultie is to remoue from a multitude any sinis
                  •
               er opnion which is either contrarye to ye common-weale, or else contrary to their owne opinion, wherein no other meanes can be vsed, then woords: the which is conuenient that they should be heard of all.
            
                THe speaches of a Generall or of a Captaine, to his  Souldiours, dooth take away feare, dooth kindle vp and inflame their mindes and courages, dooth encrease their obstination, and resolution, doth discouer de
                  ••
               ites, dooth promise rewards, doth shew vnto them perrils, and the way how to shun them, dooth reprehend, requ
                  •
               s
                  •
               , thret
                  •
               n, dooth fill with hope, praise and dispraise, and dooth performe all those thinges, by the which humain passions, are  e
                  •
               stinguished or are kindled vp. Therefore that Prince or common-weale, that hath an armie, ought to acustome the souldiers, to haue their Captaine speak, and the Captain to speak often to the Souldiours.
            
                THe best way that a Generall or Captaine hath to cause his Souldiours become resolute and obstinate in fight:  is to take away from them all hope to saue themselues, but onely by ouercomming: the which resolution or obstination is also encreased through confidence, or loue towards their Captain, or towards their countrye: Weapons, good order, fresh victorie, and the opinion which is had of the Captaine, dooth cause and confirme in them confidence: nature doth bréede in them the loue of their Cuntrie, vertue more then any other benefit, that of the Captaine also there may be many sorts of necessities, but that is strongest which dooth constraine them either to ouercome or to dye.
            
               
               A Cittie whose ditches without the same, togither with counterscarpes and other strengthes, be higher then  the walles of the Cittie: that Towne is most weake, for that those become bulwarkes to the enemye that dooth assalt them: and doth not hinder him to endamage them, for that easilye they may be opened, and giue place to his artillerie.
            
                NOthing dooth giue more hope to the enemye to be able to inuade a Cittie, then to know that the same is not  accustomed to see the enemy: for that many times through feare onely without experience of force, Citties are lost: Therfore when any Prince or other Captain dooth assault a Cittie, he ought to make all his showes and o
                  ••
               entations terrible: and that a towne that is assaulted, ought to place in that parte where the enemye dooth assault, strong men, and such as are not terrified by opinion, but by weapons: for if the first attempt doth become vaine, it encreaseth the mindes of the besieged, and afterwards the enemy  is forced to ouercome those that are within the town, with valour, vertue, and reputation.
            
                GEneralles and Captaines for two reasons are commended  and praised: the one is, that haue with an armie ordered by his naturall discipline, performed great things: the other is, of those that not onelye haue had to ouercome the enemye, but firste before they come so farre, haue beene of necessitie constrained to order, teach and instruct their armie well, and those without doubt do merite much more praise, then those haue deserued, that haue wrought vertuously and worthily, with these well exercised auntient armies.
            
               
               A Generall amongst all his other actions, ought to indeuour  himself with all art, to deuide ye forces of his enemies, either by making his Souldiours suspected of him, in whom he trustes and puts confidence, or to giue him occasion to seperate his people, and by this meanes to become more weake.
            
                THat which aboue al other things kéeps an army vnited together, is the reputation of the Generall, the which doth only arise of his vertue: for that neither blood, neither authoritie doth neuer giue it him without valour.
            
                THe firste thing that a Generall must looke to performe, is to kéep his Souldiours punished and paide: for when they want their paye, it falles out of necessitie, that they must want punishment, for that a Souldier cannot be corrected vnlesse he be paied, neither if the Souldier desire to liue, can he abstaine from robbing and spoyle, but if he pay them and not punishment, the Souldiour becomes in euery respect insolent: and the Generall growes to be of small estimation: the which being so, he cannot maintain the dignitie of his degrée: and not maintaining the same, tumultes and discords of necessitie doo followe, which are the ruine of an armie.
            
               
               WHen either hunger or any other naturall necessitye,  or humaine passion, doth bring the enemy to his last desperation: and pricked forward with the same, dooth come to fight with the General: he ought to remain within the lodgings of his camp, and so much as is in his power, to flée and shunne the charge and encounter of battaile.
            
                NO man ought euer to performe any thing, by means  whereof without rememedy he dooth begin to loose his first reputation, the which being lost, it makes his other orders and appointments to be estéemed lesse, and doth amaze those that haue taken vpon them his defence.
            
                THe three principall actions which an Army is to performe, is to marche, fight, and lodge: and if an Armie  dooth marche, lodge and fight in good order, and perfect practise: the Generall obtaines honour, although the battaile take not good effect.
            
                ALthough a man be of an excellent wit and naturall  iudgement, yet is it impossible that he should attaine vnto, and vnderstand well, certaine perticulares: and therefore experience is necessarye, the which nothing else dooth teache him, but the practise of thinges: wherefore he that hath managed many affaires, dooth vnderstand, for that by expe
                  •
               ience it self, he hath learned how good, and how much experience is woorth.
            
                WIthout doubt a Prince dooth more please, that  is prodigall then couetous, and neuerthelesse hee ought altogither to be the contrarye: for the prodigall person is forced to vse extortions, and rapines, and the couetous person, dooth not take any thing from any person, besides that those be of greater  number that suffer discommoditie through the burdens of prodigalitie, then those that receiue benefites of his liberalitie: the reason is, that amongst men hope is of greater force, then fame, and those be of greater number that hope to obtaine something at his hands, then those that feare to be oppressed.
            
                HE that hath liuing, possessions, or goods in his owne natiue Countrie, and is subiect to a bloody and beastly Tirant, fewe rules that are good can be giuen to that man, except to take vpon him exile: but when the tirant either through prudence, or through necessitie, dooth gouerne with respect: a man that is well qualited, ought to indeuour himself to be accounted of many not couragious, but of a quiet nature: and not desirous of alterations if he be not forced therunto. For that by this means the tirant will embrace him, and will not goe about to giue him cause to make nouelties, 
                  •
               he which thing he would not doo, when he dooth knowe him vnquiet, for that then he thinks in any case he will not remaine firme, and is cons
                  •
               rained of necessitie to exstinguish and destroy him.
            
                IT is an honourable thing to a man, not to promise any  thing, but that which he will perfourme: but commonly al those to whom he makes denial although iustly, remain euill satisfied: for that men do not suffer themselues to be gouerned by reason. The contrary chaunceth to him that promiseth, for that many cases doo occurre: by the which, they are not constrained to make experience of that which he hath promised: and so he dooth satisfie him with his minde, and yet if he must performe the act, they want no excuses, and many are so vndiscrete, that they suffer themselues to be compassed about with woords: neuerthelesse it is so foule a thing for a man to faile of his promise, that he ought to preferre this before any profit, that maye be drawne of the contrarye: and therfore a man ought to entertaine or temporise somewhat with general answers,  and full of good hopes, but not in such sorte as they may binde thée precizely.
            
                IT is a commendable thing, that good and valiant souldiours in haughtie and hard enterprises, and in diffici
                  •
               e passages,  should exhort one an other to doo well: to the intent that their not ouercomming through their negligence and passing their time with ease, and not making one onely experience against their enemies of their vertue and valour: should be reputed to them for a shame. And therefore they ought not to expect yt their fame should be defamed, neither their prosperous fortune turne to a contrarye course: but rather hoysse vp their sayles, according to ye fréendly winde that blowes.
            
                THe Stratagems and aduertisements of an olde Captaine,  when they are effectuallye perfourmed of his Souldiours: are as hurtfull to his enemyes, as the weapons which doo kill them.
            
                IT is necessary that those which consider of perrilles: doo  firste of all compare them amongst them selues, and afterwards make choise of the leaste: And he that giues fauours, it is requisite that he haue that consideration in all thinges.
            
                WHen a people doo remaine without head: and doo  liue of them-selues: they become lesse apte for the warres. And if after they returne vnder a head: they are made lesse obedient, for that they were once frée, and more apt to discordes amongst them, dooth forslowe his victorie, and often times dooth loose his state.
            
                PRincipalities when they are instituted by olde men, haue alwayes had small continuance: for that for the  most parte olde men because they liue but a small time, either doo not furnish out the planting of their plat, or if they doo plant it, they leaue it with so small & weake rootes, that when that vertue & force which did custome it dooth faile: the first winde dooth bend downe and bow the same.
            
               
                THere is nothing more woorthy in an excellent Prince, or in a well ordered Common-weale, neither more profitable for a Prouince: then to builde and edifie a newe Towne, whether men maye reduce them selues through the commoditie of de
                  •
               ence or benefite of the fertill ground. For that it makes the Countrye that is ouercome, more secure to the vanquishour: and dooth fill with inhabitants voide places, and maintaines men well distributed and dispearced in a Prouince, forsomuch as the inhabitours multiplying, they be more prompt and readye in their offences, and more secure in their defences.
            
                MEn doo neuer maintain themselues in any difficultie  if they be not maintained through a necessitie: in such sort as where the feare of warres doth constrain them to inhabit willingly in rough and strong places, that feare being ceased, and being called vpon by commoditye: they doo inhabite more willingly, in easie and domesticall places.
            
                THe gréeuous and naturall discordes which are amongst  the populare sorte and the noble, being caused for that the one partie would commaund, and the other for that they would not obay, are the occasions of many euils that arise in a Citie, for that through this diuersitie of honours, all those other thinges that disturbe the Common-weale, take their nourishment.
            
                THat Citie which would maintain it selfe rather with  factions then with Lawes, when any one faction doth remaine in the same without any that oppose themselues: it is conuenient of necessitie, that the same deuide it selfe within it selfe, for that it cannot defend it selfe, from these priuate procéedinges the which the same for his safety had first instituted.
            
                WHere many doo erre, none are corrected, small factes are punished, the great and gréeuous are rewarded:  and when manye do suffer: fewe do goe about to reuenge them selues, for that vniuersall iniuries are supported with greater patience then those that are perticular.
            
                FOr the moste parte all those that attaine to riches and great power, either with fraude, either with force, doo  attaine vnto the same. And after they haue either with violence or with deceite vsurped those thinges, to hide the filthynes of their getting: they doo make honest the same vnder a false tytle of gaine. And those that through lack of prudence, or through folly, doo shun and flie these meanes: are alwaies ouer-whelmed in slauerye and pouertie. For that faithfull seruants are alwaies conserued, and good men alwaies are poore, and none there be that at any time doo issue out of seruitude, but those that be vnfaithfull and shamelesse-hardye and forth of pouertie but those that are rauenous and fraudulent: for nature hath placed all the fortune of men in the midst of them, the which are subiecte and exposed more to rapine then to industrie, and more to the wicked then the good. Héerof it procéedes, that men eate one an other, and he that may least: goes to the woorst.
            
                WHere necessitie contraryes, audacitie is iudged prudence, and couragious men neuer make account  of perrill in greate matters: for that alwayes those enterprises that begin with perril, doo end with rewarde, and foorth of one perrill we can neuer issue without an other perrill.
            
                WEl ordered Cities, that are administred vnder y• name  of Common weales: doo oftentimes varie and change their gouernmentes and their states, not by the meanes of libertye and seruitude as manye thinke: but by the meanes of seruitude and licence. For of libertie the name of the ministers of licence, which are the people is celebrated, and that of seruitude, which are the Nobilitye is celebrated, euerye one of those desire not to be subiect, neither to the Lawes, neither vnto men:  True it is, that when for all that it chaunceth, that when through the good fortune of the Citie, there dooth arise in the same, a wise, good, and mightye Cittizen, by whome Lawes are instituted, by whom these humours of the nobilitie and of the populare sorte are quieted, or are restrained in such sort, that they cannot woorke any euill: then it comes to passe that this Citie may be called free, and that 
                  •
               ate maye be called stable and firme, for being grounded vpon good lawes and good orders, it hath no such necessi
               
                  •
               ie of the vertue of one man, as the others haue that doo maintaine the same, manye auntient Common-weales were endowed with like lawes and orders: all those that often in their gouernement haue changed and doo change from a tiranicall state to a licentious state, and from the one to the other, haue failed in this: and for that in them through the mightye enemies that euerye one hath, there neither is nor can be any stabilitie, for that the one dooth not please good men, the other doth displease wise men: the one may easily doo euill, the other may doo good but with great difficultie, in the one insolent men haue ouer-great authoritie, in the other those that be foolish. And it is con
               
                  •
               enient that both the one and the other 
                  •
               e maintained by one man through vertue and fortune, which either through death maye become lesse, or by trauaile become vnprofitable.
            
               
               A Wise man ought euer little to estéeme, to liue in a Citie where lawes are of l
                  •
               sse account then men: for that Country is to be desired, in the which we may safelye enioye our substaunce and our fréends, not that where other men may easily take from vs that which is ours, and our 
                  •••
               ends, for feare of their proper state, doo abandon vs in 
                  〈◊〉
                most necessitie.
            
                PRouinces for the most parte are accustomed in the  chaunges they make, from order to come to disorder, and afterwards againe, from disorder to passe to  orders: for that the affaires of this worlde being not firme by nature, where they arriue at their last profession, not hauing wher-vpon to ascend higher: it falles out of necessitie that they discend, and after they be discended, and being come by disorder to the last step, not being able of necesitie to discend lower: it is conuenient that they climbe vp againe, and so alwaies from the good we discend to euill, and from the euill we ascend to good: for that warres bringes quietnes, quietnes brings idlenes, idlenes engenders disorder, disorder dooth ruinate vs, and likewise of 
                  •
               uine doth spring orders, of orders come vertue, of vertue ariseth glorye, and good fortune: wherefore of prudent persons it is obserued, as letters come after weapons, and that in Prouinces and Cities, Captaines are borne before Philosophers, for that the good and well ordered wepons hauing brought forth victories, and victories brought quietnes: the fortitude and strength of armed mindes cannot be corrupted with a more honest idlenes, then which that of le
                  •
               ters, neither can idlenes enter into a well ordered Citie, with a greater or more perrilous deceite then by letters: Prouinces therefore come by these meanes to ruine, whereinto being arriued, men by blowes being made wise returne to orders, if that alreadye through extraordinarye forces they remaine not choked and deuoured.
            
                THere is not any thing more hard then that obedience the which we call the denying of our selues, wherupon  I cannot sée the occasion wherfore we flée from performing towards God that which dooth carrie our health, and procure our selues to do it towards men, in things which doth promise vncertaine and small benefites, if we will not saye that this comes to passe through the commonoccasion of al euils, that is through our great ignorance & malice, which dooth estéeme of nothing but these present and these earthly goods, beyond all measure, and together with the pleasure that many take to deceiue others: but through whatsoeuer  occasion it dooth rise, it is a great enemye to reputation.
            
                AN Armie being vanquished, the warres are vanquished,  but the townes being vanquished, and leauing the Armye entire: the warres begin to be more hotte, forsomuch as that Armie which is entire, maye recouer the Townes, the which when they holde in their handes, the warres is not ouercome.
            
                HE is not wise that dooth attempt to defend a thing  that in any case is to be lost, he may with lesse infamy and with lesse damage, loose any state alone, then to loose both the state and his monye.
            
                THere is no man so prudent, neither any man so learned vpon the earth, but that the greatest part of that which he knowes is not lesse then that which lyes hid vnto him, héerof it springes, that if we haue occasion to builde, we cal vnto vs cunning woorkmen and architectours: if we are to saile vpon the Seas, we demaund the counsell of Mariners: but in matters of warre, so much the more diligently we ought to goe about to performe this, by how much the perrill séemes to be greater: forsomuch as the harmes of other thinges séeme to be more light, euerye want being able to be amended, but the errours of warre, besides the perpetuall shame, doo carrie with them blowes, woundes, death and destruction in a Common-weale: the which are so extreame euilles, that they cannot be corrected nor shunned: and therefore in these cases we ought to take mature counsell of wise men, and the aduertisement of those that are inueterated in Armes, and experimented in such seruice.
            
                THere is no man so rash and foolish hardye, that being able to depresse and ouercome the enemye with a prudent prolonging of time, will rather with a furious speede put the victorie in doubt and hazard, which deferring and lingering, doth promise him most certain: forsomuch as  victorie cannot be so well gotten with an inconsiderate spéede, as with a prudent staye: and neither so well in going to finde the enemye at his owne doores, as to defend himselfe within his owne confines: and to goe about rather to put our selues in perrill, then ouercome: is the part of an vnwise man, and of one that is more rash, then couragious.
            
                WIse men haue not sought meanes and desired, that  faith should be more obserued in any humain action, then in confederacies: for that, if faith be broken amongst them which are bound togeather in leage, what thing is there that can be accoūted stable and entire in this world? for which respect the iudgementes which are made vpon other contentions, for that they are as it were priuate, giue almost no other punishment then in money, and capitall punishment: for that the lawes do not in any case support integrity, that he ought to be reputed for entire, which is not ofentire faith towards his confederates.
            
                IN the gouernment of a Common-weale, euerye man  dooth confesse, that we ought to haue greater respect to honor, then profit: for that euen as a Citie is of great estimation and reputation, so faith ought to be pure and sincere.
            
                EUen as horses through idlenes & ouermuch abundance of meate becomes vnwildy and res
                  •
               ie: so people sometimes  through the curtesie and benignity of those that gouerne, become insolent and proude, and haue néede of force to hold back the reines of liberty.
            
                WHen a Common-weale doth moue warres against a Prince, she ought first to look about her and take care that she be not deceiued with the woordes of her enemye:  besides that, she ought to traine vp her people, so as they maye bee able to resist the inuading force of the enemye, and to withstand those perrilles which doo chaunce at vnawares. Thirdly she ought to make choise of prudent  and well practised men, who may stand like Senternelles and watch-men, attentiue and vigilant for the benefite of the Common-weale: and wisely vnderstand euery thing, and with great prudence prouide for euery thing. Forthly, to conserue and kéep the amitie of adioyning Princes, yeelding fauour to those that haue néede: Last of all to write to the greatest Princes of the worlde, consulting with thē vpon occurent causes.
            
                THe expences of the warres are gréeuous to euery one, but specially to the multitude, which doo not foresee future perrilles: Wherupon, euen vs Phisitions vse oftentimes 
                  •
               ire and iron, towards the sick persons they gouern, and loose one parte to saue the whole: so ought the gouernours of the Common-weale, perceiuing and foreseeing future perrilles, constraine the people to spend one part of their goods, for the conseruation of all the rest: for that libertye being lost, euery thing falles into the handes of the Conquerour, and next dooth follow the infamie and shame of slauerie: the which of worthy men ought to be chased away, euen vnto death it selfe.
            
                THe people and the vulgare multitudes which doo not  foresee future things, doo firste feele and sée the perrilles before they haue imagined and thought vpon them: but excellent men, although they foresee perrilles in a populare Common-weale, neither cannot nor dare not make prouision, for when they make demonstration of the perrils and perswade to vse remedye, immediatly it is saide they desire warres: and make lawe and prohibitions in such sort that he that would prouide for the safetie of the Citie, there should remaine no way for him able to perfourm the same, wherupon it ariseth that making no prouision, times doo poste awaye, but when perrilles are present, and canot be auoyded, then full of feare, they consult what is to be doon.
            
                THose men are woorthie of very great infamie, who not  c
                  •
               ring to be infamous, doo not obserue their giuen  faith, neither their promises they haue made neither their sworne conuentions. And although euery breache of promise be infamous, neuertheles that is most infamous which against capitulacions of peace, dooth drawe warres after i
                  •
               . For if the sacred effectes of faith, and the obseruing of othes be taken awaye: what remaines more amongste men that is good and godly, wherby one may put trust in an other? and by which inconueniences, the common conuersation and companye of men is broken.
            
                IT is manifeste to euery one, that nature hath graunted not onely to men, but also vnto brute beastes, a certaine  desire of libertie: to obtaine and keepe the which libertie, they enforce them selues with all dilligence and naturall industrie to performe all those things that may maintain the same in them, and doo beare great hate to all those that they imagine to be contrary to these their appetites. And this is apparentlye perceiued in those vnreasonable creatures, which are accustomed to remain domestically bound who so soone as they are vnloosed from them that gouerne them, with actes and gestures make signe, how gratefull it is vnto them to be looste from those bondes and Chaynes, and that they are able to goe at libertie where they list. And therfore if we beholde this naturall desire of libertie to be in beastes, how much more ought the same to be in men, who God hath made aboue all other creatures, most prudent and wise, and hath endowed vs with reason and vnderstanding, to the intent that we may follow the order of nature, and defend that libertie, then the which there is nothing amongst men more déere and of greater prise and valour: And although nature the mother of thinges hath graunted vs infinite benefites, neuertheles she hath giuen vs nothing, neither better neither swéeter then libertie.
            
                ALthough warrs are made and taken in hand for many  ocasions, neuertheles there is none more iust nor more  woorthy of praise, then that which is taken in hand for the defence of our libertie and of our Country, the which dooth containe in it, our houses, our Children, our wiues, our fathers and mothers, riches, the Temples, and finally euery humaine and deuine thing.
            
                THere be two things in a Common-weale, the which although by effect and name they are swéete: neuertheles oftentimes they haue beene an occasion of great harmes to mightie and noble Cities, as peace and a restraint of money foorth of the publike profit. For that perrills being placed a farre off or before our eyes: either they are not séene or if they be séen, whilst we do ouermuch delight in sparing or in peace, we estéeme them so small, that almoste we are brought into euery euident perrill, before we will prouide for the terrible name of warrs although we be in manifest daunger, and all to shun the odious name of expences.
            
               
               A King is no other then a man brought vp in deliacies, and as it is accustomed to be said in swaddle clothes, and is a man that hath néed of a greate number of officers and seruants. From whome if his wonted seruices be taken away: without dout he is of lesse power then others, forsomuch as he is not accustomed neither wonted to exercise neither his féete, neither his handes, neither any other parte of his body, but to liue in idlenes. And Kings knowe better how to commaund then to performe.
            
                HEe is aswell to be reprehended that through basenes of minde dooth suffer those occasions to passe, wherby he might recouer his state, assure the rest▪ & succour others vnto whome he is bound and beholden: as on the other side also he that ouer boldely or ouer rashly dooth commit all things to fortune, where he cannot looke for due & worthye recompence of his perrills and trauailes.
            
                WHen there be many mighty men and Cities confederate  together, it beeing conuenient that many heads should be of one selfe opinion: it is impossible that they  should long maintain them selues, all of them vnited together, or that they should vse one selfe consultation or bring soddainly things to effecte, because they are not of one selfe will and minde, but rather euery one is onely carefull for his owne proper profit. For where mens mindes are disagreeing: there likewise their déedes fall out to be disagréeable, whereof there can neuer any thing that is perfecte arise.
            
                COuragious men ought neuer to make account of perrilles  in greate matters. Therfore those merite to be praised that vse endeuours, not only to deliuer themselues from tirannie: but become vnto him that dooth aspire vnto tirannie, so much his superiour, that he haue greater cause to be greeued and to feare them: then they him.
            
               
               A Good Citizen ought neuer to speake neither for fauour or grace, neither through the instigation or beneuolence  of others: but onlye in respect of that he knowes to be lawdable and best, aswell for the particular as generall commoditie of all. And neuer to perswade any thing but which shall be as agréeable to God: as in the sight of men reasonable, iust, and sacred, louing rather better the publike benefites and the vniuersall quiet, then his owne proper life.
            
                THe end of all enterprises is more vneasie then the beginning: for to giue end to a begun enterprise, requires  trauaile. And a Ship dooth fréely cut through the Seas, although the windes doo not blowe prosperously, the Mariners alwaies bending their sayles in such sorte, that they goe forward vpon their voyage, but cōming to enter in to the Hauen: it is necessary to haue prosperous windes, hauing to enter with their Ship in at a straight passage.
            
               
               A Captain ought not to comforte his Souldiers, but vnto a glorious enterprise, for that to comforte them to  their wonted works & actions is shamful, not only to them  that are comforted, but also to him that dooth comfort, séeking for at the hands of the Souldiour, that which he is bound vnto.
            
                THe Soules of those warriours and valiant men, that  haue beene esteemed and thought to dye for their cuntrye, 
                  •
               or their Children, and for their religion, being disseuered with weapons from the bondage of their bodie: it is no doubt but the shining starry heauens doth receiue them into a most happie quiet mantion: and there doth remaine vpon earth some signe of glorye or clamour: for that those that dye by infirmity, do leaue behinde no memory of them but he that goes against his enemye, if it chaunce he dye, glorye dooth follow him.
            
                HE that dooth serue his turne with the benefite of traiterie,  through the receiued grace, dooth take therein like a Conquerour suddaine pleasure, and guided in time to come with a continuall suspition, at one instant dooth feare and hate the traitour, although he haue béene beneficiall vnto him, and haue that in himselfe, and proued the same, haue afterwards to take héed and warily to shun the signe of tradiments.
            
                ALl great facts are accustomed to be better directed  with good counselles, then with celeritie of time: for that, for the most parte a mature dilation, which with opportunity doth conduct to the end, doth carry with it much greater profite: but rash audacitie and ouer-curious spéed in matters, when they are not performed in time conuenient & not ap
                  •
               , hath cut off from many the hope to dispatch any thing: for that the enemy dooth more easily ouercome a multitude which as yet is not in order, then that which with fewer people, but well instructed and ordered, dooth come to giue an onset, and to fight.
            
                HAving not well prouided for one warre▪ and to goe about to take in hand another, is a great folly, for that th
                  •
               se which hang in ballance, and are not intētiue, against  one onely enemye, reason will that they be ouercome by their aduersaries.
            
                TO raise vp in time a Campe for any place, hath directed and reduced many to better fortune: but the desire to  doo some glorious act, and that doth taste of a valiant man: the same being not performed in time, hath brought him rather into 
                  •
               lauerye & perpetual dishonour, then made him glorious and honourable: for that we are not to seeke after and follow the names of things, but rather are to gain the commodity of them: for that the vertue of a man doth not shewe it selfe in thinges that are new begun, but those which are brought to an ende doo make him noble and famous.
            
                THe enemye dooth shun and flée those that with a great preparation and at one instant time goe to assault him:  but those which desire perpetually to conserue their bodies and remaine far off from the warres, are soone ouercome, and made slaues: for that it is of great importance in warfare to haue prompt and readie the willes of the combatants, and when their mindes are inclined to fight, they are accustomed to accomplishe manye egregions victories and famous thinges, but how small and fewe soeuer those valiant men and armed with vertues are, yet they surpasse the great armies of the enemie.
            
                THose do not gaine great praise, that haue ouercome the lesse mightye, but those also that with lesse preparations  doo surpasse the rest in greatnes of minde. But to those which of their proper nature are very timerous, it would fall out to be a great help to them to be full of courage and audacitie, for that for the most parte, all those whose states depend vpon stéele and weapons, by despising perilles couragiously, they haue oftentimes become victorious.
            
                WE maye more easilye breake and kill those that of things already doone, haue carried away the victorie  (if peraduēture) they are puffed vp & made proud thereby,  then those that without thinking vpon the same, be fallen downe from the same: although they procéed with their enemies in time to come more timerously and doubtfully: for negligence and basenes doo corrupt also those thinges that are excellently well ordered, but trauaile accompanied with care and diligence: hath aided greatly vnto manye, although Fortune hath béene contrarye vnto them: for that those that with slothe and follye take in hand any enterprise, are accustomed oftentimes to weaken themselues, and to faile in their forces, but those that proceed in the same with care and with diligence, are accustomed to encreace marueilously.
            
                TO all those that are borne, the selfe-same ende of life dooth not followe, neither the very same chaunce and qualitie of death, as in many things it comes to passe, men are disagréeing amongst themselues: for those that are Cowards and not apt for the warre, hauing first receiued many iniuries, and giuen occasion to cause themselues to be 
                  ••
               outed of the enemy, according to the yéeres that God hath most ordained, they finishe and make an end of their destinie, the which for al that ought not to chaunce to worthye and valiant men, who with vertue and with great glory ought to finde the meanes to end their liues.
            
                THose that be rashe doo much more easilye obtaine the  name of couragious, then those that be politicke and prudent, for that he that dooth take vpon to performe anye enterprise, ouer and beside his duetie, through the beneuolence of any one, vnto whome peraduenture he seeme to be a valiant & wise man, obtaines honor: but he that prudently and with iudgement doth auoide any perrill, neither for all that hath well performed those things according to his desire, he shalbe without doubt accounted capable, through the occurrence of the thing, and if it fall out according to his minde and iudgement, it will not seeme vnto the ignorant  that he hath doone any thing of himselfe.
            
                HUmaine thinges are sometimes accustomed to deceiue much: for that euery man being mortall, and it séeming  to euery one, to be hardly apt for the rash disgraces of fortune, it is necessarye (as reason will that he cléerly and manifestly sée his grosenes and insolence, and neuertheles, although he will not, yet he must needes be subiect to the necessitie of fortune.
            
                WE maye easilye fight with those that are halfe dead with hunger, and much sooner ouercome the enemye  with dearth and famine, then with weapons, neither can we cast more sharpe dartes, neither shoote more swift arrowes against our aduersaries, then those of long abstinence and fasting: the which being a disease that consumeth force, it is not nourished with any other meat then with want of things to eate, and the penury of meate doth cast to the ground and ruinate the force of weapons.
            
                THere is no Captaine so farre out of his right sences, or  simple Souldiour so rash, that being able to fight with securitie & aduauntage, will rather to his losse and perrill attempt the chaunce of battaile, and that maye without blowes or wounds receiue victorie, will rather with blood put his health and safetie in doubtfull hazard.
            
                EUery one knows how slolie and without trauaile they doo handle their weapons, whose armes are consumed  with fasting, and can with great paine rule themselues: and he cannot very well perfourme any thing with them in battaile, that in other exercises hath consumed his forces: and there victory is spéedilye obtained, where he that is whole dooth fight with the sicke: the strong, with the weak, and the aflicted with labour, with him that hath neuer tasted of any trauaile.
            
                IT is an extreame follye to abandon with the base minde of a woman, and to despise with a childish feare   that which is gained with the minde of a man, and with the valour of a Souldier, and to giue into the hands of the enemye that which he hath as yet not gayned, together with riches not hoped for, and therefore what hope can be had in them, or how maye we beléeue that they are to behaue themselues in armes, who making the profession of Souldiours, are onely made afraide with thinking vpon warres, and with the imagination of battailes: therefore is it better to take a glorious death, then to desire to liue to lead a shamefull and vile life, for in a short space of time life dooth leaue vs, but shame dooth neuer leaue vs, euen after death: but dooth rather make our shame so much the longer and the greater, by how much our death hath beene shamefull and infamous.
            
                WHat signe of victorie can we receiue more certaine, then before the battaile to possesse the spoyle, and to occupye the enemies lodginges before we come to fight with them: and it is much better to ouercome securely by putting the enemy in feare then to put in doubt, and hazard his safetie, with making proofe experience of armes.
            
                THere is nothing more swéet to him that is in calamitie then death: and that death is most happie, which is hoped for and desired, for that she dooth not take awaye the delights of time but doth consume the vnplesant taste of bitter and noysome things, and as in prosperous things it is good to desire life, so in aduersitie it is fit we call after death.
            
                IT is the parte and duetye of a good Citizen, that he doo  preserue himselfe for the benefite of the Common-weal, and beware that he doo not harme without some fruit, and he ought not to leaue off and to slippe any fit saying or act for the commodity of his Countrie, yea if moreouer, he could no otherwise then with his blood preserue it.
            
               THose which haue a desire to furnish and to obtaine any thing, are accustomed to differ in their words and their  déeds: forsomuch as they faine all thinges to obtain their intent, but after they haue once obtained it, they do not in any sorte abstaine from the fulfilling of their desires, and besides this those that come after doo alwaies force themselues to ouerpasse their auncestours in audacitie, thinking▪ that the like is small, for that befoore it hath beene committed, they choose that which is vnaccustomed, as if it we
                  •
               e a thing fit and worthy for them, because it is behinde the opinion and exspectation of men.
            
                THose that hunt after and desire the gifts of liberalitie,  it is necessarye that they prouide and force themselues that they doo not lose the same at the beginning: forsomuch as seruitude doth alwaies giue the firste and chéefest molestation. It is a iust thing to moue warres, because they will not sustaine the same, but he that is once become subiect to others, and afterwardes would rebell, dooth shewe himself rather to be a contumelious slaue, then a louer of libertye.
            
                IN warres it dooth not onlye benefite to be store of men, although they be very warlicke: but also it dooth benefite  the small number, if amongst them there be force: for those that be few, may easily set themselues in order, and maye easilye help one another: but great armies are of greater trauaile to be set in order, and besides that they carrye alwaies with them many vices of minde, and those thinges that are of valewe in prosperitie, through euerye small errour, are exstinguished, and become woorth nothing.
            
                EUen as it is the act of vain-glorious and light men, to become proud in prosperitie, so is it the acte of men of  vile and base mindes, to become afraide in errours and aduersities: for he that dooth so, dooth shewe that he hath no constancie at all, & that he is ouer-light headed, to change himselfe firste into one parte, then into another: and that the strong man of fortitude is he, that dooth remaine firme and dooth not change: whose minde is sober and quiet, euen  in thinges that be administred vnluckily, to the intent he may be accounted one selfe person in all his actions, correcting errours with right counselles.
            
                NO man at any time vnlesse he be a vanquishour, doth  chāge wars into peace: and it is a great folly to hope for safetie by flying, and by casting away his armes & wepons wher-withall he doth defend himselfe, and doth couer his owne proper bodye: and those doo bring greatest perrilles in a battaile, which are most afraide, for that audacitie is as it were a most strong wall.
            
                WHen the Nobility gouerns a Common-weale, that  gouernment cannot be but good, and cheefelye when they gouerne by loue, and ha
                  •
               e an eye to the common benefite: for that the Nobilitie being frée from the occupations of Artifficers and handie-crafts, they may haue their mindes more apt and turned to the management of the conseruation of the state: but when contrariwise the Nobilitye haue their mindes blinded with some passions, or corrupted with bribes: then iustice running into ruine, can neuer be found quiet nor in tranquilitye: and specialllye, turning that gouernement to the damage of the people, to the shame and infamie of the Common-weale.
            
                TO prepare for warres, and at one time not to charge  L'erario, to constrain vnto warfare those yt would not endamage, to take care of all those things appertaining to peace and warres, and to doo them before the eyes of the enuious, of those that are partiall, and those that are aduersaries: is a way more difficile, then that which a man would beléeue.
            
                IT is not a parte appertaining to a right Souldiour, to  runne first to one side, then to another, for vnto that captaine or Souldiour that hath no stedfast faith: a charge of importance, cannot be committed vnto his handes,  neither cannot be trusted with any strong place: and therfore vnto men that be strong and of valour, it appertayneth more to despise death, then to haue our life in hatred: and oftentimes those that be vile and base, are foreced either through the tedious toyle and trauaile, to prouide for themselues and for their owne profit, but vertue dooth leaue nothing behinde vnprouided and vnexperimented.
            
                NEcessitie and force goe oftentimes before reason, and  chéefelye in the enterprises of warres, in the which very rarelye we can be able to determine and to assemble times, forsomuch as the fortune of warres dooth instruct euen those that are ouercome, in the art of warrefare.
            
                WHat thing is of greater disgrace, then to lament our selues of iniuries, and to prepare our selues to war  to our perrilles, and flying and shunning the Iudge, make him our enemye? for that the Iudge although he be wicked, neuerthelesse dooth interprete the Lawes, but thy enimye although he be iust, dooth séeke thy death: then therefore we ought to please the Iudge, and defend our selues from our enemy: to the intent he doo not moue and raise vp our neighbours against vs: for that by pleasing them, they become more benigne, and this is auoyded by standing aloofe from him.
            
                ALthough valour and vertue, be accustomed to be  commended in warrefare: neuerthelesse, Fortune hath a swaye and rule therein: but it is conuenient that prudent men amend their faultes and errours, and in prosperitie to be modest, for rude wittes become proude, through any happye successe, as though they were not to fight with men: and those that be weake through anye sinister chaunce, loose all hope without considering that the successe of Warres doo easilye  change: he therfore is a most woorthy man, that in aduersities can manly sustaine the furies of fortune, and dooth studye to amend his wants & faults: but he that is negligent, dooth fall oftentimes in his rising, and running headlong, goes altogiter into ruine: but if this oftentimes fall out where onelye vertue is, how much more in warres: where the Squadrons are of sundrye generations, their mindes and their willes sundrye, the place contrarye, the raggednes therof difficile, and the space of ground straite to fight in, in which thinges fortune is of greater force then vertue.
            
                WHen a Citizen perswading publicke benefites, dooth not shewe therein any passion, in applying himselfe to priuate benefites, he dooth easilye encline the mindes of the hearers, to all that which he desires, but when in perswading publick benefites it séemes he hath a meaning to procure some priuate commoditie, or his owne profite: he doth not so easily bow and make fauourable the mindes of them that heare him.
            
                IT is a more filthye and infamous thing to those that are  in anye dignitye, to gaine with fraude and with deceite: then by manifest and open violence, for violence by all reason proceedes from the power which fortune hath giuen vnto some: but deceite, from the snares of an vniust minde.
            
                THat wise Captain which with a good, vigilant and prudent eye, hath in consideration the enemies erroures, and dooth dispose himselfe to assault them hottelye and couragiously: not in equall battaile, or at an appointed time, not with like wil, but according as he shall sée his aduauntage, he dooth obtaine victorie for the most parte.
            
               
               I Make my account, that that Citie which departes from the exercise of busines, and giues it selfe to idlenes, will soone runne into ruine: and that those men amongst all the rest liue in greatest securitie, that vsing the present lawes,  although they were lesse good,, without any contention, doo gouerne their Common-weale, without strife and discorde.
            
                IN those cases that may endamage a Common-weale, it is better to remaine prouided to defend them, then to expect  to make prouision when they are come: and in all matters of warre, it is better to feare, then to dispraise: for that feare makes wise men to be alwaies prouided, and despising for the most parte dooth bring vs vnto those ends that are neither desired nor beléeued.
            
                EUerye well ordered Common-weale, ought to proceede faire and easily to banish a man foorth of his house, and  to send him into exile: who through his vertue or through his fauour, either with his owne or with forraine strangers, may be embraced of his enemies, and that may more hurt them being banished, then he could benefite, being at home in his owne house.
            
                FOr that it is a perrillous thing to tell the trueth vnto Princes, and speciallye in those thinges, that they  are resolutely determined to doo, esteeming them for good: therefore it sil
                  •
               ome comes to passe, that they are well councelled, and as they ought to be: forasmuch as if they tell the trueth, he becomes their enemy: if they flatter, he obtaines their grace: and flatterye is more secure then veritie.
            
                IF the opinion and iudgements that be contrary amongst themselues: be not well examined and discussed, we cannot  so easily make choise of the best parte, but it is conuenient to vse that which is first reported: but when many do alleadge that which euery one dooth beléeue to be best, we maye make choice thereof, as we would doo of golde that dooth glister of it selfe: and being put to the touch, is discearned whither it be pure or not.
            
                ALl the gaine of great enterprises, dooth consist in good counsell, and although some froward hap doo chaunce  against all counsell this comes to passe, for that Fortune dooth ouercome our prouidence, but hee that dooth take naughty counsell, (although it succeede happily) is woorthy of blame, for verye sildome to the deuices of euill counsell dooth succeed prosperous endes.
            
               
               A Good counsellour ought neuer to hide the trueth, although it turn to the preiudice of his life: for it is better for him to loose his life, then to kéepe secret a good counsell: for that the end of things will make manifest of what minde he was that did wiselye giue counsell, and who did speak things to please the Prince, to flatter him: and it wil then followe, that the good counsellour will be better beloued being so dead, then the flatterer shall be esteemed, that remaines liuing.
            
                MAnye chaunces in warrefare make men beleeue, that men constrained of necessitie, procéed much farther thē their proper courage, and naturall force dooth beare: and héerby it comes to passe, that many after the ouer-throwe constrained to begin a new battaile, haue ouerthrown the vanquishours.
            
                THose which haue their life in gifte of the enemye, and accustomed oftentimes to dye with miserie and with shame: and contrariwise all those that consider that the law of death is common to all, without hauing to fighting combate, or any other perrill: they goe to encounter an honorable death: & such as those haue I euer seene, arriue to a goodly olde age, and during their life, alwaies to manage honorable enterprises, and such as were ful of great praise and fame.
            
                IT sildom comes to passe that any good counsel should not  generally be accepted of all: for that our vnderstanding being by nature giuen to settle and staye it selfe in true thinges, or that haue great apparence of trueth, it is requisite that they should embrace right counselles for good and true.
            
               
               THe speach of a light and of an inconstant person, is reputed  vnprofitable and vaine who dooth vnconsideratly runne here and there without any reputation or honor. Contrariwise when it is knowne that any one dooth carry greate respecte to his faith: his speache when he dooth desire, praye or make request, is much more woorth then the force of any other. And the same chanceth when he would cause any one to returne to his obedience, he dooth farre more basely obtaine his desire with woordes, then an other with déedes, and his threatnings haue more force then other meanes, executions and punishments: and he dooth bring foorth greater frute by promising, then any other by giuing.
            
                NO man that dooth gouerne and rule others: can haue neither a more godlye neither a more honourable riches  then vertue, iustice, and the magnanimitie of minde: The which if any one haue hauing together with the same greate numbers of fr
                  •
               end
                  ••
               
               ▪ and trustie faithfull persons: h
                  •
               e can not but be verye rich, neither shall he want anye persons that shall reioyce with him in his prosperitie, and who in ye time of aduersse fortune, will conuersse with him, helpe him and succour him.
            
                IT is no doubte but that the couetousnes of Princes Officers, be apte and sufficient, to make their goodnes  and bountie infamous. For that Princes when they make warres, not béeing able for the moste parte to be there in personne: of force they must put trust in their Officers and Commissaryes of their Campe. Who beleeuing that the Souldiours, may be driuen off and entertayned with fayre woordes and greate hopes: retaines those payes which Princes doo send to the Armye to paye the Souldiours.
            
                NOt onely the Common-weales, but also priuate men ought of necessitie, by how much the more they florish   in forces: by so much the more to procure themselues those things, which at some time maye turne to their profit, to the intent that when occasion and néed requires, they may haue a defence wherewithall to help themselues.
            
                HE that desires to ouercome, ought not to put himselfe in flight: for victorie is not gained with our shoulders but with our hands: & euery victorie merites to be praised in euery place, but that which is shewed & séene in warres is woorthy to be celebrated and lift vp euen vnto heauen, for that the same is visible, and doth shine in the middest of so many perrilles, no lesse then golde in the midst of a hot flaming fire.
            
                FRom the beginning of the world it hath béen instituted  for a lawe, that Cities taken by warres, should appertaine to the conquerours: and besides this, the men, the money, and what thing soeuer else is within the Citie, to be a reward of the victorie.
            
                MEn estéeme it a great thing to gaine Empire, but  much greater it is to kéepe it after that it is gotten: for that we oftentimes sée, that manye through audacitye and fortune may take a Kingdome, but not maintain it: whilste it is gained with much diligence and care, without Prudence and Temperance.
            
                THe proportion or the name dooth not make anye man  freend or enemye: but the good or euill which we reap of things, dooth make thē freends or enemies: louing th
                  •
               se that bring vs good, and hating those that bring vs euill: neither haue men planted this lawe, neither haue we taken it from any of our predicessours, but nature doth teach it vs: and for this rispect, we leaue our fréendes when they offend vs▪ and embrace our enemies when they doo benefite vs: and that Citie which hath engendred vs, we loue it when it dooth well, and dispraise it when it shewes the contrarie, and dooth euill: and this falles not out by reason of the place where it is set: but through the damage or  through the proffite which chaunceth to be perfourmed by the same, neither dooth it chaunce only to priuate persons, to haue such opinion of euery of these thinges, but also vnto all Cities and vnto all people. Demaunde nothing but that which is according to the deuine lawes, neither doo any thing out of the common iustification of men.
            
                THat Captaine which dooth thinke that he can with woordes, make those men couragious, which neuer  haue seene the enemie in the face: dooth greatly deceiue him selfe. Wherefore in enterprises of importance, it is no wisedome to set an Armye of young and vnexpert Souldiours, in the face of a Campe of olde tryed Souldiers. For although the General be most valiant and prudent, neuertheles he cannot with securitie serue his turne with those that haue small practise in warfare.
            
                THe troupes and great multitudes of people, are very easie to be deceiued and perswaded any thing. Unto  whome it oftentimes chaunceth the same that it dooth vnto the Sea: For euen as the Sea by his nature dooth no hurt to those yt vse it well: but if it be tossed with furious windes, it becomes like to the windes wherwithall it is tumbled on euery side. So likewise the multitude becomes like to those that manage them which are their Captains and counsellers.
            
                TO me it séemes that Hauen townes are much liker to Shippes then to the Land or shore: for they haue in  them a continuall concourse and greate aboundaunce of Marchants, but that which is gathered and reaped of the frutes of the earth and by the worke and industrie of Artificers, is more sure and dooth continue longer. For this occasion, the auncient Empires for the most parte, were farre off from the Seaes, and therefore they did encrease and endure long.
            
                ENuye amongste Captaines hath alwayes béene an occasion  to ruinate Armyes, and to destroye Kingdomes.  For that suffring them selues to be caryed away with passions, they vse not their counselles for the common proffit but according to the euill disposition of their mindes, whervpon it followes, that those which haue giuen good counsell, be despised, and afterwardes Princes by meanes of those euill counselles: finde themselues to be depriued of their States.
            
                ALthough a Generall or Ambassadour haue Commission of his Prince to conclude any thing, neuertheles he ought not to take vpon him so much authoritie, that therby their commission should become rash or licencious: and cheefly when in the managing of things there is some point that may doo hurt to the honour of his prudēce, the which thing the Ambassadour ought not to ratifie, neither to accepte anye thinge, before he haue aduertised his Prince thereof.
            
                IT is no safetie for a frée Citie, to fauour any parte, where  two Princes that are neighboures make warres together. And also to stande in the midst and kéepe a meane, dooth not bring with it greate securitie, for that these two Princes at the last maye agree together to ruinate them, whilste thou hast béene neither freende to the one nor to the other.
            
                IT comes to passe of necessitie, that those that possesse any  thing, should be laid in waite for by many. Therfore it is good that he preuent the snares of his enemyes, to the intent that those that doo repose themselues in their owne proper goodes, should not fall into those daungers like vnto those that through ouermuche aboundaunce doo mooue warres.
            
                NO fréend doth differ from an enemie by nature, which  is cōmon to euery one, but by customes and by déeds. The which being good, makes euery stranger séem to be his neighbour & familiar, but being wicked: makes euery man although a neighbour, to become a stranger.
            
               
               NAture hath appointed it to be healthfull and necessary to man, that some should be rulde and gouerned, and  it is impossible that without this order, anye thing should perseuere and go forward any long time, and it is a conuenient thing that one that is ruler ouer another, haue care ouer conuenient thinges, and to comaund, but he that is subiect, it appertaines vnto him to be obedient without any excuse, and to execute diligentlye that which is commaunded him.
            
                ALthough iniuries be doone vnto a man, yet for all that he dooth not euer lye vnder: neither he that is superiour  in power is alwaies a vanquishour, but the one & the other are subiect to humaine instabilities and the vncertaintie of Fortune: and oftentimes the ends doo not succéed according to the hopes that we haue, but quite against their thoughts and imaginations.
            
                THat man becomes terrible, that either is iniuried or reputes himselfe to be iniuried, and verye many times  besides his force, he puts himselfe into perrilles, carrying this minde, that either he will ouercome or not loose, without drawing bloode of the enemye: and they sometimes are vanquishours, and sometimes are ouercome: and now equall in power, now inferiour: it falles out that some dye altogither and some other obtaine the victorie of Cadmus.
            
            
                WHen discordes beginne amongst any that indeuour themselues to resist violence with violence, and  knowe not that reuenge cannot be made with equitie and humanitie, but according to the appetite and licence which they take through weapons: it comes to passe that they make a circuler & winding compasse of euils, without end and it comes yt there is successiuely made a resolution of crueltie: for that he yt is vanquishour, dooth abound in iniuries, & giues no end to his doing euil, and he that is disgraced through the displesure and wrath of his mizerie,  if in the beginning he be not altogither destroyed, he remaines in continuall desire to reuenge himselfe against him that did him iniuries, vntill such time as he feele himselfe satisfied in his minde: and in like sorte the rest of the multitude, although they haue not béene pertakers of this thing, neuerthelesse, through the pittie they beare to him that is ouercome, and through the enuye they beare to the vanquishour: fearing also to suffer such like, and hope they maye be able to doo the same to him: and by this meanes the one halfe of the Citizens are moued to make sedition, and the one and the other succéeds and followes on to euil, which is like to a Circulare and legitimate course, hauing this occasion to reuenge those that haue béene oppressed, and although they are priuately set free, neuerthelesse euery way they destroy the Common-weale.
            
                THe instruementes of Maiestrates and of armies is so  ioyned and lincked with humaine imperfections, that they are not apt for the diuinitie, as deuine worships are: which raising vs from the earth, makes vs to approche neere to God himselfe: and consequentlye dooth make vs more pertakers of his vertue, then of any care of worldlye matters: where-upon dooth spring and arise good fame, and after the same, that reputation which is holden in hyest degrée, drawing the mindes of the people into a firme beleefe that we are exactly good, not in exteriour actions, but in inwarde conscience: and besides that inducing them to holde for certaine, that we cannot erre, God being vpon our side: which likewise is an occasion that men reuerence vs with a certaine feare, not to offend vs: because they will not offend together there withall his diuine maiestie.
            
                WHen we take in hand any voyage, the ende is, to arriue at that place whither we think to goe, the midst or meane is the way by the which we take our iourney: so in our affaires we ought to haue before our eyes, tw
                  •
                
                considerations, the end, and security to arriue with satisfaction, but when vnto these two, spéede maye be ioyned: then haue we fully all those parts that appertains to perfect affaires.
            
                OF the two, offensiue warres is better then the defenciue: for that he yt dooth assault, hath already thought  vpon all that which is necessarye for him, and therefore he is become thorowlye resolute: but he that is assaulted, is taken either vnprouided or prouided: the vnprouided person dooth prepare & defend himselfe by force, and without doubt hath infinite disaduauntages, the which if they come to him through the fraud of others, he is excused: but if he know himselfe to haue any mightye enemye, and hath not forseene the same: he is woorthye of blame, and dooth merite the name of imprudent. He that is prouided will likewise be accounted not verye wise, if he haue not vsed all force and diligence, to be the first to issue and break, for that although before the chaunce doo fall, it appeares that he is furnished with so much as is néedefull, yet vpon the déede dooing, great store of wants discouer themselues, and with long procéeding and continuance, for the most parte he growes wursse, and to feele defects, forsomuch as he fals vnto the want of Captaines, of Souldiours, of victuales, of artillerie, and of other such like things necessarye for the saide defence: the which procéeds because he is not able to woorke by entire frée choice and election, and that he is constrained to do euery thing through méere necessitie, besides that his owne proper people doo suffer infinitely, with the perrill of their totall ruine, and with continuall feare of losse, without any hope of gaine.
            
                THe counsell of a Prince compounded of diuers and sundry persons, is most commmended: for many haue proued  many things, and all consists in experience, because the subiect is humaine actions, wherein we oftentimes see by proofe, that that thing dooth succéede and fall out, which by  reason was not looked for, and many men, besides that they haue seene much, haue heard many things and read much, wherby they possesse a discourse of greater effect, and likewise because the affaires that are consulted vpon are many and sundrye, therin is to be required diuers and sundry iudgementes: and he that rules, hath so huge a Machine vpon his shoulders, that he is forced to haue many armes, to lay hand vpon to helpe him to sustaine that heauye burden.
            
                THe counsellour of a Prince ought both to be quicke and  graue, to the intent that by his onely viuacitie, he become not vaine: and through only grauitie, grosse and sluggishe: being quick he wil be vigilant, and if graue, he wilbe well staide in himselfe to giue eare: and in the act of counselling if he be quicke, he dooth discouer difficulties, dooth pearce and see into them, and dooth not loose the courage of his minde, and hath recourse to prouision and preuention: and if graue, he examines and resolues feares, perrils, and determines vpon the prouisions: and so viuacitie makes him to foresée, and grauitie causeth him to prouide, and he that dooth prouide, will: and he that dooth foresee, knowes: and he that will and knowes, and is not hindred, and empeched, may put his valour in execution: and for that the quick person is subtile and sharpe, and the graue firme and mature: the one dooth arise more by nature then by experience, and the other more by experience then by nature
                  •
                we may say that of viuacity, comes wit, and of grauity, iudgement wherof prudence is framed: and that good waye and maner how to vse the same, which is dexteritie, so that for the full perfection of counsell, it is necessary that viuacitye and grauitie doo concurre therin, the one giuing to another reciprocall helpe.
            
                COunsell is made of those things that remaine alwaies  in one selfe forme, neither of those that doo change and are notorious, neither of those which although they be difficile,  neuerthelesse there remaines and rests not much, but when any case dooth fall out, that hath manye shapes and cullours, so that it may change it selfe in sundry sorts, and take many formes, and that it dooth importe much either in apparence or in consequence, or in the one and the other sorte: the which thing comes often, for that oftentimes ma
                  ••
               ers doo fall out, which carrye with them such doubts as are to be had in consideration.
            
                IN the gouernment of a free Citie, where there is no head  that is vndoubtedlye Lord and Maister: euerye thing is subiect to ye lawes, but in a Monarchie men are not bound vnto them, but all that which dooth please the Monarch himselfe, becomes Lawe in effect: the which he maye performe, either by letters or by subscriptions, either by decrées, or by woords, or by edictes, or in some other sort: and euen as the father of a famulye maye at his pleasure alter the orders, that he hath constituted in his house: So a Prince hath so great authoritie ouer his subiects as he wil himselfe: and moreouer so much the greater, by how much the more his power is free: and much more also, for that the same doth extend ouer all the principalls of the houses, the Citie being all, and the house parte of all.
            
                SInce it dooth chaunce for the most parte that the people doo taste of extreame pouertie, and the Nobilitye of extreame  riches, (in a Common-weale not well ordered) it destroyes the forme of ciuill gouernment: forsomuch as those that be extreame poore, vse industrie, to follow craft and fraude, and those that are very rich become proud, insolent, and insupportable: and finallye seditions doo arise: the disorders of these extreams, procéeding so far forward, that either those of base degrée, recommend themselues to great persons which are mightye, and therefore able to giue them liuinges: or great men goe about to gaine those of mean and base degrée, to make them partiall vnto  them with the occasion, by finding them euill satisfied, and by hauing the meanes to entertain them, and so they may easilye stirre vp tumults against the regall power.
            
                THat Citizen that would be holden for iust, it is necessarie, that he know how to distribute, euerye thing to all persons, according to their degrées and dignities, and that he knowe how to defend the customes and orders of his Countrie, to obserue the lawes, and to be vpright in controuersies, and stand firme in conuentions.
            
                TO amend entirely the customes of a Citie, to prouide  for disorders, to remedie scandalles, to take away abuses, to roote out vices, to kéepe in safetie the people, and to conduct and bring them to a vertuous and happy life: as it is a thing of very great importance, so without doubt it is so much more glorious and commendable.
            
                EUery man carries great hate to those, who towardes  their benefactors do shew themselues ingrateful, therfore euen as it is a thing proper to authoritie, to nourishe vs with honour and praise, and that since we are thereby moued and inflamed to followe studies through the swéetnes of glory: so men of hye spirites, if they see the trauailes they haue taken for other mens commodities, oftentimes to be acknowledged with benigne and gratefull mindes, they reioyce in their honest trauails, and become pleasant in those perrilles that most terrifie and triumph in ye midst of most cruell deaths, since that with the spirite of fame, they are so noblye and worthily maintained in life, wherefore with great forwardnes they aduenture their bodyes willinglye, inticed through hope, that the force of benefite ought to remaine imprinted in the memoryes of men eternally.
            
                THe good qualities that are found amongst men, are  confirmed either by vertue, either by long vse and habite, or by natures, carrying with thē an inclination thervnto, euen from their swadles, or by a certain 
                  〈◊〉
                
                men estéeming by that meanes to be able to attain to some purpose or determined inuention: therefore it is required in those that seeke for honours, that libertye and affability be in them by nature, not for that it is not good to obtaine the same vertuously and by election, but for that not being able so well to make iudgement of the inward partes of others, sometimes it chaunceth, that which is doone by artificiall meanes, dooth make such a manner of showe, that it séemes, that it is like vnto vertue, wherby it may easily deceiue, but nature dooth neuer deceiue.
            
                HE that desires honours: it is necessarie that he dispose himselfe to the matter long time before, and indeuour  himselfe to make euery one his fréend, but aboue all: those he knowes to be of a good spirit, men of traine and abilitie, and suche as haue courage in them. The occasiones to obtaine freendes, dooth alwayes springe and arise, so that they be taken in time: and the desire to take them, ought to be so much the greater in like time, by how much more at that instant, a benefit, how little soeuer it be, séemes to haue great force to worke great effectes & parts of beneuolence.
            
                THe right practises to séeke to obtaine honoures, are  those which are accomplished and doon before the time of the demaund. For that the time of paymente and debte being come: those haue gained fréendes that freend them in good earnest. Forsomuch as those that are gotten in that time, that the seruice doon vnto them, are perceued of them to be doon for a desire to please them and not in hope of rewarde, forsomuch as pleasures so neere the payment, cannot be gratefull: neither receiued with good conscience.
            
                BEneuolence sometimes is gotten no lesse with reuerence  and with dooing benefites, then with receiuing them, and cheefelye of those that are of greater power: who for the moste parte become fréendes, when they perceiue them-selues to be esteemed, and that confidence is put in them, with often séekinge for some pleasures at  their handes that will not be discommodious or gréeuous vnto them.
            
                WHosoeuer desires honoures: ought not to make practise  for the same himselfe: neuertheles he ought to receiue whosoeuer dooth speake vnto him, with a gratefull minde, and retayning in himselfe a certain modestie: make showe alwayes to receiue that which is to come, rather as proceeding of curtesie then for any other of his own merits: besides this, let him make signe that he dooth es
                  •
               eeme well and déerly of what help soeuer is offred vnto him: making showe that it will be of great importance for him. Forsomuch as euery one although very meane and weake by nature, makes great account of it to be estéemed a profitable person, and therfore that it was his due to haue had some obligacion of those vnto whome they haue lent the same.
            
                IT is necessarie that he that dooth demaund and seeke for  honours, should haue alwaies his countenance and his fore-head open & vncouered: and that he giue of himselfe, very great expectation of benignitie and curtesie, and that he indeuour himselfe to know the nature, and his disposition to profit that speakes with reasons, putting him in manye hopes of his desire: for he that hopes, is much more deutifull & diligent then the rest, this humanitie of woords is of more power then is able to be spoken: and such there hath been, that neither desiring or knowing how to vse it, haue lost goodly and great occasions.
            
                HE that dooth trauaile to make others to obtaine honours,  it is necessarye that he haue good vnderstanding, and better vtterance: for he that hath naughtye vtterance is, as though he had no vnderstanding: Moreouer, it is requisite that he be couragious, forsomuch as sometimes there arise such accidents, that he that can best shew his force to fortitude, dooth remaine superiour, and this courage is necessary to be accompanied, with greatnes of blood, with many followers, and with excellent vertue, forsomuch,  as whosoeuer is courag
                  •
               ous without stay and piller of some of these qualities, shall perseuer himselfe rather to be deri
                  •
               ed and flo
                  •
               ted, and shall spoyle all, rather then helpe and amend the matter.
            
                EUen as there be sundrye woorthie men, that through their good behauiour and gentle cur
                  •
               esies, are of estimation  amongst all persons▪ so there be some others, so spitefull of nature, that they are hated of euerye one. The firste, although before that time they haue not applyed themselues to the negotiation of affaires, yet may they by the fauour of their freends perfourme many things: and such as these are to be accounted for freends, and so far as we can, we ought to get and obtaine them, to the intent to set them a woork. The second sort also, are to be estéemed for freends, but it is not good to vse them in our affaires: forsomuch as we shall receiue by them more harmes, then benefites: and that we ought to doo with such dexteritie, that they doo not perceiue that they are accounted for such, for spitefull persons also are full of wrath, and without iudgement dispose themselues to doo ouerthwartly, and if they cannot harm vs otherwise, yet they will hurt vs with their tunges as dayly we perceiue by experience.
            FINIS. Deo Gratias. Et Pace, Et Praelio.
            
               THis is the end of the first Booke, translated out of Italian into English. Anno. 1590.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
                  HITCHCOCKS ARMES.
                  EN DIEV EST MA DEFFENSE.
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ A Table wherein is contained the contents of these Conceites, Shewing their number by figure, they being in all 
                  
                     •
                  03.
            
            
               
                  A.
                  ABode.
                  706.
                  Accidents or chaunces.
                  74.551.
                  Actions.
                  68.293.539.633.
                  To Accomodate our selues.
                  511.515
                  Aduenture or chaunce.
                  108.
                  Aduise.
                  3
                        •
                     0.
                  Administration.
                  260
                  Affection.
                  170
                  Affaires or busines▪
                  
                  244.245.
                  Affirmations.
                  2.167.
                  Agents.
                  373.
                  Olde Age.
                  523.
                  Alterations,
                  418.
                  Ambition.
                  123.304.315.316.469.536.
                  Ametie.
                  218.317.379.
                  Appetite.
                  153.18.9.
                  Armes.
                  250.592.
                  Art ofwarre.
                  251
                  Artificiall deuises.
                  65.456.565.570.
                  Assurednes or securitie.
                  619.
                  Authoritie.
                  146.252.374.412.423.474.513.
               
            
            
               
                  B.
                  Basenes or vilenes of minde.
                  718
                  Base and meane men towardes great personages.
                  193.
                  Daye of battaile.
                  369.530. or Battailes. 214.
                  Benefites.
                  225, 276.547.
                  Beneuolence▪
                  
                  799.
                  Beastlyne
                        •
                     .
                  285.
                  Bond or Obligations.
                  63.
                  Bondage or slauerie,
                  246.363.427.781.
               
            
            
               
                  C.
                  Calumines or detractions.
                  411.
                  Causes or affaires.
                  58.
                  Captaines or Generals.
                  28.179.139.158.300.321.322.325.521.522.545.593.665 670 672 683.676.677.678.679.680 682.688.723.735.754.773.
                  Care or deep consideration.
                  165
                  Chastisement.
                  108.131.
                  Charitie.
                  270.525.
                  Charge or burden.
                  39.
                  Cities or states.
                  134.668.675.692.699, 700.770.775.778
                  
                     Citizens.
                  37.135.248.333.471.485.593.721.740.752.793.
                  Ciuil
                        •
                     tie.
                  262.
                  Circumspectnes.
                  283.
                  Clemencie.
                  215.
                  Common-weales.
                  7.45.628.708.710.757.768.
                  Colonies or newe Inhabitantes.
                  462.
                  Commaunding or rule.
                  186.567.
                  Companyes or bands.
                  18.41.
                  Counselles or aduise.
                  9.27.64.97.105.194.287.297.299.386.538.574.607.725.760.764.788.790.
                  Considerations.
                  16.154.
                  Conuersations.
                  125,
                  Conseruation or well keeping.
                  212.
                  Confederation or League.
                  227.343.344.
                  Confidence or trust.
                  2.475.609.
                  Counsellours.
                  324.536.761.789
                  Consultation.
                  298.
                  Contentions.
                  263.
                  Constancie.
                  387.
                  Contrarye course in managing causes.
                  555.
                  Corrispondence or similitude.
                  200.
                  Corruption.
                  512.
                  Customes.
                  12.435.
                  Cowards.
                  731.
                  Couragiousnes.
                  284.
                  Couetousnes.
                  340.684.767.
                  Credulitie.
                  143.229.657.661.
                  Crueltie.
                  560.563.
                  Curiositie.
                  3.
               
            
            
               
                  D.
                  Deliberations.
                  235.
                  Deniall.
                  196.
                  Detraction or euill speaking.
                  197.
                  Deeds or actions.
                  183.331.
                  Degrees.
                  145.535.
                  Demaunds.
                  468.
                  Determinations or deliberating.
                  27.25.82.206.224.291.293.294.542.642.
                  Demerites,
                  734.736.
                  To desire or request.
                  638.
                  Dearth.
                  734.
                  Dignetie.
                  159.
                  Difficultie.
                  518.
                  Difference.
                  179.
                  Discorde.
                  61.89.784.
                  Discipline.
                  274.
                  Discourses.
                  425.
                  Displeasure,
                  550.
                  Dsarmed or without weapon.
                  553.
                  Disturbations.
                  98.
                  Distribution.
                  223.486.
                  Disorders.
                  247.477.
                  Disimulations.
                  584.
                  Disswasion.
                  671.
                  Discontentment.
                  505.
                  Deceiuours.
                  141.
                  
                     Displeasure or entring into cholor.
                  608.
                  Damage or losse.
                  224.616.
                  Doubts.
                  405.
                  To dye.
                  208.739.763.
                  A Desembler.
                  483.
               
            
            
               
                  E.
                  Excesses.
                  454.455.
                  Effects.
                  195.181.
                  Election or choise.
                  10.330.536.
                  Emulations.
                  137.
                  Embassadours.
                  279.473.
                  Emnities.
                  694.
                  Enterparling and meeting of Princes.
                  371.
                  To enlarge or augement.
                  295.488.
                  To enrich our selues.
                  442.516.585.
                  Enterprises.
                  88.178.221.311.355.322.760.
                  Ennye.
                  328.620.646.648.649.6
                        •
                     1.776.
                  Enemies.
                  368.
                  Entertainement or delayes.
                  26.
                  Errours.
                  163.242.365.396.744.
                  Euents, happes or chaunces.
                  263
                  Finall end.
                  386.
                  Executions or accomplishements.
                  168.184.
                  Examples.
                  169.
                  Extremities.
                  231.610.
                  Experiences.
                  78.683.
                  Exercises.
                  404.621▪
                  
                  Expences in warre.
                  711.
               
            
            
               
                  F.
                  Fame.
                  734, 736.
                  Fauours
                  49.149.534.
                  Faith.
                  31.306.684.707.713.763.
                  Faultie.
                  133.
                  Feare.
                  550.643.644.319.
                  Flatterie.
                  54.
                        •
                     41.449.
                  Flight.
                  597.
                  Footmen or Souldiours.
                  591.
                  Fortune.
                  114.140.380.
                  Force.
                  410.479.
                  Forme or proportion.
                  415.
                  Fortifications.
                  572.674.
                  Forgetfulnes.
                  43.
                  A Freend.
                  128.
                  Foreshewing or fore-happes.
                  305.
                  Foreseeings or preuentions.
                  266.756.
                  Fugitiues.
                  315.
               
            
            
               
                  G.
                  Gaines or getting of any thing.
                  492, 753.771.
                  Gouernours.
                  91.103.109.215.117.801.746.766.
                  Glorie.
                  92.287.
                  Gouernment.
                  652.
                  Goodnes of life.
                  421.
                  Goodnes of persons.
                  90.
                  Goods.
                  308.
                  
                     Good deeds or works.
                  307.377.
                  Grauetie.
                  36.
                  Grace or fauour.
                  144.
                  Greatnes or might.
                  157.
                  Grosse wittes.
                  677.624.
                  Gratefulnes.
                  795.
               
            
            
               
                  H.
                  Hate.
                  328.
                  Hope.
                  235.
                  Histories.
                  376.
                  Honestie.
                  31.
                  Honours.
                  119.318.796.796.800.801.802.
               
            
            
               
                  I.
                  Ignorance.
                  594.
                  Inuasion or vsurping.
                  438.
                  Iniuries.
                  32.659.660.783.
                  Introductions.
                  181.
                  Insolence.
                  226.
                  Impressions in our mindes.
                  347.
                  Imitations.
                  379.
                  Inconueniences.
                  392.453.
                  Inconstancie.
                  399.
                  Intent.
                  640.
                  Ire or wrath.
                  190.
                  Irresolution.
                  558
                  Irruption or inuation.
                  182.
                  The Iudge.
                  142.
                  Iudgements.
                  209.467.564, 518.
                  Iustice.
                  175.
               
            
            
               
                  K.
                  Kings.
                  95.717.
                  Knowlege or perseuerence.
                  383.
               
            
            
               
                  L,
                  Lamen
                        ••
                     tion or complaining
                  623,
                  Lawes.
                  378.435.436.791.
                  Leages.
                  210.216.217.234.362.457.458.719.
                  Letters or learning.
                  286.
                  Libertie or free state.
                  40.50.162.222.238.239.246 392.359.428.700.714.742.
                  Liberalitie.
                  171.558.
                  Lustines or galant courage.
                  83.
                  Losses.
                  507.704.
                  Short Life.
                  161.
                  Loue.
                  130.627.
               
            
            
               
                  M.
                  Magistrate.
                  80.319.393.
                  Maister.
                  176.
                  Male-content or euill satisfied.
                  551.
                  To Maintain.
                  391.
                  Measure.
                  187.
                  Keeping of the meane.
                  450.
                  Magnanimitie.
                  632.720.
                  Miserable.
                  556.559.
                  Mistrust.
                  30.229.663.
                  Mis-fortunes.
                  26.
                  Multitudes or assemblies.
                  258.275.429, 636.
                  Mutations or changes.
                  580.
                  Mightie.
                  56.59.
                  Money.
                  302.515.
               
            
            
               
               
                  N.
                  Nature of Princes.
                  15.
                  Necessitie.
                  233.382.517.6
                        •
                     3.698.749.762.
                  A Negotiatour.
                  53.469, 470.575.
                  Newtralitie.
                  67.207.384.385.388.389.394.395.396.397.400.
                  Newes.
                  268.
                  To be Negligent.
                  517.
                  Night.
                  269.
                  Noble.
                  51.
                  Nobilitie.
                  482.
                  Notice or knowledge.
                  472
                  Nouelties.
                  118.360.
                  Needfull occasions.
                  126.127.
               
            
            
               
                  O,
                  Obedience.
                  527.702.
                  Occasion or oppertunitie.
                  8.82.
                  Offences or harmes.
                  409.502.562.625.
                  Obtemperations, temporising or congratulation.
                  81.
                  Orders.
                  436.520.
                  The maker of good orders.
                  381.425.438.546.
                  Opinions or iudgments.
                  337.
                  Ouerthrowes.
                  464.
                  Off-icers or Seruants.
                  14.467.469.595.
               
            
            
               
                  P.
                  Peace.
                  57.278.349.662.
                  Pact or condition.
                  464.
                  Things past.
                  480.
                  People.
                  23.69.199, 229.230.290.356.481.578.690.709.774.
                  Perrill
                        •
                     s.
                  1.292.689.712.
                  To pardon.
                  42.185.
                  Perswasion.
                  228.67.
                  Pleasure.
                  550.
                  Persecution.
                  255.
                  Practises.
                  582.
                  To premeditate.
                  149.
                  Preuention.
                  160.
                  Predictions.
                  211.327.
                  Preparations.
                  476.
                  Power.
                  6.
                  Pouertie,
                  161.627.791.
                  A Prince.
                  11.17.22.44.52.102.107.113.116.122.155.345.347.434.466.596.602.655.691.747.
                  Princes.
                  73.201.
                  Prodigalities.
                  29.
                  Prosperitie.
                  264.
                  Proceeding forward in affaires.
                  487.
                  Promises.
                  686.
                  Prudence.
                  650.
                  Presumption or rash boldenes.
                  698.718.725.729.
                  To praise.
                  433.663.
                  Praise.
                  60
                  Pride.
                  197.
                  Punishment.
                  524.
                  Profitablenes.
                  35.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Q.
                  Good qualities.
                  396.803.
               
            
            
               
                  R.
                  Rash persons.
                  732.
                  Raigne.
                  20.
                  Reason.
                  134.
                  Religion.
                  424.426.785.
                  Respects.
                  164.
                  Reprehenders.
                  203.
                  Reputation.
                  232.451.479.681.
                  Resolution.
                  243.300.549.
                  Remembrances.
                  312.313.
                  Requests.
                  259.437.532.599.667.
                  Reformation.
                  432.444.
                  Reuenge.
                  180.
                  Rewardes.
                  75.
                  Riches.
                  46.188.697.791.
                  New Rule or Empire.
                  13.
               
            
            
               
                  S.
                  Sage or wise.
                  641.148.
                  Sects, factions, banding, or part-taking.
                  240.669.695.
                  Seditions.
                  132.
                  Seueritie.
                  2
                        •
                     6.
                  To Serue.
                  420.422.579.604.
                  Securitie.
                  79.120.249.
                  Scandalles.
                  460.
                  Silence.
                  335.
                  Slacknes.
                  561
                  Sinceritie.
                  622.
                  Substance.
                  84.
                  Successe of things.
                  205.
                  Suspition.
                  220.207.346.446.447.484.629.
                  A Successour.
                  334.516.
                  A Souldiour.
                  261.326.440.687.724.737.738.
                  State.
                  48.99.497.
                  Stratagems.
                  522.
                  Waye of Sta
                        ••
                     .
                  419.
                  Solitarines.
                  647.
                  Strangers.
                  463.
                  Strong.
                  529.634.635.636.637.
               
            
            
               
                  T.
                  Taciturnitie or secrecie.
                  174.
                  Temeritie or rashnes.
                  265.
                  To Temporise.
                  571.
                  Tirants.
                  33.249.685.
                  Treason.
                  7
                        •
                     4.
                  Tumults.
                  431.
                  Time.
                  150.24
                        •
                     .543.
                  Trueth or veritie.
                  758.
                  Threatnings.
                  100.
                  Terrour or feare.
                  235.
               
            
            
               
                  V.
                  Valour.
                  325.371.
                  Varietie.
                  72.
                  Varying or changing.
                  701.
                  Vassalles.
                  630.
                  Vertue.
                  181.
                  Victorie.
                  66.289.597.730.769.
                  
                     Vniuersall.
                  658.
                  Vniting or knitting in one.
                  94.669.
                  Violence.
                  413.490.528.
                  Vices.
                  93.181.
                  Vnworthines or indignity.
                  296.
               
            
            
               
                  W.
                  Watchfulnes.
                  353.
                  Warrefare.
                  77.611.
                  Warres.
                  41.86.
                        •
                     04.213.271.301.352.390.531.548.588.589.590.600.613.605.606.609.666.705.715.716.726.727.728.743.745.751.787.
                  Wicked naughty persons.
                  172.254.
                  Worldly affaires.
                  366.402.
                  Wrath or displeasure.
                  471.236.629.630.
               
            
            
               
                  Y.
                  Youth.
                  70.
                  Yeelding or graunting.
                  257.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
               Captaine Hichcock.
               
THis saide Captaine Hichcock seruing in the Lowe Cuntries, Anno. 2586. with two hundreth Souldiours: brought from thence with this Booke, the second booke of Sansouinos politick Conceites, which shall be put to the Printing so soon as it is translated out of the Italian into English.
         
      
   