
      
         
            
            
            A true diſcourſe of the
occurrences in the warres of Sauoy,
and the winning of the Forte of Mont-millan: by the
moſt Chriſtian King of France and Nauarre
Henrie the fourth.
Alſo the number of Cannons and Munition by his Maieſtie
taken in the ſaid Mont-millan.
            
            Wherevnto is annexed, the Oration of Sir
Philip Cauriana, Knight: pronounced to the moſt Chriſtian
Queene Mary de Medicis, at her departure out
of Tuſcane to goe into France.
            
            Faithfully tranſlated out of French by E. A.
            
            
            Imprinted at London for Walter Burre, at the ſigne of the
Flower de Luce and Crowne, in Pouies Church-yarde. 1601.
         
      
      
         
            
            A true diſcourſe of things happened
in the armie for Sauoy, and in
the winning of the Caſtle of
Mont-millan.
            
               HIs moſt Chriſtian Maieſtie, forbearing
ſo farre as his honor and the duety of a
Prince that loueth peace and the good of
his Countrey could affoorde, was at the
laſt to his great griefe, forced to haue recourſe
to all meanes conuenient to bring
the Duke of Sauoy to good order. The
ſaid Duke hauing taken from the crowne of France, and vſurped
the Marquizat of Saluces in time of peace, in the dayes of
the late King Henry the third, his Maieſties predeceſſor of
happy memory, hath not reſtored the ſaid Marquizate, according
to the treatie and concluſion of peace made at Veruins in
the yeare 1598. betwéene his Maieſtie Phillip the ſecond late
King of Spaine, and the ſaid Duke of Sauoy, neither as he
promiſed by the laſt agréement betwéene his Maieſtie and the
ſaid Duke of Sauoy, made at Paris in February laſt. A matter
that hath mooued his Maieſtie to alter his purpoſe: declaring
to thoſe to whome it may concerne, that hauing attended the
ſaid Dukes reſolution, he was laſtly enforced to recouer the
ſaid Marquizate by force of Armes.
            The King therefore willing by vallour and in diſcretion,
not onely to preſerue that which appertaineth to the Crowne,
but alſo to recouer that which aforetime hath béene alienated,
did therevpon redemaund the Marquizate of Saluces, which

                  ••
               d béene alienated, as is aforeſaid. But the Duke finding it to
be one of the moſt precious flowers of his garland, referred off

the King dayly for the reſtitution of the ſame: Whereby his
Maieſtie hauing expected it a yeare and a halfe, did neuertheleſſe
liue in hope according to the ſaid Dukes promiſe, to haue
had the ſaid reſtitution performed by the firſt day of June laſt
paſſed. But the King perceiuing that his elemencie engendred
ſo great contempt, ſent his ſolemne declaration to the ſaide
Duke of Sauoy, therein proteſting that himſelfe was no cauſe
of the warre or breache of peace, but that full ill againſt his
will he vndertooke this warre, as knowing verye well that it
could not redound but to the ſaid Dukes vtter ruine & decay.
            The King therefore, conſidering the premiſſes, did to his
great griefe (albeit he came not out of Paris to that intent) bring
his armie into Breſſe and Sauoy, where it ſoone ſhewed it ſelfe
with ſo many troopes, as prooued, that the Kings iuſt title or
quarrell carried that which to him did appertaine. The townes
and Caſtles neuer ſtood out any or very ſmall force, but yéelded:
ſo as the King in a very ſhort time pierced through the countrey
euen to Mont-millan, where vpon his arriuall, he ſeized on
the towne, as likewiſe he did ſooneafter of Chamtery, Charbonniers
and other places, euen to Morienne, which he brought
vnder his obedience, in which places himſelfe was preſent, to
the great perrill and danger of his life.
            Hauing thus taken the towne of Mont-millan, he cauſed the
Caſtle to be ſummoned to yéelde, vnleſſe that they had rather
endure the furie of the Cannon. Howbeit, ſith they grew obſtinate,
the King deuided his army to beate it on euery ſide, and
cauſed his men to raiſe Baſtions, Fortes, Hilles, and Bulwarkes
with wonderfull pollicie to beate the place.
            This doone, it ſéemed, that albeit mans induſtrie could performe
no more, yet all this was but as a Butte for the Cannons
of the ſaid Caſtle to leuell at: the place being of all men
holden to be inpregnable and almoſt inacceſſible. But God,
who ruleth the hearts of Kings and Princes, peized the hearts
of theſe two Princes, whereby the one was found to be repleniſhed
with a iuſt quarrell, whereto he alſo ſhewed himſelfe fauourable,
as he promiſeth by his Prophets, when he findeth a

heart after his owne minde. So that whereas the Duke of Sauoy,
purpoſed there to haue ſuffered the Frenchmen to haue
champed on their bittes, with the diſcommoditie of the winter
ſeaſon and tempeſts, the place happily fell into the kings hands,
to the great preiudice of the ſaid Duke of Sauoy, who now findeth
himſelfe to be the prey of ſuch miſhap as he threatned to
others, therein reſembling the Thruſh, who pearched vpon a
twigge ſpreddeth her wings, and ſo is taken of her ſelfe: or the
Gyants that ſought to ſight with heauen: for ſurely this battle
of the Giants, doth repreſent and figure vnto no other but theſe
that will riſe againſt their betters, as they did againſt Iupiter,
according to the wordes of the Poet.
            
               The Gyants men ſay, would enterprize,
               To ſeaze vpon heauen, and Iupiter ſurprize.
            
            Now will I bring vnto the French Theater, one of the
principall actes of this tragedie. The King conſidering how
difficult it was by aſſault to come néere this place, and fearing
the loſſe of the meaneſt of his Souldiers, ſought to winne thoſe
in the Caſtle by compoſition, wherevpon God reading in his
heart his good minde and affection, ſtrengthened him more and
more againſt his enemies. Many things they do report, that
miniſtred intelligence to the king: but I doe ground my ſelfe
vpon the moſt certaine, & I doe beléeue that the kings iuſt quarell
deliuered him this place, as the lawfull daughter of France
built and erected by our Kings: for, as ſay the auncient Philoſophers:
All things muſt returne to their head and foundation,
ſo that as well that, as the reſt, being of France, All ſhall returne
to France.
            
            In the end the Lord of Brandy Captaine of the ſaid Caſtle,
finding himſelfe vnable to reſiſt the French armie, much leſſe
the courage of ſo inuincible and magnanimious a king: withall
that he could not hould, as being ſurprized by the kings diligence
and foreſight, who reſembled an Alexander or Iulius
Caeſar, who both enterpriſed and executed in manner at once:
ſought to growe to compoſition as himſelfe required: whereto
the King condiſcended, mittigating certaine articles that went

beyond the lawes of warre, which he would not paſſe.
            This compoſition did firſt containe a truce for one moneth:
ſo that incaſe the Duke of Sauoy did not come to ſuccour the
beſieged and raiſe the ſiedge from before the place, the ſaid lord
Brandys promiſed euen with hoſtages, to deliuer the place into
the kings hands. The truce drawing to expiration, toward the
end thereof the Duke of Sauoy meaning to appeare, was ſtopped,
through the kings diſcréet foreſight, who ſent his armie to
the paſſages to ſtop the ſaid Duke of Sauoy, from all acceſſe.
Thus he being repulſed, and vnable to bring any ſuccour, eyther
to raiſe the ſiege from before the place, it was yéelded vnder
the moſt happy ſucceſſe of the moſt Chriſtian & moſt magnanimious
King, according to the graunt that the Lorde of
Brandy had obteined from his Maieſty. Héervpon the king, the
16. of Nouemb. 1600. ſent in 500. French ſouldiers, vnder the
leading of the Lord of Crequy, who was to commaund in the
ſame. The Lord of Brandy, according to an article by the King
granted in forme of compoſition, departed: Namely with the
life of the ſaid Lord of Brandy and all his, the Souldiers with
the Drum ſtriking vp, the Ancient diſplaide, the Matche lighted,
the Bullet in the mouth, the Muſquets and Harquebuts
charged, with bag and baggage, ſo much as to them apperteyned,
without ſearch, viſitation or moleſtation whatſoeuer, and
furniſhed with ſo much warlicke prouiſion as they could well
carry with them: leauing to his Maieſties poſſeſſion, the faireſt
and ſtrongeſt place in all Sauoy, with 80. Canons great
and ſmall, 30000. Bullets, and 500. thouſand of Powder.
Thus much for the conqueſt and departure from the Caſtle of
Mont-millan, a houlde in ſome mens opinion vnpoſſible to be
gotten: yet poſſible to our great King, being armed with equitie
and a iuſt quarrell.
            Now therefore, O yée French nation, yée are to lift vp your
hands to heauen in ſigne of ioye, and to importunate the ſame
with your petitions and prayers, and manifould repetition of
this worde with the Prophet, O Lord preſerue the King, and
be his protector.
            
            
               
Now therefore let him not be content onely to mainteine his
eſtate and people in peace: but alſo let him flouriſh, and as it
were ſhoote foorth againe the auncient Lawrell branches of his
aunceſters. Now I ſay is the time, that thou O France maiſt
boaſt, that thou haſt not onely a Themiſtocles, an Alexander,
or a Caeſar, but euen all thrée comprized in the ſole courage of
this great Henry the fourth. Now is the time that the olde
prouerbe may be verified in him. That nothing is difficult to
a valiant minde: Likewiſe that he hath clambered to the rocke
of vertue: and that he hath purchaſed the tipe of perfection;
that he hath out faced the hazards, and for a long time caryed
away and houlden the title of a great King and Captaine,
whome all the worlde admireth and feareth, vnder his clemencie,
curteſie, valour and benignity. God graunt that France
may long enioy ſo fauourable a ſunne-ſhine, to beate away the
ſtormes that otherwiſe are likelie to fall therevpon:
likewiſe that his life, his goodneſſe, and valour,
may in his vertue poſſeſſe the
greateſt worldly Empires.
            Amen.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            The Oration of ſir Philip Cauriana,
Knight, pronounced to the moſt Chriſtian Queene Mary de
Medicis, at her departure out of Tuſcane to go into France.
and dedicated to the Queene.
            To the Lady Dutcheſſe of Nemours, the Queenes Gouerneſſe.
            
               IT were a matter moſt abſurd, moſt diſcreet and
famous Princeſſe, to ſuffer this briefe tranſlation,
as it were by hap hazard, to preſent it ſelfe at the
feete of this great Queene, without your fauourable
ſafe conduct. Men might ſay: What preſumptuous
doult is this, that dare thus approach to this
Maieſtie, newly arriued for our tranquillitie, and
as yet ignorant of the manners & faſhions of this Countrie? Is ſhe not
ſufficiently bufied in the receiuing of her deſerued honours, done vnto
her both by great and ſmall, townes and communalties as ſhe goeth?
Is not her name ſufficiently honoured with that high title which the
heauens and her vertue do graunt her? What can this man adde to
her glory, ſauing only his particular vowes of ſmall efficacie? Pardon
me good Lady, and if it pleaſe you to way this my zeale in the ballanc
                  •…
               
of your ſingular wiſedome, and if you finde it ouer light or of bad aſſay,
ſend it to the minte and ſuppreſſe it: but if it hang in equall peyſe, as
we ſay, or that it be too light of ſome few graines, doe it this fauour,
to let it paſſe at how low a price ſo euer you ſhall thinke good. This benefite
ſhall proceed only from your fauour and courtezie: and by this
courſe you ſhall ſtirre vp the gallant ſpirits of France to ſeeke to delight
her with ſome braue and comely conceipt, ſaying: ſithe this man for
ſo ſmall induſtry employed vpon another mans argument was ſo fauonrably
accepted, how much more ſhall we in giuing her Maieſtie a farre
richer gift? yet it is alwayes to be conſidered, that Maieſties do limit
their contentment not after the valew or riches, which they need not,
but as things do delight them. Witneſſe the common example of the
king that accepted the country mans Radiſhes, who was well rewarded:
and the Gentleman who grounding himſelfe vpon the like reaſons,
looked for a farre greater rewarde if he preſented a better thing,
and therevpon preſented his Maieſtie with a goodly horſe and of great
valew: to whom the king, very well conceauing his meaning, gaue in
reward the poore mans Radiſhes which he had deerly paide for. Thus
I beſeech GOD moſt excellent Princeſſe to keepe and preſerue you.
Written in the holy yeare 1600.
            
               Your moſt humble and moſt affectionate ſeruant,
Chappuys.
            
         
         
            
            To the Queene.
            
               TO the end, moſt glorious Queen,
to repreſent vnto you the trueth
of that which was foretould you
by the L. Knight Cauriana, in his
eloquent and gallant diſcourſe
vnto you preſented, at your proſperous
departure out of Tuſcane
to come into this realme, where
through Gods grace you are now reſident: namely,
to your glory, your fame, and your rare vertues, ſhould
heereafter miniſter argument and matter to writers: albeit
my ſelfe be none of the number of thoſe whoſe
Pen may be worthy, yet hath a naturall inſtinct, that
ſhould vrge vs to honour you, made mee the firſt that
ſhould breake this Yce. Howbeit to auoyde the title of
preſumption, in taking more vpon me then I am able to
performe, I haue thought good onely to tranſlate into
this language the ſelfe ſame diſcourſe of Cauriana, to
the end that by this meanes you may the better like of
my zeale, which may miniſter vnto you an entrance to
learne (if alreadye you knowe it not) the language of
your affectionate Frenchmen: beſides that, otherwiſe
I am not able more worthily to celebrate your great
vertues and commendations. The Lorde vouchſafe
long to preſerue you, to the good and quiet of this
eſtate.
            
               Your moſt humble and moſt obedient ſeruant
and ſubiect.
G. CHAPPVYS.
            
         
         
            
            The Oration of S. Philip Cauriana,
Knight: deliuered to the moſt chriſtian Queene
Mary de Medicis, vpon her departure out
of Tuſcane for France.
            
               IS it true, moſt noble Tuſcanes? and is the
time come, that we may with ſighes breath
out, Ele tenebre noſtre altrui fann' Alba? And
our darkeneſſe bréede a cléere morning to
others? That this noble Plant, which we
haue ſo carefully cherriſhed and bred vp,
ſhould vppon the conuenient terme of her
growth, the glorious proppe and piller of our whole hope, be
tranſported into a forreine countrie? ſhall the glorye of our
greatneſſe ſerue to the glory of the greatneſſe of others? Or
ſhall we with drye eyes behould ſo ſorrowfull and wofull a departure?
Is it true, moſt Chriſtian Quéene, that you can abandon
the goodly land of Tuſcane, your natiue countrie, to
paſſe into France? ſhall the riuer Arnus, for ſo many honors
famous, in whoſe armes you haue taken your birth, with her
quiet ſtreame, ſubmit her glory, or giue place to the rauenous
or impeteous courſe of the riuer of Rhoſne, that expecteth you
in thoſe parts? And ſhall the Tuſcane Nimphes, as vnfortunate
Bées, haue ſpent their time in framing and beautifying
your ſpirit with vertue, to the end their labours may ſerue to
delight the taſte of others, through the ſwéetneſſe of your behauiour
and royall countenances? Alas, how grieuous is our
condition! O hard law of Himene, which eſtranging young
and tender Virgins from the houſes of their parents, and from
the ſwéet preſence and cheriſhings of their mothers, dooth oftentimes
lead them as baniſhed perſons into farre countries,
differing from their owne, both in lawes, manners & language.
But procéede and goe moſt noble Quéene, to the place where
the heauens haue appointed. Swéepe bouldly ouer the proud
Tirrene Sea: for Neptune appeaſeth the waues, Aeolus ſuppreſſeth
the windes, Iuno maketh the ayre cléere, and the Skie
adorned with fauourable ſtarres, which promiſe vnto you all

tranquillitie and calmes: and peradueuture enamoured of you,
they all do ſtriue who ſhall ſhew moſt feruent zeale to proſper
your voyage of all men deſired. Go forward as aſſured to receaue
the honors due to your high birth or royall vertues: for
with you do go the graces; modeſtie, wiſdome, chaſtity and
beautie.
            Go foorth to the place where you haue a new empire prouided:
for vertue guideth you, and fame goeth before you, publiſhing
your name, with a fame of eternall remembrance, making
the day memorable, wherein you did abandon Italy to
paſſe into France: go forth mery and glad to the place where euery
man doth expect you with as great zeale and affection, as
euer princeſſe was expected. For out of this famous and royall
marriage euery one dooth hope of a famous iſſue of ſome
inuinſible Heros, with eternall peace, not onely to the gallant
King of France, but alſo to all Europe. The valiant Henry
doth already looke for you, who being the conquerer of ſo much
people, deſireth in perſon to yéeld vp vnto you the glory of his
victories: to you, I ſay, who from all eternitie haue béene deſtined
to be the conquerer of him. Now doth he deſire to behold,
not your portraiture, but euen your ſelfe: and tranſformed into
you, for your ſake and your good hap, to vndertake more glorious
enterpriſes, and to growe greater and more famous then
himſelfe.
            Goe your wayes therefore, and you ſhall be aſſured to beholde
a moſt Noble Kingdome, a moſt fruitefull ſoyle, a moſt
courteous people, a moſt ſtrong and valliant nation, and a
limmitted liberty of all modeſtye. Goe your wayes (I ſaye)
merrilye to the place where they will offer to your name eternall
ſacrifices of haughty and ſingular mindes: and where
life is more lifelike then in any place of the world. There ſhall
you 
                  ••…
               de the Indias for wealth, happy Arabi
                     •…
                  
                for goodneſſe of
ayre, and Arcadia and Olimpus for pleaſures. Oh how greatly
and that iuſtly, will the nimphes of diuers countries enuie
you that were not able to diuert the magnaminious Henry
from your loue; as alſo could not all the fained coūtenances of

flattery, or the continuall ſubtilties practiſed by diuers to hinder
this marriage, that was firſt concluded in heauen, and
afterward approued and admired by men.
            O moſt valiant king, inuincible Prince: you that haue ſo
many yeares moſt gloriouſly béene the burden both of Ciuill
and forraine warres, & ſo fortunatly laboured and ſwet in your
armour: beholde, this is that fayre Nimph whome your famous
poets, repleniſhed with diuine fury, haue of long foretould
to be reſerued in heauen for you, as the recompence, of
your labours, trauailes and heroycall vertues: the ſame who
ſhall quiet your minde: the ſame that in whoſe diſcretions and
fidelitie, you ſhall repoſe your moſt inward and ſecret cogitations:
who being your companion in your kingdome, ſhall alſo
accompany you in your fortunes, adding to your glory a new
luſtre or brightneſſe: who by her fruitfulneſſe ſhall cure the
auncient woundes of your flouriſhing kingdome This is that
beautifull and ritch crowne of felicitie and contentation, that
was to enuiron the royall head, which for a laſt ornament hath
iuſtly deſerued to bee ioyned and referred to both your royall
heads.
            Happye therefore is that ſoyle that hath brought foorth ſo
noble a plant: neither is it any meruaile that others doe enuy
her, ſithe her beauty and grace by vnuſuall meanes doe ſtriue
among them. Bleſſed was that moſt religious and moſt vertuous
Mother, that beautified the worlde with ſo worthye a
daughter: and had the heauens permitted her to ſée that which
at this day we doe beholde, ſhée would moſt willingly haue
departed this life.
            Alſo you the moſt inuincible Heros, or great Lordes of the
Imperiall blond of Auſtrich, that liue moſt happilye in the
Eliſian fields, behoulding the happy offſpring, the yong branch
of your moſt worthy line, who borne and brought vp in Italy, is
going to take poſſeſſion of the French Empire: Behold your
glorie ſhining more eminent then euer heretofore in thrée princes,
in theſe dayes diſcended out of the heauens, as new Angels,
vnto the earth: who by their Empire and conſanguinitie
doe imbrace in manner the whole worlde; the moſt

vertuous Mary, the moſt religious Margaret, and the moſt diſcréet
Iſabel, who raigneth in Flanders, as the other in Spaine.
You glorious & magnimious father, whome the heauens haue
forbidden to ſée your daughter ſo well beloued and made much
off, at her comming to be mariageable, and ſo highly married:
looke downe frō the place where thy vertues haue placed thée,
and beholde this new Quéene, of thy glory and fulneſſe of thy
felicitie: thou ſhalt ſée that in vertue ſhe repreſenteth thy aunceſters,
and in her actions, thy greatneſſe: ſo that by the iuſt
law of nature we do commonly of good ſéede looke to reape good
fruite. Now hath the worlde moſt vertuous Quéene, had ſo
much ſpéech of you, not onely in Italy and Germany, but alſo
in England & Spaine, with equall praiſe and enuie, that your
ſelfe haue béene the continuall ſubiect of all diſcourſes holden
within theſe ten yeares in all Imperiall & royall courts, whenſoeuer
they mentioned any great mariage: neither doth there
euen at this day, any one paſſe the Alpes, that part Italy and
France, but with great meruaile is inquiſitiue, euen among
the common ſort, ſaying: Is it I pray you true, that the Princeſſe
Mary is ſo fayre, as it is ſaide? Is ſhe ſo gracious as the
voice goeth? And is it true that ſhe ſhall be our Quéene? Oh
how happye for vs if this might come to paſſe: ſo ſhould we
thinke the loſſe of our goods and moſt precious things, befallen
vs in theſe our ciuill warres almoſt of fortye yeares continuance,
to be but ſmall, in regarde of the good that we are to hope
for in ſo beautifull, excellent, and reuerent a mariage? and this
only, not a woman, but a goddeſſe, ſhould ſuffice to recouer all
our calamities. This your honourable fame, and this generall
deſire of euery man, runneth ouer the Alpes, euen vnto the vttermoſt
bounds of France: neither is there Painter or Caruer
of Images, but with all induſtrie, as of their Quéene, doe
indeuour to draw your image and portraiture to the perfection
of his ſkill. There is not ſo meane a man, or howſoeuer poore,
but hath it in his houſe: and as in time paſſed the Image of
Auguſtus was worſhipped in priuate houſes, euen ſo it was at
this day. Truly it is a great matter that in the conceipts of infinite
perſons, there ſhould be formed firſt ye Idea of ſome great

matter to come, from the which by like means the iſſue ſhould
be taken: alſo that they cannot poſſibly be drawne frō this firſt
conceipt, vntill the occaſion be fulfilled, which afterward comming
to light, diſcouereth the trueth of the vniuerſall iudgement.
The like hath hapned in you, moſt vertuous Mary, who
being diſcended from kings, grafted and allied to great kings,
and endued with royall conditions, after the troubleſome deceaſe
of King Henry the third, were in the iudgement of all
men marryed to the valient Henry of Bourbon. Such a iudgement,
albeit aſſeſſed by man, was notwithſtanding, the worke
of God & fatall from heauen, who hauing cut off all & ſo great
hinderances, which as the world knoweth, ſéemed inſuperable,
and croſſed your preſent mariage, haue now knit you in an indiſſoluble
knot, to the inuincible king of France. Theſe ſurely
are miracles, workes vnexpected: effects whoſe cauſes are vnknowne
to vs, and teſtimonies that God hath alwayes a care
of kings and Princes. Well may you thinke that neither your
fathers treaſure, neither the nobility of your blood, neither your
great eſtates, which the king néedeth not: but the only fame of
your vertues, of your graces, of your Chriſtian pitty, & of your
beauty, did induce this great king to aſke you in mariage, who
had no want of ſwéete and flattering Syrens, or ſtore of crafty
Cyrces, which in diuers ſorts raiſed loue warres againſt him,
and laid ſiege to ouercome him: yet he firme and conſtant, as a
rocke againſt the billowes and waues of the ſea, would neuer
change, neither will euer alter his minde: much leſſe now,
when hauing ſéene your preſence to ſurpaſſe and excéed the report,
he ſhalbe forced to reſt entangled in your gracious lookes:
& his moſt generous agents, that ſo laboured you for his wife,
ſhall now reuerence you for the chiefeſt and greateſt Quéen in
Chriſtendome, as you are, and be content to ſurrender all their
deſires to your preſent glory. Thus haue the heauens alwaies,
and in time fit and conuenient, béen liberall of their fauours to
a vertuous and innocent Princeſſe. Yéeld therfore perpetuall
praiſe to God, and thanke the wiſdom, and more then fatherly
piety of your vnckle Don Ferdinando the great duke towards
you. Commend the goodneſſe and exemplary life of that great

Chriſtiā rather in déed thē name, out of whoſe mariage yours
was deuided, as out of great things greater are formed. For
in theſe young yeares of your tender age, you were by them
ſo brought vp and trained in vertue & Chriſtian piety, that the
moſt Chriſtian king, mooued and enflamed with the report of
your name, craued you in mariage. Oh happy couple, O moſt
glorious mariages, O memorable coniunction, & moſt glorious
fruits which we expect from you? I do already behold, neither
am I deceiued, a moſt noble line iſſuing from you which ſpredding
the French name ouer the whole world, ſhall plant an other
Gallo-gretia, an other Celtiberi
                     •
                  
                in the fartheſt parts of
the Eaſt: & your ſelues ſhall hencefoorth be a ſufficient ground
for all writers, grauers and Painters to employ themſelues in
their exerciſes. You ſhall miniſter occaſion of ſpéech both publick
& priuate, both in deuoute and ſeculer places, & euery man
ſtill will talke of your actions, of your maners, and of your ieſtures:
yea many times will they ſay: Thus ſaid great Quéen
Mary, Thus did ſhe. Thus ſhall you liue immortall in the
memory of mortall men, with the true titles of honor & glorie,
neither feined nor begged. Go therfore foorth, and continue your
iourney moſt Chriſtian Quéen, proud of the moſt worthy troop
of ſo many Princes, Princeſſes, & moſt noble Kntghts & Gentlemen
that waite vpon you: of ſo many ſoules which accompany
you with their vowes & prayers vnto God for your proſperous
iourney & fruitfulneſſe, but farre more of Angels, into
whoſe tuition our good God hath cōmitted you. And you moſt
happy Tiſi that carrieſt ſo great a Quéene, feare thou neither
tempeſts nor rocks, for with her thou carrieſt her good fortune.
You go into a realme, where ye magnanimous Katherin your
kinſwoman by the father, did ſo gloriouſly commaund almoſt
for the ſpace of forty years, that the name of your moſt famous
family, borne to ſway the greateſt Empires, is holden in very
great accompt. You go to a kingdome eſtabliſhed in a Monarchy,
& at the ſame time in Chriſtianity, almoſt thirtéen hundred
yeares ago. You go to that place where you were expected, deſired,
& adored, before yée were knowne: euen you, whoſe vertues
& religion were heard of before your name. You marie the

moſt gallant warrior that euer drew ſword, who in a long & ſet order
of his predeceſſors of the ſelfe nation & line is the ſixtie & fifth. What
farther portion of humaine felicitie do you want? I do already ſée
all the ſhoares of Prouence couered with people of all ages & kinds,
and of all ſorts, knéeling before you & ſaluting you as their Quéene,
not omitting any token of perfect and inward mirthe & ioy, for your
comming.
            What ſhall we then do, that haue nurſſed and brought you vp?
ſhall we by our ſlackneſſe ſéeme to enuie Prouince, or rather all
France in their ioy? ſhall we diſlike your contentment & glory? oh!
God forbid. Nay rather as in the beginning of my ſpéech I aduiſed
you, moſt vertuous Tuſcan, to haue your recourſe to ſighes & ſobs,
and ſorrowfull lamentations for her departure, ſo now, being come
againe to my ſelfe, & hauing ouercome ſorrow, I thinke it more neceſſary
that we reioyce with her, to whome Italy being but a ſmall
matter, the king of heauen hath giuen the faireſt kingdom, togither
with the mighteſt king Chriſtian to be her ſpouſe & huſband, becauſe
her glory is our glory. Feare not that her far iourney ſhall euer blot
out of her minde the loue that ſhe beareth vs, or ſuppreſſe the memorie
of the ſacrifice of our harrs, which we haue already ſo long ſince
offered vnto her. For ſuch a heauenly ſubſtance as ſhe is, is not ſubiect
to times or alterations, as other mortall creatures are: but being
far diſtant from her countrie, ſhe will reſemble the Sunne, that heateſh
more by reflection and reuerberation, then by the direct beames
therof. And you alſo, moſt noble and beautifull Gentlewomen, ſithe
your ſexe is by this rather deuine then humaine Marye, at this time
mounted ſo high, giue yée thankes vnto God, and ſounding foorth
his glorious name, ſhewe ſome token of your inwarde ioye, and
where your wordes cannot, let it bee ſupplyed by your affections,
mindes, and a reuerend ſilence. Print in your hearts her liuelye
Image; ſéeke to imitate her in her vertues and manners: for in ſo
dooing, you ſhall ſhewe no leſſe ſigne of reuerence and loue towards
her, then if you ſhould continually celebrate her with Hymnes and
prayſes.
            Purpoſely O holy Father Clement the eight, haue I forborne to
ſpeake of you vntill the end of my diſcourſe, to the end my wordes
may remaine the more liuelye printed in the hearts of the Readers.

But what ſhall I ſay of you: for you haue ſhewed that things acbompted
vnpoſſible of man, are ſubiect to your power, wiſdom & felicity.
In a few words you did both begin & end the important war
of Ferrara, and that without bloodſhed. With your weapons & counſaile
you haue fréed the greateſt part of Hungary from the tyrrannie
and oppreſſion of the Turkes, you haue with great dexterity cō
               cluded
and ſetled peace ſo long deſired, & with moſt men almoſt diſpaired
off betwéen the two moſt mighty kings of France & Spaine.
The laſt you haue conioyned in marriage with the moſt religious
Margarit of Auſtrich, & now you are conioyning of this man with
the moſt glorious Mary of Medicis, for frō you grew the beginning,
and without you our endeuours were but vaine, our hopes vaine,
yea they were but dreames & vowes. It was you, yea euen you, that
began this worke, well may we therefore & in truth, name you both in
your thoughts & déeds, moſt fortunate and happy. But O great Ferdinand,
with what full and conuenient reward ſhall all Italy make
you recompence? for among all your royall actions ſince your election
to the Tuſcan Empire, this mariage by you conceited, diſcréetly
aduiſed, handled, and concluded, is their fulneſſe, their glory, & their
perfection, & with ſuch as can diſcerne the nature of the preſent time,
and the courſe of humaine affaires, your greatneſſe ſhall for euer be
eſtéemed the ſafety of Italy, & the preſeruation of the chriſtian commonwealth:
ſo that naming you the father of Italy, they ſhall attribute
vnto you the name & title that to you appertaineth, and withall
cauſe you at all times & with all men, to be holden for a moſt wiſe &
happy Prince, as you are. Procéed therfore moſt innocent and moſt
chriſtian Mary on your iourney, loaden with as great glory as euer
had Princeſſe: & let theſe be your names & titles, Chaſte, Wiſe, Religious
& Happy: and at all times remember the order of the Knights
of S. Stephan, moſt affectionate to your name, fauor them with your
countenance & felicity, as the moſt principall workmanſhip of your
magnanimious grandfather on the father ſide, & now by your moſt
noble Vnckle, brought to ſo high a degrée, that all places vnder the
ſunne are now repleniſhed with the glory of their name: beſides that
you héere ſée them moſt ready to become your faithful ſhelter in this
moſt happy paſſage: neuer diſdaine yt vnfainedly & without flattery,
they haue thought good this day to celebrate your diuine honors.
            FINIS.
         
      
   