
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  
                     ❧Cōmon
places of scripture ordrely
and after a cōpendious forme
of teachyng, set forth with no
litle labour, to the gret profit
and help of all such studentes
in gods worde as haue not
had longe exercyse in the
same, by the ryghte excellent
clerke Erasmus
Sarcerius.
                  Translated in to Englysh
by Rychard
Tauerner.
❧
                  
                  Iohn̄ Byddell.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MOST HYGHE,
and most excellent prynce HENRY
the .VII
                  •
               . by the grace of god kyng
of Englande and of Fraunce, defensor
of the fayth: Lorde of Irlande, and in
erth supreme heed immediatlye vnder
Christ of the churche of Englande,
his most humble subiect & seruaunte
RYCHARDE
TAVERNER wissheth
all felicite
and helthe.
            
               OYuers mortal mē
which either knew
not, or of weyknes
ꝑfectly cōsidred not
Chryst (most drad 
                  •
               
most gracious soueraygne
lord) haue deuerslye
laboured to
seke them immortal
name and memory:
Of which some bicause they could not atteyn
it by their worthy actes, haue sought the same
by vnworthy and most heynous crymes, as
Pausan
                  •
               as, which only to get hym a ꝑpetual
name, slewe the myghty and victorious king
Philip of Macedonia, as also he whiche for
the same intent purposed to haue set on fyre
the most famous tēple of Diana in Ephesus.
Others there haue ben, and at this daye be,
men of excellēt litterature & eloquēce, which

with their pen haue 
                  •
               ought this 
                  •
               gular fame
amonges whome euen they also which haue
most of all dispraysed and sharpely rebuked
in others this ambicion of name, yet to theyr
own workes wherin they haue to vehemēt
                  •
               y
reprehended other, coulde not tempre ne stey
themselues from prefixing their own names.
So impotent a thynge, 
                  •
               o vnquencheable is
this thurst, this desyre or glory.
            Agayne, other some there haue ben, men of
most noble hert & high courage, whiche haue
laboured to win them renowme and 
                  •
               ame, either
by feates of armes, or by prudently counsellyng
& administrating cōmon weales: as
Philip kynge of Macedonie, Alexandre the
great, Themistocles, Phociō, the two Scipions,
Pompey, Iullius Cesar, Lue us Sill
                  •
               ,
Cicero, Lygurgus, with in
                  ••
               ite other.
            Socrates (althoughe he knew not Christ,
yet for his great sanctimony & purenes of life
a m
                  •
               n more worthy to be reputed a
                  •
               aynt thē
many of our 
                  •
               omysh sayntes) being demaunded
by what wayes a mā might wyn an honest
fame, answered: If thou shalt apply thyselfe
to be such one in dede as thou de
                  •••
               est to
be counted, as who sholde saye: wylt thou be
counted a furtherer of iullyce, a good prince,
a good coun
                  •
               e
                  •
               er: Then indeuour thy self to
be such in dede. For vndoubtedly like as the
shadowe foloweth the body, as a cōpaignion
inseparable, euē to doth glory, renowme, and
fame accōpany excelēt veues, worthy gestes,
and noble qualityes, and that so moche the
rather, if the same be vnloked 
                  •
               or. Of whiche

thinge, albeit there want no goodly exemples
euerye where aswell in prophane hystoryes
as in the holye scryptures, yet this one acte of
a woman & that a famous synner shall at this
tyme suffyce. Mary Magdaleyne to whome
bycause she loued moche, was moche forgyuen,
at a souper in whiche Chryste was present,
whyle her syster minystred at the table
before all the gestes, of an excedinge zele and
loue she bare to Chryste annoyted wt a ryght
precyous oyntement his feete, and with the
very heare of her heed dryed them agayne.
Here I dare boldly saye this Magdaleyne
loked for no fame by this facte, yet what answered
Christ to suche as murmured against
her & said, this oyntmēt might haue ben solde
for moche money and giuen to the poore Uerely
(sayth Chryst) I saye vnto you, where so
euer this gospell shal be preached throughout
all the world, this also that she hath done shal
be told for a remembraūce of her.
            But nowe to reflycte my oracyon vnto
your mooste royall maiestie, surely I can not
but be throughly perswaded as well by the
conty
                  •
               uall procedynges, as by the successe
of thynges, that not onely your graces moost
delyberate prouydence, but also the prudente
counsels of certein of your maiesties faythful
counseylours, haue not proceded of any ambiciō
of name, but of a mere zele & ardent loue
towardes the publyque weale, & furtheraūce
o
                  •
                gods sacred trouth. Wherfore where lo euer
throughout the worlde the abolyshment
of the bysshop of Romes vsurped power shal

be bruted or cronicled, there also shal be reaported
the most gloryous actes of Henry the
eyght kynge or Englande, as chefe furderer
and worker of the fame. And sēblably where
so euer his maiesties noble actes shall be bruted
there also shal not be forgotten the memory
of certayne his counsellours, namely of the
lorde Crumwell, so worthye a counselloure
of so worthye a prynce.
            But agayne lyke as renowme foloweth
excellent vertues, so enuye pursueth hygh renowme.
I saye, it is not possible but suche as
haue the gouernaunce of thynges, and be in
great authoritie shal be hated, maligned, enuyed,
euyl spoken of amonges the multitude.
Alexādre the great when it was shewed him
that a certayne lende person had spokē many
delyyteful wordes of him, answered to such
as were aboute hym, Surely I tell you, it is
princely & a thing appropryed to a great and
noble man, that when he hath done well, he
shall be reaported euyll. So erronyous is
the iudgement of the people, so pestyferous
is the enuye of malycious & despytefull persons.
P
                  •
               ocion the Atheniense was a coūsellour
moche more profytable then pleasaunt.
Demosthenes contraryly was rather a pleasaunt
councellour then profytable. This studyed
moch to folow thaffections of ye people
the other egrely resysted the same with his
holsome counsels, when on a tyme they mette
togither, Demosthenes thus greted Phociō.
By the goddes imortal, Phocyon, yf the people
of Athens begyn ones to rage, they wyll

surely kyll the. Trouth, sayde Phocion, they
wyll kyll me in theyr rage, but the will they
kyl, when they come to theyr ryght wyites.
Doubteles (mooste myghtye and redoubted
prince) it can not be dyssembled, but as certeyne
or your graces counseyl be highly praysed,
extolled, and magnityed of many: So
agayne on the contrary part, they be enuyed,
malygned, and hated of others, namelye of
suche as either haue enuye at theyr vocacion,
or be yet styll roted in theyr popyishe superstycion▪
Or these some perchaunce in theyr
turyous rage, wolde desyre theyr deth.
            But agayne the same yf at any tyme they
shall retourne to theyr ryght wyttes, wyl rather
wysshe (as not a fewe alredy haue done)
the contu
                  •
               ion of suche, as haue meynteyned
them in theyr rebellyous suꝑsticiō. I meane
the bysshop of Romes priuy adherentꝭ, who
withoute questyon do hate all thinges that
tend to the aduauncement of gods honour, &
detection of theyr cloked hypocresye.
            But as the lorde of hoostes hathe hythervnto
protected and directed youre excellente
maiestie and certayne of your moost faythfull
counsayllours agaynste the mooste vngodlye
and pestilent conspiracyes of youre
ennemyes in all youre affayres: so I beseche
him in suche wise to poure out his grace vpon
the rest of your graces louynge subiect, as we
all togither with one accorde, tolowynge your
highnes as our heed and myghty shepeherde
maye vtterly vomyt out of vs all papisticall
venym, and hertely at laste imbrase the pure

and syncere verite of gods moost holy worde.
To the illustracyon and settynge forth wherof,
as it is not vnknowen, howe moche your
moost faythfull counseyllour myne olde mayster
and synguler good lorde, my lorde priuy
seale hath conferred and holpen, so of his studyous
procedynges and circumspecte perseueraunce
in the same, this onely thinge sufficiently
declareth, that nowe of late he hathe
impelled me to translate in to Englysshe this
bake of Erasmꝰ Sarcerius, a treasure inestimable
vnto chrysten men, in whiche boke he
hathe so compendiously, so absolutely & frutfully
handeled all the common places of the
chrysten religyon, as neuer afore this tyme
hath ben done of any, namely in suche forme.
            A daungerous pece of worke doubteles,
and full of diffycultie it is, so to handle these
maters as shall in all poyntes satisfie the expectaciō
of the readers, as declareth eloquently
wrytinge to your most redoubted maiestie,
the excellente clerke Philip Melanchthon in
his epystle before his common places, whose
iudgement this Sarcerius foloweth welnere
in all thinges. Onely in this they differ, that
Melanchthon dyrecteth his style to the vnderstandyng
onely of the lerned persons well
exercysed in scriptures. This tempereth his
penne also to the capacitie of yonge student
                  •
               
of scripture and suche as haue not had moche
exercise in the same.
            Nowe it hathe ben an olde prouerbe and
not wtout cause celebrate of all ages. Quot
capita, to
                  •
               sensus, so manye hedes, so many

myttes, I graunte the godly and lerned men
in the pryncipall articles of our faythe do not
varye, but do constauntly synge all one note,
yet neuerthelesse in other dysputable mattiers
(in whiche it is not mete for euery man
to wade) as predestynacyon, contyngencye,
frewyll, & suche lyke, there hathe ben always,
and yet is some dissencion, so that what one
aloweth an other disprayseth, what one disꝑueth,
an other approueth. And yet it can not
be denyed but there is one symple infallible
trouth who so can attayne it.
            The cause of this blindnes is, that sithens
the fall of Adam, at whiche tyme mankynde
was depryued of the similitude of god, vnto
whiche he was fyrste create, mans wytte
hathe ben so darkened and his nature so spotted
and cankred with the originall vice, that
he can not but be wrapped in infinite errours.
Onely god hathe perfecte intellygence, and
is true in his wordes. Omnis autem homo
mendax. There is no man but he lyeth, but he
erreth, but he both disceyueth & is disceyued.
Best is he that erreth leest. Saynt Augustyn
wrote very moche, but agayne he retracted
moche. It is not possyble for one man bothe
to wryte moche, aud to write al thynges true
that shall nede no reprehensyon. In a longe
worke (sayth the poete Horace) a man maye
other whyles lawfully slombre. Neyther do
I speake this bycause I knowe any notable
errour in Sarcerius.
            But forasmoche as the iudgementes of
men be variable, and namely in this kynde

of wrytynge, it is very harde to satisfye all
mens myndes: Therfore if either this excellēt
clerke Erasmus Sarcerius in his writinges,
or I in my translacion shall not throughly
answere is your maiesties and other mens
expectacion: It shal apperteyne to a christian
modestie to interprete all thynges vnto the
best parte.
            As for exemple: It is not vnknowen what
great alteracion hathe lately ben amonges
lerned men concernynge frewyl. Some haue
put frewyll in no thynges, some on the contrary
parte haue gone aboute to meyntayne
frewyll in all thynges. Agayne other goynge
in the meane betwen both these extremes, as
Melanchthou & this Sa
                  •
               cerius, with many
other excellent clerkes, haue denyed frewyl
onely in spiritual mocyons and that also in
such persons as be not yet regenerate and renued
by the holy ghost, & yet in the mean season
they take it not so awaye, but they leue
them also in spirituall mocions a certeyn indeuour
or willing, which indeuour neuerthelesse
can fyni
                  •
               she nothinge, onles it be holpen
by the holy ghost. This (after my pore iudgement)
is the ryghtest and truest waye.
            But now, if accordynge to the varietie of
mans iudgement, the same shall not forthwt
appere to others, set them not incontinuently
damne and gyue sentence of other mens writynges,
but diligently enserche the scripture,
which is the only rule & touche stone, wherewith
we ought to trye the trouthe from the
vntrouth, the pure and syncere doctrine from

the corrupt & hypocriticall. If they shall fynd
any thing ryghter or better then this doctrine
let them louyngly imparte and communicate
their waye vnto vs, yf not, let them vse this
waye with vs.
            But what so euer this boke is (for to your
graces most exacte iudgement I refer it) lyke
as by the īpulsion & cōmaundemēt of my said
old master my iord priuy seale, I haue trāslated
it ī to oue vulgare tong: So his lordship
hath willed me (wher as els I wold not haue
ben so bold) to offre and dedicate the same vnto
your moost noble & redoubted maiestie, to
thintent that where as he dyd lately p̄fer me
vnto your graces seruice in ye office of ye signet
(for what qualities he espied in me I can not
tel) I might at lest testifie & declare vnto your
highnes my prōpt & redye mynde to do your
grace such pore seruice as to my habilite may
extende. And so consequently that this boke
vnder your maiesties protection and patrocinie
may the more plausibly and gredyly be
deuoured of the people, for whose only cause
and edificacion youre hyghnes and suche as
be your moost prudent counsaylers haue prouyded
dyuers holsome bokes to be set forthe
in englysshe.
            In dilatyng of which ryght excedyng and
hygh benefyte with infinyte other wrought
to the inestimable vtilitie of the people, I wil
not further at this present procede, onely I
beseche our lorde, that lyke as your hyghnes
hath hyther vnto with moost prudent, godly
and gracyous meanes, wonderfullye holpen

the state and publyke weale of youre graces
most florishing realme, so your maiestie may
procede, and to thende perceuerin ye same, to
the glory of god, your highnes honour, vnitie
of your subiectes, welthe of your realme, de
               
                  •
               ogaciō
of the bisshop of Romes vsurped power,
reioyse of your welwillers, confusion
of your graces aduersaries. Thus most
myghty, most hygh, and most gracious
soueraygne lord I commit
your hyghnes to the holye
Trinite, to whome be
all honour, prayse,
and glorye for
euermore.
Amen.
            
               DOMINE SALVVM
FAC REGEM.
☜☞
         
      
      
         
            A COMPENDIOVS FORME
of teaching or discipline, declaring the
cōmon & pryncipal places of our chrireligiō,
wonderfull necessary to all
such as be desirous to know gods
trouth, and his sacred worde.
         
            Of God. CAPI. I.
            
               GOD is one certein diuine
being or essencie,What god is. cōsistyng
of thre persons: that is to
wete, god ye father, the son,
and holy ghost.
            This diffinition is approued of holy
scripture,Aprobacion. which by ye name of godheed,
calleth these thre persōs, as more
playnly shall appere in the perticular
intreating of eche person.
            ¶By the determinacion of the coūsell
of Nice.What god is by the coūsell of Nyce. God is one diuyne beinge or
essencie, which both is called, & also is
god, eternal, vnbodily, vnꝓtable, animmense
power, wisdom, goodnes the maker
and preseruer of all thinges, bothe
visible & inuisible, and yet thre persōs
of al one being, & power euerlastinge:
the father, sonne, and holy ghost.
            ¶God is not deuided in ꝑtes,No partes of god. Deut. vi. for there

                  •
               s but one god. Herke, o Israel, (saith ye
scripture) the lord thy god is one lord.

But forasmoch as holy scripture assigneth
diuine essentie to thre, therfore ye
fathers haue found out the name of ꝑson,
to auoyde many errours. Now, by
the name of parson is mēt a substaūce
indiuisible,Of god no cause. vnderstandyng. &c.
            ¶Forasmoche as god hym selfe is the
creatour and maker of all,Rom
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  . xi. d therfore he
hath no cause of his beīg. For as Paul
sayth: who hath giuen vnto him first,
that he myght be recompensed agayn?
So that god (as witnesseth also Gregory)
is onely cause of causes.
            ¶Theffectꝭ & workes of god be these:The effectes of god. Roma. 
                     •
                  . b
to creat & maynteyn yt he hath created.
For the power & diuinite of god (sayth
Paul) is euerlastīg. Now, the power &
diuinite of god to be euerlastynge, is
nought els, but yt god createth gouerneth
& mainteyneth his creatures euer
lastīgly. In hī (as it is said in yt actꝭ) we
liue,Act. 
                     •
                   vii. Psal. cxlv
                     •
                  . we moue, & we haue our being. He
giueth (sayth ye prophet) escā oī carni,
meat to euery creature. Also his effectꝭ
be: To loue his creatures bycause he
maynteyneth thē.Exodi. xx. Roma. ij. Psal. cxlij. To be merciful paciēt,
piteful. To heare his humble suters,
for: Prope est deꝰ inuocātibus eū:
God is at hād to thē y• cal vpō him. To
forgiue sin̄es, for only god by him self

is rightous. To punish sinnes,Nume. xliii. 1. Reg. ii. Deut. xxxii. for he
visiteth ye wickednes of ye fathers vpō
their childrē (as Moses saith) in to the
third & fourth generacion. To bryng
down to the graue, & to fetch vp again.
To kyll & make alyue agayne. These
workꝭ and effectes of god be not casual
or accidental, but naturally appropriate
to god and euerlastyng.
            ¶Cōtrary to god,Contraryes to god. is what so euer is repugnaunt
to him & his nature, as: To
deny wt the Symonians that god made
the world. To graūt with Basilides
that god is a created mynd. To graūt
with Colobarsus & others, yt beside one
true god, there is yet an other furious
god, which is also maker of the world.
To graūt wt the Gnostickes, ye nature
of god to be a substaūce of soules. To
graunt wt the Appellites, yt there is one
god good, and an other bad, made of y•
good. To graūt wt the Anthropomorpihtes,
god to be an ymage of a corruptible
mā. To graūt wt the Manichees
two goddes. To graunt with the Epicurians,
that god regardeth not mēs
maters. To graunt that god knoweth
not some thynges. To bynd god to any
certeyn place. For in ye boke of Deuteronomie
thou shalte rede thus:Deut. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                Vnderstād

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
therfore, & turne in to thy hert
that the lord he is god in heuē aboue, &
in erth beneth. To graunt wt the philosophers,
that god is an element. To
graunt wt some philolophers, that god
had beginning. To graunt y• god any
other way maye be lerned and vnderstand
then by his worde.
         
         
            Of god the father. CA. II.
            GOd the father,What god the 
                     •
                  ather is. is fyrst parson in
Trinite, first cause of our saluacion,
which hath blessed vs with
all maner spiritual blessyng in heuēly
thynges by Christ, & which hath chosē
vs before the foūdacion of the world y•
we shold he holy & withoute blame before
hym, and which hath predestinate
and ordeyned vs to be his chyldren of
adopcion, through Christ Iesu.
            This difinitiō is certein,Probacion. Ephe. i. a. No cause of the father. takē forth
of saint Paules epistle to y• Ephesiās.
            ¶The father hath no former causes,
but is hym selfe the cause of all.
            ¶This affirmeth 
                  •
               . Austin in his boke
Detrinitate & vnitate dei. ca. ij. saying:
the father hath giuē to all yt be, ye cause
of their being,No diuision of the father. & him self hath receyued
the cause of his being of none other.
            ¶God the father is one only person, 
                  •
               
               
not the father, sonne & holy ghost togither,
as certaine heretikes haue taught.Theffectes of the father.
¶The effectes of God the father be after
a worldly maner gathered of the fatherly
affections & circūstaunces whiche
be incident to an erthly father, to thintent
that we mortall men may the better
vnderstande y• workynges & propertyes
of god the father, as, To loue. To
cherysshe his. To haue care of his. To
chasten his, that he may saue them. To
nourysh his. These offycies or workes
of the father be eternal, euē as he is eternal.
More offycies or effectes euerye
where in scripture do appere, where mē
               tion
is made of the louynge kyndenes
towardes man of god the father. And
hervnto maye also be added the workes
a litle afore attributed to god, for ye scripture
calleth ye father by his own ꝓpre
name god. But albeit after thexāple of
an humane father, y• properties of god y•
father be set forth, yet he exercyseth thē
not after mās fassyō, for god was other
wise affected than is mā. A worldly father
may promise his son a thing, & afterward
not fulfyl the same. But god y•
heuēly father deceiueth not, but kepeth
promyse: accordīg to the wordes of Balā
y• prophet where he saith. God is not

as a mā yt be can lye, nor as ye son of mā
y• he cā be chaūged. Also it manye times
chaūceth y• the worldly father regardeth
not his son, but god our spiritual father
can not forget his children.Contraryes or heresies. ¶It is repugnaūt
to this doctrine, To deny god
the father to be y• first cause of oue saluaciō.
To graū
               
                  •
                god the father to haue
had beginning. To graūt wt the Archontikes,
yt the god of the law & of the prophetꝭ
is not ye father of christ To giaūt
with the Sabellians, y• the selfe father
is the son & the holy ghost. Also that ye
father suffred. To graunt with the Metangismonites,
that the son is in the father,
as one vessel in an other: whiche
errour at this day the folysshe annabaptistes
haue renued. To graunt that the
officies or workes of god the father shal
at any tyme cease.
         
         
            Of god the Son. CA. III.
            GOd the son Iesus Christ,what god the sonne is. seconde
parsō in Trinite, is the expresse &
sufficiēt ymage of ye inuisible god
wherin the wyl of god y• father shineth
apparaūtly, & wherin mā as it were ī a
glasse may behold what thīg he ought
to do y• myght please god the father.
            ¶The Christ is ye expresse ymage of ye
father,Probacions of this diffinition. is ꝓued by the epistle to the Habrues

where it is writē thus,Ebre. 
                     〈…〉
                  
                which son
being ye bryghtnes of his glory, & express
ymage of his substaūce. &c. Also that he
is thymage of the iuinsible god, is confyrmed
by S. Paule to the Coll.Coll os. i. e sayng
which is the ymage of ye iu
                  ••
               sible god,
first begottē of al creatures.ii. Cor. iiii. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                Of the shynyng
of the father ī Christ speketh P
                  •
               
where he sayth. For it is god yt cōmaū
               ded
the lyght to shyne out of darknesse,
who hath shyned ī your hertes to gyue
lyght of the knowledge of the glory of
god in the face of Iesu Chryst.i. Pet. ii. d Finally ī
the .j. epis. of S. Pe. Christ is ꝓpowned
vnto vs an exēple whō we shold folow
¶Chryst is the very & the onely son of
god,An other diffinitiō of god the sonne. begottē without beginyng of god
y• father, veray god, not made, but wich
hath ben at ye beginyng, 
                  •
               gal to the father,
ꝓmysed of the father vnto Adā
               braham,
& other holy fathers, to reden
mankynde lost by the fal of the first prētes,
very man, born of the virgin 
                  ••
               
               ry,
which to take away the synꝭ of th
                  •
               
hole worlde suffered, & was crucifyed,
which the thyrd day rose agayn to lyfe
syttīg now on the right hā
               
                  •
                of god the
father. a mediatour for al yt beleue ī him
frōwhens also he shal ons com to iudg
the quycke and deed.
            
               
               ¶Probacions of this diffinicion.
               ¶Thou art my son,Psal. ii. I haue this day begottē
y•. And agayn: I shal be father vnto
him, & he shal be my son. Also in the
gospel.Math. ii. Out of Egypt haue I called my
son. The father also sayd him self. This
is my wel beloued son.Math. iii. Undoubtedlye
Christ is the very son of god (that is to
wete) ye natural son, begotten of the father,
euē as lyght of lyght, but wtout begīnyng,
none otherwise thē wordes are
begotten of thinges.Iohan. i. a As Iohn̄ in the .i.
cha. sayth. And the word was god. Tho
was also cried whā he felt his maisters
sydes.Roma. ix. My god. Moreouer Paul calleth
Christ god.Collos. ii. c And to y• Collossiās he writeth,
y• in him dwelleth all ye fulnes of
yt godhed corporally. But ye shal vnder
stande that Christ is in such wise god &
ye son, as he is not after mans maner begotten,Iohan. i. a
nor as a treasure made. For S.
Iohn̄ in his gospel beginneth thus of y•
second parson, saying. In the beginning
was y• word. &c. whervnto Paul agreeth
in his epistle to y• Philippiās,Philip. ii. where
he writeth: which whan he was egal to
god. 
                     •
                  o here he maketh the son egal wt 
the father. Also Christ saith him self I &
my father be one. Now, to Adā promise
was made of Christ in .gene. iij. To abraham

in .gē. xii. &. xvij. To thother holy
fathers the promises made be spred in
sūdry places of scriptur. The end of the
promyses is the redempciō of mākynde
gen. iij. Ipsum conterer caput tuū,Gene. iii. that
is to say: That sede (meanīg Christ) shal
treade the on thy heed.Gene. xvii In gen. xvij. to
Abraham he sayd: In thy sede al naciōs
shalbe blessed. The occasiō of the redemption
was the dāpnaciō gottē by y• fall
of the fyrst parētes. Of the manhode of
Christ teacheth vs the prophet esay, saying:
Lo a vyrgyn shall conceyue.Esaie. vij. Also ye
epist.Ebre. ij. d to the. Hebr. where it sayth, In all
thīges it became hī to be made like vnto
his brethren, that he might be merciful
The cōmen Crede saith: Borne of yt virgyn
Mary, which proueth also the rest,
how Christ suffered, & was crucyfyed.
Also how he rose ageyn which was for
this only purpose to take away the sinꝭ
of ye hole world. This was long before
ꝓphecyed of esay which saith.Esaie. liii. a But he
was woūded for our wickednes, he was
smyttē for our offēces. And Iohn̄ in his
epi.i. Iohan. ij. d saith for the sinnes of ye hole world.
And lest we shold thinke ye Christe hath
now fully executed his office & hath nothyng
a do, ye shal vnderstād that he sitteth
on yt ryght hād of God ye father making

intercession for vs.Ro
                        •
                     a. viii. f. This testefyeth
S. Paul saying. which also is on ye right
hand of god & which maketh intercessiō
for vs. And at last he shal com at his secōd
cōming to declare him self the son
of god in maiestie yt ye good may be glorified
& the wicked destroyed as witnes
the crede or simbol Apostilique & ye. xxv.
chap. of theuangelist Mathew.
               
                  AS touching creatiō or being,No causes of Christ. Christ
hath no cause for he neither was creted
nor had his begīning of any other, but
was frō ye begīning to gither wt ye father
as S. Iohn̄ writeth.Ioh. ii. a In the beginning
was ye word & ye word was wt god. But
forasmoch as y• scriptur calleth Christ ye
son,After a maner of the father is cause of the son. therfore in respect of ye father to discerne
the ꝑsōs & their officies (after y• vsage
of scriptur) we make ye father cause
of ye son,No diuision. of Chryst. al humane cogitaciō laid away
¶Christ is one, one ꝑson in t
                     •
                  inite made
mā being him self god for our cause not
yt he is two or diuers thinges but is very
god & mā, neither so yt he is seuerally
prest, & kinge, prest in the spirituall kingdome
& king in the kingdom of ye world
but is togither prest & king in the spiritualPsal. 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
kingdom for euermore.
               
                  THE workes or officies of Christe
ought to be gathered of the hole ChristTheffectes or workes of Chryst.
                  
which now sitteth on ye right hād of god
the father very god & mā, the workes of
his māhod, as to eat, drīke, slepe, wake,
& such like, now yt he is glorified be ceased,
neither came christ to y• purpose y• he
shold exercise thē ꝑpetually. But besides
those effectes & workes of the manhode
there be yet other apꝑteyning chefly to
our saluaciō which shal īdure ꝑpetualli
as. To saue the people frō their sinnes.
To take away the sinꝭ of the world / as
Iohn̄ baptist witnesseth saing, beholde
the lābe of god which taketh away ye sinnes
of y• world. To iustify, as y• Apostle
Paul recordeth sayīg. Being thē iustifyed
of faith by Iesu Christ.Roma. v
                        •
                      Esaie. lui. To satisfy for
our sinnes.i. Iohan. j. a To be a mercystocke for our
synꝭ, as Iohn̄ thapostle writeth in his epistle.
To be our mediatour & peax maker,Gala. ii▪
                  
to become ye prest & bisshop for euermore,Timo. ii.
as in the .cix. psalm app
                     •
                  reth.Psul cix. And
y• bycause of intercession as wytnesseth
Paul to the Roma.Roma. viii. saying. which also
maketh intercessiō for vs. Also thapostle
Iohn̄ where he sayth.i. Iohan. ii. Bicause we haue
Christ our spokesmā or aduocate wt the
father. To be king & captayne. To be
lord ouer the people of god Iere.Hiere. xi. Hiere. xv. Eze. xxxii ii. e xv. To
be ye only shepherd & bisshop of his chutche
as ezechiel. did prophecye sayinge I

wyl raise vp vnto them (saith god) one
only shepherd euē my seruaūt Dauid he
shal fede thē & he shalbe their shepherd.By Dauid is vnderstande christ cōming of the stocke of Dauid. Iere. xxiii. b
I the lord wilbe their lord & my seruaūt
Dauid shalbe their prince. To this accordeth
the prophet Ieremy, sayīg. Behold
the time cōmeth (saith the lord) that I
wyl rayse vp the rightous braunche of
Dauid whiche shall rule.i. Pet. i. d And S. Peter
where he saith, ye were as shepe going astray,
but now ye are cōuerted vnto the
shepherd & bysshop of your soules. To
be ye hed of his church.Collos. i
                        •
                     
                   And he is y• heed
saith s. Paul of y• body of ye church.Ephes. i. And
to the Ephes. he saith. And he hath giuē
hī to be hed ouer al vnto ye church. Also
to the Colossiās.Collos ii. d Not obteyning the hed
wherof al the body by iointes & couples
receyuing nourisshmēt & beyng cōpacte
& kny
                     •
                   togither encreseth wt ye increace
of god.i. Pet. ii. To be ye hed corner stone elected
& precious. Ecce pono in Siō lapi
                     •
                  ē. Lo
I put in Ston a stone.Esaie. xxviii. &c. To be the foū
                  daciō
of al saintes as Paul saith. Builded
vpon the foundacion of thapostles
and prophetes.Ephe. ii. These and semblable
effectes or officies of Christe appeare in
holy scriptur, of which many ye bisshop
of Rome doth fōdly & folisshly chalēge
vnto him cōtrary to ye eternal shepherd

ship & bysshoperich of Chryst. But in gatherynge
these officies & propertyes of
Christ, ye must take good hede leest bycause
of his .ij. natures ye chaūce to fall
in errour. For whē we speke of ye officies
& workes of Christ, we speke of the hole
Christ as he now sitteth on the ryghte
hand of god, very god and man.Contraryes or heresyes. ¶Bycause
Chryst Iesu the son of god is one,
for whose cause we be reputed rightous
and do please god. Therfore there haueben
many which by y• instituciō of Sathā,
haue studied to take away, diminish
& plucke from vs this Christ. And al ye
herisyes agaynst Christ do cōsiste for ye
moste part in ye diminisshing & derogatiō
either of ye parson or of ye workes of
Christ as. To graūt wt ye Arrians that
Christ is not naturally god albeit they
graūt ye (word) to be ꝑson. To giūte wt 
Paul Samosatensis yt the word or (as
it is called in greke) Logos,That whiche is verbū, y• is to say worde in the latyn translacion is in Greke (in whiche tonge 
                        •
                     . Iohū wrote his Gospell) logos, which signifyeth indifferently 
                        •
                      worde, and a thoughte of mynde. is not a ꝑsō
but only ye thought or knowlege of ye father
all one wt the father. To graūte wt 
Seruetus that ye (word) was no parson
before it toke mās nature. To graūt wt 
ye Sabellians & priscillanistes ye Christe
is the same yt the father is To graūt wt 
the Donatistes ye Christ ye son is of lesse
power thā ye father. To graunte wt the

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
Metāgismonites y• Christ ye son did 
                     〈◊〉
                  
in to the father as a lesse vessell in to a
greter vessel. To graūt with the Appol
                     •
                  
linaristes, that the flesh of Christe & the
word haue al one substaūce. To graunt
with certeyn Origeniās that Christ is a
creature. To graunt with certeyn other
Origenians that Christ it he be cōpared
with other holy mē is the trouth self but
if he be cōpared to ye father, so is he a lie
or lesing, & that Christ doth so moch differ
from the father as thapostles do frō
Christ. To graūt with the Necians that
the self Christ is father & holy ghost. To
graunt with the Sethians that Christ
is the son of Noye. To graūte with the
Carpocratians ye Iesus was but man &
naturally born of father & mother & receiued
a soule which knew those thīges
that were heuenly. To graūt wt the Symonians
y• Christ did neither come nor
suff
                     •
                  e any thing of the Iewes, but that
one Simō in the time of Tiberius came
to the peoples thinking in the parson of
the son. To graūt with the Ualentiniās
ye Christ sēt of the father brought with
him a spiritual & heuēly body and that
he toke nothing of Mary but passed by
her only as thorow a pipe of a cōdite or
conueyaūce. This heresy one Pelli
                     •
                  ica
                     ••
                  
                  
us at this day hath renewed. To graūt
with the Archontikes y• Christ was not
born of woman neither had any flesh in
dede or dyed or suffred any thing, but y•
be fayned his passion. To graūt with y•
Appellites yt Christ neither brought his
flesh with him from heuen neither toke

                     •
                  t of Mary, but gat it of the elemētes of
the worlde which he rendred again to ye
world ascending againe without flesshe
in to heuē. To graūt with ye Paulines
that Christ was not euer, but yt he toke
his beginning of Mary & that he was
a pure man. To graūt with the Manichees
yt Christ came only to deliuer mēs
soul & not the bodies. And yt Christ was
not in very flesh but shewed to our sēses
a counterfait shape of flesh, & neither dyed
ne rose againe. To graunte with certeyn
heretikes that Christ was alway,
but not alway the son, which name (they
say) he fyrst receyued when he was born.
To graunt with one Marcus yt Christ
not veryly but opinatiuely suffred.Opinatiuely, is to our thynkynge opinion. To
graūt wt certayne olde
                     •
                   heretikes that ye
godhede of Christ suffred whan his flesh
was hanged on the crosse. To graūt wt
ye Seleucians that Christ sitteth not in
flesh at the right hand of god the father
but hath put it of and laid it in the son,

takinge occacion of the ps
                     •
                  lme y• sayth.
In sole pasuit tabeenaculum suum. yt is
he hath put his tabernacle in the son. O
grosse heretikes.The heresye of the papisteꝭ To graūt with some y•
y• hole Christ sitteth not on ye right hād
of god the father. To graūt that the for
said officies of Christ be executed only in
heuē of him, & that the same are to be excercysed
here in erth of the pope, cōtrary
to the place of ye psalm before remēbred.
Tues sacerdos in eternū. Thou art the
prest for euermore, And cōtrary to ye eternall
bisshoprych of Christ. To graunt yt
there is an other mercymaker,The herysie of sayntmen. mediatour
& itercessour for our sinꝭ thē Christ
as they do, which set vp sayntes by workes
ī place of Christ. To say yt Christ only
merited or deserued vnto vs ye first grace
only inclyning vs to loue god, but yt we
be saued by our workes. To saye wt the
Nazereis & diuers other false Apostles yt
the rites & ceremonyes of the olde law
                     •
                  
be necessary to Christen men.
            
         
         
            Of the holy ghost. CA. iiii.
            THe holy ghost is the third persō in
trinitie,what the holy ghost is. verye god, not made nor
created nether begottē, but ꝓcedīg
of the father & son & flowyng from the
father and son togither substancially to
thiutē
               
                  •
                he might leade vs into al trouth

illuminate & ballowe vs to the trouth,
and kepe vs ī ye same, expownyng, declarynge
& glorifienge Chryst, confermyng
the inherytaūce receyued in Chryste for
whiche he is also put as a pledge or ernest
by god the father.
            
               THAT the holy ghost is ye thyrd ꝑsō
in trinitie & veri god,Probecions of this distinition. the places & texces
of scripture folowīg do proue.Mat. xxviii. b In ye gospel
of Mat. Christ cōmaūdeth his disciples
to baptise al nacions ī ye name of ye
father ye son & tholy ghost. This ꝓueth
tholi ghost to be ye thyrd & also a distinct
ꝑson,i. Iohan. v. b. S. Iohā also in his epistle ꝓueth
the same, sayng. The father, son, & holy
ghost these .iij. be one. In Gen.Gene. i. a the fyrst
chap. also is wrytē. that the spirit of the
lorde was born vpō the waters. Itē in
the spal. Cxxxix. whither shall I go frō
thy spirite.Psal. cxxxix. b Iohan. i. e Also in Io. i, And I saw the
spirite of the lord as a doue. Nowe, the
holy gost is therfore god, forasmoch as
he quickneth, halloweth & cōfor
                  •
               eth the
inward myndes which work? cā not be
but appropered to ye godhed. Moreouer
syth scriptur assineth these workꝭ to the
holy ghost it wil haue vs trust suerly to
tholy ghost, yt he both wyll & maye performe
y• same. But to trust, is a worship
ānexed to god onely. The article of our

faith techeth the same, I beleue ī ye holy
ghost. Furthermore were we sayd y• tholi
ghost is not made nether created this
we added for thauoidīge of the name of
creature. Gendred or begottē he is not,
for the scripture vseth the word ofprocedīg,
For tholy ghost is said to procede
of the father & sō
               
                  •
               e, as chryst hym selfe
sayth in the gospel of Io.Iohan. xv. d whē yt coūfortour
cōmeth whome I shal sēd you. &c.
whiche procedeth of my father, he shall
beate wytnesse of me. Loo here ye se yt ye
holy ghost is sent of Chryste & ꝓcedeth
of ye rather, & that the father & the sone
be discerned from tholy ghost. That substācially
tholy ghost floweth of the father
& son is added leest y• sholdest think
tholy ghost is ifetiour to the other two
ꝑsons.saynt Augustyne
                     •
                  
                For as s. Augu. in his .vi. boke dec
                  ••
               ni.
sayth. Tholy gost is sōwhat cōmō
(as moche as it is) to ye father & son, but
this cōmēnesse is cōsubstāciall & coeternall.
The other parte of the diffinicyon
is clere & ꝓued by the .xiii
                  •
               . xv. xvi. chap.
of the euage. Io. where the said work?
& offycies of tholye ghoste be descrybed.
That finally tholy ghost is an etnest or
pledge gyuen vs of god,ii. Cort
                     •
                  . l. Ep
                     •
                  e. i. Roma. viii. b it is red in dyuers
places of Paules apys
                  •
               īes.
            ¶Tholt ghost ī respect of his beīg hath

no cause sith at the begīning he is with
the father and son,No causes of tholy ghostes being. euerlasting god.
But in respect of proceding, the father &
son be in maner as causes. For as before
is shewed, tholy ghost is said to procede
of ye father & therfore somtime in scripture
he is called y• spirite of y• father, as
Christ saith.Iohū. xv. d It is not you that speake
but the spirite of your father. And other
whiles he is said to be ye spirite of y• son
as where thapostle saith.Math. x. c. God hath sēt
y• spirite of his son into your hertes. And
in an other place.Roma. viii. b. He that hath not ye
spirite of Christ, ye same is none of his.
¶Tholy ghost is one,No partes of thoiy ghost. & the third ꝑson
in trinite called by sondry names ī scripture
as in ye psalm,Iohū. ii. c. d & in ye epistle of Iohū
y• is called an vnctiō or an anointīg.Psal. xliui. b I
                  •
               
y• gospel of Iohn̄ a cōfor
                  •
               our.Iohū. x vi. b. Paul calleth
him the ernest of our inheritaunce.Ephe. i. b.
Otherwhiles this word spiritus (in englisshe☞
spirite) is takē very largely,The significations of spiritus. for a
styrring, a mouing natur or power, for
the wind, for lyfe, for mociōs or passiōs
created in mē, as wel good as euyl.Gen. viii. a Iohan. iiii. e Iohū. iiii. c But
ī this place it sinifieth a spritual nature
for as Christ testifyeth god is a spirite.
Theffectes or offices of tholy gost may
be nōbred these
                  •
               
               Tgeffectes of the holy ghost. To leade into al trouth
To cal, to lightē vnto the trouth: This

he worketh by ye word preached.Iohū. xvi. To hallow,
to preserue in trouth. These workynges
appere euery where in scriptur.
To expoūd, to declare,Iohū. xiiii. xv. and .xvi. to gloryfy Christ
To reproue the world of iustice, of syn,
& of iudgement.Iohan. xvi. b Roma. viii. To comfort, wherby he
is called a cōfortour. To confirme the cō
               sciences
vpon the trouth of the word, &
vpon thinheritaūce receyued in Christe.
To endow the church with al maner of
gyftes.i. Corint. xii. Roma. xii. Actes .ii. a. To gyue that we may speake wt
fyered tongues, that is, that mightely &
boldly we may cōfesse ye word. To make
new the hole mynde of man,☞ frō whēce
afterward do procede spirituall frutes
true fayth,Gala. v. true awe of god, charitie and
such like, for ye law can not truly be done
enlesse first ye holy gost be receyued, whō
Christ giueth.☞ To prospere & further the
word preached yt it may spedyly go forward.
And for this cause thapostle wissheth
oftētimes ye holy gost to be giuē to
ye churches.Ro. viii. d. Roma. viii. i. Corin. xii Lu
                     •
                  . xii. To help our infirmities. To
pray for ye weake. To serch ye depthes of
god. To reche what to answere ꝑsecutours.
To be a tokē of ye true liberty & ē
               fraūchemēt
frō the curse of the law accordīg
to Paul yt saith. Where ye spirite
of ye lord is, there is lidertie. Now, tholy
gost is called ye sprite of ye lord bicause ye
               
lorde sendeth & giueth it. Of these workes
or officies of ye holy gost,☞ some tholy
ghost worketh by the worde, & other
some by inwarde operacion wtoute the
worde preached. And albeit ye outward
preaching of the word shal ones cease,
yet such officies of tholy ghost shal not
cease as be euerlasting, like as him self
is euerlasting, & worketh by the euerlasting
& vnperishable word. Moreouer
the holy ghost is come to execute ye said
officies, not of him self, but sent of god
the father, & giuen of Christ the sonne.
Wherfore also tholy ghost can not be
present without Christ.
            
               TO this doctrine, & to the nature of ye
holy ghost is cōtrary:Contraries or heresies. To say, after
thopinion of the Grekes, ye tholy gost
ꝓcedeth not of the father and son ioyntly,
but onely of the father. To graunt
 wt certein Origenians, ye tholy ghost is
a creature. To say wt the Macedoniās
tholy gost is not of the same substaūce
or being, of which god ye father & ye son
is but a creature. To say at this time wt 
Cāpan• yt the holygost is not y• .iij.Campanu
                     •
                  . ꝑson
in Trinite. To holde wt the Noecians
tholy ghost is vnlike to the father. To
graunte with the Donatistes ye tholy
ghost is inferiour to the father & son.

To say wt certeyn heretikes, yt the self
holy gost is not giuē, but only his giftꝭ
which is not tholy ghost owne self. Against
whō disputeth s. Ang.Augstine libro .xv. detrinitate To graūt
 wt certein Anabapti
                  •
               es yt tholy gost is
not a ꝑson of y• trinite, but only a doue
which god myraculously did send ones
or twise.Anabaptistꝭ To graunt wt other Anabaptistes,
tholy ghost is only a power of ye
father & son, & not a god or a parsō of
him self. To say against ye opē text in
the actes of ye apostles,Actes. ii. 
                     •
                   Ioel. i. g. the ꝓmise made
of tholy ghost vnto the apostles, was
first fulfylled in certeyn heretikes named
ye Cataphriges & the Manichees.
To graūt a mā may atteyn to ye knowlege
of the trouth or word wtout tholy
ghost. To graūt y• any mā may continue
in ye trouth which he hath ꝓfessed
 wtout the assistēce of tholy ghost. To
graūt any ꝑson may be borne again in
to a new life & workes alowed of god
 wtout tholy ghost. To graūt wt the folish
papistes,The heresie of papistes. y• the pope is here in erth
the executer of the holy ghost,☞ he to declare
& expound the wil of Christ. To
graūt & defend to the blasphemous reproche
of the holy ghost, yt all papisticall
counsels,O intollerable ātichristꝭ. yea thoughe they be repugnaunt
to the open word & glory of

Chryst haue proceded, & he confyrmed
of the holy ghost.
         
         
            Of predestination. CA. V.
            PRedestinatiō is ye sure p̄ordinaūce
of god,The definition of predestonation. wherby all thingꝭ come to
passe, aswel inwarde, as outward
workꝭ & thoughtꝭ, ī al creatures according
to ye appoyntmēt of his wil.
            
               THIS diffinitiō to be good,probation of the definiciō Ephesi. i. Math. x. c. is ꝓued
by s. Paul, where he saith, god worketh
al thingꝭ according to the coūsel of his
wil. Also our sauiour Christ saith. Are
not .ij. sparows sold for a farthing, &
none of thē falleth on the groūd wtout
your father. To this agreeth Salomō in
his ꝓuerbes saying.Pro. xvi. a. The lord worketh
al thingꝭ for him self, yea & the wicked
also to the euil day. Paul to ye Ephesi.Ephesi. i. b. ii. Timo. 
                     •
                  . c
according to ye pleasure of his wil. Also
to Timothe. Accordīg to his purpose
& grace. But forasmoche as al creatures
hāg of thordinaūce of nature, whiche
god of his fre will hath ordeyned,
therfore all thynges do not folowe ne
come to passe of mere and symple necessitie,
but by the ꝓcesse and course of
nature so of good ordeyned. Yea & also
in mens thoughtes & winges there is a
fre choyse, and therfore synnes do procede

& haue therfore ꝓceded of the free
choyse of mā. But to chintent a mās cō
               science
may be defēded & armed frō despayre,
if we wil wisely speke of predestinacion,
we must fetch our beginnīg
at the gospel, which is an vniuersal ꝓmyse.
And we must euermore haue recourse
to predestinacion of condicion,
wherof we shal speke hereafter, as for
exēple: Yf the children of Israel shall
walke in my cōmaūdementes, they shal
be saued. Yf yu shalt receiue the gospell,
thou shalt be saued.Augustine de p̄destinatiōe capi▪ 
                  
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                Wherfore s. Austin
also agreeth, saying. God did predestinate
man to be obedient vnto him, & to
absteyn frō tas
                  •
               ing of the apple yt was
forbodden him: but yf he wold be disobedient,
to dye. Suche is thende of the
hole predestinacion (as farforth as apperteyneth
to mē) yt we shold know we
be predestinate vpō this cōdicion, yt yf
we receiue ye word, we shal be the children
of god, whom god hath chosen, to
make vs his childrē by adopcion,Ephes. i 
                     •
                  
                as s.
Paul writing to the Ephesians declareth.
And this condicion is proued by
the vniuersal ꝓmyse of y• gospel. Now
ye some of vs be damned, this is bicause
we byleue not 
                  •
               he pospel. Wherfore also
thapostle saith:ii. Timo ii. d Yf a man wil purge

self frō such (meaning wicked doctrines,
for of thē he spake a litle before) he
shal be a vessel sanctified vnto honour,
mete for the lorde, & prepared vnto all
good workes. Also herevnto perteyne
such places of scripture as do promise
an vniuersal grace, wherby a mans cō
               sciēce
ought to lyft it selfe vp agaynst
such assaultes as his reason maketh of
predestinaciō, as this vniuersal ꝓmise.
God willeth all men to be saued.i. Timo. ii. 
                     •
                   Eze. xxxiii. 
                     •
                   Math. xi. d God
willeth not the deth of the sinner, but yt
he turne & do repentaūce. Also: Come
vnto me (sayth Christ) al ye y• labour &
are laden, & I shal refresh you. Undoubtedly
it is an extreme madnes a man to
vexe his mynde wt vnfrutful questions
cōcernīg p̄destinaciō, where as he may
cōfort him self wt the general ꝓmise of
grace, and wt sure tokēs yt he is chosen
to be saued as be these tokens: to giue
credite to the gospel,Tokens of elections. to desire & to receyue
mercy offred by the gospel, to endure
in fayth to the last end. It is gret
foly to doubt whether yu be predestinat
vnto saluacion, when thou hearest the
worde, whan yu bileu
                  •
               st the word, wh
                  ••
               
thou deli
                  •
               est in y• word. It is an other
maner of thing wt the wicked persons,
which can not but be vncerteyn & euer

in doubt, bicause they lacke the worde
which who so euer hath not, must nedꝭ
be vtterly destitute of all solace, yea
such be ꝯstrained to despaire & to think
al euil of p̄destinacion. Wonder it is y•
p̄destinatiō doth so tormēt mēs mindes
sithēs nothing is more certeyn then yt
the same is set forth vnto vs to our cō
               fort,Roma. viii. f.
so yt by pacience & consolacion of
scriptures we might haue hope. And no
doubt if y• most diligeht apostle s. Paul
had wist predestinacion shold haue hindered
the cōfortes of godly persons, he
wold not so oft haue made mencion of
it in his epistles.
            
               BVT forasmoch as some mē receiue
not the gospel, & therfore ꝯsequētly do
perish, it is now to be sene how they deserue
there dānaciō if p̄destinacion taketh
away y• libertie of our wil (as valla
& others haue thought) I se not howUalla.
god can be excused yt he is not causer of
synnes,Augustyne. quest. xxiii. wherfore S. Aug. semeth very
rightly to saye in this wise. It is very
folyshly spokē yt the p̄destinatiō of god
worketh ī al mē, whether it be to good
or to euil, so yt to eyther of thē mē be of
a certeyn necessitie cōpelled, sithens in
the good men a wil is to be vnderstāde
not wtout grace, and in the euill men a

wil is also to be vnderstande without
grace, which wordes of Aug. may thus
be declared. In y• we receyue the good,
bileue the word, & kepe it to thend, this
ꝓcedeth of grace, which prepareth our
wil, which our wil afterward doth bileue
the worde & desireth & receyueth y•
ꝓmise offred by y• worde. On y• ꝯtrary
part, in yt the euil men receyue not yt is
good, nor bileue the word, yea & if they
bileue it, do again forsake it to their dā
               nacion,
this cōmeth of their frewil in
which they stande euil & wicked ꝑsons
forsakē of god, whō god may iustly forsake,
as it shal be sene vnto him.
            
               ¶An other diffinition of predestinatiō
against ye assaultes of reasō subtelly
disputing in mens consciences
vpon predestination.
               PRedestinacion is a sure election by
which god hath elected vs in hī self
afore y• creacion of the world,Another diffinicion. to thend
we might be holy & fautles before him
by charite, to make vs his sōnes thrugh
Iesu Christ in him self, according to y•
pleasure of his wyl.
            
            
               ¶The ꝓbaciō of this diffinition.
               
                  THIS hole diffinitiō is takē forth ofEphe. i. a
                  
Paul. The ꝑson y• choseth is god. And
where as we sayd in hī, & before ye creation
of the world, by this we exclude y•
merites of our workes, as the exemple
of Iacob & Esau brought in of Paule
in his epistle to y• Romayns declareth.
The final cause of predestination,Roma. ix. is
yt we might be holy. &c. by Iesus Christ
which wordes also take away merite.
The cause efficient of predestinacion,
is the pleasure of gods wyl.
               ¶Now, yt predestination is not our defert,The causes of predestinacyon.
& that of it no cause resteth in vs agaynst
the scholemē opēly appereth by
the open places of scripture, as in the
text before remēbred of Paul,Ephe. i. b accordīg
to y• pleasure of his wil. Also in y• late
                     •
                  
epistle to Timo,ii. Timoth. i. 
                        •
                     
                   where he saith, which
hathe saued vs, and called by an holye
vocacion, not accordynge to oure dedes,
but accordynge to his owne purpose
and grace. Furthermore writyng
to the Romayns, he maketh the mercye
of god the cause of election, where
he concludeth sayinge. It lyeth not in
mans wyl or running,Roma. ix. c but in the mercy
of god.S. Augustyn To this agreeth Aug. sayinge.
Elegit deus quos voluit gratuitamīa.
God hath chosen whō he wolde of his
free mercye. Also in an other place he

sayth: Predestinatio est diuine volūtatis
ꝑ gratiā electio. That is, p̄destinaciō
is the electiō of gods wil by grace.
               
                  OF predestination there may be .ij.
partꝭ.The partes of predestinacion. The one is called predestinatiō
of alligacion, & the other predestinatiō
of cōdiciō, according to the diuisiō of
Aug. in his boke of predestinaciō.Predestinacion of alligacion. Alligacion
is the necessite of thingꝭ presēt,
as whē a thing is sene to be present by
gods foresyght, yt same must nedes be,
although it hath no necessite of nature
as yt all men be mortal, it is necessary,
god so prouydyng.Predestinacion of condicion. Predestinatiō of cō
                  dicion,
is: as yf Adam eat of this apple
he shal dye. Yf Israel shal walke in the
way of the lord, & shal kepe his cōmaū
                  demētes,
he shal be saued. If yu recyuest
the gospel & styckest fast thervnto to y•
end of thy life, yu shalt be saued, but if yu
receyuest it not, yu shalt be damned. In
this part of predestinatiō we ought to
comfort our cōsciēce, whē we be vexed
 wt the iudgemēt of reason, contrary to
the vniuersal ꝓmesse of the gospel. But
of these partes we shalll speke more in
the title of cōtingēcie or chaūce, which
chaūce bicause the aūcient fathers of y•
church wold not take away, they seme
to haue inuēted the foresayd partes.
               
                  
                  THE principal effect of p̄destinatiō
is set forth in scripture to be iustificatiō,
which is greatly in y• mater of p̄destinatiō
to be cōsidered,The effectes of predestinacion. yf we couet to
saue our cōsciēce that it be not striken
downe wt the throng of infinite questions.
And thus cōmeth p̄destinatiō to be
estemed by his effect, yf we cōpare it wt 
iustification as wt the final cause. For
god hath chosen vs to iustifie vs, to adopte
vs to his childrē, & to reward vs
 wt the euerlasting kingdom, according
to the saying of Paul in his epistle to
the Ephes.Ephe. i. Also according to y• saying
of Christ him self in y• gospel of Mat.
where he saith: Come ye blessed childrē
of my father,Math. xxv. f inherite ye the kingdom
p̄pared for you frō the beginning of y•
world. Furthermore iustificaciō is the
principal effect or worke of the gospel
but the gospel is a vniuersal promise,
wherfore by the vniuersal ꝓmise must
p̄destinatiō be iudged, & yf we do so, no
occasiō shal any more remayn to vexe
y• mind wt any ꝑticularite. But to make
al thinges y• clerer these argumētes folowing
shal be here ryght necessary to
be reteyned.
               The gospel is a vniuersal ꝓmise.
Ergo iustificaciō (which is theffect therAn argumēt.
                  
of) must nedes be a vniuersal promise.
The former part of my argumēt called
the antecedēt is playne, for ye gospel
is not boūd vnto circūstaūces, yea
& many places of scripture of the vniuersal
promise proue ye same, as ye text
of Christ. Come vnto me al ye that labour
& are laden,Math. xl. d & I will refresh you.
Also the sayinge of Paule. Deus vultoēs
homines saluos fieri.i. Timo. ii. a. God willeth
al men to be saued. The argument holdeth
frō the cause to theffect. An other
argument.
               Iustificacion is vniuersall.An other argument.
               
               Ergo p̄destinacion also (whiche is the
cause of iustificaciō) is vniuersal. This
iustificaciō, which is y• work & theffect
of p̄destinacion hath his sure foūdaciō
in scripture, where so euer mencion is
made of the final cause of our callyng
as ī the place aboue mēcioned of Paul
to the Ephesiās.Ephe. i. Roma. xv. a i. Corin. i b Also to the Romains
whom he hath called, the same he hath
also iustified. Itē in the first epistle to
the Corinth. God is faithful by whom
ye be called in to the feliship of his son
Iesu Christ our lorde. These and semblable
sentences, are circumlocucions
of iustificacion.
               
                  OF iustificacion the worke of p̄destinaciō
                  
procede also other effectes, as to
be assured yt we please god. To knowe
yt we be the sonnes of god. To knowe
that we can not be plucked frō Christ,
for, whō god the father hath gyuen to
his son, no mā can take from him. To
know yt we beglorified, according to y•
saying of Paul, whō he hath iustified,
them also he hath glorified. To know
yt we haue euerlasting lyfe. For to this
effect we be iustified. To know yt we be
gouerned and defended of god. These
and like effectes of predestinacion wel
knowē, it appereth that holy scripture
speke not in vayne of predestination,Predestina
                     
                        •
                     ion well considered is a great solace and comforte to good men. either
to make vs afrayd, or to dryue vs
to dispayre, yea, I dare boldly saye, yf
predestinacion be wt her effectes wel cō
                  sidered
& dryuē in to the herte, there is
nothyng stronger then it to plucke vp
a mās cōscience, but contrarily where
predestinacion nakedly wtout her effectes
is cōsidered by y• iudgement of reason
so ther is nothing more redy to destroy
the conscience, then is predestinacion:
wherfore when we be vexed about
p̄destination, it is our own blame
which do not measure it by the worde
of god, but by reasō of mā which reasō
sithēs euery where it is blīd in maters

of god, why shold it here se any thing?
               
                  THE aficiēt father also of y• church
do cōfirme & ratifie the foresaid effectꝭ
of predestinaciō.S. Austyne. S. Aug. in his boke Debono
ꝑseuerantie, calleth the effecte of
p̄destinacion, the apposition of grace.
Also Oigen vpon the .viij. chap. to the
Romains hath these wordes,Origene. he yt is iustified,
semeth therfore to be iustifyed
bicause he is predestinate.
               Cōtrarye to p̄destinacion.Cōtraries to predestinatiō
                   To graūt
y• predestinaciō is to be iudged of reasō
law, or of our worthynes. To graunt
predestinacion to be particular▪ which
errour disturbeth y• consciēce, maketh
incerteyn y• ꝓmise, ouerwelmeth faith.
To deny the p̄destination of cōdiciō.
To hold wt the scholemē, yt ther is some
cause in vs of p̄destinacion. To say predestination
taketh away tōtingēcie or
chaūce. To hold bicause al thīgꝭ chaūce
by p̄destinaciō, y• god therfore is cause
of syn, frō which errour the graūtyng
of contingencie doth deliuer vs, which
teacheth yt man synneth of his frewyl,
as hereafter more playnly shal be declared.The error of Laur. Ualla.
To graūt wt Ualla & others to be
no libertie of wil, bicause of p̄destination.
To graūt wt the scholemen, yt our
worthines and merites be the cause of

p̄destinacion vnto iustificacion & euerlasting life. To graūt any other final
effect of p̄destinaciō thā iustificacion.
To deny wt the Epicuriās the diuyne
p̄destinaciō,The Epicures. saying, god hath no care of
his thinges created, & forsaketh them.
To disturbe the cōsciēce of man wt the
suꝑsticious inquiry of p̄destinacion.
            
         
         
            Of contingencie or chaunce.
CAPI. VI.
            COntingēcie or chaūce semeth at
the fyrst face to be wiped awaye
of p̄destinacion. Therfore nowe
let vs se how both may be saued. This
shal be yf we graūt to reasonable cratures
some choyse and libertie in suche
thinges as be subiect to the iudgement
of reason
            Cōtingēcie therfore is wherby thinges
created in maters subiect to reason
be now chaūged,what contingencie is. altered & fal ī to these
& those doingꝭ & chaūges, by reason of
the choise & libertie graūted thē of god
at their creacion.
            ¶We say ī maters subiect to reasō lest
ye shold thynke all thynges happen by
chaūce & cōtingently.The profe herof. Of fre choyse rereceyued
in creation which such thīgꝭ
as be creat haue in affayres subiect to y•
               
iudgemēt of reasō, doubteth no mā. For
albeit god maketh & kepeth thīges, forseeth
& determineth thinges yt happē or
chaūce, yet he hath create & made them
reasonable creatures (yt is which be led
 wt fre wil & choyse ī such thinges as be
vnder the iudgemēt of reasō. Al which
thynges shall be more apparaunt whē
we shal begyn to entreate of frewil.
            
               THE cause of chaūce is the fre will
which thinges created take in matersThe cause of chaunce.
subiect to reason, wherfore sith nature
was ordeyned wt the frāke & fre wil of
god, the naturall also necessitie is not
merely & symplely necessary, but for bicause
it was so appoynted & ordeyned.
Also in mens affayres & doinges frewil
is cause of chaūce or cōtingencie. Therfore
synne commeth and hathe come
of the frewyll of the denyl and of mā,
as further shal be declared in the tytle
of synne. And bycause it is a blasphemyng
of god to say god is the causer &
author of synne, therfore contingencie
may not be denyed, to thintent we may
impute to the deuyll and to man that
thynge whiche blasphemously shoulde
elles be imputed and put vpon god. Augustyne
hathe a pretye sayinge where
he saythe.A sayeng of Austyne. Fieri non potest vt per quem

a malis surgitur ꝑ eū in mala decidatur.
That is, it can not be yt by whom
we ryse frō euils, by him we shold fall
downe in to euyls.
            ¶Cōtingencie is not deuided proprely
in to partes,The ꝑtes of contingentie. but yet y• it may be the better
vnderstand, the distinctiō folowīg
is necessary.Necessite absolute. Of necessities some be absolute
or vnchaungeable, as it is necessary
y• god is good, rightous, true, wise
&c. And some necessities be not absolute,
but bicause y• thinges to so folow,
& this is called the necessitie of consequencie,Necessite of consequence.
as: it is necessary yt Ierusalē be
destroyed, it is necessarye yt the kyngdom
of Israel perish, & such like. These
be not of their owne nature necessary,
but after yt they be ones determined &
appointed so to be, then they must nedꝭ
come to passe, or bicause they folow of
some former causes as it is necessary yt
heresies may be, bicause ye deuil hateth
god & the gospel. These of their self nature
(I say) be not necessary, but cōtingēt
and chaunsing. For this cōsequēce
or folowyng, taketh not away y• libertie
of wil.Melāchthon in his cōmon places. But of this mater ye may se
more ī the cōmon places of Philip Melanchthon,
& in his cōmentaryes vpon
the epistle to the Romayns.
            
               
               BVT forasmoch as Aug. semeth to declare
these ꝑtes of cōtingencie or chaū
               sing,August. que
                     ••
                   xxiii. capi. iiii.
I think it good to shew forth his
diuision, who writeth in this wise.
            There be two necessities,Necessite simple. the one simple,
as it is a necessitie yt al men be mortal.
The other of cōdicion,Necessite of condicion. as if a man
know y• one doth walke, it is necessite yt
he walketh. For yt a man assuredly knoweth,
it can be none otherwise then he
knoweth. But this necessitie draweth
not wt it yt simple necessitie. For this necessitie
which I cal of condiciō, is not
made of the ꝓpre nature. But of the putting
to of y• cōdicion. For no necessitie
dryueth him y• walketh wt his wyll, to
walke, although then whē he walketh
it is necessary yt he walketh. Sēblably
if a man se a thyng present through the
prouydence of god, the same is of necessitie,
albeit it hathe no necessitie of nature.
&c.
            
               THE effectꝭ or workes of cōtingēcie
be in thinges subiect to reasō al fre doinges,Theffectes of contingentie▪
               
but yet not wtout the foreknowlege
of god, as to be altred: to be chaū
               ged:
to do this or yt. Thinges creat to
fal in to this or yt chaūce, not of an absosute
necessitie, but bycause they be so
create & or deyned, which neuerthelesse

god maye at his pleasure otherwyse
chaūge, alter, & lede in to other doingꝭ
& actions. But those creatures lefte to
their fre wil may altre thē self do this
or that, & fal in to this or that chaūce &
al this ī thingꝭ subiect to reasō by gods
ꝑmission, but not by gods impulsiō, as
saynt August. sayth.
            Contrary opinions herevnto be.Contraries. To
graūt yt there is no chaunce bicause of
p̄destinatiō. To deny chaūce bicause of
the losse of liberte, which mā fully had
before the fall. To say al thingꝭ be moued
& done of absolute necessitie after y•
opinion of the Stoickes, as the seruaūt
of Zeno was wōt to reason y• mater wt 
his master,☞ yt he ought not to be beaten
bicause by desteny he was cōstrayned
to sin & do amys. To graūt any chaūce
in god, or in ye nature of god. To graūt
that bicause of libertie which is cause
of cōtingēcie, it lyeth in our power to
please god, to byleue in god, & so forth▪
although not wt stādyng a mā to do his
deuour for y• word, to desire & receyue
it after a maner, lieth in his wil, accordyng
to the saying of Paul. Nō est volentis ne
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                currentis, sed miserētis dei.
i. it is not in the power of ye willer nor
of the runner, but of god the shewer of

mercy, where y• apostle yet leueth vnto
vs to wil & to run of which thinge we
shal more copiously intreate in y• tytle
of fre wyl. To set the naturall fate or
desteny against cōtingencie, & therfore
to deny it. For natural desteny (as saith
that ryght excellent man Philip Melanchthon
bringeth not necessite vnto
humane affayres or thynges & it is ꝑticular
& onely to be vnderstande of astrological
desteny.
         
         
            Of creation. CA. VII.
            CReatiō is a makīg by which god
did creat the spirites & al bodilyThe defini
                     ••
                  
                  on of creaciō
               
nature of nought by the word to
p̄serue a susteyn the same.
            
               AS in the very beginnīg of Genesis
ye rede.Probations
                     •
                  
                In ye beginnīg created god heuē
& erth, yt is al creatures. In ye begynnīg
that is to say what time there were no
creatures. Of ye creatiō of spirites testifieth
the ꝓphet,Psal C. iii. a Ebre. i. b. saying yu makest thyne
aūgels spirites, & thy ministers 
                  ••
               ābes
of fyre. Furthermore the spirytes are
thought to be the fyrst creatures according
to the saying of Iob, he is the begynning
of the wayes of god.Iob. xl.
            
            Now, yt by the word al thinges were
create, the begynninge of the gospel of

Iohn̄ declareth where he saith:Iohn̄. i. 
                     •
                  . al thinges
were made by it, & wtout it nothing
was made.Ebre. i. a. Also in the epistle to the Ebrues,
where it is said: by whō he hath
also create the worldes.Psal. xxx. The prophete
Dauid recorded the same, saying: by y•
word of the lord the heuēs were fixed,
and by the spirite of his mouth all the
vertue of thē. And anone after it foloweth:
he sayd, & they were made, he cō
               maunded,
& they were created. These
sayinges also proue yt of nought y• creatures
were create by the word. And by
yt they were create of nought is excluded
any mater to haue ben layd before.
            The last ꝑte of the diffinitiō, which is
to y• sauing & mainteinīg of their natures,Act. xvii. 
                     •
                  
               
is ꝓued first by the place ī the actꝭ
where it is said, by hī we liue, we moue
& haue our being, yt is, in yt we lyue & perish
not, it cōmeth of y• benefite of god.
Also by the ꝓphet.Psal. Ciii. d Oīa a te expectāt vedes
illis escā, that is, they wayt al vpō
the,Psal. xxxv. that yu mayst gyue them meat ī due
season. Itē in an other place, mē & beastes
thou shalt saue lord. These textes
and other lyke, teach yt god kepeth and
maynteyneth his creatures.
            
               GOD the father is cause of creatiō,The causes of creation.
bicause he hath creat, & doth creat. The

word, yt is the son, is the mean wherby
and wt whō al thingꝭ were create & yet
be create,Iohn̄. i. a
                     •
                  
                Iohan witnessynge the same,
all thynges were made by it. The holy
ghost is the halower quyckener of the
creation.
            ¶Creatiō (where of we here speke) of
it self is not deuided in ꝑtes, onles a mā
               Partes.
accordīg to the diuersitie of creatures
wil say ye some creatiō ꝯcerneth spiritꝭ
some humane creatures & reasonable,
other some vnreasonable.
            
               THE propre and pryncypall workes
of creation,Theffectes of creation be to preserue & maynteyne
his creatures, whiche workes I
haue afore declared.
            The mean wherby god maynteyneth
is y• word, by power of which (as to y•
Ebrues it is said) god y• father doth moderate
& bear vp al thīges.Ebru. i. 
                     •
                  
                Right excellētly
& ful wel we be aduertised here of
Philip Melāchthon, yt other workmen
or makers after they haue ons finished
& made their worke,☞ deꝑte & betake the
same to fortune & to the ensuing chaunses,
but god departeth not frō the workes
yt he maketh, but ꝑpetually kepeth
vp & maynteyneth the same, & this keping
vp & mayntenaūce is called y• general
or vniuersal sustentacion.
            
               
Cōtraries to creatiō be. To graūt wt 
Symō Magus the world was creat of
his aungels,Contraries and heresies. but yt he him self is ye high
power, which is god. To graūt wt Saturninꝰ.Saturninus
that the word & also mā was
made of inferiour aungels. To graūt
 wt the Sethiās, that two mē,The sethianꝭ that is to
wete, Cayn & Abel, were first create of
aungels, of whom afterwarde the rest
of mē proceded.Carpocrates To graunt wt Carpocrates,
that there is one principal vertue
in thingꝭ superiour, & that y• world
was creat of aūgels. The same thyng
also taught Cerinthus. To graūt wt the
Ualētiniās that Bythos,Ualētinians that is to say
depenes & silence were firste of all, of
whō came seed, minde, & trouth: of whō
brasted forth the word & life, of whom
was creat mā & the churche.Cerdon. To graūt
 wt Cerdō .ij. goddes, one good, an other
cruel, y• good maker of y• vpper worlde
& the cruell maker of this worlde. To
graūt wt Basilides,Basilides. that the hye god named
Abraxaen, whom he calleth a created
mynde created the worde, of whom
afterwarde ꝓceded prouidēce, vertue
& wysdome, of these were made afterward
principates, potestates & aūgels
and then were made infinite creatiōs
of aungels, of which aūgels were institute

and ordeined thre .C.lxxv. heuens,
and in the lowest heuens be aungelles,
which made this worlde. To graūt wt 
the Manichees fyue elemētes of which
all thinges were gendred,Manichees. and these elemētꝭ
they called by these names, smoke
darkenes, fyre, water, & wynde, in the
smoke they helde opinion that beestes
of two fete were borne, out of whiche
also they affyrme that mē proceded. In
darknes crepynge beestes. In the fyre,
the four foted beastes: in the water the
swymmynge creatures: in the wynde
foules that flye. To graunt with certeyne
philosophers anye mater aforesayd.Philosophers. Epicurians.
To contend with the Epicuriās
that god careth not for the creatures,
which folish opiniō the poete Uirgill
is agaynst,Uergill. settyng forth most elegātly
the contrary & right sentence in the .vj
boke of Eneis, Principio celum ac tertas
campos
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                liquentes. &c. To holde
that the Gentyles and Heythen persōs
knowe not the effectes and workes of
creacyon, that god preserueth, kepeth,
fedeth, nouryssheth, and beareth vp
all thynges,Roma. i. C. contrarye to the apostle
where he sayth, all that myght be knowen
of god, the same is manyfest amō
               ges
them, for god did shew it vnto thē,

so that his īuisible thīges, y• is his euer
lasting power & godhed, are vnderstād
& sene by the workes euen frō the creation
of the worlde.
         
         
            Of creatures. CA. VIII.
            A Creature is y• hole worke of god
aswel of spiritual thingꝭ create
as of other thinges & bodily natures
made to this purpose of god, to
shew yt god is, & not only yt there is god
nakedly, but also y• he is eternal, mighty,
diuine, & wōderful, y• is, which createth,
gouerneth & steyeth al thinges, by
knowlege of which thinges god yt creatour
might be glorified, magnified and
worthely thanked.
            
               ¶Probation of this diffinitiōs.
               
                  GOD created heuē & erth,Gene. i. 
                        •
                     . that is to
say, al creatures both ī heuē & erth. Of
the creaciō of aūgels witnesseth the ꝓphet,Psal. Ciii. Ebre. i. c.
& also the epystle to the Ebrues:
And leest ye shold thynke yt all spirites
were created, I put this word created,
for god is also a spirit, but vncreated.
Now the vse of creatures & wherfore
they serue techeth s. Paul,Roma. i. e saying y• god
shewed vnto the world y• which might
be knowen of him, & is manifest amōgꝭ
thē, so y• his inuisible thīges, that is to

say his eternal power & godhed are vnderstād
& sene by the workes sithēs the
crcatiō of the world. To this agreeth
the boke of wysdom, where it is sayd:S
                        •
                     pi. xiii 
                        •
                     
                  
Uayne are al men whiche haue not the
knowlege of god, as were they y• oute
of the good thingꝭ which are sene haue
not acknowleged him y• is of him selfe
euerlasting, neither taking hede to the
workes y• are made, acknowleged not
the worker of them, & so forth rede the
hole chap. for it setteth forth the vse of
the crea
                     •
                  ures of god very excellently.
But bycause it is not ynough to know
god, therfore we added, that god might
therby be glorified. For thapostle in y•
place before remembred, sheweth yt the
Gētiles knew god, but he accuseth thē
that after they had knowen him, they
wold not glorify him nor rendre louīg
thākes vnto him.what is to glorifye god. Now to glorify god,
is to giue vnto god the glory of a creatour
& gouernour, that is, to think god
not to be ydle, but to haue cure of his
creatures. To giue thākes, is stedfastly
to thinke y• god taketh charge of vs, y•
we take life & other good thīges of his
handes, & furthermore to loke for helt
                     •
                  
& defence of him. Finaly, the .cxlviij. &
cl. psalmes of Dauid, do monisshe vs

what it is to gloryfy god, & to be thā
                  
                     •
                  
                  full
vnto him, after we haue knowen
him by his creatures.
               
                  THE causes of the creatures be,The cau
                        •
                     ers of creatures. god
the father, whiche is the maker. The
worde wherby & wher wt they be creat.
Also wherby they be mainteined, & the
holy ghost the sanctifier & preseruer of
the creatures: Eternitie, power, diuinitie,
& al other thynges, which be appropriate
to god, as goodnes, wisdom
iustice, & so forthe, declare yt god bothe
myght & yet may creat and defend his
creatures.
               Creatures according to the diuersite
& variete of thē be,The particiō of creatures. some spirites, some
reasonable & humane, & other some vnreasonable.
The sp
                     •
                  
                  ̄al or gostly creatures,
which be good as be the aungels
were create to serue & ministre as well
vnto god as men, & therfore the epystle
to y• Ebrues calleth thē seruing or ministratorious
spirites. The rest of creatures
created to the vse of mā, be al subiect
to man for his cause whiche hathe
made them subiect.Roma. i. Gene. i. d. Theffectes of creatures
               
               
                  THE workꝭ & effectꝭ of creatures be
these. To declare there is god y• createth
gouerneth & kepeth all thinges. For yf
we wold fele & serche hī by his creatures,Roma. i.
                  
we shold fynd him, sithēs he is not
far frō euery one of vs, as Paule most
eloquētly declareth ī his preachīg to y•
mē of Athēs.Actes. xvii. 
                        •
                     . To serue for the ꝓfyte of
mā, forasmoche as to the vse of mā all
creatures be creat, but yet only to the
vse of y• faithful,i. timot. iiii. a. according to y• saying
of Paule where he saith yt god created
thē to be receyued wt thākes gyuing of
such as bileue & know the truth, for al
the creatures of god are good. &c. But
the infidels & wicked wtout al right do
vse y• creatures of god, or rather abuse
thē,Ro. viii. d. wherfore also the verye creatures
do feruently wayt when the sonnes of
god shall appere, to thintent they may
be deliuered frō the bondage of corruption
in to the gloryous libertie of the
sōnes of god.ii. Petri. iii. d Also s. Peter in his latter
epistle sayth, we loke for a newe heuen
& a new erth, in whō remayn rightousnesse.
On the cōtrarye parte, scripture
semeth to threten the vngodly, to be reuēged
of the creatures whō they haue
abused,Sapien. v. e. as in y• boke of wysdom is said
that the gelousy of god shall take harnesse,
& shal arme the creature to be auē
                  ged
of the enemyes.Ecc
                        •
                     . xxxix. And Iesus the son
of Syrach sayth. All thinges necessary
for the lyfe of man, are created frome

the beginning: water, fyre, yrō & sal
                     •
                  ,
mele whete and honye, mylke & wyne,
and clothyng. All these thing are created
for the best to the faythful, but to y•
vngodly, shal al these thingꝭ be turned
to their hurt & harme,Ge
                        •
                     e
                        ••
                     s. i. d. To be iubiect to
the rule of man, according to y• worde
of god spokē to Adam & Eue: Dn̄amini
ꝓiscibus maris, that is, haue ye dominiō
ouer y• fisshes of the see. &c. And
according to the saying of Paul.Roma. viii. d The
creature is subdued to vanite not willingly,
but for his cause which subdued
it vnder hope. There may be other
effectes also reckened vp of creatures,
as y• god might be glorified & praysed
by them, & in thē, which effectes be expressed
in the. ii. psalmes aforemencioned.
cxlviij. &. cl. Also yt the self creatures
might glorifye & prayse god. The
fathers cōfyrme these same effectes,Austyn vpon Iohan. as
s. Aug. Of the perpetuite of creatures
(saith he) is vnderstād y• creatour & maker
to be eternal, of the greatnes he is
vnderstād almighty, of y• ordre & disposiciō
wife, of his gouernaūce good.
               Also the same S. Aug. in an other place
saythe.Austin i
                        •
                      lib. supputacionū
                   It is mete y• the creature sholde
praise god his creatour, for to y• same
purpose he hath create him, yt he might

be praised, not nedīg any of our praise
wherfore let the minde loue, the tonge
syng, the hand write. &c.
               CōtraryesContraryesto these. To graūt yt the
hole workmāship of creatures hath alwayes
ben, & began by creation. To deny
yt the spirites, as wel the good aungels
as the bad were create. To denye
god may be knowen by the creatures,
and that he doth creat, gouerne & mainteyn
al thinges. To graūt yt the knowlege
of god of y• creatures suffyseth to
perfection wtout the word. To auaūce
the creatures aboue the creatoure, as
they do which worship saintes, gold &
syluer,Psal. Cxii
                        ••
                      Sapi. xiii. b Baru
                        •
                     . v. a. 
                        •
                     
                   agaynst whom the ꝓphet verye
ernestly speketh, & the boke of wisdom.
Also the prophet Baruch. To abuse y•
creatures after a mās lust vnto vanite
Not to gloryfy god by his creatures &
in his creatures. Not to attend to the
creatures, to thintent yt out of them y•
mayst lerne the goodnes & presence of
god. Not to gyue thankes to god whē
y• doest vse his creatures. To say wt the
Epicuriās yt god regardeth not creatures.
To graut y• the study of natural
philosophy, which stādeh in the knowlege
of natural thīgꝭ is hurtful to christianitie,
which without doubt is not

hurtful, so y• the same be gouerned by y•
doctrine of christianitie.
            
         
         
            Of Aungelles or good spirites.
CA. IX.
            AUngels or good spiritꝭ be seruīg
spiritꝭ of a fyry nature, creat to
y• ministery of god & of y• godly,
to thintēt to serue god & to be assistent
to the godly, & to kepe them.
            
               ¶Profes of this diffinition.
               
                  HE maketh his aūgels spirites & his
ministers flames of fyre,Ebre. l. 
                        •
                     
                   yt is to say of
a firy nature.Psal. c. iii. a. And the aūgels be called
seruing or ministring spirites of theyr
office y• god vseth thē as ministers, but
not but for our cause:gene. xxviii. b So Iacob fleīg
Esau is protected of the aūgels. Also ī
the boke of Exodus the lorde saith: behold
I send myne aūgel before to kepe
the in the way,Exo. xxiii. d. & to bryng the in to the
place which I haue p̄pared, beware of
hī,Iodith. xiii. c & hear his voyce. Also Iudith saith:
the lord liueth, for his aūgel hath kept
me.Math. i. 
                        •
                     . In the gospel of Math thaūgel cō
                  forteth
Ioseph against the offēce of his
mynde cōcernyng the byrth of Christ.
God also vseth the seruyce of aūgels ī
reuēging of synners, an exēple of He
                  
                     •
                  ode,
whom the aūgel of the lorde striketh.

Also in the boke of Iosue,Iosue. v. d
                        •
                     
                   where ye
aungel of the lord appereth wt a naked
swerde drawen in his hand to defende
Israel. He vseth also his aungels in other
ministeries.Luc. i. c Actes. vii. e. The aūgel Gabriel is
sēt vnto Mary. The law (as it is recorded
in the actes) was giuē by thaūgels.
I added in the diffinitiō, to the ministerye
of the godlye, to thintent ye sholde
know yt aungels were create & made to
the vse & seruice of the good & godlye
only, and not of others, as witnesseth
the .xix. psalme of the ꝓphet, in whiche
psalme god promiset
                     •
                   ayde & defence
by his aūgels vnto such as loue his holy
worde. For that psalme cōteyneth y•
prayses & cōmendaciōs of gods word,
promising to the byleuers sauetye and
defence by thexemple of Chryst frome
all euyls.
               
                  THE causes of good aūgels be:The causes of Aungels God
the father, the father & maker of them.
And the worde is the meane wherby &
wherwith thaungels were creat. The
holy ghost is the quyckener and sanctifyer.
That these fell not as other dyd,
they maye thanke the mercye of God.
For in that that god forsoke them not
they were saued and preserued, and
when he forsoke the rest and left them

to theyr free wyll giuen them at theyr
creation, they synned, & so were thrust
downe in to the helles. By reasō wherof
god is not cause of the fall of the
wicked spirites, but theyr own frewil
is in cause, by which they might as easyly
haue chosen the good as the bad.
Now, god may frely forsake, sithēs he
is frāke & fre, to do what his pleasure
is, & no mā can ne ought control hym,
ne prescribe or appoynt him any law.
Shal the worke (sayth s. Paul) say vnto
the workmā,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   why hast y• made me on
this facion? But of these thinges how
the euyll spyrites fell of theyr owne
choyse and wil, shal be hereafttr more
at large spokē.
               
                  GOOD aūgels be of one order.No denision of Aungels Neither
is it to be thought yt there is any p̄
                  rogatiue
or p̄eminēce amōgꝭ thaūgels
as they haue feined, which haue deuided
aūgels in to Hierarchies wtout the opē
worde of god.
               
                  THE workes or effectꝭ of good spirites
be these:Theffectes of Aungels To ministre & do seruice
vnto god, & to execute his cōmiss
                     •
                  ons,
as Nu .xxij. An aūgel is sent of god to
stop Balaams asse,Iudi. xiii. a 
                        ••
                     e. i. c. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . xxxiii. a. whiche cōmaundemēt
he executeth. In y• boke of Iudges
an aūgel is sent to Sampsons mother

for the cōceyuing of Sāpson. In the gospel
of Luke the aūgel Gabriel is sent ī
embassade vnto the virgyn Marye forExo. xxxiiii. a.
the cōceyuīg of Christ. To be ꝓtectour
of the godly, as appereth in thexemple
of Iacob.Gen. xxii. Also in thexēple of Moses, to
whō the lord sayth.☞ And I wil send before
the my angel. To cōfort & encourage
the godly, as ī thexēple of Ge
                     •
                  ō,
in thexēple of Ioseph ye husbād of Mary.Iudi. vi. c. Math. i. d. Dani. iii. c. and vi.
Also in thexēple of the .iij. children,
Ananias, Misael, and Asarias, whiche
were put in to a burning ouen. To forsee
yt the godly be not hurt ne miscary,
by thexēple of christ, ps. xc. Also where
after he had fasted forty dayes the aungels
ministred vnto him.Mat. iiii. 
                        •
                     . Sēblable effectes
yet many be gathered of the office
of aūgels: neither do the fathers & doctours
of ye church dissēt frō these effectes.
Hierom vpō s. Math. wryteth on
this wise.Hiero
                        •
                     
                   The worthines of soules no
doubt, is great, forasmoch as euery one
hath his aūgel appointed vnto him for
his keper euē frō his natiuitie.
               Bernard in his sermon of aūgels:Barnard Let
vs be, sayth he, deuout, let vs be louing
and kynde to so worthy kepers, let vs
loue them agayne. &c.
               Origene in his .lxxj. homel.Origen There is at

hād to euery one of vs, yea euē to ye left
of vs al, which be in the church of god
a good aūgel, the messēger of the lorde
to rule vs, to monish vs, to gouerne vs
which seeth dayly the face of the heuē
                  ly
father for the amedemēt of our dedes
& obteyning of mercy.
               Greg. also saith.Gregorle Euery one of vs haue
one peculier & ꝓpre aungel appoynted
to his custodie, & one other euil aungel
to his exercise.
            
            
               ¶Contraries to good spirites.
               
                  TO graunt wt certeyn heretikes that
the good aūgels made this world, is to
this lerning & to our religiō cōtrarye.
Item to graunt & admit Hierarchies &
p̄lacies of aungels,the .ix. ordres of aungels. be not grounded ī 
                     
                        •
                     criptur whiche they diuid
                     •
                  
besyde gods word, in to aūgels archaū
                  gels,
thrones, dominations, principatꝭ
potestates, cheruhyn, seraphin, & verrues.
Also to holde yt aungels receyue
                     •
                  
not in theyr creation frewil.S. Hierom de
                     
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     io ꝓdigo. Agaynst
whome disputeth S. Hierom, where he
sayth. Solus deus est in quē
                  
                     •
                  peccatum
cadere non potest, that is: Upon only
god synne can not fall. The reste be of
their free choyse, & may be bowed in to
either parties. To affyrme wt the scholasticall
men, that the aungels deserue
now theyr constancy & confirmacion,

as no more to fal in to syn. To deny y•
aūgels vnto as many as haue y• worde
be gyuen to kepe & ministre vnto thē.
            
         
         
            Of euyll spirytes o
                  •
               
Aungels. CA. X.
            EUil aūgels be spiritꝭ which were
fyrst ordeyned & created in veritie
good, whiche of theyr free wyll
swarued from the trouthe to lye in awayt
of al the creatures of god by his
sufferaunce.
            
               THAT euil aūgels be spiritꝭ is testified
euery where in scripture.The profe of the definiciō. Ebru. ī.
which maketh his aūgels spirites & his
ministers flames of fire. For certeynly
the deuils were fyrst created good aū
               gels.Ephe. vi. 
                     •
                  .
Paul also to the Ephe. witnesseth
the same saying: we wrestle not agaīst
flesh & blood, but agaynst rule, against
power, & agaynst worldly rulers of ye
darknes of this worlde, against spūall
wickednes for heuenly thinges. Christ
witnesseth the same, saying yt the deuy
                  •
               
was a māqueller frō the beginning (yt
is to were of his fall) and abode not in
the trouth:Ioh
                     •
                  . viii. 
                     •
                  . wherby it is apparaūt yt he
was set & create in trouth good as the
rest were.
            
               
Cōcerning frewil, yt it was the cause
of the fall of the euill spirites, there is
no question. For god in the libertye of
wil created his creatures.
            
               OF the effectꝭ & workes of deuils we
be sufficiētly taught of Peter where he
saith.1, Petri. v. c. Be sobre & watch for your aduersary
the deuil as a roring lyō walketh
about sekynge whom he maye deuour.
This effect is of the ꝑsons. Of their awaytes
& sleyghtꝭ against al creatures
to hurte the same to the hynderaūce of
mā, we shal nede no far fetched proues.
For ī the place a litle tofore remēbred
of Paul,Ephe. vi. b. the euil spirites be called rulers
of the worlde, ergo they be also rulers
of such thinges as be in the world
which to destroy, to infect, to falsefy &
make troublesome, yt is to make al in a

                  •
               ourly bourly, the deuil hath power to
thintēt he may tempt & lye in awayt of
mē. How be it these effectes of him selfe
he can not do, but by ye suffraūce of god
as appereth by ye wordes of the ꝓphet
Micheas,ii. ꝑa. xviii. d. where he fayneth yt the deuil
sayth, I wil go forth & be a lyenge spiryte
in the mouth of al the ꝓphetes, to
whō the lord sayd: thou shalt disceiue
& p̄uaile.Iob. ii. b. In likewise ī the boke of Iob.
God said to the deuil. Thou hast moued

me against Iob, yt I shold trouble &
vexe him.Iob. i. b Also: Lo (sayth the Lorde)
he is in thy power, but yet stretche not
thy hand vpon his parson.
            
               ¶An other diffinition of the power
of the euyll spirites.
               EUil spirites be rulers powers, lordes
of the worlde, guyders of the
darknes of ye world, spūal mischiefes,
subtelties & fraudes agaīst heuēly thinges.Ephe. vi, 
                        •
                     
                  
I cal thē spiritual mischiefes and
subtelt
                     •
                  es, by reason of ye great excesse
& abundance of mischiefe, fraude, subteltie
& disceyt yt is in them. And the deuyls
be called spūal fraudes, not only
bycause them selues be suche, but also
bycause they exercise and practise such
spiritual engins sleyghtes and fraudes
vpon others.
               
                  THE cause of euil spiritꝭ is their frewil,The causers of euyl spiritꝭ
ī which at ye begīning god created
al aūgels. This frewil bicause it rather
bowed to euil thē to good, caused certein
spiritꝭ first to swarue frō ye trouth
& rightousnes whiche were create and
made ī trouth good. The lerned fathers
of the churche assigne the cause of thaū
                  gels
fall some to pryde, some to enuye,

which vices be theffectes of the wil declined
to euill.
               
                  THE euil spirites can not be deuided
in to ꝑtes,No deuysion of deuyls. or certeyn ordres, albeit that
some of thē for the accustomablenes &
power of hurting seme to be called prī
                  ces:Mar. iii. c.
as Beelzebub in ye euāgel of Mark
is named prince of deuils.
               The effectes operaciōs or workinges
of thē be these: To lye in awayt vpon
the good & godly ꝑsons night & day euē
as the good aūgels cōtinually do kepeTheffectes of euyll spirites
the godly. And this effect is general, of
which those yt folow be especialties, &
in maner meanes by which the euil spirites
lye in await vpō the godly, & stop
the wicked that they can not atteyn to
godlynes. To lye & to tempt and entice
vnto lies, for he is the father of lies, as
Chryst saith:Iohn̄. ii. 
                        •
                     
                   when he speketh a lye, he
speaketh of his owne, bycause he is a
lyer & father therof. So he lyed vnto
our fyrst mother Eue, as appeareth in
Gene .iij. Also Satan (as it is red actes
fyth) tempted Ananias to cause him to
lye vnto the holy ghost. To trouble &
punish the godly, an exemple of Iob &
all the godly. To take away the good
sede, which is the worde of god, out of
the hertes of men, lest they shold bileue

be saued.Luc. viii. b To corrupte and falsefye the
word of god with wicked doctryne, as
in the parable of y• sower of good seed
and of the deuyl which sowe amongesMath. xiii. d
it darnell.i. pet. v. c ii. Cornth. x. To allege and cite scriptures
crokedly & peruersly, as Math .iiij.
where as ye deuil alleged a place out of
y• .xc. psalme. To seke busyly whō to deuoure.
To transfygure hym selfe in to
the aungel of lyght to thintent to disceyue,Luc. xxii. 
                        •
                     
                  
that is vnder the cloke of deuotion
to styrre men to vngodlynes. To
sift the godly as mē sift whete, accordynge
to that: Lo Satan hath sought
you to syft you as men syft where, but
I haue prayed for the. To rule and to
drawe the wicked at their pleasure to
all euyls,Ephe. vi. 
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   accordyng to that of Paule.
The deuyll is stronge in the vnfaythfull.
To replenysh the worlde with al
euils, settyng all thinges in a rore. For
this cause Paul calleth euil spirites rulers
of the worlde. To promise and to
gyue all maner of promocyons, that
the worlde myght be kept stil in blyndnesse
and wyckednesse,Math. iiii. 
                        •
                     . for all the kingdomes
of the worlde and glorye of the
same the deuill bosteth to be in his power,
accordyng to this: All these thinges
I wyll gyue the, yf thou wylt fall

downe & worship me. Now he that wil
giue, he sheweth yt he hath to gyue. To
cōfirme ye vngodly ī their vngodlynes
 wt singnes & wōders which he sheweth by
his subiectes & lymmes the false ꝓphetes,
as appereth. Mat .xxiiij. And by enchaūters,
as in Exo. the .iiij. & .v. chap.
is declared, wherfore also it is not impossible
yt the deuyl may by art magyk
worke many thynges. For yf wytchecraftes,
sorceryes and enchaūtmentes
were not made, or coulde not be doone,
Moyses wold not haue forbidden thē.
Neither is it any hard thing to enchaū
                  ters
to make theyr workes of effīcacie
& strength, sith Sathā (as sayth Paul)
is stronge in the vnfaythfull, whiche
where as he vttereth in the false ꝓphetes
sygnes & wonders. Why is not he
of power to do the same in iugglers cō
                  iurers,
sothsayers, enchaūters, & suche
lyke.i. regum. 28. b. It is red in scripture, how a womā
yt was an enchaūtres, raised vp the
spirite of Samuel by her wytchcraft,
or rather the deuil in the likenes of Samuel,
to enfect & disturbe the creatures
for the hatred & enuy of man, therfore
he is the lorde of the vniuersal world,
& therfore he hath in his power al thinges
of the worlde. But as I sayd these

effectes of euyl spirites be not of force
onlesse god suffreth thē. But why god
suffreth Satan to haue so great power
the causes be knowē to god, which neuerthelesse
be also in seriptures in sundry
places disclosed. Remedies agaīst
the effectes of euil spirites vnto ye godly
p̄scribeth the apostle to the Eph. the
sixt chap. Also Peter in his first epistle
cap. v. The worlde, bycause it neyther
regardeth nor hathe these remedyes,
therfore it can not resist these soresaid
effectes.
            
            
               ¶The myndes of the fathers concerning
the effectes of euil spirites.
               
                  AVG. saith:Austyne in sermonibus. al the euils of ye world
be cōmitted by the falsehod of the deuil
which hath set war in heuē, in paradise
disceit, hatred amōgꝭ our first brethrē
& in al our warkes hath sowē darnels.
Grego.Gregor. lib. ii. moralium. wryteth. The wil of Sathan is
alway wicked, but his power is neuer
vnrightous, for of him self he hath his
wil, but his power he hath of god.
I thought it good also to adde the saying
of Lactātius,Lactāciꝰ .li .v. diu
                        ••
                     usti. which writeth ī this
wyse. There is a certeyn wicked & disceytful
spirite, which is the enemye of
man, & foo of iustice, this spirite lyeth

in awaye of all mankynde. And those y•
know not god, he entangleth in errou
                     •
                  
in foly drowneth, in darknesse ouershadoweth.
&c.
            
            
               ¶The contraries of euil spirites.
               
                  TO graūt the euil spiritꝭ were crea
                     •
                  
in malice as they be now, agaīst which
heresye disputed s. Aug. very lernedly.Aust. sup. gen.
To hold yt the euil spirites are not to be
blamed yt they fell, bicause they coulde
none otherwise do wtout grace. To hold
yt the wicked spiritꝭ did fal, not of their
owne ꝓpre wil, but at the enforcement
of god.A folyshe opynyon. Zo make orders amōges ye euil
spirites. To driue the euill spirites or
theyr habitacion to Island or to ye further
borders of Norwey, about which
certeyn trifelers hold opiniō yt the sou
                  
                     •
                  es
of great men fleing to helward, be
herd weping & lamēting, which opiniō
semeth to haue ꝓceded by th
                     •
                  ccasiō of
certeyn hylles, which in those parties
oftentymes do cast forth brymstone &
otherwhiles flakes of fyre. To dispute
supersticiously of the habitacion of euyll
spirites, or not by the worde of
god,ii. pe. ii. 
                        •
                     
                   which calleth it Tatarus or hell,
according to ye of s. Peter. For yf god
spared not the aūgels y• finned, but cast
thē downe in to Tartare or hell, & deliuered

thē to chaines of darknes to be
kept vnto iudgemēt. &c. To affyrme of
trouth yt there be certeyn p̄lacies & preeminēcies
amōges the euil spirites, so yt
one sholde rule in one ꝓuince, an other
in one man, the thyrd in two or .iij. To
hold for an vndoubted trouth yt those euil
spirites which ons be vaynquisshed
of any of ye saītes do no more approche
to him y• hath ouercome thē. To graūt
yt no mo men in nōbre shal be saued, thē
as many as there were aungels ye dyd
perysshe, of which errour some accuse
Austin. To graūt yt the euil spirites shal
in tyme cōming be saued, which is Origens
errour, and at this day is renued
of the Anabaptistes by auctorite of the
cii. psalme, where it is red. The lorde
wyl not kepe his anger for euer. To deny
yt the euil spirites do togither lye ī a
wayt of al the creatures of god. To deny
ye withcraft is of any strength by y•
power of the de
                     •
                  yll.
            
         
         
            Of man. CA. XI.
            
               MAN after aūgels is of al creatures
most noble,The descriptiō of man. created ī fre wil
to thymage of god, yt is to wete,
partaker of the diuyne nature, wyse,

iust, good, true, & so forth, which by sinning
of his fre wil again lost all those
thīgꝭ, made of a ꝑtaker of ye godly nature,
ꝑtaker of the deuellish nature, of
wise vnwise, of rightous vnrightous,
of good euil, of true a lier, & to be short
such as vtterly vnderstādeth no more ī
thīgꝭ apꝑteinīg to god, so yt now mā is
the creature, yea the very bondmā of y•
deuil, who thorow gods suffrāce or for
sakīg inforceth him at his lust to what
euils he will, & also continueth suche a
bondmā & thral, onlesse he be deliuered
by Chryst, in whome the ryghtousnesse
lost returneth agayne to our helth and
saluacion.
            
               MAN is ye noblest creature after aū
               gels,The proues.
for yt he is endowed wt reasō. That
mā was creat in frewil can not be denied,
as shal appere ī yt place of frewil.
To the ymage of god yt mā was create
is witnessed in the boke of Gen.Gen. i. d And yt
by y• ymage of god is signified the nature
of god, yt is to wete, rightousnes,
goodnes, wisdom, trouth & such lyke y•
place of Paul to the Collos.Collo. iii. b. declareth.
Lye not (sayth s. Paul) one to an other,
now yt ye haue put of the old mā wt his
workꝭ & haue put on the new, which is
renued in knowlege after y• ymage of

him yt made him. And to this sense Ambrose
& Ireneus do interp̄te ymage. But
again, y• mā by sinning of his owne fre
wil, lost again the ymage of god is sufficiētly
declared by the .xlviij. psalme
of Dauid where it is said.Psal. 48. 
                     •
                  
                whē mā was
ī honour, he vnderstode not he was made
like to a brute beest, as who sholde saye
mā in y• stede of the nature of god was
made ꝑtaker of y• deuils nature, īstede
of rightous vnrightous, which of him
self vnderstādeth nothīg any more ī spiritul
thīgꝭ, according to the saying of
Paul. A natural witted mā ꝑceiueth not
such thīgꝭ as belong to ye spirite. The
ꝓphet calleth honour ye very ymage of
god, whervnto man was created, & all
those good thīgꝭ which be apꝓpred to
y• nature of god. He calleth him a brute
beest now y• he is spoiled of y• ymage of
god & of al those good thīgꝭ apꝑteinīg
to y• nature of god. That mā is ye thrall
of the deuill s. Iohn̄ sheweth where he
sayth: he yt cōmitteth syn is the seruant
of Sathan, which is the father and authour
of syn. Also thapostle saith. The
deuil is strong in the vnfaythfull, that
is in natural men, & vndoubtedly such
be al men whiche be not yet borne agayne
neither enfraūchesed by Chryst.

The deuil draweth mē as his own propre
slaues vnto al maner of noughtines
yt him lusteth not only ꝑforce & violētly,
but as his own ꝓpre louing childrē
which do study & endeuour thē selfe to
obey the desires of their father, as witnesseth
Christ him self, saying.Iohn̄. viii. 
                     •
                  
                Ye be of
your father the deuil, & ye wil obey the
desires of your father. The rest be apparaūt
ynough by the wordes of Paul
to the Rom. which saith:Roma. v. d. Lykewise as
by the syn of one, cōdemnatiō came on
all men, euē so by the iustifieng of one,
cōmeth ye rightousnesse yt bringeth life
vpō al mē. Finally I added this clause
(to our helth) in the diffinition, to disproue
thopinion of the Anabaptistes,
which say, yt by Christ mē haue so recouered
the ryghtousnes yt was lost, that
they now may of them selues satisfie y•
law for theyr syn, with a perfyte rightousnesse.
            
               THE causer of mā is god which created
hī of the mould of ye erth. Gene. i.The cause of man. The partes of man.
            
            
               MAN by reason of ye fal of our fore
father Adā, is diuided after the lerning
of christe mē, in to y• old mā & the new.
There is also an other diuision of the
hole man right necessary where scripture
ꝑteth hī in to the spirite, the soule

& the body. The spirite is which speaketh
to god, which catcheth the worde
of god & faith. The soul is wherby we
liue, & by which our body is quickned.
The body is y• outward & hole lomp of
mēbres. Of this ꝑticion maketh mēciō
thapostle to the Thessal. saying.i. thessa. v. d The
very god of peax sāctify you holly, and
your hole spirite, soule & body be kepte
taulties vnto the cōming of our lorde
Iesu Christ.
         
         
            Of the old man. CA. XII.
            
               THE olde mā is yt hole fleshly mā
by y• fal of Adam lost & dāned before
y• knowlege of y• gospel or of
Christ, & before regeneratiō made by y•
word thorow tholy gost, which old mā
is dayly corrupted, accordynge to the
concupyscences of erroure vnto all
noughtynes.
            
               ¶The ꝓbatiō of this diffinitiō.
               
                  FORASMOCH as y• scripture
byddeth vs put on a new man, whiche
according to thymage & likenes of god
must be created in ryghtousnesse, holynesse
& trouthe. And also wylleth vs to
be renewed by tholy ghost which thing
can not be doone,Ephes. iiii. 
                        •
                      Collo. iii. 
                        •
                     
                   but by the worde
and faythe in Chryste, whiche afterward

graūteth the holy gost. Therfore
of necessitie there is an old mā, neither
cā he be made new but by ye word knowen
of Christ & by fayth in Christe, in
whō is restored the losse & dānatiō of y•
old mā.R. v. d The corruptiō according to the
cōcupiscēce of errour is the general effect
of the old mā put sithēs the fall in
mās nature, which declareth yt the old
mā can do none other thing then lust after
errours & all euils. By theffect of cō
                  cupiscēce
or lust is marked & signified
the vyce that cleueth in nature,Gene, vi. 
                        •
                     . for the
hole thought of man is bent vnto euill
at all times.
               
                  THE cause of y• old mā is Satā,causes of the olde man by
whose ꝑswasion & entisemēt ye first mā
was made old, & al we were in hī made
olde, as testifieth s. Paul in the .v. chap.
to the Rom. This Sathan ruleth & leadeth
the olde mā as his own ꝓpre thral
& captiue vnto al euils. Wherfore also
we pray that the kyngdom of god may
come vnto vs and that we may be deliuered
from the raygne or tyranny rather
of the deuyll, in which all olde mē
be subiecte vnder the tyraunt Sathan.
The cause also of the olde man, is the
free wyll of man, by whiche the fyrst
man ranne hedlynge in to synne wherof

all we be made ꝑtakers yea although
we haue not synned to the similitude of
the trangression of Adam, so that nowe
no free wyll in maner remayneth vnto
vs to take & do such thinges as be good
and spirituall the deuyll so holdeth captyue
our nature and inforceth vs to sun
drye sinnes yea and such as be outward
& notoryous crimes. Of which thing also
thapostle cōplayneth where he saith.
Euyl that I wyl not do, but good that
I wolde do, that I do not.Roma. vii. 
                        •
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ¶The partes.
               ¶When we speake of the olde mā we
vnderstād not certaine partes onely of
mā as some which by the name of olde
mā vnderstand only the oldnes of flesh.
But the old man signifieth here y• hole
naturall man & all the natural powers
of mā. So scripture taketh the old man
& so vseth Paul the name of olde mā, as
to y• Corinchiās where he saith. The natural
witted man receyue not thīges of
the spirite. This man scripture otherwhiles
calleth the outward man other
whyles the erthely otherwhyles y• olde
man.
               
                  THE effectes of y• olde mā be of two
sortes.The effectes of thold man Some do spring of the corrupt nature
according to the inward lustes and

these be inward effectes. Other some be
the frutes of the inwarde effecttes of y•
olde man, & these be the outwarde. For
he that hath a wicked hert can not wāt
outwarde sinnes. For where the causes
be there must nedes folow the effectes.
Now,Eph. 4, d & 
                        •
                     
                   the inwarde effectes of the olde
man be these. To be corrupted accordīg
to the concupiscence of erroure. This effect
is generall or the cause of the test ensuing.
And this effect sticketh in nature.
Naturally to be ignoraunt of god. Not
to feare god, To dispise god. Not to
trust in god. To hate the iudgement of
god. To flee the rightfull iudgement of
god. To be angry with god. To despaire
of grace. To haue confidence in thinges
present. To haue a croked harte and bēt
to myschiefes. gen. vi. &. viii. To haue
a croked and vnsearchable hert as witnesseth
the prophete Hieremy sayingeHieremi. 27.
Croked is the hart of man & who shall
searche it?1. Corith. 2 d Not to perceyue the thinges
that be of the spieite of god accordinge
to Paules sayinge. The naturall man
perceyueth not those thinges that be of
the spirite of god. To sauer of erthlye
thinges accordinge to that of S. Paul
The first man of erth, erthlye. These effectes
sticke in the hert of mā naturally.

The outwarde effectes of the olde man
be the outward workes or frutes of the
corrupt nature and wicked minde. A rablement
of them Paul heapeth vp in y•
first chap. to y• Romaynes, after he ones
had rebuked them for their vngodlynes
be gathereth the frutes of vngodlynes
as these, vnrightousnes, horedome, adultetie,
wickednes, couetousnes, maliciousnes,
enuy and so forthe.
            
            
               ¶Of the new man.
               THe newe man is whome the holy
gost regēoreth by the worde & faith
vnto trghtousnes holynes and trouthe.
            
            
               ¶Probacions of this diffinicion.
               The holy gost to be a regeneratour witnessith
Paul, sayīg.Tit. 3. 
                        •
                     
                   But accordīg to his
mercy he hath saued vs by ye hath of regeneraciō
& renuing of tholy ghost. The
word is ye mean wherby tholy gost renueth.
For then we be renued & regenerate
when we here y• word, so of y• word sprī
                  geth
fayth, by faythe we take holde of
Christ y• reparer of ye true ryghtousnes
which giueth tholy gost, he burneth vp ī
vs ye olde vices of ye olde man, as these, ye
ignoraunce of god, ye dispising of god, ye
distrust of god, & semblable, & createth in
vs new mocions, as the knowlege of
god, awe of god, trust in god, & so 
                     •
                  orth.

Such vertues or good workes the apostle
nameth the frutes of the spirite,Galle. 5. a by
reason of tholy ghost or spirite the worker
of them. An all these trutes be comprised
of the saide apostle vnder these
thre names, rightousnes,Ephe. 4. 
                        •
                     . holynes, and
trouth. For vnto these vertues we be regenerate
yt we might receyue in Christe
the lost rightousnes, and myght worke
holy and true workes, and not hipocriti
call or feyned.
               
                  THE cause of the new mā is tholye
ghost as affirmeth Paul,The cause of the new man whiche saith yt
by ye renuing of tholy ghost we were saued.
&c. The meanes of regeneracion the
scripture putteth to be the word & faith,Tit. z. 
                        •
                     
                  
y• word as cause, & faith as theffecte, For
faith (saith Paul) is by hearīg,Roma. 10 d bearīg, by
ye word of god. Baptime is a signe of y•
inwarde renuing, and of gods will towardes
vs y• we be new men. Of these
causes ꝓperly speaketh the gospell, in
which the holy ghost is promised / fayth
requyred & baptisme e instituted.
               
                  EVEN as the olde man signifieth ye
hole mā, so also the new mā is taken for
him that is holye regenerate and renued.Partes.
But how this thing is done we shall
bere after declare in the effectes.
               ¶Theffectes of the new man be gathered

by the cōtrary of the effectes of the
olde man.Theffectes of the new man as: To know god. To magnifye
god. To loue god. To trust in god.
To put y• hole trust & hope in god, Furthermore
as the effectes of the olde mā
be of two sortes, so also be ye effectes of
the new man of two sortes that is to
wete, inwarde effectes whiche be of the
mynd, & outward, which be of outward
good workes, Now, ye effectes of ye newe
men differ frō the effectes of hipocrites.
countertayting regeneracion or renuing
in asmoch as they be truely done and of
a pure herte as Paul writeh to Timothe,1. timoth. 1. b
where he sayth. The ende of the cō
                  maundement
is charite oute of a pure
herte and good conscience and faith not
fayned. For this cause also the workes
of new men be called the frutes of the
spirite, both bicause that the spirite worketh
them, and bycause they be done spiritually,
that is to saye, truely with a
willing and consēting mynd. And heape
of workes of a new mā thou shalt finde
in the epistle of Paul to the Galathiās
the .v. chapter. Howbeit the foresaid effectes
do not so returne againe by regeneracion
or new byrth which is made by
y• holy ghost but yt they alway remayne
entangled wt a wonderfull weaknesse

which new byrth neuertheles beīg thus
impe
                     ••
                  te & weake god taketh in good
parte in suche persons as be receiued in
Christ acordinge to the sainge of Paule
There is no condempnacion now vntoRoma. viii. a.
them which walke in Christ, Also, ye be
not vnder the law, but vnder grace, that
is to saye, albeit yt fulfyll not the law,
yet it accuseth not you bicause ye be the
sonnes of god.
            
            
               ¶Contraryes to the hole man.
               ¶Contearyes to this right doctrine concerninge
mā be these: To graūt with certaine
heretikes that man alwayes hath
ben,Thopinō of the anabaptistes & yt he was not created. To graunt
with the Anabaptistes, that mā did not
vtterly in the fall lose the nature of god
but onely that it was darkened, lyke as
the flame of fyre is wont to lye hide in
ye asshes, or as syluer i8 hid in the drosses.
But that in Christ it is come againe
with such persecucion that a man maye
nowe allege and plede his rightousnes
against the wrath of god for sinnes. To
affyrme with Saturninus that man
was create of aungels. To graunt that
the olde man can do ought of him selfe
in thinges of god. To holde that tholde
man can worke any good thing that cā
please god contrarye to the sayinge of

Paul. What so euer is not of faith, is
sinne. To denye that the olde man is y•
seruaūt and slaue of Sathan againste
that place. The deuyll worketh in the
vnfaithful. To saye that the flesh onely
of man now after the fal vnderstandeth
not god, trusteth not to god, & so forthe.
but the soule or minde of it selfe maye,
although it be not born a new. To hold
that a man maye be borne agayne newe
without preaching of the worde, wtout
faith, & without tholy ghost. To graunt
that the new man receyued in Christe a
part of rightousnes, yt is to wete, a generall
rightousnes, but that he maye be saued,
he nedeth olso a speciall rightousnes
whiche is gotten by good workes.
To graūt that the new man receyueth
suche a free choyse and election in the renuing,
that of his free and franke wyll
be may satisfy the law concerning rightousnes
which may suffice before god.
            
         
         
            Of free wyll. CA. xiii.
            FRe wil, by the way of teachīg,A diuision of fre wyll may
be thus deuided into fre wyl before
the fall or free wyl ꝓfite, & into fre
wyl after the fal or impertite. And this
also is of two sortes, y• one in spirituall
thīges, the other in outward thīges subiect

to reason.
            
               ¶Of free will before the fall.
               ¶Fre wil befor
                     •
                   y• fal was a ful liberte
to inbrase aswel good thinges as badde
to kepe the commaūdementes of god as
not to kepe thē, at his franke & free wil
giuen in creacion of God.
               ¶This hole diffinicion is set forthe in
Eccles.Probations of this diffinition. the .xv. chapter. where it is written
in this wyse.
               ¶God made man at the beginninge &
left him in the hande of his counsayle
he gaue him his commaundementes &
preceptes, If thou wilt obserue the commaundementes
& kepe acceptable faithfulnes
for euer, they shal preserue the,
he hath set water & fyre before the, reach
out thy hande vnto which thou wylte.
Before man is life and deth, good & euil
loke what him liketh shall be giuē him.
These wordes were spoken of y• author
of the same boke of Iesus y• son of Syrach
of the libertye of man which indifferently
& a like freely might imbrace
good and euil, neither was it any meruayle,
sithēs he was the ymage of god &
partaker of the nature of god. And vndoubtedly
such was that libertie before
the fall of man, as yet at this daye the
holye aūgels haue. But after that the

                  
                     •
                  mage of god was loste and the partakīg
of the godly nature bicause of sin then
was the lybertye of imbrasing good spituall
thingꝭ taken away according to y•
foresayde sainge of Paul. The naturall
man perceyueth not such thinges as be
o
                     •
                   the spirite. Yea and in outwarde thinges
the lybertye is corrupted for not so
moch as in them the wyll is so free but
that it may be letted of the deuyll.
            
            
               ¶The causes of free will
before the fall.
               
                  THE cause of this fre wil is god y• cretoure
which in creation gaue y• libertie
of 
                     〈◊〉
                   to his creatoures. The instrumēt
or meanes of exercisinge this lybertye be
reason & will. Reason iudgeth, y• will obeyeth
or repugneth to y• iudgemēt or reson
& ruleth the lower powers, y• lower
powers be the senses & the appetites of
ye senses or affection. Wherfore free wil
is defined of the philosophers to be the
will ioyned with reason.The scolemē
                   The master in
the sentencies & the rest of schole men
setting aside reason do gather fre choise
or fre wil only of the will wheras they
write that free wil is called as touchīg
the wyll bycause voluntary it maye be
moued & with a willing appetite caried
to suche thinges as it iudgeth or wyll

iudge good or euil. Now, vpō ye ꝑmissiō
of reasō & wyl as ye causes or fre wyl, it
is apaparaūt yt the fal of Adā chaunced
not of any necessitie. For where necessitie
is, there is not libertie. But where is
not lybertye, there can neither be wyll,
wherfore vnto the will of man sinne is
rightly imputed bicause of ye presence of
liberti in which mā at his creaciō lyued.
                     
                        •
                     o ꝑticion.
               
               ¶This free choyse in creatures of chosing
good & euyl, is not deuided. In god
is frewil but not as was in man. For
god by his frewil can not be bowed vnto
euylles, for asmoch as he can not put
of his nature.
               ¶Theffectes of free wyll before the fal
were these.Theffectes of fre wyll. before the fal To haue power to loue god
& to hate him. To trust in god & not to
trust. To kepe the cōmaūdement of god
& not to kepe. To enbrace god & not to ē
                  brace.
To receyue euyll & not to receyue
& such lyke. These effectes are so to be vnderstād
y• they might haue proceded of
y• franke lybertye no necessite cōpelling
to the same. And these effectes be of free
wyll, because they might haue proceded
of free wyll which myght haue ben bowed,
indifferently aswell to good as to
euyl. Wherfore Adam by that lybertye
might haue done both wel and euil. So

also vnto thaungelles by that lybertye
it was graunted bothe to receyue euyll
and not to receyue, whiche when they
toke euyll they fell.
            
            
               ¶Of free wyll or choyse
after the fall.
               
                  FRE choyse after the fall in spiritual
thynges is nothynge elles but a wyll
desyrynge good or spirituall thynges,
whiche yet can not atteyn ne brynge to
passe, onlesse the holy ghost commeth &
helpeth our wyll & endeuours. As perteyuyng
to outwarde thyngꝭ fre choyse
is a wyl, in a maner of efficacy & strēgth
of outwarde thynges without the renuynge
of the spirite, whiche notwithstandynge
maye be letted of the deuyll.
            
            
               ¶The proues of this diffinicion.
               
                  THIS diffiniciō is sufficiētly proued
by Paul, where he saith.Roma. vii. d The thīg that
I allowe not, and that I will not, I
do, and that I hate, I do, Here thou 
                     •
                  eest
a certayne desyre, wyll, indeuoure
and studye of good, Also thou seest
that the effectes whiche oughte to be
done do not answere to the wyll of desyre
endeuor and studye. And in an other
place the said Paul saith.Roma. i
                        •
                     . It is not of y•
                  
                     •
                  ūner nor of y• willer but of god y• hauer
of mercy. Here thapostle yet leueth vnto

our wyll, to runne and to wyl,Prouet. 16. b and yet
he ascrybeth all thynges to the mercye
of god. Salomon in his prouerbes doth
attribute to the herte of man the thynking
of his way, & forthwith he addeth
Et dominus di
                     •
                  igit gressus suos. The
lord directeth his goyngꝭ. Ye wyl aske
then what is lefte vnto our free wyll ī
thynges spirituall? I answere in fewe
wordes: A certayne desyre of thinges or
goodes spirituall, a wyll, an attēptate,
a study, a rūnyng, a thīkyng, all whiche
neuerthelesse be nothyng neyther to at
tayne thy desyre, neyther to ꝑforme the
same. Therfore the apostle always praeth
for the churches, to whiche he wryteth
that god wyll performe the good
that he hath begonne in them, as to the
Philippi. cap. i. knowyng this thynge
certeynly, that be whiche hath begonne
in you a good worke, shal performe the
same. It is therfore to be thought vniuersally
that our desyre and endeuours
vnto spirituall goodes can do nothyng
onles fyrst the holy ghoste approcheth
& helpeth our desyre & longingꝭ, whiche
holpē so, they shal ensue those effectes ī
receyuyng & ꝑfourmīg ye sayd spirituall
thyngꝭ.Roma. 
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     
                   For as Pau. sayth, they whiche
be led wt y• spirite of god, be ye sonnes of

god that is to saye, they yt haue tholye
ghost may ꝑforme yt thyng which besemeth
sonꝭ to do. Now, it besemeth the
sonꝭ of god wt ioye to receyue & execute
the cōmaūdementes of theyr father.
Itē where y• spirite of yt lord is, there is
libertie, yt is, there is truly done the wyl
of god, there our endeuours be trulye
made free, where tholy ghost is helper,
which is called y• spirite of y• lord, forasmoch
as our lord Chryst gyueth hym, &
wtout Chryst he is not resident, for who
so hath not Chryst, ye same can not haue
tholi ghost, And cōtrarili who hath not
tholy ghost y• same is none of Chrystes
mā. Now to be Christes mā. is nothing
els, but to receyue his word, & beleue hī
which to do, yu hast nede of tholy ghoste
to gyue the lyght to y• word, ye worketh
faith. Howbeit, although by tholy gost
our desyre is made effectuall, for ye receyuyng
& ꝑformyng of thynges spiritual,
yet it is not so effectual & free, that such
workꝭ as be done by the same, cā be pleded
for tru ryghtwysnes, agaynst y• yre
of god. Wherfore oure wyll yt was loste
doth so retorne effctuall by tholy ghost
vnto spirituall thinges to be done and
performed that yet we be iustifyed in
Chryste yea in that is oure wyll made

effectual by tholy gost, yt we may receyue
ye word of Christ, to thin
                     •
                  ē
                  
                     •
                   we myght
be iustifyed by hym, and not to thintent
that by our effectuall wyll we myght ouerwelme
the ryghtwysnes of Chryste,
in whose place who so euer dothe substytute
& set his owne iustice, hath neyther
tholy ghost, nor a wyll of any strengthe,
For the holy ghost doth therfore
helpe our wyll and endeuoure, that we
myght receyue Chryste, & that by hym,
our wyll myght remayne effectuall, the
holye ghoste workynge togither wt vs,
which fyrst helpeth our endeuours and
maketh ye same of efficacie. wherby we
may receyue Chryst & afterwarde gyuē
vnto vs of Chryst kepeth our wyll myghty
vnto all good thynges to be reteyned
and done.
               
                  AS touching fre wyl ī outward thīgꝭ
ther is no doubt. For so long as reasō &
wil abide ī mē (which shal abyde so long
as mē be mē) fre wil shal not cease ī outward
thyngꝭ to be done of mē but so yet
whyle it be graūted of reason & wyll as
vnto causes to worke. For ye deuyl may
let those causes ī their cou
                     •
                  s which beīg

                     •
                  etted ye outward actions cā not folow.Partes of fre wyl after the fall.
               
               
                  FRE choise after ye fal is deuided into
fre wyl in thyngꝭ spirytual & īto fre wil

in thynges outward. Fre wyl ī thinges
spirituall wat it is and wat it can do I
haue declared before. Fre wyl in thingꝭ
outward is truly fre, so it be not letted
of ye deuyl & to this is not requyred tholy
gost or any renuaūce by tholy ghost.
               
                  THE cause of frewyll in thynges spirituallThe cause of fre wyll
eyther to be accepted or performed
is the holy ghoste wose office is to
gyue lyght vnto ye beleuyng of ye word,
so in ye word beleued is foūd Chryst for
wose sake tholy ghost maketh our endeuours
franke. Also tholy ghoste kepeth

                     •
                  yl the same in force to y• ꝑformaūce of
good thynges. The cause of our desyre
& endeuours in thinges spiritual be, resō
& wyl, reason iudgeth by ye lawe of nature
(after a maner) of thynges sptrytuall.
The wyll obeyeth but to no effecte
accordying 
                     •
                  o the saynge of Paule, that
which I allowe & wolde I do not, and
that I hate I do, Of fre wyll in outewarde
thynges the causes be reasō and
wyll whiche bothe twayne the deuyll
may let so yt thou shalt not alow those
thynges which thy resō aloweth nor wil
those thyngꝭ yt be allowed of reason.
Albeit in y• meane seasō the iudgmēt accusyng
thy conscience remayneth & g
                     •
                  aweth
y• same cōtinually. Now yf the in

ward causes be letted, it is not possyble
that the outward effectꝭ can folow. also
it may be that thou alowest thynges
allowed of reason & also ye wol
                     •
                  est the
same yet ye deuyl may let the outwarde
effectes, as euery man in him selfe hath
experyenc dayly herof, & thexemples of
very good & godly men teache also the
same, which purpose one thyng & do an
other, Now free wyl in outward thingꝭ
may be effectual without the holy ghost
or renuaunce made by the holy ghost.
               ¶Theffectes of free wyll after the fall
in thynges spirituall may be recounted
these.Theffectes of fre wyll. after the fall. To wyl good or spiritual thyngꝭ
Ro. vij. That I do I allowe not, & that
I wolde not yt I doo.Prouerb
                        •
                     . 16. To thynke to doo
good. To endeuour, to wyll, to tūne for
thinges good or spirituall, Rom̄, ix. To
take hold after a maner of the promyse
after a maner to do ye outwarde workꝭ
of y• lawe, these effectes must alwaye so
be vnderstande. yf they be not let of the
deuyll, and withoute doubt these effectꝭ
be nothynge withoute the holy ghoste
whiche approchynge neare dothe lyghten
y• herte to beleue, doth quyckē oure
endeuours to byleue hertely in god, hertely
to serue god hertely to loue god, neuerthelesse
all these thynges we do so.

that yet alwayes they be couered wt som
infirmitie, which god gladly winketh at
bycause of his Christ the restorer of our
lost iustice.
               ¶Theffectes of fre will after the fall in
outward thinges be these:Theffectes of fre choyce after the fa
                        •••
                     
                   To eate, not
to eate. To slepe, not to slepe, To drinke
not to drinke. To cloth him self with
this or that garmēt. To do this or that
or not to do the same, & such lyke. These
effectes although they seme to be of the
moost franke fre will (as they be in dede)
yet this fre wyl is imperfite and bonde
and whiche maye be let of the deuyll
by the sufferaunce of god, as manyfestly
we haue declared heretofore.
               ¶Contraryes to free will in a generalitie
be these.Contrarye
                        •
                      to fre wyll generally. To deny that mā was creat
in fre wyll. To denye reason and wil to
be as meanes and instrumētes wherby
free wyll was exercyced before the fall
and yet is exercysed in thinges subiecte
to reason. To graunte that God hathe
suche a free choyse as man hadde before
the fall, by whiche Adam myghte inclyne
both to good, and euyll. To deny
that man had such a fre wyll as yet the
holy aungels haue. To graunt with the
Mantchees, that orygynall synne is not
imputable to the free will of man. To

sayē man is inclyned to euyll, not of his
free wyll, but of necessitie constrayning
to the same. These persons vnderstande
not what is lybertie, for yf it were inforced
of necessitie it were no lyberty, wherfore
eyther we must byleue that man imbraced
euyll of fre wyll, or we must deny
the lyberty in which mā was create.
But S. Augustyne saith.August in Enchiridion. Homo male
vtens liber
                     •
                   arbitito et se perdit et ip̄m
quia peeditum est per peccatū, non a necessitate,
sed a peccato, qui enim facit peccatum,
seruus est peccati. That is to say
man by euyl vsinge of fre wyl lost both
hym selfe and it, for it was lost through
synne, not of necessitie, but of synne, for
he that committeth synne, is the seruaūt
of sinne.
                     
                        •
                     au. vall
                        •
                     . To graunt with Ualla and other
that there is no lybertye of man by
cause all thinges be done by gods ordynaunce.
In this errour Ualla consydered
not that the creatures were ereate reasonable,
which be led with choyse or election
in such thinges and affayres as
be subiect to the iudgemēt of reason. To
graunt with certayne to moch spiritual
ꝑsons,
                     
                        •
                     imium spirituales that there is no desyre good wyll
attemptace he studye in vs for good thī
                  ges
or spirituall. This erroure we haue
sufficiently debated before. To graunte

with the Pelagians that mā of his frePelagian
                        •
                     
                  
wyll maye kepe all the commaundemē
                  tes
of god yea and without grace also. Agaynste
whom disputeth at large saynt
Augustine.Scole men. To graunte with the schole
men that albeit free will is holpen of y•
holy ghost or of grace yet it is in oure
free wyl to deserue rightousnes. But
grace in this place is taken not onely for
the ayde of the holy ghost but for ye self
fre imputacion & acceptaunce of rightousnes.
To graunt with the AnnabaptistesAnabaptistꝭ
that after the deth of Christ returned
fully vnto all men a lyke, such free
wyl as was lost so that now it is in our
powers as easely as before to imbrace
good an euyll. To meynteyn and dyspute
after this wyse. God hath no cō
                  maunded
thinges impossible, Ergo it is
in our power to kepe the commaundementes
of god. To graunt that our will
is of strength without the holy ghost in
thinges spiritual agaynst whiche errour
Saynt Augustine disputeth in this wyse
For Adam to go into synne sufficed free
wyll by whiche bespotted him selfe.
               But that he maye be stronge vnto rightousnes
he nedeth a Phision for he that
is not sounde, nedeth a quyckener bycause
he is deed. &c. To graunte that fre

wyll is other wise holpen of the holye
ghost than be lighteninge to beleue the
gospell or Christ for whose onely sake y•
holy ghost helpeth our endeuours. To
deny free wyl in outwarde thinges. To
reasō thus we haue fre wyl in outward
thinges without the renuaunce of the
holy ghost, Ergo in thinges spirituall also.
To graunte that God requyreth no
more of vs but our endeuours and oure
owne powers. To denye that our endeuours
aswel in thinges spiritual as outward
may be letted of the deuyl.
            
         
         
            Of sinne. CA. XV.
            SYnne is a perpetuall vice sticking in
nature against the law of god which
vttereth it self now and then amōg
with outwarde worde & dede and y• necessaryly.
            
               ¶Proues of this diffinicion.
               
                  THE thoughtes of mās hert is euillGen. viii. d
from his chyldehode. Also Ieremy saith.
Croked is the herte of man and vnsearchable.
The prophet also saith.Psalm. xiii. a. Psal. c. xv. a There
is none that doth good. And in an other
place. Euery man is a lyer. Paul to the
Romaynes witnesseth the same sayinge
goodnes dwelleth not ī my flesh:Roma. vii. d. where
he sheweth also that this vice wrestleth

with the lawe of god and therfore he
addeth. The lawe delyteth me accordīg
to the inwarde man but I se an other
law in my mēbres rebellynge against y•
lawe of my mynde. &c. Outward sayingꝭ
& factes be the frutes of that vice that
sticketh in nature, whiche frutes neuer
fayle whersoeuer inwarde vngodlynes
is at hande which thinge clerely appeareth
of thordre of Paules chidinge to y•
Romaynes the first chapter, where first
of al, thapostle treateth of the wickednes
of hert which he rebuked in the gē
                  tyles
and afterwarde setteth forthe the
effectes of wickednes euen the very outward
vices, saying: wherfore god hathe
giuen them vp into lustes of reproche.
            
            
               ¶Causes of sinne.
               ¶The deuil is cause of synne by whose
impulsion the firste parent Adā was entisedIohn̄. viii. 
                        •
                     
                  
to sinne. And Christ him self calleth
Sathan the father of lyes that is to say
which gēdreth and worketh lies in men.
The cause also of sinne is the choyse of
the first mā by whiche he assented to the
deuyll, prouokinge him to the same. And
forasmoch as in mans thoughtes and
affayres his will is yet fre, therfore sinnes
do procede & haue ꝓceded of y• frāke
wyll of man but hereof more copyously

we haue disputed in the tytles of predestinacion
and contingency.
               ¶Synne is one,Partes. euen the synne of byrth
(which they call originall syn) cleuinge
in the nature of man, the frutes wherof
be all thoughtes, wordes and dedes agaynste
the law of god. The fathers of
the churche deuide sinne (for the playnenesseDiuison.
of teachinge) into synne orygynall
and synne actuall. To these maye be added
the thirde, the sinne against the holye
ghost.
            
            
               ¶Of orygynall synne.
               SYnne originall is a corrupcion of nature
of man, which causeth that mē
he borne y• children of wrath & synners
in so moche that they can not truelye obey
the lawe of god nor be without sin.
            
            
               ¶Proues of this diffinition.
               ¶We were of nature the children of yre.Ephe. ii.
Also psal. 50. Lo I was cōceyued in wickednesse.Gene. vi. a
Itm̄. The thoughte of mans
hert is euyl frō his chyldhode. More auctorytyes
of scripture thou shalte fynde
before in the diffinition of the generall
sinne. The residue of the diffinion is declared
by the wordes of Paul, where he
saith.Roma. vii. d 
                        •
                     . Iohn̄. i. I fynde an other lawe in my mē
                  bres.
Also Iohn̄ in his epistle sayinge. If
we saye we haue not syn, we make hym

a lyer. Now howe can man be without
sin, sithens of nature he is both a sinner
& also conceyued in syn we added, truely
to obey, to note ye diuersitie betwene
true obedience and rayned. The true obedience
by reason of corrupcion of nature
is taken from vs, but the fayned or imperfyte
obedyence is after some maner
ī our powers. Herevnto appertayne such
places of scripture as disseuer ye true obedience
of Gods law frō y• feyned. Also y•
true worshyp of god from ye hipocritical
as be these, thou shalt loue thy lord godDeut. vi. b▪
                  
 wt al thy hole hert▪ also in an other place
put these my wordes in youre hertes &
mindes. Moreouer the Lord in deutero,
taketh away from men the vnderstanding
of the law and true obedience. For
he saith who can gyue that they cā haueDeut. v.
suche a mynde that they maye feare
me and kepe my commaundemētes.Esay. xxix. Also
by the prophet Esay he sayth. This people
approcheth to me with theyr mouth
but their hert is farre fro me. &c. Where
he discerneth the false obedience and
worshyppe whiche colourably is doone
& the true obedience and worship which
oughte to be done. Saynte Paule also
requyreth vnto the true obedience of
Gods lawe farre greater thynges then

be in our powers, where he saith. The
ende of the cōmaūdement is charitie of a
                     
                        ••
                      Timoth. i.
pure hert and good conscience and faith
vnfeined. Of which end of the lawe who
cā glory beside Christ, which alone was
appoynted of god t
                     •
                   this true obediēce
of the lawe as witnesseth him selfe of
his office in this behalfe. Mat. v. I came
not to lose the lawe but to fullfyll it,
wherfore forasmoch as so greate obedience
towardes the law of god is requyred
we may iustly & wel confesse yt we
can not be without synne.
            
            
               ¶The diffinition of original
sinne by doctours.
               ¶Augustine defyneth orygynall syn to
be concupiscence,S. Augustyn which haue succeded in
place of rightousnes yt was loste. Other
whiles diffininge it in a general itie, he
compriseth the inwarde corrupcion as
cause with the outwarde sinnes as effectes,
and saithe, that sin is that whiche
is spoken, done or coueted againste
the lawe of God.
               Thomas saith originanal sin is an hauourThomas the scole man.
of the sycke nature, that is (as he
hym selfe expouneth) an in ordinate disposiciō
of y• harmony of original iustice.
Hugo diffineth it to be the ignoraunce
in minde and iust in flesh.Hugo.
               
               
                  
¶The cause of original sinne,Causes of original sy
                        •
                     . is Sathā
the deceyuer of our first parentes, & their
fre will wherby they assented to euil &
despised the cōmaundement of god, by
this assent the nature of our first parentes
Adam & Eue was corrupted, & euen
as the parentes then were such folowed
and were made afterwarde theyr childrenRoma. v.
by naturull contagion & propagacion
as witnesseth Paul. The doctours
assigne the material cause of oryginall
sinne to be concupiscence.Partes.
               
               ¶Certaine men without daunger of y•
trouth do diuide originall sinne into sin
parsonall in Adam,Syn ꝑsonall. Syn natural and sinne naturall
in others, howbeit this ought to be added
that after the fall that was also
made in Adam natural whiche before y•
fall was not of Adams nature. This
particion maketh also to the vnderstandinge
of the true succession & stretchyng
forth of orygynall finne to thintēt thou
mayst know that by it nature is infected
and corrupted.
               ¶Theffectes of oryginall sinne be takē
                  theffectes of oigrinall syn.
forth of the perfection of Adams nature
before the fal or forth of the fyrst right
wysnes lost in Adam, and that by comparison
of the contraryes, as these: To
be partaker of y• deuylles nature, where

as before the fal he was partaker of the
nature of god that is, he was wife, rightouse,
good,Gen. 
                        •
                     . true. And this was bicause
he was create accordinge, to the ymage
of god whiche agayne by sinninge he
did put of. So for wyse, he was made
vnwyse, for iust iniust, for good euyll.
for true a lyer. &c. To these be added for
a clearer declaracion, also these effectes
folowinge: Not to knowe god, to disspise
god, to be withoute feare and awe
of god, without trust in god. To fle god
the iudge, not to perceyue such thinges
as be of the spirite. To vate the iugdementi. Corinth. ii.
of god. To be angry with god. To
dyspayre of god and of his grace. To
haue trust in tēporal thinges. To striue
agaynst the lawe of god. To haue wicked
thoughtes of the herte euen from
the chyldehode. Not truly to obeye the
lawe of god. For he that of nature is repugnaunt
to the lawe of god, how can
he trulye obeye god? sithens thaffections
& loue of the flesh is emnitie agaīst
god for it is not subiect to y• law of god
no nor can not be.Rom. viii. v Also to cause yt we neuer
can be without syn, for that whiche
is natural we can not vtterly put of.
These effectes & sēblable be ascribed to
original sī, bicause they sticke ī nature or

be the frutes of y• corrupt nature, which
effectes be oftentimes mēcyoned in scriptures,
and ought alwayes to be vnderstande
of the corruption of nature, as,
that euery mā is a lyer, that is to say, of
nature. The prophet sayth. There is no
ryghtwyse mā, no not one, vnderstande
of nature. There is none y• hath vnderstandynge,
of nature. There is none yt
ensercheth god, of nature, vnryghtous,
vnwyse, a lyer, & semblable wordes be
often tymes red in scripture. & ought to
be vnderstand & conferred wt the nature
of man before the fall. Moreouer al the
sayd effectes be deedly synnes in ye wycked,
forasmoche as deth as a penalitie
foloweth them, for as Pau. sayth.Roma. vi. d. Roma. v. d The
wages of sine is deth. Also in an other
place he saith. Through y• faulte of one
man sīne entered in to the worlde, & by
reasō of synne, dethe. And so vpō all mē
deth came, ī asmoch as al we haue sīned
wherfore in cōsyderacyō & of the penaltie
original sinne hath yet other effectes
as: To bryng deth, for y• stipende of sīne
(saith Pau.) is deth.Roma. vi. d. i. corin. xv. g Also, The darte of
sīne is deth, yt is to were, which maketh
deth, or of which deth doth ēsue. Itē, by
synne entred deth. To put vnder y• tirā
                  nyRoma. viii. c.
of ye deuyl, as where it is said of god.

I wyll put enmyties bitwene the andGen. iii. c
the woman, bytwene thy sede and hee
sede.Ephe. vi. a. &c. To make the chyldren of wrath
and of damnacion. To make an euyl cō
                  science,
for as wytnesseth Salomō ī his
prouerbes,Pro. xviii. n The wycked fleeth, no man
pursuyng hym. To these ought to be added
also other effectes of oryginal synne
in respecte of the penaltie, as concupiscence
and synne, which effectes do cause
all thynges whiche we do of nature before
we be regendred & borne anewe, be
synnes. For the payn of oryginall synne
is nothynge els but to synne. For lyke
as no man can put of, nature in other
thynges, thoughe he neuer so sore struggeleth
with it, euē so nature beyng corrupted
and punysshed with syn as with
a penaltie, can do none other thyng thā
syn. And that syn is the punysshment of
orygynall vyce or wyckednes. Thapostle
Paul sheweth sufficiently,Roma. i. 
                        •
                     
                   where he
reherseth in order the puni
                     •
                  shmentes of
wyckednes, euen the very synnes. Herevnto
perteyneth the common and true
saynge. Deus punit peccatum peccato.
God punyssheth syn with syn. I wolde
also here haue put to the penall effectes
of y• vtter frutes of this oryginal vyce,
but y• I thought it best to defer thē vnto

theffectes of actual syn, for hyther vnto
the scolemen haue onely drawen them
to outwarde actes and factes.
            
            
               ¶The contraryes of originall syn.
               ¶The cōtraryes of origynal syn spring
chefly of the minishyng and settyng at
lite and extenuacion of it, as. To graūt
that origynall syn is not a vyce that hā
                  geth
in nature. To say orrigynall syn is
onely fomes (as they call it) that is,Fomes peccati. the
kyndlynge or a qualitie of the body by
whiche the body & not the mynde is enfected
and to whiche we our selues ma
                     •
                  
gyue a salue or medecyne. To say orryginal
syn betokeneth only an outward
dede & not a contynuall & dayly disease.
To say ther be none other synꝭ then outward
dedes which errour they defend by
these sainges of philosophers: Nature is
good. Also euery syn is volūtary,☞ which
sētences & suche lyke be true among philosophers
& in ciuil causes but to bryng
y• same to enlesson or diminysh y• disease
of origynall syn is farre out of y• waye.
To graūt concupiscence or iuste to be y•
punyshment of oryginall syn & not syn
it selfe,S. Austy
                        •
                     
                   agaynst S. Augustyn who diffinith
origynal syn to be cōcupiscēce. Also
agaīst Paul who saith,Roma. vii. 
                        •
                     
                   but I knew not
sin but by y• lawe. for I had not knowē
                  
luste or concupisence onles y• lawe had
said. Thou shalt not couet or luste. To
graūt yt this kynlyng or fomes (as they
call it) is a thyng indifferent of it selfe,
neyther good nor euell.Adiaphora. But who euer
durst call these thynges indifferent that
knewe any good veyne of scripture, to
dout of ye yre of god to be angry wt god
& semblable cōbraūces of nature which
be ye necessary frutes of originall synne.
To extenuate & mynyshe origenall syn
sayng, men be not letted by it but that
they may kepe of them selfes all ye preceptes
of god. To say origynall syn is
onely a weakenes in nature or incitmēt
& kyndling & no syn that is to say a thīg
of the selfe nature worthy death & damnacyon.Pelagians.
To graunt wt the Pelagians y•
orygenall syn came vpō other men not
by naturall corrupcyon & propagacyon
but by imitation werfore the Pelagiās
wyll not y• by baptysme origynal synne
is losed in īfantes bycause they cōtende
that in byrth there is none such original
synne.Reatus To say origynal synne is onely a
gylte or offence which is wyped awaye
in baptyme.The manithees To graūt wt the Man
                     •
                  ches
that fleshly lust werby the fleshe lusteth
agaynste the spirite in vs an infirmytye
procedinge of the corrupte nature in the

fyrste man but a contrary substaunce so
stickynge in vs that when we be delyueredCōcupiscence
and purged it is seuered from vs.
To graunt that luste is the acte of lustynge
and not the fyrst vyce gotten of Adam.Anabaptistis
To saye with the Anabaptystes
orygynall synne ceased and is quenshed
in suche as be rebaptysed. To graunt orygynall
synne not to be a pure priuacion
but onely a corrupte hauoure whose
powers be of it selfe truely to acknowelege
godes truste in him. &c. To graunt
with the scole men that the punyshmēt
of orygynail syn is only concupiscence.Scolastickes
To denye that the punyshmentes of orygynal
sinnes be besydes concupiscence
also synne, dethe, the tyrannye of the
deuyll, dampnacyon. &c.
            
            
               ¶Of actuall synne.
               ¶It is manyfest that scole men do onelye
call those actuall synnes which stād
in outewarde wordes or dedes, wherfore
I thought good to treate of suche
seuerally of my accustomed compendyous
maner of teachynge, to thentente
I myght satysfye the reder which perchaunce
as yet, is intāgled with ye olde
diuisyon of syn. Neuertheles I thynkeA protestratiō
                  
cōueniēt to proteste & declare before vnto
you yt there is one only & symple syn

stickynge in the nature of man whiche
accustomablye we call orrigynall synne
from whiche vndoutedly actuall synne
differeth nothynge but so moche as the
cause and effecte do differre: wherfore it
had bene ynough to haue put actual sin
amonges the effectes of originall synne
but yt I feared theyr iudgmentꝭ whiche
accompte it a greuous offence in thingꝭ
yea not necessarie to depart and swarue
from the auncyent wryters. But for asmoche
as oryginall syn is a vice sticking
in nature from which procede not only
euell wordes and dedes, but also noughty
affections and thoughtes whiche before
god be the verye selfe synnes. Also
forasmoch as suche affections & thoughtes
be the actes of the vyce styckynge in
nature: Therfore actuall synnes must be
vnderstanded not only outward wordꝭ
and dedes but also inwarde affections
and thoughtes wherfore in this wyse oweth
actuall synne to be defyned.
               ¶Actual synne, is euery affection, euery
thought,The diffinition of actuall synnes. euery worde & dede agaynst the
lawe of god yea & what so euer is done
without faythe. This syn issueth forth
of the corrupt nature of man and is the
effecte of origynall synne.
            
            
               ¶The proues of this diffinicyon.
               
                  
A wycked & euil mind of nature can
not want actual syn, for the vice original,
which is cause of it, neuer plaieth,
neuer kepeth holy day. Now the cause
alwaies working, theffectꝭ can not but
always ensue. Also a vicious & corrupttre,
can not but brīg forth euil frutes.
Out of the herte (saith Christ) procedeMath. xv. e.
euil thoughtes, slaughters, aduotries.
&c, And god oftimes scourgeth wickednes
wt outward sin̄es, while he suffreth
the wicked to run frō one syn to an other.Roma. 
                        •
                     
                  
These synnes wher wt god scourgeth
& punissheth synnes, the doctours
also cal many tymes the punyshmētes
of syn,Gregorye as s. Greg. writing thus. Syn y•
springeth of syn is not only now a syn
but it is both syn & also y• punishmēt of
syn, bicause wt a iust iudgement god almighty
ouershadoweth as it were wt a
cloude the hert of the synner.
               No mā doubteth but all actual synnes
may be referred to the inward thoughtes
to outward spekinges & dedes. For
thaffections & thoughtes of the mynde
be actual synnes it is certeyn & clere ynough,
forasmoch as they be theffectes
of y• original vice.Roma. vis. And thapostle saith.
But syn by occasion engēdred by y• cō
                  maundemēt
in me, all maner of concupiscēce,

as who sholde saye syn espied &
knowē by y• law maketh afrayd & furthermore
moueth the lust agaynst god
to 
                     ••
                  e the iudgemēt of god & be angry agaynst
god. Also Christ in the gospel of
Mat. reherseth the thoughtes of y• hert
amonges theffectes of the corrupt hert
of nature.Math. xv. 
                        •
                     
                   For forth of the hert (sayth
he) come wicked thoughtes, slaughters
murders. &c.
               Those sines which can not be referred
either to thaffectiōs thoughtꝭ wordes
or dedes be cōprised vnder yt general
sētēce of Paul,Roma. 
                        •
                     iiii. what so euer is done
wtout faith, is syn, wherfore not onely
thaffectiōs & thoughtes, spekinges & 
                     ••
                  
                  des
which be euil be actuall synnes, but
also honest affectiōs, thoughtꝭ, wordes
& dedes be actual synnes, not of thē selues,
or bicause god wold not honest affectiōs
& thoughtes, honest sayinges &
dedes to be had, or disaloweth or doth
not reacquite the same, but bicause the
ꝑsons of whom they be done please not
god, & bicause they be done wtout faith,
Agayn such affectiōs thoughtꝭ, wordes
& dedes as be honest do please god, & be
not synnes whē they ꝓcede of fayth toward
Christ, for whose onely sake all
our workes he pleasaunt vnto god.
               
                  
                  THE cause of actual syn is Satā,The cause of actuall syn. father
of al sinnes. Our wil, which is fre
to euil, assenteth to Satā the engēderer
& ꝓuoker of synnes. The lesse prīcipall
cause is the original vice frō whēce as
forth of a foūteyn all actual synnes do
flowe.
               
                  IT is an old diuisiō of actual syn inThe partes of actual syn.
to syn mortal & venial. The scholemen
about either of these sines do but trifle
very fondly & folishly, some thinke thē
called venial bicause they obtein easely
Veniā, yt is to say ꝑdon or forgiuenes &
which may be quēched & chased awaye
either by holywa
                     •
                  , or other ceremonies
Other some wil haue thē called venial
synnes, bycause after this life they receyue
pardon in purgatory. Againe other
some say they be so called, hauinge
respect to sin yt is irremissible, which is
the syn agaynst the holy ghost. But the
wiser & better lerned scholeme do referScole me
                        •
                     
                  
vnto venial sinnes those disposiciōs of
thoughtes & affections which tende to
mortal sines: & vndoubtedly al thoug
                     •
                  
                  tes
& noughty affectiōs in holy & good
mē be venial synnes, wt whiche dayly y•
myndes of the godlye be vexed, where
as the flesh coueteth & lusteth agaynst
the spiryte. But by cause the scripture

damneth such affectiōs & thoughtes as
be moost greuous sinnes in the eyes of
god, & furthermore Paule aduertiseth

                     •
                  s to mortifye wt the spirite such dedes
of the flesh. Therfore those ye begin to be
called venial synnes, be not lite sinnes
as to distrust in god, to be angrye and
displeased with god. For vndoubtedly
these synnes are become mortal sinnes
in the wicked ꝑsons, forasmoch as deth
as a punishment dothe ensue them, for
the wicked make no resistence by faith
wherfore in respect of deth as a penaltie
and punyshment. there be no venial
synnes in ye wicked. Albeit the same affectiōs
& thoughtes against gods lawe
in the good ꝑsons be venial sinnes, bicause
they be forgiuē thē. For the godly
disalow such affectiōs & thoughtes, &
make resistēce against thē, so yt they fal
not in to the outwarde factes. Now, in
such as make resistēce is yet faith, wherfore
in the mean seasō they be declared
rightous. But on the cōtrary syde al sī
                  nes
be mortal yt be done against ye lawe
of god, wt a cōscience which wt standeth
not by fayth. For this cause affectiōs &
thoughtes are now become deedly sinnes,
whē no resistēce is made on our behalf agaynst thē, but be alowed, tyll at

last also by our assēt they brast forth in
to our outward crymes & noughtines.
And such as thus do syn, be fallē frō y•
grace of god, & be no more cōpted for
good, whō also dānatiō foloweth, onlesse
they repēt. But of this mater loke
vpō Melāchton.Melāchth
                        •
                     
                   in his places debating
the thing more at large.
               ¶Thoccasiō of this diuisiō of actual
synnes semeth to haue come hereof, bicause
the fathers of the church saw .ij.
sortes of actual sines, some inward, as
affectiōs & thoughtes, some outwarde,
as wordes & dedes. But forasmoch as
they were led of their own ꝓpre iudgemēt,
wtout coūsell had wt the places of
scripture, or ꝑswaded wt this cōmō saying.
God iudgeth not thaffectiōs, therfor
they parted venial sinnes, as affections
& thoughtes (by minisshīg ye same)
in the wicked also frō the peyn of deth.
But the diuisiō of actual sinnes shalbe
symple,A true diuision of actuall synnes. syncere, & lesse peryllous yf yu
wilt deuide thē in to sines which be inwarde
(as affectiōs & thoughtes which
may be called venial in such as do resist
by fayth, & therfore be yet coūted rightous)
& in to outward synnes, as wordes
& dedes, in to whiche who so euer
crasteth forth, be fallen frō grace, & be

no more nombred among the rightous
but yt as wel the inward as ye outward
sines be deedly, onlesse y• resist by faith.
But in the wicked in whom is no resistence,
or which hath not Christ can be
no venial syunes,
               ¶Forasmoch as of actual sinnes some
be affectiōs & thoughtꝭ,Cheffectes of actuall sinnes other some wordes
& dedes, therfore double effectꝭ here
of (yt is to wete) of venial syn do aryse,
I meane of affections & thoughtes in ye
godly, & of actual syn by it self, I mean
as wel of affectiōs & thoughtꝭ as of outward
wordes & dedes in the wycked &
in such as depart frō grace. These double
effectes serue for none other thynge
but to discerne the venial in the godly
frō the none venial, yt is from suche as
who so euer be intangled & roted in, be
no longer occompted rightous, to thintent
we might know the difference bitwene
ye godly & vngodly which do syn
in affectiōs & thoughtes. In the wicked
no synnes can be venial, for al their affectiōs
& thoughtes be made wtout the
holy ghost ye shold gouerne, and faith ye
shold resist. In the godly corrupt affectiōs
& thoughtes against ye law of god
be made venial sines, bicause for Christes
& faythes sake they be ꝑdoned and

forgyuen, by which fayth they wrestle
against such affectiōs & wicked thoughtes
disalowing the same, lest they shold
run in to outward vices, wherfore ī so
great strugglinges & conflictes they be
yet ꝓnounced & recompted for good &
iust ꝑsons by benefyte of theyr faythe,
not assenting to the temptacion of syn.
Now the effectes of veniall syn in the
godly may be these.Theffectes of veniall sy
                        •
                     ne To be tempted to
vngodlynes. To be tēpted to dispayre
to be angry wt god, to doubte whether
god hath respect of them: to be prouoked
against the hole law of god, yt they
sholde lust after wickednes, to thynk
                     •
                  
vpon euils, & haue theyr myndes occupyed
thervpon. Many lyke effectes of
venial synne may yet be fetched hythe
                     •
                  
out of theffectes of originall syn afor
                     •
                  
remembred. Also what theffectes of v
                     •
                  
                  nyall
synne be, euery man easyly hath
                     •
                  
experience with hym self when his spryte
and flesshe be at warre togyther
neyther ought these effectes to be lytl
                     •
                  
regarded sythens the same be moost
greuous synnes before god, and very
mortall in the wycked as perteynyng
to the payne. Neuerthelesse they 
                     •
                  
yet called venyall in the godlye, bycause
they be forgyuen and pardoned

to such as valiātly resist by faith,
or bicause they breke not forth ī to out
ward offēces. Also herevnto belōg such
places of scripture as teache y• the lyfe
of the godly is a warfare vpō this erth
as Ro. S.☜ Yf (saith Paul) ye wil mortify
the dedes of the bodye, ye shal lyue. &c.
Truly the dedes of the body be here not
only the wordes & dedes of the selfe body,
but also thaffections & dedes of the
mynde, & the bodye signifieth here not
one ꝑte of the body, as the flesh, but the
hole body.Colloss. iii. The sayd Paul in an other
place saith: Mortify therfore your erthly
mēbres,Roma. vi. hordom vnclēnes wātōnes,
euil lust. &c. Item let not therfore syn
reygne in your mortall body, so yt you
shold obey it by the lustꝭ of it. Also Iob
accordeth to the same,Iob. vii. 
                        •
                     
                   where he sayth.
A warfare is the life of mā vpō ye erth.
These places monish vs strōgly to resyst
syn, left we be vaynquisshed at last
by it to the committing of outward of
fences & enormities, and so vtterly to
dye by the same.
               Hereby now it appereth what actual
sines be mortal, ī respect of such as we
cal venial ī ye godly (yt is to wite) those
which be done agaīst the law of god, wt 
a cōsciēce not repugnaūt, ne wtstāding

by sayth, where as no resistēce on our
behalf is made agaīst thaffectiōs mociōs
& thoughtꝭ, til at last they rush forth
īto outward crimes & enormities. For
such synners haue assented to syn & be
now gone frō grace, & no longer can be
reputed good, yea & where such repent
not, they be also damned.
               Now these effectes be of ye hole actual
syn mortal,Theffectꝭ of the hole acte
                        •
                      all synne mortall. yt is, aswel of affectiōs and
thoughtꝭ, as of wordes & dedes. Not to
repugne against the tēptaciō of syn by
faith. To assēt to syn ye tempteth. To
approue those thinges which ye euil affectiōs
& thoughtes do suggest & purpose.
To haue delectacion and pleasure in
synnes. To glory in synnes. To desire
& ymagin ydolatry, & to be made an idolatour.
To desire & ymagin anye false
worship of god, and to set vp the same.
To desyre & ymagin murdre & the same
to execute. To desyre & ymagin disobediēce
& wt outward fact to accomplish
the same. To couet & ymgen aduontrye
& the same to cōmit īdede & so of ye rest.
But these effectes are so to be taken ye
forthwt they be made mortal synnes as
sone as any assēt is had to such corrupt
affections & thoughtes, although ye outward
dedes folow not, which neuerthelesse

ye mynd can not wāt yt is fallē frō
grace. So Adā shold haue synned mortally
for thassenting vnto the wycked
affectiōs & thoughtes, although he had
neuer eaten of the apple. So also in vs
affectiōs & thoughtes be made mortall
synnes, yea although outward dedes do
not ensue, euē as oft as we make no resistēce
by fayth against ye sinnes to tēpting
vs, but do giue our eare & assent to
the same, as for exēple. Good mē to be
tēpted, to wish & cōpasse murdre is a venial
syn in such as strongly & valiaūtly
make resistēce by fayth, but to assent
vnto thaffections & thoughtes to obey
thē eūe to the executiō of the murder &
not to repugne by fayth, is now becom
a deedly synne.
               Wherfore to mortal synnes actuall
ꝑteyn al these synnes, whervnto assent
is giuē, albeit they be not accōplisshed
by wordes & dedes. Itē all those which
be executed in word & dede. Hither perteyn
such places of scripture as cōtein
heapes of actual synnes worthy death,
as. i. Corin. vi. Eph. v. Gala. v. Rom. 1.
Certēly such effectꝭ be called mortal sines
not bicause grace is denied to such
synners as syn mortallye, lyke as it is
to them which being deed can not ryse

agayn, but bicause deth as a punishmēt
foloweth suche effectes. But agayne
where suche synners do chaunge theyr
lyfe and do repentaunce they may obteyn
grace.
               These also effectes may be herevnto referred.Other effectꝭ of actuall sy
                        •
                     
                  
Of a wylfulnes or haultnes of
mynde, or for other causes not to acknowlege
or receyue the gospell.
               
                  TO acknowlege or receyue ye gospel
& the same so acknowleged or receyued
slouthfully to regarde. A mā to neglect
his office in his callyng, or to do it negligently,
which synnes at this day be
most cōmon in ye world. For some men
although they knew yt it is gods cōmaū
demēt y• they shold acknowlege and rereyue
the gospell, yet they despyse it &
wil none of it. Agayn, others where as
they promptly acknowlege & receiue it
yet they regarde it negligently.Cold
                        •
                      gospelle
                        ••
                     . Suche
now adayes be many gospellers which
now be waxen colde.
            
            
               ¶Common effectes which folow
all mortall synnes.
               
                  TO bring deth vpō mē.Roma. v. 
                        •
                     . v
                        •
                     
                   
                  TO put mē vnder
the tyranny & power of ye deuil. For
who so euer falleth frō grace by sin, cā
be vnder y• power of none other thā of
the deuil, sithēs there be but two kingdoms

thone of god thother of the deuil.
Therfore also Christ maketh the deuil
father of synnes. Thapostle calleth the
deuil mighty in the vnfaithful, & other
whiles he calleth deuils the rulers and
princes of the world. Item, he y• cōmitteth
syn (sayth Christ) is of ye deuil. To
bring euerlasting dānatiō to such as repēt
not,Iohn̄ .xi. accordīg to ye saying of Christ
Go ye cursed in to euerlasting fyre.Math. xxv. d &c.
In which place Chryst reckeneth vp ye
synnes, for which euerlasting dānatiō
chaūseth.Iohn̄. viii. e Gall
                        •
                     . v. d. l. corint. vi. 
                        •
                     . To make mē seruaūtꝭ of syn,
for euery one ye cōmitteth syn is the seruaūt
of syn. To depriue mē of ye kyngdom
of god, for they yt do such offences
shal not īherite ye kingdom of god. To
make an euil cōsciēce according to the
saying of the wise mā. The wicked fle
                  
                     •
                  th
no man chasing him.Pro
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     . 28. a To deserue ye
syn be punisshed wt syn, according to ye
sentēce of Paul,Roma. i. d. where as he sayth. For
this cause god gaue thē vp in to the lustes
of reproche, for euen theyr women
did chaūge the natural vse vnto the vnnatural,
& likewise also the mē left the
natural vse of the womā, & brēt ī theyr
lustes one to an other. And man wt man
wrought filthynes & receyued in themselues
the reward of their errour as apꝑteyned.

&c. To susteyn reproche & an
euyl name in this life, according to the
sētēce of Salomō.Prouerb. 
                        •
                     8. The wicked whē he
cōmeth ī to ye botom of synnes is set at
nought, & reproche & sclaūdre do folow
him.Nume. v To bring also outward mischaū
                  ces
& curses vpō such as commit thē, as
god him self witnesseth saying. Bicause
ye haue trāsgressed my cōmaundemētes
ye shal not prosper. An exēple hereof is
red in Eue.Gen. 3. 
                        •
                     
                   to whom god sayd: I shall
multiply thy sorowes. Also ī Adā: Cursed
be the erth in thy worke, hither perteyn
the curses in the old testament against
the breakers of gods cōmaundementes.
Also exemples, which testify ye
synnes were punisshed wt outward misfortunes
& yet be punisshed,
            
            
               ¶Contraries to venial synne.
               
                  TO graūt any venial sinnes in ye wieked.☞
                  To make but a trifle of venial sinnes,
& compt thē for lyte offencen. To
say venial sinnes be queushed or chased
away by holy water or by purgatory,Holy water.
or other thinges. To say y• the purging
of veniall synnes nedeth not grace or
Chryst. To say y• thaffectiōs & thoughtes,
of which venial sines sprīg, cānot
be made mortal synnes, yf assēt be had
to the the same, although the outward

fact or word folow not. To say al affectiōs
& thoughtes be euil, bicause they
be actual sinnes, but a distinctiō ought
to be had bitwene affectiōs, for they be
of .ii. sortꝭ.Two sortes of affections Some be clene cōtrary to ye
law of god, as to couet other mēs gooddes,
to enuy other mē for ye benefytꝭ of
god, to haue distrust ī god, to be angry
 wt god, & such like. These be ꝓprely theffectes
of original syn & merely euyll &
vicious, worthy to be cast forth of the
nature of mā. Other affectiōs there be
which be not repugnaūt wt gods lawe,
as to loue a mans own childrē, to loue
his wife & suche lyke. To take these away,
is to take away ye mouyng & lyfe
of nature. But cōcerning this mater ye
maye se more in the common places of
Melāchton.Melāchthon To deny venial synnes in
holy men.
            
            
               ¶Contraryes to mortal synnes.
               
                  TO put but seuē deedly synnes.Mo then. vii mortall sin̄es To deny
ye thaffectiōs & thoughtes in the wicked,
or in such as resist not by fayth be
dedly synnes. To graūt yt such synnes
as be done agaynst the cōmaūdemēt of
god be not dedly, although assēt be had
to the same, onlesse ye outward factes do
folow. To graūt ye all mortall synnes
be not dānable. To graūt ye fayth may

stand wt mortal syn. To hold ye mortal
tymes can not be forgyuen after baptisme.
To deny grace vnto suche as be
in dedly syn. To make it no mortal syn
not to acknowlege or receyue ye gospel
or ye same receyued, negligently to folow.
Also of a p̄sūptiō of mynde to despise
ye gospel, & not to regarde his calling
or not to execute ye same as to his
duty apperteyneth.More 
                        〈◊〉
                      Contraryes to the hole synne. 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               More general cōtraries to ye hole sin
be these. To graūt thopiniō of ye Stoickes
ye synnes be egal, so yt there sholde
be no differēce bitwene Nero synnyng
moche, & Pompeiꝰ Attīcus synnīg lesse.
To make god causer of syn, bicause he
determineth al thingꝭ. To graūt wt the
Iouinianistes synnes to be egal,Iouinianists & that
mā can not syn after he be ones regenerate
or borne anew. To deny grace to
them y• do syn after they haue ones acknowleged
the trouthe. To deny yt the
chief rewardes of syn be deth, the tyrā
                  nye
of Satan, & damnation. To graūt
with the Pelagians yt the lyfe of good
men in this worlde hathe no rewarde
at all.Pelagian
                        •
                     .
               
            
         
         
            Of synne agaynste the holye
ghost. CA. XIIII.
            
               
FOrasmoch as we be fallē in to the
treaty of syn, we thinke it good to
cast herevnto ye sin of the holy gost
albeit it ought to haue bē reserued and
put els very wel af
                  •
                ye title of gospell,
bycause this syn springeth of it, as out
of his propre obiect.
            
               THE syn agaynst the holy gost is wt 
an obstinate mynde against the 
                  •
               sciēce
to damne the gospel & the workes of itWhat synne agaynst the holy ghost is.
which sin not acknowledged can not be
forgyuen, neither in this world, nor in
the world to come, for which also it is
not to be prayed.
            
               THIS diffinitiō appereth certein of
theThe proues of this diffinition. .xij. chap. of Math. where the phari
               
                  •
               ees,
being theyr cōsciences conuīct wt 
ye very trouth, many argumētꝭ brought
of Christ to ye same purpose, yet agaīst
their cōscience they cryed out ye Christ
did cast forth the deuil by the power of
the deuil, wherfore cōsequently in that
they condemned this worke of Chryst,
they also cōdemned tholy gost, whiche
was the cause & worker of that worke
by whose power Christ did cast forthe
the deuil. Now, & such a syn can not be
remitted neither in this nor in the next
world, Christ expresly declareth in the
fornamed chap. but yet if it be acknowleged,

it maye be remytted. For to such
as be lyuing here in this worlde grace
is not denied yf they repēt & aske forgyuenes.
Finally that we ought not to
pray for suche teache s. Iohn̄ in his epistle.Iohn̄. v. b
For so long as this syn is obstinatly
defended, it abydeth alwaye vnpardonable.
            
               THE cause of this sin is the deuīl father
& worker of al synnes.The cause. The cause
also of this sin, is the wil of mā, which
is fre vnto euil, for mā being forsaken
of god & left to his frewil, falleth in to
this synne,
            ¶The syn agaynst the holy gost hath
no ꝑtes,No partes. The names of this synne. i. Iohn̄. v. d which syn otherwhiles y• scripture
calleth Peccatū ad mortē (yt is to
say syn vnto deth) as s. Iohn̄ in his epistle
calleth it. But the doctours call it
otherwhiles the syn of vnrepentaunce
somtyme an obduracion or hardnes of
hert, somtyme a stubburnnes, somtime
a resistence against y• trouth, y• against
the conscience, and somtime they name
it the dispayre of grace:Gene. iiii. v Suche maner
of synne commytted Cayn,Marc. xv. a Mat. xxvii. a 
                     •
                   Luc. xxiii. a. Iohn̄ .xviii. v. where as
he sayde: Greater is my wyckednesse
then that I can deserue forgynenesse.
Item, the synne of Iudas the betrayer
of Chryst.
            
               
               ¶Theffectes of the syn agaynst
the holy ghost.
               ¶Theffectes of the syn agaynst tholy
ghost be these: To damne the gospel &
the frutꝭ of the same, after thexēple of
the pharisees.Math xii. b. To make ye syn irremmissible
or vnꝑdonable in such as obstinatly
& stubburnly cōtinue in dānyng the
gospel.Math .xii. v. To bring deth .i. Ioh .v. To crucifie
the son of god agayn, as thexēple
to ye Ebrues declareth.Ebreos .vi. a. To make ye son
of god a laughing stocke, as in the said
epistle is shewed. But these effectes are
so to be vnderstād & taken yt the syn agaynst
the holy gost if it be acknowlegedEbre. vi. a
ī this lyfe may be forgyuē. Herevnto
also may be brought al such effectes
as generally folow al mortal synnes.
               Cōtraries to this doctrine be these:Contraryes. To
graūt ye euery syn which is cōmitted after
baptisme is a syn agaynste the holy
ghost, yea though it cōmeth of a weiknes
& not of any 
                     •
                  tēpt or obstinacy. To
graūt yt the syn against tholy gost can
not be forgiuē in this life if the same be
acknowleged, which erour cōfuteth s.
Aug.Augustyn. vpon the wordes of Christ. Mat
.xij. To make a trifle of the sin against
the holy gost, cōtrary to the wordes of
Christ which extolleth this syn aboueMath .xii. e
                  
any syn committed agaynst his owne
person.
            
         
         
            Of the lawe. CA. XV.
            THe law in a generalite is whiche
techeth what is to be done & what
is to be left.Diffinition.
            
            This diffinitiō is vndouted,The profe. takē forth
of the ꝓpre officies of ye law, whiche be
to teche cōmaunde & declare what is to
be done, & what not.
            
               OF lawes some be natural,The partes. some diuine,
some humane.
            
               THE causes of lawes be the makers
and instituters.The causes.
            
            Theffect of lawes is to declare & commaūde
what thinges we ought to do,Theffectes. &
what to leaue vndone.
            
               ¶The lawe of nature,
               
                  THE law of nature is a certeyn notyce
or knowlege of gods lawe,what ye lawe of nature is. imprynted
and grauen of god in the nature
of mā, ordeyned to know god and
loue his neyghboure, to thintent there
myght be kept in the myndes of mē, an
occasion of religion & publike quietie,
peax, & teanquillitie of men amonges
them selues.
               That the law of nature is a notice of
gods law,Profes of this diffinition. is euidēt by the first chapi
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
to the Rom. where ye apostle declareth
yt the gētiles or hethē ꝑsons haue knowlege
of god, by the law of nature, & not
only a single knowlege, yt there is a god
but also ye god doth creat, doth gouern
& cōserue al thingꝭ which to vnderstād
ī god, is ꝓprely to know god. Howbeit
this knowlege is wōderfully dimed, obscured
& corrupted by the fal of Adam
as hereafter in theffectes we shal shew,
in which some ꝑte of the diffinitiō shal
be bet
                     •
                   declared. Nowe to acknowlege
god & loue his neyghbour togyther wt 
the rest be the final effectes of the lawe
of nature.
               The cause of ye law of nature is god ye
instituter,Cause which gaue his law indifferently
in to the hertes of al mē.
               
                  THE lawe of nature is not deuided
of it selfe in to partes,Partes. but forasmoche
as some lawes of nature perteyne to
know god, some to loue the neyghbour
or to the cōseruacion of mākynde, therfore
let the varietie, and sundrinesse of
naturall lawes suffise in place of a diuision.
               Theffectes of natural lawes be takē
forth of ye very lawes writtē in ye mindes
of mē,Effe
                        •
                     es. as:Roma. i. c. To know god yt he is euerlastīg,
mighty & godly (that is) yt he

createth, gouerneth & 
                     •
                  serueth al thīgꝭ
for yt is to know the eternitie, power &
diuinitie of god. To worship one god.
To glorify god. To be thākful to god
the maker & sauour of al thīgꝭ. To cal
vpō god.Roma. 
                        •
                     . These later effectes cōcernīg
ye worship of god, thapostle taketh not
away frō the very gentiles, but yt they
haue thē by the law of nature, but he accuseth
thē, y• accordingly as they knew
god, they gaue hī not ye true worshyp,
wherfore whyle he sayth yt the gētyles
payd not neither yelded vnto god whō
they knew, his tru worship, he sheweth
sufficiētly yt they had a knowlege of ye
true worshyp.
               Now,☞ yt the gentyles gaue not the true
worship to god, whō by his creatures
they knew, ye wickednes of their minde
was to blame, which by meanes of original
syn, wold not obey the knowlege
that they haue of god, but is naturally
voyde of ye fear of god & trust ī god, neither
doth it aske any help of god. &c.
Wherfore all ye foresaid effectꝭ be so in
vs corrupt & spotted sithēs ye fal of Adā
yt we can not truly know god, truly
obey him. &c. which thingꝭ neuertheles
before the fal mā could haue done by ye
law of nature.
               
                  
There be yet other effectꝭ ofS y• law of
nature ꝑteyning to the loue of y• neighbour,
& to the cōseruatiō of mākynd in
the state of trāquillite, which be these.
To hurt no mā. To saue the cōmodities
of life. To haue a felow ī wedlok. To
gēdre issue. To nourish y• same. To help
an other. To kepe couenaūtꝭ. To haue
& to vse al thīges ī cōmon. To be born
vnto fredō, & such like. Of these effectꝭ
or lawes of nature, some nature hathe
corrected, as the law y• al thīgꝭ be in cō
                  mō,
& the law of fredom to thintent it
might kepe & cōserue the hole policy of
mā in a state of trāquillite & eschue the
corruptiō of the hole nature or ꝑte, yet
neuertheles not wtstāding this correctiō
those first natural lawes be not vtterly
extinct in the mindes of mā,The sentence Of M. Tulli Cicero. Marcus
Tullius Cicero witnessinge y• same in
the fyrst boke of his officies, where he
writeth yt the law concerning the communiō
of al thīges is not extinct, but according
to the sentēce of Plato, y• man
is borne to the vse & behoue of mā, ye one
shold help & further an other in giuing
receyuing. &c. by which wordes Cicero
calleth vs backe agayne to the lawe of
nature, which is of great efficacie and
strength through thinstinct of nature,

which as a leder or capiteyn, we ought
to folow, to thintēr ye cōmon vtilities
& ꝓfites might be brought forth in to y•
middes amongꝭ men by interchaūging
of officies & duties of one to an other:
So by the impulsiō & cōsent of nature
the law cōcerninge libertie gaue place to peril,Dispensaciō. of nature.
leest y• captiues & such as were
take prysoners ī warres shold be vtterlye
slayne, for nature had rather giue
place here (as a mā wold say) vnto nature
than wt great incōmoditie vtterly
to perish, or not to do for the best.
               
                  YET in the mean seasō libertie which
naturaly is grauē in the mynde of mā
abydeth stil, althoughe outwardly for
certein causes it be corrected, wherfore
it is to be graūted y• natural laws may
be corrected & redressed for the causes
aforesayd of nature it self, which continually
doth nothīg els but laboureth
to the cōseruaciō of mākynde, and that
in an outward vse of thynges, to thintent
y• greater perils might be eschued
which els wold corrupt y• hold nature,
or at lest a good part of it.☞ But y• lawe
of nature in such correctiō alwais yet
remayne hole and perpetual with the
mynde. So wt the mynd is communitie
of thynges styll remaynyng, although

that thingꝭ outwardly be priuate & vncōmon.
This cōmunitie whiche is the
mynd teacheth y• the neighbour hauing
nede, is to be holpē. Therfore it is to be
lerned here whan the lawes of nature
may be corrected & how, y• is whē for y•
sayd causes nature maketh one law to
gyue place to an other, when one dothe
mitigate another, y• so nature might be
kepte, which out wardly bicause of necessitie
or peril of mās societie is cōpelled
to giue place.Wisedome is to be had in iudgynge the lawes of nature. Certes it is very ꝓfitable
also in admittīg the lawes of nature
to put some differēce & choyse, lest
we iudge al maner of lawes to be īdiffet
rētly the lawes of nature. For there be
some which seme to be lawes of nature
& yet be not, but rather be 
                     •
                  trary to nature,
& to tēporal or ciuil lawes, for ciuil
or tēporall lawes also haue ꝓceded
out of the self nature & were fyrst ordeined
to kepe thordre of nature, & the societie
of mās life, of which sort be these
lawes, Gyue & take, as the poete Hesiodꝰ
reherseth, also this law: vi vi repellere
licet, it is lauful to put of violēce
 wt violence, & such like, which lawes be
sprong forth of the noughty affections
of our nature. Finally these also effectꝭ
ought to be added, a quiet cōsciēce by y•
                  
keping of the law of nature. And an euil
cōscience by the breache of the law
of nature.
               ¶Contraryes to the law of nature be
these.Contraries. to the lawe of nature To graūt yt the law of nature before
the fall of Adam was not the true
knowlege of god, yt he createth gouerneth
& cōserueth al thīges. To graūt y•
the lawes of nature maye be corrected
by the bisshop of Rome or other rulers
wtout y• violēce & iniury of nature.☞ To
this errour answereth the emperour ī
his instituciōs, where as he sayth yt the
lawes of nature be imutable, wherfore
I answere thus, yt simplye no lawes of
nature cā be corrected of any mā, for y•
power of thē remayne alwayes in the
hertes of mē stable & sure. Also y• lawes
of nature be in no mās hādes, wherfore
no mā can correct & chaūge y• which hī
self haue not made. But forasmoch as
we se certeyn lawes be redressed & corrected.Note how the correctiō of the lawes fyrst began.
Therfore now it is to be sene frō
whēs y• redresse & correctiō ꝓceded, vndoubtedly
natural lawes be so long immutable,
& not to be chaūged as no daū
                  ger
of the polecy & mās societie, or corruptiō
of the hole nature, or of any ꝑte
hereof moueth the contrary. For truly
vnto the conseruacion of these thinges

cōseruaciō of these thīges nature was
creat, & cōsequently al natural lawes.
Now because ye natural law cōcerning
the cōmunitie of thīges shold haue hurted
the cōseruacion of mākynde & publyque
peax: Therfore came nature &
made one law to giue place to another
yt the societie & felowship of mā sholde
be 
                     •
                  serued, & the greater peril eschued.
But how y• lawes now corrected do yet
stik stil in the mynde of mā cōtinually,
I haue shewed before. To graūt y• the
law of nature can be taken forth of the
mindes of mē, or vtterly extinguisshed
To which errour we answered before.
To graūt yt the law of nature hath the
same force & efficacie in knowyng god
and giuing the true worshyp vnto him
that it had before the fal of Adā, which
errour may be cōfuted by the .7. chap.
to the Romayns. To graūt yt the lawes
of nature, which concerne the loue of
men, and the conseruacion of mens felowshyp
or societie can doo as lytle in
outwarde officies necessary to the conseruaciō
of life as such laws of nature
as cōcerne ye knowlege of god & the gyuing
vnto him of his true worship. To
graūt yt we cā satisfie y• law of nature

                     •
                  cernīg the knowing of god, & giuing

vnto him true worship wtout the holye
ghost. To graūt ye any mā may transgresse
the lawe of nature wtout daūger
or scruple of cōsciēce. To dispēce litely
in natural lawes which ꝓtein to the
neyghbour no such peril of extreme necessitie
as before is declared cōpelling
to the same.
            
         
         
            Of the lawe of god.
CA. XVI.
            THe law of god in a generalitie is
a cōmaundemēt requyring ꝓfyteThe definicion of godde
                     •
                   lawe.
obediēce towardes god & cōdemning
such as ꝑforme not this perfyt obedience.
And sith no mā can performe
the same, it was certeyn yt the law was
giuen to this purpose, yt it shold lede vs
to ye knowlege of our sin & of our weiknes,
which thīges knowē we might flethens
vnto Christ the ꝑformer of ꝓfyt
obediēce, & so be made partakers of his
obedience through fayth vnto our iustificacion.
            
               ¶Proues of this diffinition.
               That the law of god requireth ꝓfite
obediēce it is opē ynough by many places
of Moses, as ī Deu .vi. chap. Thou
shalt loue him wt al thy hole hert wt thy
hole mynde. Also in the .x. chapiter the

same sentēce is red, wher also we be cō
                  maūded
to circūcise y• foreskyn of our
hert.Iosue .xxii. a Itē in y• boke of 
                     •
                  osue is red thus.
And stik you vnto him, & serue him ī al
your hert,Iosue .xxiiii. c in al your mynd. &c. Itē ī an
other place. Now therfore fear y• lorde
& serue him wt a most ꝓfyte & true hert:
So thē I cal ꝓfyte obediēce, which bringeth
beside y• outward workꝭ also a cō
                  senting
mynd to y• law of god. Christ ī
the new testamēt requireth the same ꝓfyte
obedience.Math .xxii. d. For whē he was demaū
                  ded
of a doctour of law, what is ye greatest
cōmaūdemēt? He answered: y• shalt
loue thy lorde god wt thy hole hert. &c.
Also to this vse & purpose he in
                     •
                  preteth
the law in the .v. of Mat. to thintēt he
wold shew, yt it is not ynough to bring
only outward workes to the fulfilling
of the law, onles y• brīgest also a cōsenting
mynd. The place in Deut. ca. 17.
testifieth clerely y• al those be cōdēned
by the law which ꝑforme not the ꝓfite
obediēce of the law towardes god. For
Moses saith: cursed is euery one y• shal
not abide in al such thīges as is writtē
in the boke of y• law. But now again y•
no mā kepe the law vnto the ꝓfyte obediēce
of the same, euery mā ꝓueth & feleth
in him selfe sufficiēty, & Christ declareth

where he techeth yt his office is
to fulfil the law,Math .v. b & that he came to that
intent.Roma .iii. c. S. Paul also defineth the law to
be the knowlege of syn, y• is, which accuseth,
frayeth the cōscience, & maketh
synnes knowen. Item he saith. The law
entred in by y• way y• syn might aboūde.Roma. 
                        •
                     . d
The rest of the diffini
                     •
                  ion appereth in
the thyrde chap. to the Gala. where the
apostle expresseth the vse of the law giuē
to the leding vnto Christ:Galath. iii. d wherfore
the law was our scholemaster or leder
vnto Christ, to thintent y• by fayth we
shold be iustified, and not by the workes
of the lawe.
               
                  OF gods lawes,Diuisyon of gods lawe Causes some be moral, some
ceremonial, & some iudicial.
               
                  THE cause of gods law is god ye instituter.
The publissher & declarer was
Moses. The cause of enactīg gods law
was the frowardnes of the Israelites
which was to be chastised wt a law, as
it were by a scholemaster or leader,Gala. iii. d tyl
the comming of Chryst. Other occasions
of the gyuynge of gods law be put
of Paule in the thirde chap. to the Ro.
by these wordes, where he sayth: what
prefermēt hath the Iewe, or what helped
circumcision. Surely very moche.
First vnto them was cōmitted the spekingꝭ

of god (yt is to say) certeyn lawes
& ceremonies vnto a people certeyn, in
which y• ꝓmises made vpō Christ shold
be disclosed by the clere testimonye of
god. The principal effectes of the lawe
Paul putteth in the .iij. & .vi. chap. to ye
Rom.Roma .iii. c Roma. v. b Roma .vii. b as these. To declare synnes, for
by the law cōmeth y• knowlege of syn.
Also the law entred in by the way ye sin
might abounde & be encreased. But I
knewe not syn (sayth Paule) but by the
law, for I had not knowen 
                     •
                  cupiscēce
or lust, onles the law had said:Geue .iii. yu shalt
not lust. Also god sayth vnto Adā, who
hath shewed the that yu were naked, but
that yu hast eaten of the tre, of whiche yu
were commaunded not to eate. To accuse,
to feare, to damne the conscience.
To make the cōscience vnquiet doubting,
& incerteyn, bicause it espyeth yt it
can not kepe the law. And on the cōtrary
parte the conscience is made quiet &
certeyn,Roma .iiii. when by thexēple of Abraham
it considereth onely the promesse. To
kepe mē vnder awe, tyll the cōming of
Chryst, as witnesseth Paul. The lawe
is a scholemaster vnto Christ.Gala .iii. d i. Timot. i. b Item the
law was gyuen for the vnrightous persōs,
to teache the true workes yt please
god, and wt whiche we exercise our obedence

towardes god. To be a doctrine about
which & vnder which the ꝓmises
of Christ be opened,Roma .iii. a as Paul to the Romayns
declareth. For this is thende of
the hole polecy yt was institute among
the Iues: Of these effectes, some be only
ciuil namely such as monish & intreate
of repressing the malice of man, & some
perteyn only to the conscience, as be al
the rest, but these effectes ought not only
to be reiect & cast vpon the Iues, but
they endure ī their ful vertue & strēgth
styll amonges all suche as haue not yet
Chryst, neyther the holy ghoste, accordyng
to this saying: Where y• spirite
of the lorde is, there is liberty, I mean
to be enfraunchised & fre from the law
and tyrannye of the same. Item to the
ryghtous man (sayth s. Paule) a law is
not giuē,Timoth. 
                        •
                     . that is to saye to such as haue
not Chryst, and be vnder grace, lawes
be not made but to the vnrightous and
disloyal or disobedient, I mean to such
as yet haue not Christ, neither be led wt 
the spiryte of god.Rom .viii. For surely there is
nowe no condemnacion to suche as be
planted in Chryst Iesu.Gala .iii. 
                        •
                     
                   Forasmoche as
Chryst hath redemed vs from the curse
of the lawe whyle he was made for vs
a curse.
               
                  
                  THE cōtraries of gods law I wil
not bring forth, tyl I haue finisshed al
the partes of it.
            
         
         
            Of moral lawes. CA. XVII.
            MOral lawes be the .x. cōmaundemētes,Morall lawes what they be.
which expound & declare
the lawes of nature, & teache the
workes y• be pleasaunt to god.
            
               OF the fyrst ꝑte of the diffinition y•
moral lawes be the .x.Probatiō of the definiciō
                cōmaundemētes
doubteth no man.Math. v. And forasmoche as
Christ saith yt he teacheth not a doctrine
straunge frō the lawes & ꝓphetes, & the
law & prophetes requyre fayth and the
loue of the neyghbour: Therfore the
moral lawes vndoubtedly doth teache
workes y• please god, for they cōmaund
fayth and loue of the neyghbour. Now
the .x. commaundementes maye be referred
and reduced holly to fayth and
to the loue of the neyghbour.She fyrst table of Moses The first
table of Moses fetteth forthe and expoundeth
these lawes folowynge of
nature. To knowe God: to worshyp
god, to cal on god, to obeye god, to gloryfye
god, to be grate and louynge to
God. To knowe that God rewardeth
the ryghtous, and punyssheth the vnryghtous.
Amonges these lawes of

nature some concerne the inwarde worship
whiche is taught by the firste commaūdement,
some cōcerne the outward
worship which is taught by ye second cō
               maūdement,
some ceremonyes declared
by the third cōmaundement. The secōd
table expouneth and setteth forth these
lawes of nature folowinge.The second table. To prohibite
iniurye & to punysh the gyltye. To
hurt no man. To preserue the felowship
& cōiūction of wedlocke. To vse thinges
in cōmon. To norysh the yssue. To kepe
promyse and couenauntes. To helpe an
other, and suche lyke. Of these, the prohibicion
of iniurye and punyshmente of
offences maye be reherred to the .iiii. precepte.
To hurte no man and to norysshe
the yssue be referred to the .v. The scocie
tye of wedlocke to the .vi. The communitie
of thinges and to helpe an other to
the .vii. To kepe couenaūtes to the .viii.
            ¶The institutor and maker of the motall
lawes is god.Causes. The publysher & setter
forth is Moses.
            ¶Of moral lawes some perteine to god
and some to the neighbour.Partes God wolde
the morall lawes to be distributed and
put ī to two tables not without a great
mysterye which thing I haue opened in
an other place. And albeit y• forenamed

effectꝭ whiche were ascribed to gods law
generally, do also agree to moral lawes
these that folowe be more proprely annexed to morall lawes, that is to we
                  •
               e
To declare and expounde the lawes of
nature. To teache the true workes that
please god. Out of these also the newe
testament boroweth his worke wherwt
the beleuers exercyse their obedience towardes
god, not because Moses techeth
those workes, but bycause nature also
hath taught the same, wherfore to this
effect of morall lawes perteyne all the
cōmaundementes in y• new testamēt cō
               cernīg
good maners as be ī sūdry places
of Paules epist. namely. Ro .xii. Ephes.

                  •
               iii. Balath. v. &c. Forlyke as the tables
of Moses which conteyne the .x. cōmaū
               dementes
do expounde & set forthe the
lawes of nature. So such thinges as be
cōmaunded in the new testament cōcerning
maners declare the decalogy or .x.
cōmaundementes. Also lyke as he shall
moche better vnderstande the lawes of
nature which hath the knowlege of the
x. commaūdemētes, so he lyke wyse shal
far better vnderstand the cōmaūdementes
concerning maners in ye new testament
which can refer y• same to the two
tables of Moses as to theyr propre and

originall fountaynes. Howbeit this dlygently
must be consydred where th
scripture speaketh of fayth as of the inwarde
worshyp of god wherof y• outewarde
worship & where of ceremonyes
Also it speketh of y• maners of lyfe.
         
         
            Of lawes iudicial. XVIII.
            IUdicial lawes be such as cōmaund of
temporall polytyque or ciuill causes
            ¶This diffinicion is certayne & appereth
euen by y• very nature of y• wordeProbacyo
                     •
                  
               
and temporall or ciuile causes perteyne
to iudgementes.
            ¶Also of these lawes god is y• īstitutor
& Mases the publyssher & setter forthe.Causes.
            
            ¶Bycause y• thinges be dyuers of whithe
iudgementes be gyuen and debates
arise:Partes▪
                Therfore dyuers also and sundrye
iudicial lawes were in the policy of Moses
made, whiche diuersitie of thinges
shal here be put in stede of partes. Surely
all the iudicial lawes of Moses may
be reduced to these chiefe places and hedes.
Theft, murther, burtīg, of y• parētes
like for lyke called 
                  •
               alio, punyshmentes
c
                  •
               idinges, damage done, aduoutrye succession
wedlocke, lawful and vnlawful
persons with whome contractes of matrymony
may be made or not made.
            ¶Beside y• effectꝭ which y• iudicial lawesEffecte
                     •
                  
               
               
haue in common with such effectes as be
ascribed to the hole lawe of God they
chalenge vnot thē proprely these .ii. To
be signes and testimonyes of the profession
of faith towardes god. To re
                  •
               reine
men from outward iniuryes and vices,
And bycause this effecte is merely polytike
therfore theffectes politike or cyuile
lawes maye also bether be broughte as
be these. To dryue awaye iniuryes. To
punysh the gyltye. To conserue the publique
honestye and such lyke, wherof we
shall speake herafter in y• intreatinge of
humane lawes.
         
         
            Of ceremonial lawes. CA. XIX.
            LAwes ceremonial be such as be ordeyned
cōcernīg ceremonies & rites
of the church,Diffinition. & such thynges & persons
as belonge to the perfourminge of
the rites and ceremonies.
            ¶This diffinition appeareth good euen
of the very nature of the worde,Probacion. rite is
a more generall terme & includeth that
whiche by the word of ceremony might
be happelye omitted, but whersoeuer eccliasticall
rites and ceremonyes be there
suche thinges & persons be, requyred as
be necessarye to thexecucion of the same.Causes
            
            ¶Thinstitutor & maker of these, is god

and Moses the publisher.
            ¶The varietie and sūdrynes of ceremonial
lawes shal serue in stede of the partes.Partes
For ceremoniall lawes maye be re
               
                  •
               erred
to these thinges ensuinge, that is
to were, to the temple to sacrifices to y•
garmentes of the prestes, to expiacious,
to consecracions of prestes, to eatyng, to
holydayes, to howes, and the most part
of these thinges may be reduced to the
iudaicall presthode. Nowe of these thinges
chiefly treateth the thirde booke of
Moses called Leuiticus.
            ¶Theffectes of ceremoniall lawes be,Effectes. y•
they were fygures and tipes of the spirituall
presthode of Christe, as the epistle
to the Ebrues ryght excellentlye declareth
namely in the .ix. and .x. chapiters,
where it is writtē.Ebre. x. 
                     •
                  . The law which hath
but the shadow of good thingꝭ to come,
and not the thinges in their owne fassiō
can neuer make the commers thervnto
perfite with sacrifices which the offre euery
yere contynuallye. &c. Also co be signes
and testimonies of the profession of
faith towardes god. The effectꝭ properly
belong vnto ceremonial lawes, beside
those that they haue in common with y•
hole lawe of god.
            
               ¶Cōtraryes to y• hole law of god.
               
                  
¶Contraryes to the hole lawes of god
be these.Cōtraries to the hole lawe A
                        ••
                     honti
                        •
                     es. To dispise or reiect with y• A
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     •
                  ontickes
the lawe or olde testament.
To renounce & vtterly damne the lawe
with the Seuerians.Seuerians. To saye the lawe
pertayne nothing to christen mē so y• amonges
thē no vse ne ꝓfite is of it, In
which opinion some men do shew y• also
S.Hierome. I
                     •
                  rome weln
                     ••
                  e was. To say y• by y•
law of god the naturall weakenes that
is to say cōcupiscēce is not damned. To
graunt y• we can satisfy the lawe of god
by our owne outward workes. Also by
our owne inward endeuoure of will although
our cōcupiscēce or lust be repugnaunt.
To say y• workes of y• law please
god wtout Christ & y• holy ghost. To saye
after the recept of Christ man can so satysfy
the law that he is hable to allege
& pleade agaynst y• yre of God his own
iustice gotten by his owne propre workes.
To say the gentiles were iustified
by the law of nature, ye fathers by ye law
of Moses & we be iustified by y• lawe of
the gospel. To say that the perfect fulfilling
of the lawe vnto iustifycacion before
god hath euer ꝑteyned to vs or ben
in our powers or yet pertayne to vs or
is in our powers. This errour is agaīste
the office of Christ which witnesseth y•
                  
his office is to fulfyll the lawe who indedeMath. v. vse
fulfylled the vttermost poynte of
the true rightousnes, forasmoche as he
brought both the outward, workes and
also a consenting mynde to the lawe as
the prophete Esay openly teacheth in y•
                  Esaie. liii. c
liii. chapiter sayinge that he committed
no wickednes neither was there anye
gile in his mouth. To say the lawes of
god be counselles gyuen onely to the ꝑfecte
persons. But this is a peryllous errour
which teacheth that god chaūgeth
his eternal wil for our infirmity. Thou
therfore which felest thou canst not fulfyll
the lawe, tun to him that can. Neyther
is the lawe therfore giuen y• thou
myghtest be hable to kepe it. To graūt
that the law outwardly kept iustyfyeth
before god. To say beside the workes
of the morall lawes there maye yet better
be ordeyned and be al redy ordeyned
which do plese god. To say there be many
workes omytted in the moral lawes
which the pope hath supplyed. To saye
y• moral lawes be not sufficiēt to thexercise
of good workes & to the testificacion
of faith before god.Therrour of papistes. To say y• moral lawes
at lest way do iustify a christē mā before
god although neyther y• iudicial lawes
ne y• ceremonial lawes cā do y• same

To whiche erroure I answere that the
moral lawes sholde in dede iustyfye the
thristen mā yf it were in our powers perfectly
to fulfyll the same. To say the morall
lawes binde vs bycause Moses did
publysh and promulgate them and not
bycause nature hath taughte thē before
Moses. To denye that al suche thinges
as be commaunded in the new testamēt
concerning the true worship of god and
maners of lyfe maye be well referred to
the decalogye of Moses conteyning the

                     〈◊〉
                   cōmaundementes. To brynge agayne
the iudiciall lawes of Moses & to binde
the christen men to the same as nowe of
late certayne hertikes haue gone about
namely Monetarius Pipetius and the
Anabaptistes.Monetarius Piperius Anabaptist▪
                   To reiecte rasshely suche
iudicial lawes as consent with the law
of nature. Such lawes to abrogate and
disanull is to do iniurye & force against
nature and to chalenge to be free from
nature. So certeyn mē at this day vnder
the pretence of lyberty do attempt & go
about to vngarnysshe nature of the iudiciall
lawes & to garnysh or rather defoyle
& contamynate her with wickednes.
To graunt the ceremonial lawes in
y• olde testament iustified before god bycause
they conteyned vnder thē sacrifices

for sinnes. To graunt that albeit in the
newe testament the sacrifices of MosesThe errour of them that make ye masse a sacrifyce.
be no longer in theyr force & strengthe,
yet that the newe testament hath newe
sacrifices for sinnes institute and ordeyned
of Christ hym selfe, that is to wete
that in the masse Christ sholde be sacrificed.
To saye that christen men be not
free from all ceremoniall lawes whiche
erroure maye be thus confuted, christen
men muste nedes be free from all ceremoniall
lawes bicause the iudaical ceremones
agre not wt the lawe of nature also
bicause in the newe testament sacrifyces
made of beestes be no lōger in strength
& force ne y• other ceremonyes of Moses
lawe but the spirituall workes of the
harte & affections repurged by the holye
ghost in the hart. Furthermore the kindome
of Christ is without al maner of
obseruacion.Luce. xvii. 
                        •
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            Of humane lawes. CA. XX.
            THe trety of lawes by due ordre requireth
yt I shold speake also here
of mās lawes, though it were for
none other thīg, but bicause I haue made
mēciō of thē ī ye diuisiō of law ī a generalite.Diffynicyon.
¶Mannes lawes therfore be of
which y• authors & makers be princes or

other inferriour magistrates, ordeined
to y• cōseruasiō of peax & of the publique
honestly in the worlde.
            ¶This diffinition appeareth true by y•
very nature of y• word,Proue. & I added therin
feri
                  •
               ur magistrate, lest a mā shold thynk
y• humane lawes made of such be not of
force and strength.
            ¶The causes & the authours of mans
lawes be (as I said) the superiour and
inferyour magistrates,Cause. as emperouces
kinges, princes, common weith. cities,
&c. But forasmoch as men be here offended
and greued, thinkinge y• they ought
not to kepe these lawes bycause they be
but the ordynaunces of men: Therfore
we must haue respecte to the principal
cause of the magistrate which is god as
witnesseth Paule,Roma. xiii. 
                     •
                  . So that god whiche
hath institute & ordeyned ye rulers to be
his ministers & vicars, doth also consequently
alowe their lawes: Therfore it
were not greatly amysse ne vnꝓfytable
to make god him self in maner y• cause &
author of humane lawes.☞ which lawes
god do publysh & ꝓmulgate by thē as
by his instrumētes & meanes.Cicero. Cicero in
his .ii. boke Delegibus, maketh y• lawes
of nature causes of humāe lawes where
he saith. N
                  •••
                autē videntur primū humane

leges e legibus nature. That is,
mens lawes seme fyrst to haue spronge
out of the lawes of nature. wherfore
mēs lawes be so tarforth honest & good
as they be eyther to the conseruacion or
to the declaracion of the natural lawes
but if they be repugnaūt to the lawe of
nature, forth wt they are to be iudged vn
honest & tyrannycall, & agayne they be
wycked & vngodly, yf they be agaynste
goddes lawe.
            ¶Mēnes lawes be deuidedd into ciuil
or tēporall lawes,Partes. & into ecclestasticall
lawes which heretofore haue bē called
pōtyficyall lawes. I call ecclesiasticall
lawes, such ordynaunces as cōcerne the
honest ceremonyes & rytes in y• cōgregacyō.
Also such as cōcerne priuilegies reuenues
& stipendes of the ministers of the
church, & such lyke, which lawes so long
as they be not repūgnaūt to chrystianitie
& gods worde are to be obserued, and
kept not only bycause suche lawes & ordinaūces
are in effecte ciuil lawes & necessary
to the ryght institucyō of a publyque
weale, but also bycause goddes
word cōmaūdeth vs to noury
                  •
               he y• mynisters
of y• churche, & that all thyng be
in the church semyngly & in order.Effectes
            
            ¶The same effectes & officies that be appoynted

to rulers maye be assigned also
to theyr lawes, for y• ruler oughte to exercyse
his office, to iudge, & defēde, accordynge
to y• lawes, Now the officyes or
effectes of humane lawes by y• worde of
god be these To defēde y• gilties, to punysshe
y• gyltie, to dryue awaye intu
                  •
               ies
To reueng iniutyes done to y• subiectes
These offyces thapostle doth assigne to
y• rulers / & also saynte Peter in his first
eppstle cap.Rom
                     •
                  . xiii. b ii. Itē, to cōserue y• publyque
honesty. To cōserue & mayntein a quyet
& peacible cōmon welth.Cicero lib. iii. delegibus. For as Cicero
testifyeth, suche is y• efficacye & strengeh
of y• lawes, that without them neyther
any house, neyther citye, neyther nacyō
               cā
stand, neither ye hole nature of thingꝭ
nor y• world it self. Item to declare & expounde
the lawes of nature, to correcte
vyces, to commende vertues.
            
               THE cōtraryes to humane lawes be
these.Contraryes To saye mennes lawes be not cō
               uenyent
and mete for chrysten men to
vse. To affyrme that the gospell taketh
awaye humane lawes & polytyque ordynaunces,
where as the gospel is a spirytual
kyngdome,Iohn̄. xviii. f as wytnesseth Christ
sayng, my kīgdome is not of this world
To deny that humane lawes made of
any inferiour magistrate are to be kept.

To deny that mēnes lawes be violēt &
tyranny call, when they be repugnaunt
to nature & wycked and vngodly, when
they be cōtrarye to the lawe of god. To
deny yt ecclesiasticall lawes cōcernynge
honest ceremonies, stipendes & lyuynges
of the ministers of the churche, & suche
lyke are to be kepte, who so euer made
them so that the same be admytted & ratyfyed
by the kynge & hed rulers. To denye
y• theffectes of humane lawes may
be taken forth of scripture as muche as
pertayneth to the offyce of the rulers.Anabaptist
                     •
                  s
            
            To forbydde with the Anabaptistes the
vse or excercise of humane lawes vnto
Chrysten men. To condemne wt the said
Anabaptistes all politique lawes & ordinaunces
of mā, & in theyr place to substitute
& ordeyne the tēporall lawes of
Moses. To affyrme that tēporal lawes
touche not the conscience contrarye to y•
doctryn of Pau. which sayth, we ought
to obey not only for feare of vengeaūce
but also bycause of conscience.Rom
                     •
                  . xiii. 
                     •
                  
                Yea the
workes of the polytyque lyfe and kepinges
of mēns lawes be good workes
ī y• godly ꝑsons & a tru worshyp of god.
For by y• same & all one cōmaundement
we obey the rulers & kepe theyr lawes.
For y• selfe same god which hath bydd
                  •
               
               
vs to giue honour vnto the rulers hath
cōmaūded vs also to kepe theyr lawes.
         
         
            Of the gospell. CA XXI.Diffinicion
            
            THe gospell is a preachynge of repentaunce
and 
                  •
               orgeuenes of synnes
in Chrystes name.
            ¶This diffiuicyon is made of y• partesProbacion
of the gospel & appeareth by the wordꝭ
of Chryst where after his resurrectiō be
sayd to his disciples. Thus it is wryten
& thus it behoued Chryst to suffre & to
tyse agayn from deth the .iii. day, & that
repentaunce & remissyō of synnes sholde
be preached in his name amonges al natyons.
&c. Chryst is the persō for whose
sake repentaunce is preached & for whō
forgeuenes of synnts chaunceth.
            
               THE cause of the gospell disclosed isCause.
y• mercy of god by whiche god ꝓmysed
thē glad tydynges to mākynd cōcernīge
Chryst.Ephe. i. This caus y• apostle otherwhies
calleth y• acceptable pleasure of god, otherwhyles
grace. The ꝓmyse also may
be y• cause of y• gospel accordynge to the
sayng of P. put a parte to preach y• gospel
of god which he ꝓmysed afore, &c.Roma. l. 
                     •
                  
               
            
            Hither vnto belong also such places of
scripture as cōteyn the ꝓmyse of y• gospel
which first was made to Adā & afterwarde

to Abrahā & so by lytle & lytle of
tētymes afterward to the holy fathers.Gen. iii. Gen. xii. xvii. and. xxii. The meane.
Chryst is the meane or ꝑsō ī whom god
hath promysed the gospel to mākynde,
& in whom it was fyrst reueled & disclosed
at the tyme appointed y• god had set
with hīselfe & determyned y• thorough
hym in hym and for hym sholde be offered
to all y• beleue forgyuenes of sinnes
which is the very effecte of the gospell.
The holy ghost lightneth to the gospel
which was promysed in Chryst & nowe
opened.The ill
                     •
                  minator to the
                     •
                   Gospell. Thoccasion of the ꝓmise▪
                Nowe mans nature oppressed.
 wt syn & deth for the fall of Adam was
y• occasiō of y• gospel fyrst promysed & afterwarde
disclosed. This occasyon is opened
in the .iii. chap. of Genesis, where
euen in the very synnes the gospell is
promysed to Adam.The parte of the gospel Luc. iiii. 
                     •
                  
               
            
            ¶There be .ii. partes of the gospel repē
               taunce
& remyssyon of synnes, temyssyō
of synnes is the ꝓpre parte of y• gospel,
repētaunce the meane & entraunce of remissyō.
For in repētaūce is knoweleged
the syn which knowē the synner is occasioned
to fle to Christ as to a phisiciō for
whome synnes be forgyuē. And for this
cause Chryst begīneth his preachyng wt 
puokyng mē to repentaunce as it is red
in Math.Mathe. iiii. 
                     •
                  
                From that tyme Iesus began

to preach & say repent ye, the kyngdom
of heuē is at hand. Also in Marke.Mat. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                The
tyme is fulfylled and the kyngdome of
god is at hand repent ye and beleue the
gospell. Not that it is the propre office
of Chryste to preache repentaunce but
he repeteth the doctryne of Iohan concernyng
penaūce to thyntent he myght
cōtyrme the same▪ & also that we might
know that by the knowlegyng of oure
synnes which in repētaūce doth chaūce
we haue intraunce & accesse to Chryste.
            ¶Theffectes of the gospell be takē cō
               monly
out of ye partes & thinges incidēt
to the gospell,Theffectes of the gospell. which folow remissiō of
synnes as y• propre effectes of y• gospell
which be these. To preche repentaunce.
This effecte is certayne of thexemple of
Chryste whiche began his prechynge wt 
repētaunce. Also of thexemple of Iohn̄
Baptyst the messenger & runner before.
This effect also must necessarily go before,
bicause without p̄achyng of repē
               taunce,
there is no occasyon to come to
remissy on of synnes / for repentaunce is
in maner y• cause of fayth, as here after
shall be declared. which obteyneth forgyuenes.
Item to prech remissiō of sin̄es
in Christ / for y• promyse of y• gospel was
made in Chryst & disclosed in Chryst, for

thobteyninge of remission of sinnes.
            ¶Also these effectes. To preache iustifycacion
in Christ, and that our reconsiliacion
with god the father is in Christe
To preache that we be rightous and
wel takē of god the father for Christes
sake. To preache the giuinge of the
holye ghost, and of the euerlastinge life
in Christ. To teach that y• conscience is
in rest and quyet through Christ, as witnesseth
Paule,Roma. v we haue pear towardes
god by our Lord Iesu Christ. To teach
y• we please god for no workes or merites
of oure owne, but onely for Chryst.
And this is y• very true lyberty of y• gospel,The true lybertie of the gospell.
to know yt we be reconcyled & made
at one wt god through Christ although
we satisfy not y• law. Hither pertayne y•
places of y• scripture which be concerning
the promyse of y• new couenaunte

                  〈◊〉
                testament as Ieremy. 31. Ezechi. 35. &c.
To teache y• true worship of god true
faith & feare which worship was almost
out of vse & lost by reason of y• humane
& pharisaical cōstitucions, as y• prophetꝭ
euery where complayne.
            ¶These effectes be vniuersall & franke
euen as the gospel is a franke promise &
uniuersall. But yt theffectes of y• gospel
chaunce not to al mē is bicause al mē beleue

not. For faith is the meane wherby
theffectes of the gospel be purchased.
            ¶Cōtraryes to y• gospel be these.Contraries to the gospell To a
                  •
               
               fyrme
that the promyse of the gospel is
perticuler whiche errour is reproued by
manye places of scripture as Math xi. 
                  •
               .
Tim
                  •
                .ii. To say the gospell was knowen
to nature, Agaynst whiche erroure
Paule alone is sufficient declaring that
it was hid & at last releued & opened 
                  〈◊〉
               
god aboue.Ephe. ii. 
                     •
                  . iii. To affirme that the fathers
in the olde testement had an other gospel
promised than we haue now which
erroure maye partly be confuted by the
place of Paule .i. Cor. x. where be saith
that all the fathers dranke of the spirituall
rocke and the rocke was Christe
If therfore the fathers dranke of Christ
Ergo they had also y• gospel knowne be

                  •
                spir
                  •
               te, ī which Christ, was ꝓmysed.
To cōtēde y• y• gētiles had y• law of nature
ī stede of y• gospel, y• Iues y• law of
Moses & christē mē y• gospell of Christe,
but this erroure, isopē sith by y• testimonyes
of scripture it is euidēt y• ther hath
ben alwayes one & the same gospel from
the begīning to which who soeuer hath
giuē credite & faith haue ben saued. To
affirme that the gospell do promyse forgiuenes
of sinꝭ vnto such also as doubt.
            
               
To say the gospel doth promyse forgiuenes
of sinnes, condicionallye yf it be purchased
with workes. To saye the gospel
promyseth remission of synnes to ydle
personnes whiche withoute any true
mocion of mynde and withoute faythe
take it. To graunt that any man can be
beleue the gospell without the callinge
& lyghteninge of the holy ghost. To denye
the gospell to be a franke promise.
To denye theffectes of the gospell frely
to chaunce without y• and or respecte
of workes. To saye theffectes of the gospell
do chaunce partelye by faith partly
by oure workes. To saye the promise of
the gospell must be measured by predestinacion
& not of it selfe. To dreame y•
the gospell is onely preached by the spirite
in the herte and that there nede not
any outwarde preaching & ministracion
of the worde contrary to the doctryne
of thapostle.Roma. x. d To saye theffectes of the
gospell do chaunce without faithe. To
preache one parte of the gospel without
the other as repentaūce without remission
of sinnes, or on the contrarye part.
remyssion of sinnes without repentaūce
to make mē ydle & careles by ouermoch
preachīg of remission of sinnes not ones
touching repentaunce y• other part of y•
               
gospel. To graunt that without preaching
of repentaunce, the gospell maye
be rightly receyued. To affirme that forgyuenes
of sinnnes is had without penaunce.The true. diffinicion of penaunce
I call penaunce the true fearing
or broosing of ye consciēce & the acknowleging
of sinꝭ. For the conscience beyng
thus made afrayd & striken downe to ye
grounde by the knowlege of synnes taketh
first an occasion to draw nere vnto
Christ by fayth and to receyue at his hā
               des
remyssion of synnes Item to saye
the gospell for this cause preacheth penaunce
that remyssion of sinnes sholde
be gyuen for our workes sake or for our
owne worthynes. This errour I haue
debated & refuted in the handlyng of ye
partes of the gospell.
         
         
            Of faith. CA. XXII.
            FAyth is an assured trust vpon the ꝓmyses
of Christ,Diffinicion of faythe. iustifienge al suche
ꝑsons before god by his acceptaūce
as haue this fayth certeyn & vndoubted
¶In the epi. to ye Ebrues,Proue. Hebr. xi. a faith is saide
to be an assurāce of thīges which are hoped
for, yt is to say, a most certeyn knowlege
wtout doubting. And this most certeyn
knowlege Paul expresseth in Abrahā
wt most lyuely termes,Roma. iiii. d saying: which
Abraham: contrarye to hope byleued in

hope, that he shold be y• father of many
nacions, according to that whiche was
spokē. So shall thy sede be. And he faynted
not in the fayth, nor yet cōsidred his
owne bodye which was now deed, euē
whan he was almost an .
                  •
               . yere olde,
neyther yet yt Sara his wife was past
childe beringe yet he staggered not at y•
promyse of god through vnbeleue, but
was made stronge in the fayth, & gaue
honour to god, fully asured y• what he
had promysed, yt he was hable to make
good, & therfore was it reckened to him
for rightousnes. Hithervnto we haue
rehersed these wordes of Paul. Now y•
faith is a trust or confidence vpon the
promyses of Christ is declared by an other
worde of the sayde text in the epist.Hebre. xi. a
to y• Ebrues, where as it is called a certen
                  •
               y
of thinges which are not sene. Also
in thexemple before remembred of Abraham
where Paul said yt he staggered
not,Roma. iiii, d ne wauered at the promyse of god
we se manefestly yt the promyse is the ꝓpre
obiect or matter whervpō faith worketh,
Christ is the person for whom y• ꝓmyse
was made according to this sayīg
In thy sede all nacions shall be blessed
This sede was Christe as witnesseth
Paule.Gene. xii. a Gal. iii. c Nowe of theffecte and workyng

of fayth which is that it iustifieth, we be
certefied by Paule, who concludeth saynge.
Arbitramur igitut 
                  •
               ide iustifica
                  •
               t
hominē abs
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                operibus legis. yt is to say
Therfore we iudge yt a man is iustified
by faith without the workes of the law
Itē, in y• .v. chap. he sayth. Bicause therfore
we are iustified by fayth.Roma. v. a we are at
peace with god, through our lorde Iesu
Chryst, by whom we haue a bryngīg in
through fayth vnto this grace wit
                  ••
                we
stande. I added (before god) bicause I
wolde seperat y• ciuyle iustyce from the
iustice of y• gospel.we be iustified by unpucaciō or gods acceptannce. Also Iaded (by acceptaunce)
y• is to saye, by imputacyon, or
imputatyuely, bycause I wolde take awaye
y• opiniō of our owne meryte or
workes For not accordynge to our meryte
or workes faythe iustifyeth but accordinge
to grace by acceptaunce or imputacio / 
for as Paule saythe.Roma. iiii. a To hym y•
worketh is y• reward not rekened of fauour
but of deuti, but to him y• worketh
not but byleueth on hym y• iustifyeth y•
vngodly, is his faythe counted for rightwysnes.
By these words thapostle putteth
as cōtraryes togyther meryte & imputaciō.
                  
                     •
                  ene. xv. b Roma. iiii. u
Also in y• exemple of Abraham
y• scripture sayth. Abraham beleued god
& it was coūted vnto him for rightwysnes.

Also Dauid in his psalm saith.psal. xxxi. 
                     •
                  
                Blessed
i
                  •
                y• mā to whom god shal not 
                  •
               pute
sin. Truely we haue here an exēple in Abrahā
of a sure & vndoubted faith, whiche
is y• father of that byleue, y• by thexēple
of hī we might be iustified by faith.
¶THE causes of faithe be y• holye
gost & the worde.The causes of faythe. For y• holy ghoste by a
meane that is generall & appointed of
god, moueth the hertes, neither doth he
giue faith but by the worde,Roma x. d accordinge
to the sayinge of Paul. Faith is of hearinge.
& hearinge by the worde of god.
Furthermore the cause also of faith, is
the holy ghost, for fayth is his gifte,i. corinth. xil. 
                     •
                  
                as
affirmeth saint Paul. Also repentaunce
in maner is a cause of fayth, or at leest a
greate occasion. For by repentaunce the
sin is knowen, now the knowlege of sin
doth ministre an occasion to haste vnto
Christ, which so sone as he is caught by
faith forgyueth sinnes, but bycause re
                  •
               ē
               taūce
is a part of the word or gospel therfore
this cause is cōprised vnder y• worde
nether shal we nede to seuer it frō y• word
¶Faith of which we speake here is not
clouē into partes:Partes For it is one certaine
mociō of mīde hauing a stedfast eye vpō
the promyses of Christ and assentinge to
him, but forasmoch as y• scripture 
                  •
               isce
                  •
               
               neth

the true and lyuely fayth from the
fayned & deed fayth, therfore faith may
be after a maner diuided into the true
fayth & fayned fayth, not y• fayth whiche
is true and iustifieth can be fayned
or deed but that we myghte knowe y•
the deed & fayned faith is vnprofitable
vnto iustificacion & differeth nothynge
in dede from an opinion. The true faith
from the fayned is discerned of Paul,
                  
                     •
                  timoth. i. b y•
quicke & lyuinge fayth is dyuyded frō
the ded & vneffectuall fayth of s. Iames
in his epistle.Iacob. ii. d But as touchinge to that
diuision of fayth which y• scole men vnto
this day haue folowed I wyl speake
herafter.
            ¶One of the principall effecteꝭ of fayth
is iustifycaciō of which al the rest depēde
& procede.Theffectes or workes of faythe. This effecte is cōfirmed
by many places of scripture & also by sū
               dry
exemples, as by the textes of Paule
before remēbred where he saythe, We
iudge therfore y• mā is iustified by faith
Itm̄,Roma. iiii. d Roma. v. a Abacuc. ii. a Gala. iii. d Iustified therfore by fayth we are
at pe
                  •
               x wt god. &c. Also y• ꝓphet Abacuk
saith. The rightous man shall lyue by
faith. Itē to the gal. Paul writeth. The
law was our scholemayster vnto Christ
yt we myght be iustifyed by faith.Gene. xv. b Roma. iiii. a Exemples
prouinge the same be these, Abrabā
               
beleued god & it was coūted vnto hym
for rightousnes, Christ said to the sinful
womā. Thy fayth hath saued the.Math. ix. c Math. ix. d Als
                  •
               
to the blynde mā he saide, loke vp thy
fayth hath saued the.
            ¶Also these effectes be of faythe. To
make the conscience quyete,Roma. v. a accordiuge
to the testimonye of Paul, Iustyfyed
therfore by faith we are at peax wt god
through oure Lorde Iesu Christ. To ascertayne
vs that we please god, for without
fayth it is impossible to please god
To make vs certayne of gods promyse
To make vs sure of euerlastīg lyfe.Iohan. iii. c Act. xv. v. For
he that beleueth in the son hath lyfe euerlasting.
To be a meane wherby hertes
be puryfyed. To make vs the sonnes
of god.Gala. iii. d For ye be al the sonnes of God
(saith Paul) by the faithe whiche is in
Christ Iesu. To make that our sinꝭ be
not imputed vnto vs,psal. xxxi. a accordinge to the
psalme, blessed is the mā to whom god
shal not accōpt sin. To saue the beleuers
that they be not a shamed,Esa. xxviii. d. Roma. x. c accordinge
to the scripture, who so euer beleueth in
him shal not be ashamed. To gendre in
vs a callyng vpō Christ.Roma. 
                     •
                  
                For how (saith
thapostle) shal they cal on him whome
they beleue not. To worke in vs hope
and loue towardes god accordinge to y•
               
workes of the prophete, let them hope
in the, which haue knowen thy name. &c
But y• knowlege of god is only by faith
To bringe to passe that al thinges may
be possible vnto vs as Christ him selfe recordeth
sayinge.
                  
                     •
                  ar. xl. 
                     •
                  
                Haue confidence in god
verelye I say vnto you whoso euir shal
saye vnto this moūtaine take away thy
selfe & cast thy self into the see & shal not
wauer in his hert but shall be leue those
thīges which he saith shal come to passe
what so euer he sayth shall be doone to
him. Thus the faithe of Ezechias got a
right goodly victorye agaynst the Assitians.i. Reg. xvii.
By faythe Dauid aduentured vpō
Golyath & slew him. By fayth the children
of Israel beleued God, & Phatao
was drowned in the see.Roma. x. b To worke in y•
faithful confession. To worke true giuīg
of thankes to god, when we be ascertayned
by faith that god is mercyfull vnto
vs & that our workes do please him, the
effectes also of faith be all good workes
as frutes of charitie which y• they please
god our faith assureth vs after it knoweth
y• god is mercyful. And these effectes
be called testimonyes of fayth by which
the beleuers are knowen that the word
is not the cause of faithe, but. But yt
there maye be a difference betwene the
true workers that worke by faythe and

hypocrytes whiche pretend y• same feynedly,
we ought to iudge by the worde
which declareth eyther of thē. A hepe of
good workꝭ as frutes or effectꝭ of faith
y• apostle rekeneth vp Ro. xii. & Gala. v.
            ¶Contraryes to fayth be these:Contraries To
graūt that fayth is only a knowlege of
the hystory of Chryst, how he was cō
               ceyued,
borne, crucifyed, & dyed. To saye
scripture requireth fayth, y• is a qualite
ī vs. & not that cōsydereh only the promyses
of Chryst. To say y• wycked haue
all one sayth wt the godly, which errour
is no errour y
                  •
                faith after y• scholemen▪
               Scholemen.
be but a knowledge of the bystorye of
Chryst. To affyrme y• faith is a principle
or a cause, bryngyng wt it other vertues
for whiche vertues we be pronounsed
rightwyse.The scolemen deuide saythe in to sayth formatā acquisitā, and infusam. To deuide faith wt the scolemen
into faith formed, acquyred & infū
               ded,
so yt the wycked gentyles haue formed
faith althoughe they lacke y• workes
of charite, & yt the īfūded faith doth
not iustifye, onles it be forme wt charite.
So at last, yt the acquyred fayth suffiseth
to iustificaciō. To graūt y• the cause
of faith is our loue, which errour commeth
of yt the causes of faith be not knowē
which be tholy ghost, the word & repētaūce.Anabapti
                     •••
                  
               
To holde with the Anabaptistꝭ

only tholy ghost, cōtrary to Paules sayeng. Fayth is of hearyng, hearyng by y•
worde of god,Hebionites. To say wt the Hebionites
that the fayth in ꝓsecucyon ought to be
denyed & kept in the herte. To say fayth
is but an opynyon whiche dare not approche
to god by callyng vpō, or which
wauereth. To deny that fayth may be
ēcreased, cōtrari to the parable of yt mustarde
sede. & many other exēples of scripture.
To call that a true fayth, whiche
good workꝭ do not folowe a wytnesses
of y• same. To saye fayth iustifyeth not
alone, but by yt help of workꝭ, or y• faith
pryncipallye, and the workes secōdarill
do iustify. This errour is suffcyētly shaken
& cōfuted by the wordes of Paule,
which be, wtout workes, freely. To hold
that fayth ꝑtayne to the knowledge of
Chryst, & the workes of charite to iustifycacyō.
To say fayth cānot iustifie, bycause
fayth is in y• vnderstādynge, & iust
yce in the wyll. The solucyō of this errour
hangeth of the manifolde signifycacyō
of this worde fayth, which taken
only for a knowledge is a qualitie: But
whē it is takē for an assent of ye ꝓmyse
of Christ, so it is not a ꝙlite out a relaciō.
To graūt yt our good workꝭ be accepted
of god of thēselfꝭ, & not for faithes.
            
               
               ¶A brefe treatyse of faith, takē forth of
the fathers & approued doctours,
which cōferme y• aforesayd
doctryne of faythe,
¶The diffinicyon,
               FAyth, sayth, s. Augustyn,Aug. de p̄dest, sctō
                     
                        
                           
                        
                        rum
                     . is to thynke
with an assent suche thinges as perteyn
to the chrystē relygiō. Here thou seest
that vnto faith not only y• knowlege
of the historye is requyred, but an assēt.
Nowe to the chrystē relygyō
                  ▪ ꝑteyn chefly
the ꝓmyses of Chryst, which beleued
make the chrystē relygyō.August. suꝑ Iohēm The same s,
Augustyn also sayth, what is fayth but
to beleue that thou seest not? But the ꝓmyses
of Chryst be such thynges as be
not sene but conceiued by fayth. Also in
his boke de fide ad Petrum. Faith, saith
he, is y• begynnyng of mānes saluacyon
without which no man can come to the
nombre of the chyldren of god, without
which also al the loboure of mā is vain
Lo this place opēly testyfyeth of what
fayth Austyn speaketh, of that no dout
which maketh vs the chyldren of god.
& that is, which conceyueth the ꝓmyses
of Chryst, & is assured to please god for
Chryst. If Austyn had ment onely of a
knowledge it sholde folow that al such
were forth wt y• chyldrē of god as know

the hystory of Chryst although they be
led with no inwarde mocyō of mynde.
            
            
               ¶Theffectes of fayth by doctours.
               ¶August.Aug. quest. xxiiii. where a stedfast fayth is not
there can be no ryghtwysenes. For the
ryghtwyse lyueth by fayth.
               
                  ALSO he saith. There is no riches, no
treasure, no substaūce of this world greter,
than is the catholyque fayth, which
saueth synful mē, lyghtneth ye blynde. ac.
               
                  ALSO in his boke de natura & gracia
he sayth. If chryst dyed not frely, Ergo
all mankynde can not be iustifyed &
redemed from the moste iuste pre of god
Also in an other place▪ fayth is the fyrste
thynge that make the soule subiecte to
god, afterwarde it gyueth preceptes of
lyuynge whiche kepte oure, hope is
confyrmed, charite nouryshed, and that
thynge begynneth to shyne whiche before
only was beleued.
               ¶Saynt Ambrose,Ambros. de virginitate. O fayth more plentuous
& ryche then all treasures, more
stronge more sauyng thā al physicyons.
¶Chrysostome also sayed,Chrysost. sup Math. Fayth is a
lampe, for as a lampe lyghteneth the
house, so fayth the sowle.
            
            
               ¶Causes of fayth by fathers.
               
                  THE scholemen make charite y• cause
of faith, but y• doctours & fathers of the

churche be agaynst it. For saynt Austyn
wryteth with open wordꝭ,August. de agone. ca. y• fayth must
go before charite. Also Gregory saith.Greg. vpon Ezechi
                        •
                     l.
Onles faithe be fyrst had, we can in no
wyse atteyne to y• spritual loue, for charite
goeth not before faith, but fayth before
charite. No mā cā loue y• thīg yt he
beleueth not, likewise as he cā not hopeThe pa
                        •
                     tes of faythe. 
                        •
                     y doctours.
               
               
                  THE moost auncyent fathers be all agreed
that fayth is one certayn mocyon
which loketh vpō the ꝓmys
                     •
                  e of Christ
and assenteth to the 
                     •
                  ame. It is but a
dreame and a thynge forged of scolemē
to deuyde fayth in fidem for matam infusā et
acquisitā, wt theyr wycked opinions
which thei haue hadded to y• same.
            
         
         
            Of iustifycation. CA. XXIII.
            IUstifycacyon is a fre imputacyō of remyssyō
of synnes in Chryst whiche is
purchased by fayth to the possessynge
or receyuynge of euerlastynge lyfe.
            
               THE fyrst part of the diffinicyō is certayne
& proued by the thyrd and fourthPro
                     •
                  e of 
                     〈◊〉
                   diffinicion
chapt. to the Roma. where the apostle
saith. But now wt out the law the ryghtwysnes
of god is manyfest. Itē they be
iustifyed frely by his grace. &c. The īheretaūce
is therfore gyuē by fayth yt it may
be of grace. Itē a rewarde is not īputed

of fauour but of dutye: &c. Ephesi
                  •
               ns. ia.
ye be saued by grace thoroughe fayth.
Nowe the imputacion is free bycause it
is accompted of fauour & not of dutye,
lyke as Dauid declareth the blessednes
of mā,Roma. iiii. a. vnto whome god ascribeth rightousnes
without dedes. The addycyō of
remissyon of synnes declareth what is
ment by iustificacyon, yt is to wyt trmissyon
of synnes. Now Chryst is the ꝑson
for whome such as beleue are released
of theyr synnes. Faith is y• meane wherby
to purchase iustifycacyō or forgyuenes
of synnes bycause fayth agreeth to
the ꝓmyses of Chryst accordyng to Pa.Roma. iii. d
sayng, we iudge therfore that a man is
iustifyed by fayth. Euerlastyng lyfe is a
thing incydēt to iustifycacyō which necessarily
foloweth ye iustifyed accordyng
to this texte. He yt beleueth on hī hath
euerlastyng lyfe.Iohn̄. xvii. a Also this, As thou hast
gyuen him power of euery fleshe, y• vnto
so many as thou hast gyuē hym he may
gyue euerlastynge lyfe.
            
               THE causes of iustificacyō be,Causes. ye fre al

                  •
               owaūce īputacyō through y• mercy and
fauour of god, & fayth the obteyner of
mercy. These causes are very fayrly sene
& beholden in the exemple of Abraham

                  •
                was iustifyed vnto whome forasmoch

as he gaue credit to the mercye, rightousnes
was accōpted.Roma. iiii. 
                     •
                  
                These causes
thapostle layeth as cōtraryes againste
duty, reward & meryte, which thinges
the scholemē dreme to be the causes of
iustificacion. Against whom & against
their p̄decessours y• Pelagiās s. Aug.August. de natura et gracia. disputeth
very sharply, ꝓuing wt many argumētes
y• grace is not giuē for our merites.
Doubtles fayth is y• cause of iustificaciō,
not bicause it is a qualite or
worke in vs, but bicause it receyueth y•
mercy ꝓmised in Christ.
            ¶Iustificatiō wherof we treat here,Nopartes of Iustificaciō,
is not deuided in to ꝑtes. For we speke
here of iustificacion yt is of valour before
god, & that standeth in remissiō of
synnes in the cōscience. The iustice of
the law apꝑteyneth to an other place,
which only serued in y• polecy of Moses.
Also the iustice of reason ꝑteyneth
not to this place which is wrought of
reasō by y• fulfilling of honest workꝭ.
            
               THE ꝓpre effectes of iustificaciō be
remission of synnes,Effectes or workes of iustification. for herevnto we
be iustified, yt we might receyue remission
of sinnes. Also trāquillitie or peax
of cōsciēce bicause of the release of sinnes.
For beīg iustified by fayth, we are
at peax wt god.Roma. v. 
                     •
                  
                Also to be sure we plese

god, & that we be the chyldren of god.
To know yt the holy gost is giuē vs. To
know we haue & shall haue euerlasting
life. To be certeinly ꝑswaded y• god regardeth
vs. These & sēblable effectꝭ or
workes of iustificacion appere openly
in the Romains. For yf we haue peace
whē we be iustified by fayth throughe
our lord Iesus Christ, we cā not be but
certeynly ꝑswaded yt we haue god our
mercyful & good lord, yt we please god,
that we be the sonnes of god, yt god careth
for vs, not onely in tyme of welth
but also in our very trouble & afflictiō.
And therfore it foloweth ī y• same chapitre,
we reioise in hope of the glory of
god.Roma. v. a Neyther do we so onely, but also
we glory in tribulaciō. For we know y•
tribulaciō brīgeth paciēce, paciēce trial,
trial bringeth hope, & hope maketh
not ashamed, yt is to say is not cōfounded
or doubteth, bicause the loue of god
is shed abrode in our hertꝭ by the holye
ghost, which is giuē vnto vs. &c. Itē a
litle before, but god setteth forthe his
loue yt he hath to vs forasmoch as while
we were yet sinners Christ dyed for vs
moch more thē now sith we ar iustified
in his blode, we shal be saued frō wrath
thrugh hī. For if whē we were synners

we were made at one wt god by ye death
of his son, moch more now whē we be
made at one shal be p̄serued by his life.
Finaly it is now y• lowest effect of iustification
to work wel. For we be iustified
to do good workꝭ, as witnesseth Paul
to y• Ephe. saying: By grace ar ye made
safe through faythe,Ephe. ii. b & that not of your
selfes, for it is the gift of god & cōmeth
not of workꝭ lest any mā shold boste hī
self. For we be his workmanship created
ī Christ Iesu vnto good workꝭ. Undoubtedly
it were very ꝓfitable to driue
this effect ful oft ī to the eares of y• hearers
of gods word, lest they be made ydle
& careles, not declarīg wt any good
workes yt they be iustified. Truly our
good workꝭ please god, bicause they be
done of y• iustified which 
                  •
               ceiue Christ
by fayth, which Christ only recōcileth
vs to the father, & causeth that our workes
please god.
            
               CONTRARYES to iustifycacion
be these:Contraries to iustificatiō Scholemen. To say with the scholemen,
iustifycacyon signifyeth in vs
a qualitie or vertue, or Infusionem
habitus. To saye iustifycacyon is
partycular. To saye the causes of iustifycacyon
be oure merytes, workes,
or worthynesse. To saye with the Pelagiās,

iustificaciō is gyuē of our merites,
& of nature. To say wt the scholemē,Meritō cōgruū et condignum. y• mē deserue iustificaciō ex merito
cōgruo or cōdigno. To say mē deserue
iustificacion actu elicito, doing yt lieth
ī thē. That is to say, whē reasō beīg sory
for ye sin, fetcheth out an act of lou
                  •
               g
god or worketh wel. To defend wt the
scholemē & philosophers the rightousnes
of reasō against the rightousnes of
fayth,Philosophers. & to graūt wtthē yt we be recounted
ryghtous before god, for the ryghtousnes
of reason. To say the fathers
were iustified by the law of nature, the
Iewes by the law of Moses, & that we
christē mē be iustified by the law of the
gospel. To graūt yt the iustificacion of
reasō of Moses & of the gospell, do nothing
differ. To graunt yt contricion &
charite, is ynough to get iustificacion.
To interprete scripture falsely where
it saith we be iustified by faith, that is
as certeyn lewde ꝑsons do interp̄te by
the hole doctrine of the christen religiō
& so cōsequently by the law. To saye yt
the cōsciēce may be otherwise pacified
then by fre iustificacion. To deny feee
iustificacion by gods imputacion,Roma. v. a contrary
to the fourth chap. of Paule to y•
Rom. To glory of iustificacion & neuertheles

to vtter no good workes. To
say iustificaciō can stand or endure wt
               out
the sequele of good workes. To deny
yt the preaching of iustificacion wt
               out
ye final effect of good workꝭ, is rote
of al mischief.
         
         
            Of hope. CA. XXIIII.Diffinicion
            
            HOpe is a certayne vndoubted awaytyng
of the bileued saluaciō
which is not sene, through pacience
in fayth.
            
               BY hope saith Paul,Probacions of the definicion. we be saued, but
hope if it be sene, is not hope, for yt a mā
seeth, why sholde he hope the same, but
yf the thing which we se not,Roma. viii. d we hope,
thē do we wt paciēce abyde for it. These
wordes of y• apostle be a sufficient ꝓue
of the diffinitiō, by which he wil yt such
as haue byleued the saluaciō set forthe
in Christ, shold not doubt, but certeynly
hope & abyde as a thyng inuisible wt 
the fleshly eyes, & that by paciēce. I added
(in fayth) that yu sholdest not think
yt hope can stande wt out fayth, for they
be thīgꝭ ānexed, & the one cā not be seuered
frō the other, ī so moch y• scripture
cōfoūdeth many times fayth & hope togither,
as Psal. 77. the ꝓphet saith. The
children yt shal be borne, shal shew their

childrē yt they may put ī god their hope.
I praye you what other thinge here is
hope thē faith. This alliaūce of faith &
hope is very wel expressed ī the epystle
to the Ebr.
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                where faith is defined to be
a sure cōfidēce of thingꝭ not hoped for
& a substance of thīges not sene. I added
furthermore in the diffinitiō these wordes
(certein & vndoubted) to take away
thopiniō of suche triflers as think that
hope may stand wt a wauering mynde.
For like as faith can not be wt doubtīg
as clerely appere by y• wordes of Paul
in thexēple of Abrahā: So likewise neither
hope can be wt doubtinge. For hoping
is a sure ꝑswasion that yu shalt receiue
those thinges which yu hast by the
worde cōceyued by fayth, promised vnto
the. Finally vnder the worde of saluacion,
I cōprise al those thīges which
be promysed to suche as byleue in the
word whether they be spiritual or corporal
goodes, as wel in this life, as after
this life: Al which thinges hope abideth
& loketh for in faith certeyn and
not doubtynge.
            
               THE causes of hope be tholy ghost &
faith.The causes of hope. The holy gost is cause forasmoch
as it is his gyft, & he engēdreth it in vs
witnessing Paul. Hope is not ashamed,

bicause the loue of god is shed abrode ī
our hertes by tholy ghost.Roma. v. a Moreouer ye
holy ghost is the cause of hope,Roma. viii. d forasmoch
as he helpeth our hope. For thapostle
after he hath finished the argumēt
yt he maketh of hope out of the formall
cause of saluaciō, forth wt he addeth likewise
also y• spirite helpeth our īfirmities.
I make fayth the cause of hope, bicause
of the gret affinitie biewene thē.
Fayth bileueth, hope abideth & waiteth
for the thinges bileued, for thē we hope
y• god wil giue vs such thīgꝭ as he hath
ꝓmised vnto vs by his worde, when wt
a fayth we cōceyue god & know yt he is
merciful vnto vs in Christ.
            
               THE obiect or mater whervpō hope
worketh, is the ꝓmise of gods mercy ī
al thīges promised. The ꝓuokīg cause
to hope is the cōmaūdemēt of god. psa.
4. Offre ye a sacrifice of rightousnes,
and hope ye in the lorde. Itē. psal. 146
The lorde is very wel pleased wt such
as fear him, & in them which hope vpō
his mercy.
            There be no ꝑtes of hope of which we
here speke.No partes of hope. For it in one certeyn mociō
or aff
                  •
               ction of minde, which abideth wt
a sure trust for the thīges promised by
the worde, yet neuerthelesse hope hath

an eye as wel the corporal as to y• spiritual
ꝓmise, in yt we certeynly hope &
bileue yt we be the childrē of god, yt god
wil kepe vs ī faith, yt he wil kepe al his
ꝓmises, & giue vs af
                  •
                this life, life euerlasting.
Also yt he will norish defende &
saue vs frō al euis & perils.
            Theffectes of hope chefly spring of y•
thingꝭ ꝓmised & byleued by fayth.Theffectes of hope. And
bicause faith, iustificacion and hope be
knit togither thone to thother, they borow
diuers effectes & workes either of
other. Now the ꝓmises be of .ij. sondry
thynges towardes which hope also extendeth
it selfe, & therfore also double
effectes of hope may be gathered, some
be gathered of the ꝓmise of thinges spiritual,
& other some of y• ꝓmise of thinges
tēporal. Effectes proceding of the
ꝓmesse of spiritual thīgꝭ may be these.
Certeynly to hope and be assured yt our
synnes be released in Christ. Certeinly
to hope yt we be the sonnes of god. To
hope certeynly y• god is merciful vnto
vs. To hope verily y• god wil preserue
vs ī fayth, yt he wil encrease it vnto vs
& furnish the same wt spiritual gyftes:
wt sure hope to loke after this lyfe for
lyfe euerlasting. Therfore Paul & the
rest of thapostles, yea & Christ him self

going about to cōfort the godly ꝑsons
against the slaūdres of the crosse vseth
none other argumēt thē yt is takē forth
of the hope of y• lyfe to come. He yt shal
cōtinue (sayth Christ) vntil the end shal
be saued. Paul likewise sayth, we be saued
by hope.Roma. viii
                     •
                   Philip. iii. Also euery creature loketh
for deliueraūce. Item to the Philippiās
he sayth: Our cōuersacion is in heuen
frō whens also we loke for a sauiour.
To be short, godly ꝑsons can haue no
greater solace in al their afflictiōs thē
the hope of the life to come. The work
also & effect of hope, is to stey the godly
ꝑsons yt they do not shrink frō y• trouth
according to the psalme. He y• trusteth
in y• lord as y• moūt of Siō,psal. x. 
                     •
                   Roma. v. d shal not be
remoued for euer. Itē not to make ashamed
according to Paules saying: hope
maketh not ashamed, that is, it suffreth
not a man to perish, ne the cōscience to
doubt of the promise or fauour of god.
In tribulaciō to lift vp the cōscience yt
it fal not ī to dispayre, but rather glory
in the crosse of Christ,Roma. v. a according to
Paules saying, we glory in the hope of
the praise yt shal be giuē of god, neither
do we so only, but also we glory in tribulaciō.
To make vs in aduersitie cast
our trust vpō the lord only, according

to the saying of the ꝓphet,Psal. 
                     •
                  vi. vnder y• shadow
of thy wīges I shal trust. To make
mē imortal, according to the saying of
the wise mā,Sapien. iii. the hope of the holy ꝑsons
is ful of imortalitie. To indow vs wt 
the true fear of god. For they (saith the
ꝓphet) yt fear y• lord, shal trust ī hī. To
be a sure signe of saluacion. Ro. v. By
hope we be saued. To make vs blessed
for blessed is he,psal. xxxiii. saythe Dauid, whiche
trusteth in hī. To make vs fear the malice
of mē. psal. 55. I shal trust in god, &
shal not fear what mā do vnto me. Now
theffectes of hope ꝓceding of the ꝓmise
of tēporal thīgꝭ be these. To hope surely
y• god will tēdre vs. To hope surely
y• god wil gouerne vs. To hope surely
that god wil defēde vs agaīst all euils,
as wel inward as outwarde. Sēblable
effectes be yet many ī scriptures, & they
arise for the most ꝑte of the ꝓmises annexed
to the first cōmaūdemēt wherin
god ꝓmiseth to be our god.
            Cōtraries to hope,Contraries to hope and heresyes. Thomas de Aquino. be these. To saye
hope is of thīges p̄sēt, agaīst. Paul Ro.
8. Hope if it be sene is not hope. To define
 wt Thomas y• scholemā, to be a certeyn
expectaciō of the blesse to come, cō
               mīg
of grace & our merites, which diffinitiō
is 
                  •
               trary to it self, for if hope be

a sure expectatiō, ergo it can not be of
our meritꝭ, for they cā neuer make hope
to be sure. Also if it be of grace, then is
it not of our merites. Itē to say hope cā
stād wt out fayth. To say hope can stād
 wt doubting, against the nature of true
fayth, whiche is the cause of hope. To
graūt yt true & certein hope is our own
ꝓpre worke. To deny yt the propre busynes
of hope is vpō the ꝓmise of gods
mercy.Scole men. To say wt Thomas y• scholemā
yt hope can not stand wt out our merites

                  •
                that if the merites be away, it is not
hope, but a p̄sūptiō. To say hope is no
cōmaundemēt of god. This errour maketh
mē slouthful & negligent in hope.
To say hope can stande wt out the true
feare of god, against y• prophet: They
y• feare the lord shal trust in hī. To say
that hope iustifieth, bicause in scriptures
hope & fayth be cōfounded. I graūt
they be cōfounded, but yet wt such a difference
that fayth remayne as cause of
hope, and wherevnto the scrypture imputeth
instificacion, but hope is theffect,
& a thyng annexed vnto faith. To
saye the hope of the wycked shall ones
be profytable and auaylable vnto thē,
contrarye to the sayinge of the wyse
man.Prou. x. The hope of the wycked shal perish.

Also in ye boke of wi
                  •
               dō,Prou. 
                     •
                  . it is writtē.
The hope of y• vngodly is lyke a dry
thistle flour, that is blowē away wt the
wind, it is like thyn scome yt is scatred
abrode wt the wynde, & lyke the smoke
which is disꝑsed here & there wt winde
and as the remēbraunce of a straunger
that taryeth for a day, and then departeth.
&c.
         
         
            Of loue towardes god
CA. XXV.
            LOue towardes god,Diffinicion. is wherby we
loue hym agayne, which fyrst laued
vs in his son.
            ¶Iohn̄ ī his epistle alloweth this diffinitiō
wt these wordes:Probacion. i. Io. iiii. b we loue god bicause
he loued vs, & sent his son to be a
sacrifice for our synnes.
            
               THE causes of our loue towardꝭ god
be these,Causes. tholy ghost whose gyft it is, &
which moueth the hert to loue god. Itē
the loue of god wt which god loued vs
fyrst, & also fayth, which cōceyued and
knoweth the loue of god towardes vs
which knowē forthwt sprīgeth vp our
loue towardes god.
            This loue is not diuided in ꝑtes,No partes. for it
is one certeyn mocion or zele towardes
god, wherby god is loued for him self,

as S. Augustine sayth.
            Theffectꝭ of this loue be knowē by y•
ij.Theffects or workes of loue. cōmaundement, which treateth of y•
outward worshyp of god, engēdred of
our great zele charite & loue yt we bear
towardes god, which of it self ꝑteineth
to the fyrst cōmaundemēt, wherin is requyred
also the louing of god as an inward
worshyp. For besyde fayth, feare
also & loue be referred to the first commaūdemēt:
So then theffectes of loue
towardes god be these: To feare god
for feare, fayth & loue, be thinges kny
                  •
               
togyther, & can not wel be plucked one
frō an other. But this effect procedeth
only of the fyrst cōmaundement. The
rest y• folow come forth of the seconde
cōmaundemēt for the most ꝑte. Itē not
to abuse y• name of god. Desyrously to
heare the worde of god. To cal on god
in necessitie. To aske helpe of god. To
preche his word. To cōfesse his name.
To rendre thākes to god. To obey god
To worship, to magnify, to prayse, to
glorifye god. Also to be a signe of the
knowlege of god, according to y• sayīg
of Iohn̄:i. Io. iiii. b who so euer loueth is born of
god, & knoweth god. To work y• loue of
y• neighbour, for he yt loueth god of his
owne accorde also wil his loue neighbour.

To be a signe yt we haue faith. For
where so euer ye loue of god theffect is,
there must nedes be also faith the cause
wherfore these & sēblable effectꝭ towardes
god, belong to such only as byleue,
& haue alredy receiued & knowē god by
faith, & which alredy haue felt y• mercy
& loue of god.Iosue. xxiii. Iosue af
                  •
                lōg rehersal of
the benefites of gods mercy & loue, stereth
the people againe on their behalfe
to loue God:Eccl. lvii. b So we rede y• Dauid the
king wt his hole hert praised & loued hī
that had made hī, & therfore he brasteth
forth ī to loue, praises & thākesgiuing:
So also s. Paul, being assured of y• loue
of god towardes hī, hopeth again that
he shal vaynquish al euils. For he saith:Roma. viii. 
                     •
                  
               
In al these thīges we ouercome strōgly
thrugh his help that loued vs, for I am
sure, that neither deth, neither life, neither
aungels, neither rule, neyther power,
neither thīges p̄set, neither thīges
to come, neither heigth, neither lowth,
neither any other creature, shall be hable
to seuer vs frō y• loue of god, which
is in Christ Iesus our lorde.
            Cōtraries to ye loue towardes god be
these.Cōtraries to the loue towardes god▪
                To say our loue towardes god goeth
before his luoe towardes vs. For so
some men wil, yt we shold begyn at our

loue, so that we by louīg god, might agayne
be loued of him. To say charite
can stande wt out fayth or knowlege of
god going before. To say our loue towardes
god ariseth whē we begin to do
wel, although as yet we haue not faith.
To deny tholy ghost to be cause of our
loue towardes god. To say god ought
to be loued of vs for any other thīg thē
for hī felf, that is, for the loue wherewt
he fyrst loued vs. Forasmoch as y• loue
of god is the cause ꝓuoking vs to loue
him again. To graūt yt our loue or charite
towardes god iustifieth vs, cōtrary
to scripture, which assigneth iustificacion
only to faith as ꝓpre cause of y•
same. To say yt in this worlde we may
haue so gret loue towardes god, as shal
be sufficiēt to be pleded and layd to the
iudgemēt of god for our sinnes. To say
our loue towardes god maye stande wt 
distrust or feare, contrary to the place
of Iohn̄ the fyrst epistle where he saith
Feare is not in loue,Io. iiii. d but perfyte loue
casteth out al feare. For fear hath vexacyon,
he that feareth is not perfyte in
loue. Undoubtedly this feare may wel
be called a seruile fear, bicause it is not
coupled with faythe. To saye the loue
towardes god is thexecutiō of y• lawe,

and therfore iustifieth. To whiche errour
I answere. Albeit loue towardes
god is the execution of the law, it foloweth
not therfore it is in our power to
fulfil this loue in such sort yt it may satisfie
the lawe.
         
         
            Of loue towardes the neyghbour.
CA. XXVI.
            LOue towarde the neighboure is
wherby the neyghbour is holpen
by ye cōmaūdemēt of god,Diffinicyon. & which
is the frute, hādmayde or alley to faith
which cā not be away where true faith
is present.
            That y• neighbour is to be holpen by
gods cōmaūdemēt,Pro
                     •
                  acion the very tables of y•
x. cōmaundemētꝭ ꝓue sufficiētly. And agayn
how greatly god is plesed wt this
loue of the neighbour, of which he hath
also gyuē cōmaundemēt, it may be estemed
by this, y• oftentymes in scripture
god p̄ferreth it before his own honour
as by his ꝓphet Esaie he declareth exp̄sly
vnto vs sayīg.Esaie. i. d Offre me no more oblacions,
for it is but lost labour, I abhorre
your incense. &c. Cease frō doing
of euils & violēce, lerne to do right apply
your selues to equitie, deliuer y• oppressed,
help the fatherles to his right,

defend the widow.Esaie. lviii. d &c. Also the same ꝓphet:
Behold, whē ye fast your lust remayneth
stil. For ye do no lesse violēce
to your detters. &c. Sholde yt be called
fastīg, or a day yt pleaseth ye lord. This
fastīg saith the lord pleseth not me, tyl
the tyme be yu lose hī out of bōdage yt is
in thy daūger, til y• breake y• oth of wiched
bargains, til yu let the oppressed go
fre, & take frō thē al maner of burthēs.
Dele thy bred to the hōgry, & bring the

                  •
               ore fatherles home ī to thy house, whē
y• seest the naked couer hī. &c. To this accordeth
Christ saying,Math. v. d wherfore whē yu
offrest thy gyft at the aultee, & there remēbrest
that thy brother hath ought against
the, leue there thy offring before
the alter, & go thy way, be first made at
one wt thy brother, & then come & offre
thy gyft. Now yt loue is the frute, hand
mayd & alley of fayth it is playne by y•
mutual & necessarye cleuīg togither wt
which the causes & effectꝭ be coupled wt
in thē selues. Also bicause loue pleaseth
not god wt out faith which only causeth
our workes to be wel taken wt god, according
to Paul,Roma. xiiii. d workemē or Iusticiaries what so euer is not of
fayth is syn. Also it is īpossible to plese
god wt out fayth. Now it is not all one
thing wt the christiās & wt the hethens,

whose good workes these vnshamfast
workmē do obiect against vs,
                  
                     •
                  e suche as wyll be iustified by theyr workes. for y• hethēs
ꝑson haue workꝭ of charite wtout
faith, the christē mē wt fayth, but howe
moch the charite of the christiās diffre
frō charite of the hethēs declareth sufficiētly
Christ, where he discerneth the
loue of gētiles or infidels frō the loue
of the christen bileuers,Math. v. s which pleaseth
god. For we can not loue according to
thexēple of the heuely father, yt we may
be his children & perfect ꝑsons, onlesse
we haue faith which getteth christ who
afterwarde giueth the holy ghost, he finally
maketh by renuinge our hertes &
creating in thē new mocions vs apte &
mete to performe such loue as pleaseth
god, & which maketh vs his so
                  •
               
               ̄es and
perfect, like as he is ꝑfect. Finally y• loue
to the presence of fayth is alwayes requyred
this text of Paul teacheth.
                  
                     •
                  . Corin. xiii. a Although
I had al faith so y• I could moue
mountaynes out of theyr places & yet
had not charite I were nothynge. Also
this of Iames.Iacob. ii. c Faythe wtout workes is
deed. Many exemples also in scripture
be setforth which declare charite necessarily
to folowe fayth.Math. ii. 
                     •
                  . The wyse men
com frō the east to Christ they worship
him. This is a work of faith. They opē
               
theyr treasures & offre vnto him gifte 
                  •
               
golde, frankensence & myrre, this is a
worke of charitie or loue.Math. viii. b. Also after yt
Peters wyues mother was restored agayneMar. i. c,
by Christ vnto her helth (whicheLuc. iiii. 
                     •
                  
               
thing could not be done wtout faith) she
began to ministre & to serue Christ and
his disciples, which thing procedeth of
loue.
            
               THE causes of loue towardes y• neybourCauses.
be the holy ghost & fayth. The holy
gost, bicause it is his gyft, for he causeth
loue to ꝓcede of a pure herte, good
conscience, and fayth vnfayned.i. corint. xii. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                For of
this loue we meane here. Furthermore
healinge or sanacion is the gyfte of the
holy ghost, & therfore also charite towardes
the neyghbour is the gyft of y•
holye ghost. For al gyftes be giuē to the
vse & behoue of the neyghbour, whiche
by a general terme charite compriseth.
Faythe is cause of loue towardes the
neyghbour in that it feleth Christ who
beynge felte and gotten by faythe, gyueth
the holye ghoste, he createth in vs
newe mocions of hert mete and apte to
exercise the true charitie that pleaseth
god. To these two causes maye be added
also the loue that we beare to god.
For he that loueth God, can not but

loue his neybour: Also a ꝓuokīg cause
to y• loue of y• neighbour is yt we know
it to be y• cōmaūdemēt of god accordīg
to the saying of Christ: I giue vnto you
a new cōmaundmēt y• ye loue togither.Ie. 
                     •
                  iii. d. 
                     •
                  . Iohan. i. d
Also his disciple Iohn̄ testifieth y• same
saying: this is his cōmaundemēt y• we
byleue on his son Iesus Chryst, & loue
one an other as he gaue cōmaundemēt.
S. Aug. vpō the sayd place of Christ, I
gyue you a new cōmaūdement writeth
thus. He y• loueth god, can not despise y•
cōmaundemēt y• he shold loue his neighbour.
Also Greg. writeth:Greg. lib. vii. moral. bicause ther
be .ij. cōmaūdemētes of charite, the one
of god, the other of the neighbour, by y•
loue of god is gēdred the loue of y• neybour,
& by the loue of the neighbour is
nourisshed the loue of god. And he y• regardeth
not to loue god, y• same can not
ꝑfitly loue his neighbour. The formal
cause of louīg y• neighbour is set forth
vnto vs by Christ,Math. v. s. Luc. vi. d where he willeth vs
to declare y• workꝭ of charite vpō our
neighbour, wtout any respect of the circūstances,
as of the time, ꝑson, place, &
such like, according to thexēple of the
heuēly father, which maketh his sun to
aryse on the euil, & on the good, y• is to
say, which indifferētly disꝑseth his benefites

vpon all, neyther loketh he for
kindnes on their behalfes to whō he do
good vnto. This cause of y• tru loue is
also expressed by Paul where he saith yt
               i. Timo
                     •
                  . i. 
                     •
                  
               
thende of the cōmaundemēt is loue that
cōmeth of a pure hert of a good ꝯsciēce
and of fayth vnfeyned.
            
               ONE single thing is this loue yt wePartes
now treat of, euē a zele toward yt neighbour
cōmīg of a pure hert, wt a testimony
or declaracion of outward workes.
Againste this, scrypture setteth feyned
loue forbydden to the godly, whiche is
done wtout faith & styring of tholy gost
& appropriate to dissēblers or hypocrites,
which though it outwardly glistereth
 wt gloryous workꝭ, yet wtout faith
it pleaseth not god.
            
               AN hepe of theffectes hereof recitethEffectes or offyces of this charite.
Paul. 1. Cor. 13. & Ro. 12. that is to wete
these: To be paciēt, louing, not enuyous,
not foule mouthed, not hault, not
p̄sumptuous, not seking his owne, not
redy to anger, not thinking euil, not reioysing
in wickednes, but ioying ī the
trouth, bearing all thinges, bileuing al
thynges, hopynge all thynges. Item to
edifie & profyt the neighbour. 1. Cor. 8.
To rule al giftes. 1. Cor. 12. Now forth
of the .12. chap. to the Ro. be takē these

workes. To p̄uent one an other in gyuing
honour. To help the necessities of
the godly. To be redy to harbour. To
speke wel of ꝑsecuters. To ioy wt them
that ioy. To wepe wt them y• wepe. To
lay downe the hault mynde. To make
him selfe egal wt thē of the lower sorte.
Not to reacquite euil for euil. These effectes
& sēblable may be generally comprised
vnder the text of Paul. Charite
worketh not euil. To the foresaid workes,Roma. x. Gala. vi. a
these also may be added. To accō
               plish
the law of christ, I mean of louīg
the neyghbour. To couer a multitude
of sines. 1. Pe. 4. To be a tokē of light
receyued.
                  
                     •
                  . Io. ii. b. For he y• sayth he is in lyghte
(sayth s. Iohn̄) & hateth his brother, is
yet darknes,Iacob. ii. c. but he y• loueth his brother
cōtinueth in light. To be a witnes of y•
true fayth. For charite as effect witnesseth
of faith y• true cause. To be a signe
of iustificaciō receiued. For to this purpose
we be iustified y• we shold do good
workes, vnder which be cōprysed also
the workꝭ of charite. Of this effect spekethIacob. ii. 
                     •
                  .
Iames, wher ye saith. Cā his faith
saue hī? as who shold say, iustificaciō
can not stand ne endure where theffectꝭ
of faith be lacking.
            
               NOVV al these said effectes of charite

must be directed to the form aforesaid,
of whiche I spake in the causes of
charite, yt is to wete, to exercise thē accordīg
to thexēple of the heuēly father
not only vpō the christen ꝑsons (which
neuertheles ought chefly to be done accordīg
to Paul which sayth:Gal. 6. 
                     •
                  
                while we
haue time let vs worke good towardes
al mē, but ī especial towardꝭ thē which
are of the houshold of faith) but rather
indifferently, vpō good & euil, wtout al
maner respecte. The worlde bicause it
exerciseth not the workes of charite &
loue, according to thexemple of the heuenly
father, therfore it neuer loueth
truely, so that the loue of it can please
god.
            Contraryes to charit
                  •
                towardes theContraryes
neighbour be these. To graūt y• loue of
y• neighbour is not a gift of tholy gost.
To say fayth sprīgeth of charite, & not
charite of faith. To say yt true loue of
the neighbour may stande wtout fayth.
To say loue of the neighbour pleaseth
god wtout faith. To hold that the workes
of charite which good mē do differ
nothing frō the workes of charite whiche
the euill mē & hypocrites do. I answere.
They differ nothyng as perteyning
to the outwarde syght, but as perteinīg

to the causes of which y• workes
of either ꝓcede, they do not a litle diffre
also ī thacceptāce of god, ī y• god aloweth
the one, & disaloweth thother. To
say yt the true loue of y• neyghbour whiche
ꝓcedeth of a pure hert, good ꝯsciēce
& faith vnfayned, is our own work
To hold y• the loue of y• neighbour sprī
               geth
not so greatly of fayth as of a cō
               tinual
vse & customablenes like as thother
vertues do, as by oftētimes doing
iustly we be made iust ꝑsons, wt oftē doing
wel we be made good. So wt oftē louing,
we get vs an habite or hauour of
loue. This errour in thīges ciuil is to
be borne, but ī the charite or loue of the
neighbour it is a mischeuous erroure,
forasmoch as it vtterly ouerwhelmeth
the causes of loue towardes the neighbour.
To say a respect is to be had of y•
circūstāces, as of the places, ꝑsōs, time
& so forthe, & that y• se vpō whom y• extendest
thy charite, whether vpon thy
frendes or enemies, christēs or not christēs.
This errour is cōtrary to y• forme
of loue towardes the neighbour,Math. v. g. Luc. vi. c. which
ought to be directed accordīg to thexē
               ple
of the heuenlye father, as before is
said. They be hethen sayinges y• bid vs
haue discrecion & respect in thexercyse

of charitable workes. Itē to say charite
is a gift of nature, and is therfore in
our powers to exercise a ꝑfect loue and
charite. To which errour I make this
answere. Albeit it be the law of nature
to loue the neighbour, yet it foloweth
not yt the ꝑfect & ful executiō of y• same
is in our powers now after the fall of
Adā. For who dare at this day glory y•
such charite is ī vs as ꝓcedeth of a pure
hert good cōscience & fayth vnfayned.
Itē to say y• charite towardes the neighbour
is ꝑfect, so yt the outward dedes be
p̄sent, although pure affectiōs & cōsenting
to the outward dedes be not there.
This errour is agaīst the forme of chariteii Timoth. i. 
                     •
                  
               
y• s. Paul p̄scribeth where he sayth
that charite or loue is the end of the cō
               maundemēt
cōming of a pure hert, of a
good cōsciēce & of faith vnfayned. To
hold y• charite or loue towardꝭ y• neighbour
doth iustifie, bicause Paul callethi. Timoth. i. 
                     •
                  
               
it the end of the cōmaundement. This
errour is sone answered, for I graunt
that charite is the ende of the cōmaundemēt,
of which thīges no mā doubteth
But the cōtrouersye & question at this
day is whether y• charite which is thēd
of the cōmaūdement be in our powers
so that we can execute the same ꝑfectly

that is, of a pure hert, good ꝯsciēce & vnfayned
faith, which ꝑfect executiō of y•
law of charite, forasmoch as it is not
in our powers, as euery mās ꝯsciēce cābeare
witnesse, surely our charitie can
not iustifie, which neuertheles shold in
dede iustifie vs if we were hable truly &
ꝑfectly to accomplish & ꝑforme y• same.
And therfore christ bicause he ꝑformed
it of a pure hert good cōscience & faith
vnfeyned did satisfie the law cōcernīg
charite euē to ryghtousnes.Rensōs that charite iustyfyeth not. Moreouer
these reasōs ensuing do ꝓue yt the charite
of the neighbour iustifieth not.
            
                Charite is theffect of faith, Ergo it cā not
run before yt cause. Therfore fayth
iustifieth, & not charite.
            
               
               THE obiect of fayth, y• is to say, the
mat whervpō fayth worketh, is y• mercy
or grace ꝓmised, but y• obiect of charite
is y• neybour. Ergo charite bicause
of the cōtrary obiectꝭ can not iustifie.
            
               
               S. Paul where as in the epistie to the
Ro. & also to the Corī. he reckeneth vp ī
maner al theffectes of charite, yet maketh
no mēcion of iustificaciō, which y•
papistes appoint vnto charite as her ꝓpre
effect, Ergo. &c.
            
               
               THE ꝓpre end of y• workꝭ of charite
is y• good mē by thē shold declare to the

world yt they be iustified, & for y• frāke
& fre iustificaciō shold agayn on theyr
behalfe shew thē selues louing & thākeful,
Ergo thende of charite can not be
iustificacion.
            
               IT is also contrary to this doctrine:
To maynteyne that the true fayth can
stande or endure without charitie, whiche
errour is very strongly impugned
of Iohn̄ in his epistle.i, Ioh. i. a. 
                     •
                  
                To say the loue
of the neyghbour dothe iustifie lesse prī
               cipally,
and fayth more principally.
         
         
            Of good workes. CA.
XXVII.
            
               GOOD workes which god hath
cōmaunded in the decalogie or .x.Diffynicyon
cōmaundementes, conteyning the
true worshyp of god, set forth to glorify
god, and spred his glory abrode, and
that by them suche as bileue not, might
be allured to receyue the worde, and
prayse god.
            
               THAT good workes be onely the
preceptes of the decalogie or ten commaundementes,Profe of this diffinicion
no man can denye, as
well bycause the decalogie is thordynaunce
of god, as bycause vnto it all
good workes whiche please god maye

be reduced. And forasmoch as there be
of the decalogie two tables, the first teching
what we owe ꝓprely to god, the
secōd what to our neighbour, therfore
of necessite there be two maner of workes,
some be spiritual to wardes god, &
some outward & politique towardes y•
neighbour, these wtout the spūal be nothing
worth, ne plesaūt to god. For the
spiritual cōmaūdemētes of the former
table, be the causes for which the outward
& ciuil work towardes the neighbour
do please god, accordinge to y• of
Paul,Roma xiiii. d what so euer is not of faith is sin,
wherfore it agreeth very euil to say as
the papistes say,Papistes. yt only the ciuil or outward
workes be good workes sithēs y•
same for the displeasaūce in the eyes of
god be vnacceptable & vnthākful onles
fayth be ioyned thervnto, which only
maketh our workes wel taken of god.
Now the p̄ceptes of the decalogie or.why the preceptes of the decalogie be called good workes. .x
cōmaūdemētes be called good workes
not bycause they iustifye, but bycause
they be done of the good, & of such as be
iustified, & bycause god hath ordeyned
thē. Certes, the .x. cōmaūdemētꝭ ꝯteyne
y• tru worship of god bicause they tech
aswel the īward as the outward worship
of god, & bicause they be onely acceptable

to god. The p̄ceptes of mē ī the
mater of religiō we cal not good workes
bicause they tech not ye tru worship
of god:Esaye .xxix. 
                     •
                   Math. xv. 
                     •
                   Mar. vii. a wherfore also y• ꝓphet Esaie dā
               neth
humane ordinācꝭ as to be takē for
the true worship of god where he saith
This people apꝓcheth vnto me wt their
mouth & worship me wt their lippꝭ but
their hert is far frō me, but they worship
me in vayn, teching doctrines the
cōmaūdemētes of mē. The reasō herof
is bicause mēs ordinaūces be not y• true
worship of god, which neuertheles the
ypocrites held for the true worship of
god, ꝯtrary to the tables. And for this
false worships sake which is appoīted
by the cōmaūdemētes & workes of mē,
euē sithēs the beginning of the worlde
there haue ben debate bitwen the godly
& vngodly ꝑsōs. This false worship of
god was the cause why Abel was slainGene. iiii. d
whiche wt faythe offered his sacrifices
where as Cain did hang ī the outward
sacrifice & worke only. Also all the ꝓphetes
for this false worships sake suffred
ꝑsecucion. For they called awaye
the childrē of Israel frō mēs ordinaunces
& frō the vntrue worship of god vnto
the preceptes of god, & vnto his true
worship. Therfore also at this daye it

is no meruaile though we cā not be allowed
ne brooked amōgꝭ these iustifyers
of workes in y• we cal thē away frō
the vntrue worship of god which they
set vp of theyr owne authoritie wtoute
gods word.The answer to an obiectiō that might 
                     •
                  e mad
                     •
                  
                But lest som of thē wolde
say yt the decalogie or tables of Moses
ꝑteyn not to vs christen men, but yt the
workes diuysed by bysshops of Rome
haue succeded in their place to the true
seruice & worshyp of god, let thē heare
what Christ saith.Math. v. 
                     •
                  
                I came not (saith he)
to lose the law, y• is, to teche other workes
cōmaūded in the law or any other
worship of god, but to fulfil the lawe.Ma
                     •
                  .
Also whē he was demaūded of a yonge
mā ꝯcernīg good workes necessary for
thobteynīg of euerlastīg life, he answered
of workes cōmaunded by the lawe
which techeth the true worship of god
forasmoch as it requyreth faith, feare,
& loue of god, as an inward & spiritual
worship like as god hī self is a spirite.
Theffectes of good workes be euerye
where set forth ī ye scripture. Esai saith
we be the plāting of the lord to glorify
god.Psal. xl. c Also the ꝓphet sayth: Offre to god
the sacrifice of praise & cal on me and y•
shalt glorify me.i. Pet. ii. 
                     •
                  
                Also thapostle Peter
sayth, Derely beloued I beseche you as

straūgers & pylgrims absteyn frō fleshly
lustes which fight against the soule
& se ye haue honest ꝯuersaciō amonges
the heathen yt they which backbyte you
as euil doers, may se your good workꝭ
& prayse god in the day of visitaciō. Finally,
Chryste saythe, so let your lyght
shyne before mē, that they may se your
good workꝭ &Math. v. b glorify your father whiche
is in heuens.
            
               THE causes of good workꝭ be tholy
ghost & fayth.Causes of good workes To these may be added
also y• loue towardes god. For he that
with faith knoweth & loueth god without
doubt also wil feare god, wil magnifie
his name, wil gladly hear & lerne
his word, wil loue his neyghbour, & in
his nede help him.
            ¶Tholy gost is cause of good workes
forasmoc
                  •
                as he moueth 
                  •
               ertes to good
workes, & gēdereth in thē new mociōs
ꝯueniēt to y• doinge of good workes y•
plese god. Faith is y• cause of good workꝭ
bicause before faith our workꝭ be not
wel takē of god. For faith getteth vnto
it christ for whose only sake our workꝭ
do plese god. And Christ thus gotten by
faith giueth tholy gost y• renewerof our
hertes to make our workes accepted of
god:Gala. 
                     •
                  . 
                     •
                  
                for this cause good workꝭ be called

of Paul the workes of the spirite.
            Melāchton in his cōmō places reh
                  ••
               
seth .iiii.Gala. v. c. d Inuitatorious or prouokinge. ꝓuoking causes to good workes.
Necessite, bicause faith ought to encrease
in vs wt ꝯtinual exercises ī prayer,
in repentaūces, ī tribulaciōs. Dignitie,
bicause our good workes although
they haue moche imꝑfection in thē yet
they ꝑtein to y• glory of god, & therfore
in scripture they be called sacrifices of
praise. Authoritie, bicause tholy gost is
y• author & worker of thē & whose gift
they be, wt which also he adourneth the
churche, to thintent the glorye of god
might be the further spred abrode and
knowē. Rewardes, bicause vnto good
workes in the godly ꝑsons aswel spiritual
as corporal rewardes be setforth
and promised.
            
               THE formal cause of good workꝭ is
fetched forth of fayth wtout which our
good workes,The formall causes of good workes neither can be truly done
neither do please god. Christ ī Mathew
p̄scribeth a forme of exercisynge good
workes wt which the neighbour is holpen,
accordīg to thexēple of the heuēly
father,Math. v. Luc. vi. be you merciful euen as your father
is merciful.
            Accordīg to y• diuersite &Partes of good workes sūdrines of
good workes, some may be called of y•
               
first table, which do execute y• true worship
of god as wel inwarde as outward
some be of the second table which do execute
outwarde & temporall workes towardes
the neighboure. But these cannot
perfitly be done, on lesse the workes
of the first table go before.
            ¶The finall effectes of good workes,Effecte
                     •
                  
                &
princypal be these. To raise vp, to exercyse,
to confirme fayth, for without thexercise
of workes, faith can not stand. 
                  •
               yther
perteyne such places of scripture, as
prouoke vs to go forward in good workes,
as Paul to the Philippians.Philip. 
                     •
                  . 
                     •
                  . This
I desire, that youre loue maye encrease
more and more in knowlege, & in al vnderstanding.
&c.Coloss. i. 
                     •
                   Gala. vi, 
                     •
                  
                Likewyse to y• collos. he
writteth. Being frutful in all good workes.
Icē to the Galath. he saith. Let vs
not be wery of well doinge. Itē neither
horemongers, neither worshippers of ymages.
&c. shal enherite the kingdome of
god. Whiche places & seblable declared,
that faith can not endure without workes,
wherfore like as wt yl workes faith
is quenched, so vndoubtedly with good
workes it is styred vp, exercysed, and confyrmed.
To be asigne of iustyfycacion receyued.
For this purpose we be iustyfyed,
we shold worke wel as, testifieth y• hole

sixth chapiter to the Romaynes wherof
the som is, that nowe, sithens we be iustified
by faith, we sholde worke wel. To
giue thankes to good workes for the benefites
receyued ī Christ, for which cause
also they be called sacryfyces of laude.
To stere other to beleue the gospel,i. Pet. ii. Math. v. and
gloryfye god. To gloryfy god, for as recordeth
the ꝓphet Esay, we be the graf
               
                  •
               inge
of the lorde to gloryfye god. Item
psal .xiix. offe
                  •
                to god a sacrifice, of praise
and call on me, and I shall delyuer the
and thou shalte gloryfy me. To be testymonyes
of the true fayth, therfore Iames
saith.Iames. ii. 
                     •
                  
                Shew me thy faith of thy dedes,
and I wyll shewe the my fayth by
my dedes. Also Christ saith by theyr frute
ye shall knowe theym, albeit this texte
semeth to go an other way.Iaco. ii. 
                     •
                  
                To make y•
faith quick & lyeuely, for as Iames saith
faith wtout workꝭ is deed. To be signes
in oure conscience that we be imperfyte
workers,Luc. xvii. accordynge to the wordes of
Christ, whē ye haue done altogither, yet
say we be vnprofytable seruaūtes, y• we
ought to do, we haue done. After these
effectes of good workes, there be yet ot
                  •
               er
which be gathered of the rewardes
y• be ꝓmysed ī y• scriptures for good workes.
And forasmoch as y• rewardes premysed
to good workes be of two sortes

               
                  ••
               fore also theffectes which do arise of
them, be of two sortes, some perteyne to
spirituall goodes, some to corporal. So
some places of sc
                  •
               iture promyse to good
workes euerlastinge lyfe, as thapostle
wssheth to the Cortinthians that god
wyll yelde them for theyr almes which
they bestowed, increase of spirituall giftes.Math. vi. v
Christ also promyseth a sure reward
to almes which god shal 
                  •
               endre openly.
Nyther ꝑteine the manyfolde promyses
in the law annexed to the commaundemētes.Leuit. xxvi▪
               
Yf ye shal walke (sayth the lord)
in my commaundemētes, and shall kepe
my ordynaunces, & 
                  〈◊〉
                them, I shal giue
you rayne in due seasons that the erthe
maye bryng forth her frute. &c. wherfore
when we be ascerteyned of the promyses
of rewardes made to good workes, it resteth
now to se whether the rewardes
of good workes do chaunce by oure desertes
or by promysse, Certes, as ferforth
as I coulde ens
                  •
               r
                  •
               h the holy scripture. I

                  •
               inde alway where mēciō is made of rewardꝭ,
yt it is done of some ꝓmyse. This
word merite I neuer finde added. Also

                  〈◊〉
                often as Christ in y• new testament is
asked (as ī diuers places he is) what is
to be done for y• receuyng of euerlastyng
lyfe, he referreth thē to y• workes of ye t
                  ••
               
               
commaundementes & addeth. Do this &
thou shalte lyue, by which answere, I
graūt, Christ chalēgeth to good workes
euerlastinge lyfe but not but to such as
perfitly do the same. And bycause it is
not in our powers perfitlye to fulfyll y•
workes of the law, where as neuertheles
a pefite obedyence is requyred, therfore
it foloweth that we cā not de serue
euerlasting lyfe, onlesse we wyll saye y•
euerlastinge lyfe chaunceth vnto vs for
our imperfectiō. Furthermore ī scripture
rewarde signifyeth one thinge & merite
an other thinge. Euerlastinge lyfe as reward
is ꝓmised to good workꝭ as a recō
               pensacion,
bycause it 
                  •
               ecōpenseth the afflictions
of the rightous persons as in y•
reuelacion of Ihon̄ it witnessed where
he speaketh of lyfe eternall whiche he
calleth a new heuē & a new life & saith.
And god shal wipe away al teares from
theyr eyes.
                  
                     •
                  poca. xxi. b Esay .xxv. c Also the prophte Esaye, And
deth shal be deuoured vtterly & god shal
wype away euery tare,Rom. vi. Item thapostle
Paul calleth euerlastinge lyfe y• gift of
god by Christe Iesu our lorde. But merite
is that which chaūceth properly to a
mās duety which he may clayme as his
ꝓpre due. Wherfore either let y• Papistꝭ
denye the place of Paul which calleth euerlasting

life y• gift of god, or els let the
shew that merite & gyft betoken all one
thinge yf they wyll haue their opinyon
allowed.
            ¶Now this effecte whiche they make of
good workes comminge by merite or desert
they extend it yet further. For they
be not content to ascrybe vnto it euerlasting
lyfe but they assigne also to it the
rewarde of all thinges aswel spirituall
as corporall euen of propre dutye,He confuteth the errour of the papistes. And
therfore these papistes these toly workemē
beleue yt by theyr good workes they
deserue election to grace, gods loue towardes
them, lighteninge to y• gospell,
saythe, forgyuenes of sinnes, iustificaciō
also the feare of god, hope & loue towardes
god & the neighbour, constauncy, pacyence,
& fynally all as well spiritual as
corporall goodes, which sayde opinion
for as moch as it is clene contrarye to y•
worde of god, & maketh our hole relygiō
to be in certayne, therfore this effecte of
good workes which they make to ꝓcede
of merites is diligētly to be cōsydered &
debated. For o lord who dare be so bold
agaynst y• most cleare & manifest authorityes
of scripture to say y• the electiō to
grace is our merite & deserte, Paul teacheth
contrarye Romayns .ix. where he

maketh the cause of oure election gods
mercy. Of deseruynge of gods loue towardes
vs who shal glory against thapostle
where he saith god setteth forth his
loue towardes vs when we were yet sinners
& the ennemyes of god.Rom. v.v Also against
the sayīg of Iohn which sayth we loue
hym bycause he loued vs.i. Io. iiii.d Now ye lyghtening
vnto the gospel no honest & pure
christiā wil attribute to merites or whiche
thus speaketh ye word of god.Corin. iv God
is faithfull by whome ye be called into
ye felawship of his sonne our lorde Iesus
Chryst. Furthermore fayth forgyuenes
of synnes, iustifycacion,Roma. iiii.c yf these come of
our desert thē thapostles is a lyar which
saith. Therfore of fayth is thinheritaūce
according to fauoure, that the promyse
myght be suer. Also be saith if these whiche
perteyn to yt law be heyres, the faith
is made voyde,Ephe. iv. & the ꝓmyse is made frustrate.
Item to the ephes. he wryteth. By
grace ye be saued through faith & yt not
at your selfes, for it is the gyft of god, &
procedeth not of workes. Fere towardes
god, hope, & loue, cā not be of our merite
for these, to gyther wt faith remyssion of
synnes, iustifycacion, euerlastinge lyfe, &
sēblable ought to be suer & certaine sith
they pertayne to the inwarde worshyp

of god. For albeit hope hath respecte also
to the promyse of outwarde thinges
yet hope is rather & ꝓperly a sure expectacion
of helth that is beleued, by whiche
we hope certainely and trust that we
be reconcyled to god by faith. As concerninge
loue towardes the neyghbour, cō
               stauncye,
& pacience in tribulacion, also ye
rest of vertues which eusue the sayd spirituall
goodes to gither also wt the outwarde
goodes, these if a mā wyl ascribe
to our merites & yt the good workes of ye
godly persons do merite & deserue them
& also thincrease or ye same, we wyl not
greatly stryue wt them forasmoch as we
se that a mittigacion of temporall paynes
do oftē times folow good workes.
Albete it pleaseth and satisfyeth we abū
               dauntlye
to saye generally that rewardes
both spiritual & temporal do folow
& ēue good workes of good mē, bycause
they be ꝓmysed vnto thē of god. Truly
by this doctryne no wickednes is taught
onlesse ꝑchaūce it be coūted a wickednes
to auaunce the glorye of god, & suppresse
our own, neither shal this doctrine make
mē slouthful and neglygent to do good
workes (as some mē thinke) sithēs we denye
not the rewardes of good workꝭ but
say only that those rewardes ꝓcede not

of our desert, of promise.
            
               NOVVE, these effectes of good workes
folowing procede of rewardes. To
haue a plentyfull rewarde in heuen as
Math. v. Christ promyseth, yf thou vnderstande
here, (according to the cōmon
fygure and maner of speakinge) heauen
for the kindome of heuē & so consequently
for the congregacion of the true beleuers)
as holy wryters be wont to vse for
the most parte this worde heuen) so the
sence shall be playne that such as suffre
tribulacion here in erth shall haue many
consolacions, but yf yu vnderstādest heuē
for the lyfe to come whiche shalbe a recōpence
of all affliction: thā the sence &
meaning shal be that such as suffre tribulacion
ī this world haue a sure hope of
euerlasting lyfe. For ī ye .v. chap. of mat.
Christ oure sauyour speaketh of the beatitudes
& blysses in this lyfe to thintent
he wold shew that the iudgement of the
worlde erreth whiche thinketh that the
true welth or blysse of lyfe standeth in
outwarde pompe & magnyfycence. And
euerlastīg life is called a reward bicause
it recompenceth, but not bycause that recōpence
is proprely due. Item to receyue
a reward of god openly, as Christ promyseth
of almes.Math. vi.a Now, to receyue a reward

of god openlye, is that in the sight of al
men the godlye be increased in worldly
goodes & enriched in this lyfe as wel
with spiritual as with temporall godes
and after this lyfe to receyue also other
euerlasting benefites & al this by ꝓmys.
To haue annexed vnto it euerlastinge
lyf by promys, that ye same maye be iure
for lyfe euerlasting is the gyft of god as
witnesseth Paul Roma. vi.
            ¶Contraries to good workes be theseCōtraryes to good workes
To graunt that beside the workes of ye
x. cōmaundementes, and such as be commaunded
in scripture, there be yet otherGood dedes deuysed and made by the bisshoppes of Rome beside goodꝭ worde be not good.
good workes necessarye to the practyse
of godlynes. To saye humayne workes
inuented of men is a part of the worship
of god. To say humane workes deuyied
by bisshops of Rome be egal to the workes
of the .x. commaundementes, vnder
lyke punisshmente to be kepte, and lyke
hope of reward. To graūte that certeyn
humane workes are to be prefered before
certayne workes of the .x. cōmaundemētes.
To say the cyuyle & outwardeThe errour of scholemen.
workes which be commaunded in the second
table of Moses be only good workes.
This is the erroure of the scholemē
whiche haue dispised hyther vnto the
workes of the fyrst table or at least haue

not sene thē. To affirme yt ye workes of ye
good & of ye bad be egal, because they be
both blyssed of god. This errour is easly
answered. For to ye wicked & euyl ꝑsons
there is no ꝓmyse made of spritual thīgꝭ
To affirme wt certeyn furyous prechersFuryous prechers.
ye honest & excellēt workꝭ ī ye vnfaythful
or vngodly ꝑsons be ye giftes of Sathan
where as Sathan of his nature, wtoute
doubt, admitteth no honesty, sith he is ye
disturber, & distroyer of al honesty. Wherfore
it is to be thought ye honest workes
also in ye euyl ꝑsons be y• singuler giftes
of god gyuē for ye conseruaciō & mayntenaunce
of tranquylyty in ye worlde. To
say bycause in ye wicked ye noble & honest
workes be called ye giftes of god, yt therfore
they please god, & that they shal for
the same receyue euerlastīg lyfe. The answere
herof dependeth of faith, which is
ye cause why good workꝭ please god, and
why in time cōmīg euerlasting lyfe shal
ēsue such workꝭ by ꝓmyse, made to thē ye
worke wel, & of faith. To graūt yt Christ
in the new testament taught other workes
thē be mencyoned ī ye tables of Moses,Math. v.
                     •
                  
               
contrary to his owne sayinge, I am
not come to breake ye law, but to fulfil it
To graūt yt Christ hath left power to ye
byshop of Rome as to his vycar generalBysshop of Rome.
               
here in erth to appoynt & p̄scrybe other
good workes straūge & diuers from the
tables of Moses. To say good workes
be in our powers to do them perfectlye,
to the mynyshyng of tholy ghost, & of
the power of Satan whiche he hath in
lercyng good workꝭ. To say there is another
form of fulfyllyng good workes
of ye second table, thā that which ChristLuc. vi.vi
                     ••
                  
               
appoynteth by thexemple of his heuēly
father, where he sayth. Be mercyful, as
youre father whiche is in heuen is mercyfull.
To holde that in ye executynge of
good workes towarde the neyghbour,
we ought to haue respect of ye cyrcūsta
                  •
               
               ces
as of ye place, of the persō, of ye tyme.
To say good workꝭ of helping ye neighbour
be so necessary. yt he which can not
ꝑform the same, yea also of necessyte, cā
not be saued, which errour thapostle soylethii. cor. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
where he saith. Let eueri mā do accordyng
as he hath purposed ī his herte
not grudgingly, or of necessite. To hold
y• good workꝭ deserue of theyr ꝓpre duti
all goodnes as wel spiritual as tēporal
which errour I haue before ī theffectꝭ of
good workꝭ debated & cōfuted. To hold
y• good workes do therfore deserue euerlastyng
lyfe, bycause euyl workꝭ deserue
euerlastyng condēnacion. To say good

workꝭ iustify. This errour also I haue
soluted before in theffectes, Finally, contraryes
to good workꝭ, be all euyll workes
done agaynst goddes commaundemētes,
as not to beleue in god, to doubt
of god, not to feare god, not to loue the
neyghbour, to commyt aduoutrye, theft
murder, & so forth. And these euyl workes
haue theyr propre effectes contrarye
to theffectes of good workes. For lyke
as good workes do styre vp, do exercyse,
and confyrme fayth: so on the contrarye
parte, euyll workes do let and quenche
fayth. They deserue theyre of god, and
euerlastyng condēnacion,Math. xxv.d. as wytnesseth
Chryst. Go ye cursed in to euerlastynge
fyre. &c. Also they sklandre ye gospell, &
the glory of god, as wytnesseth Paule
sayng. The name of god is through you
euyll spoken of among the hēthē. They
deserue induracion & to be made harde
so that synnes be punysshed with sinnes,
& euyl workꝭ,Roma. i.c wt euil workꝭ as Paule to
y• Ro. declareth. They deserue also temporal
punysshmētes, as ye tyranny of ye
deuyll. whiche prouoketh vs to all kyndes
of myschefe and of errour.
         
         
            Of fulfyllynge the lawe.
CA. XXVIII.
            
               
THe fulfyllyng of the lawe, is a ꝑfyteDiffinicion
satisfaction, wherby the law
is satisfyed both wt a consentynge
hert, & also with outward workeꝭ. But
bicause no man could ꝑforme this, therfore
came Chryst & accōplished fully yt
the lawe for vs vnto ryghtousnes, enduryng
for euer, giuyng also tholy ghost
yt we may truly feare god, byleue in god
loue god & our neyghbour, thoughe in
great imꝑfectiō, which neuertheles god
taketh ī good parte bicause of his Christ
the hole & perfyte fulfyller of the lawe
in the name of all that beleue.
            ¶I cal y• fulfyllyng of the lawe a ꝑfite
satisfactiō,Probation of the diffynicyon. which standeth in the cōsent
of the mynde, togyther with ye execuciō
of good workes. Now yt the lawe requireth
a cōsentynge mynde, the wordes of
Paule do proue which saith yt the lawe
is spirytuall (yt is to saye) requyreth spyrytuall
thynges. Also Chryst throughout
the hole .v. chap. of Mat. requyreth
to y• fulfillyng of the lawe y• affections
& herte cōsētyng to the same. Lykewise
Pau i. Timo. i. requyreth to the fulfyllīg
of ye law cha
                  ••
               e of a pure hert good
cōscience & fayth vnfayned. Nowe▪ the
old testamēt eueri where requireth loue
of the hole hert, of the hole mynd, & of ye
               
hole power. Concernyng the outwarde
kepyng of ye lawes, there is no doubte.
For the vse fulfylling the law, is of .ij.
sortꝭ ye one is inward, ye other outward.
            
               THAT no mā can kept the lawe the
place ī the actꝭ of the apostles teacheth
sufficiētly where S. Pet.
                  
                     ••
                  . xviii.v teacheth these
wordes, why tēpte ye god y• yt wyl put
a yoke on the disciples neckes which nether
our fathers nor we were hable to
beare. This is sure yf we had bē hable
ꝑfytly to haue kepte the lawe.Math. v.c Chryste
neded not to haue come whose offyce (as
he hym selfe expreslye declareth) was to
fulfyll the lawe. But by cause the beleuers
be iustifyed vnto good workꝭ (witnessynge
thapostle Ephes. ij. created to
good workꝭ. &c.) therfore Chryst gyueth
tholy ghost to the beleuers which helpeth
theyr infyrmityes y• after a maner
they myght bryng a cōsentyng herte vn
to the lawe, thoughe it be weake & imꝑfyte,
which neuertheles god accepteth &
taketh in good parte bycause of Chryst
which hath satisfyed the lawe pefectly
vnto the perfecte rightousnes of ye same
y• is of force & strength before god for euermore,
accordīge to Pau, saing, which
also (meanyng Chryst) maketh intercessiō
               Roma. viii.
                     •
                  
               
for vs. Also of ye prophet. Thou arte

the euerlastynge prseste after the ordre
Melchisedech.Psal. 109.
                     •
                  
               
            
            ¶There be two maners of fulfilynge ye
lawe,The 
                     〈◊〉
                   of fulfyllyng the lawe. the one īward the other outward
which two conioyned togyther do ꝑfectly☞
satisfye the lawe. But there was yet
neuer mā which ꝑfectly either hath euer
cōioyned or coulde cōsoyne these partes
besydes Chryst, & therfore only Chryste
is the perfecte accomplysher of the lawe
euen to the full ꝑfection. who also vnto
vs hath deserued & purchased the gylte
of fulfyllynge the same after a maner so
that we also may bryng (through Christ
& grace of tholy ghost) to the outwarde
fulfyllyng of the law a cōsētyng mynde
and may feare god truly, truli beleue in
god, refreyne our mynde & hande frome
slaughter & suche lyke wyckednes. But
yet vnder great weaknes & imperfectiō
we do these thynges & therfore our fulfyllyng
cā not be pleaded ne laid agaīst
goddes yre, neyther is it done of vs to
that purpose that we shold be iustifyed
by the same, but to thyntent fyth we be
all ready iustifyed of Chryst the perfect
executour of the law, we myght declare
& shewe by our fulfyllyng suche as it is,
our kyndnes & loue towardes god for ye
rightousnes receyued through Christ, as

I haue heretofore declared the selfe
thynge in theffectes of good workes.
            
               AS concernyng the perfyte fulfyllyng
of the lawe,The causes of thaccōplishment and fulfyllinge of the Lawe. which brought to the hole
worlde a righttousnes which is of force
before god for euermore: Chryst is the
cause of fulfyllyng ye law, who perfytly
hath satisfied the law, for which entent
also, he was ꝓmysed of ye father: as him self
testifyeth, sayng he cam not to breke
or destroye the lawe but to fulfyll it.
            ¶Thoccasion that Chryst had to fulfil
the law towarde vs,Math. v.b.
                     •
                  
                was our infirmite
& weaknes, by which we were not hable
to satisfye the lawe, the burthē wherof
(as Pe. ī the actꝭ declareth) neyther ourAct. xv.d
fathers nor we coulde beare, Pau. testyfyenge
ye same saing what ye lawe couldRoma. viii.a
not do in that it was weake bycause of
the flesshe, that ꝑformed god. & sent his
sonne in the similitude of synfull flesshe
and by synne, damned sinne in the fleshe
yt the ryghtousnes requyred of the lawe
myght be fulfylled in vs, that is to say
that by Chryst we myght be rekened to
haue satisfyed the lawe.
            
               AS ꝑteynyng to our fulfilling, which
god requyreth of the iustifyed, Christ also
togyther wt tholy ghoste is the cause.
For Christ through his ꝑfyte fulfilling

of the lawe,Marke wherfore the gyft of our fufyllyng the lawe serueth. merited and wan vnto vs
the gifte of the fulfylling the same, gyuynge
vs the holy ghoost to helpe oure
weakenes in ye fulfillīg therof not vnto
rightousnes or that we myght be iustified
therby for to that purpose onlye
serueth the fulfyllyng of Christ, but for
ye declaraciō of our louing & kinde herte
to wardes god for ye rightousnes & great
benefites that we haue receyued of his
handes in Christe. Certeynlye this holy
gost fasshyoneth & createth in vs new
intentes & mociōs of mynde. which he cō
               uenyent
(although in a great īꝑfection)
to y• true trusting in god to the true louing
of god & of the neighbour.
            ¶Forasmoch as y• perfite fulfillīg of ye
               Theffectis of of fulfyllyng the lawe.
lawe serueth for rightousnes, & our imꝑfite
fulfillīg serue to declare our kindnes
toward god for the rightousnes receyued
ī Christ therfore I thīke it good
to set forth .ii. maner of effectes of fulfilling
ye law,Theffectis of Chrystes perfect fulfilling being also of two sortes.
            ¶Theffectes of y• ꝑfite fulfilling of the
law which Christ ꝑformed for our iustyfieng
before god may be these. To satisfy
ye lawe wt a consenting hert & minde
togither wt outwarde workes. This effect
is suffyciētly ꝓued by ye ꝓphet EsayEsay. liii.c
where he describeth yt īnocency clennes &

holynes of Christ wt these wordes, he
did neuer violence ne vnrighte, neyther
hath there ben any disceitfulnes in his
mouth also to performe perfyte obedyence,
for a perfite and euerlastinge rightousnes
accordinge to the saide place of
Paul. That the lawe coulde not do in
that it was weake bycause of the fleshRoma. viii.a
that performed god. &c. Sundry effectes
also may be gathered of the commodydities
which we haue by Christes fulfyllynge
of the law as to delyuer vs from
the curse of the law as witnesseth PaulGalath. iii.c
To deserue vs a gifte to fulfill after a
maner the law to the declaracion & vtteraunce
or our kindnes in that ye Christ
hath fullfylled the same to our iustyfycation.
To deserue & get vs ye holy ghost
whiche helpeth our weaknes & our imꝑfectiō
yt we may truly kepe y• law. But
we shal rekē vp moo effectes of y• ꝑfecte
fulfilling of Christ in y• titles of abrogatiō
of ye law & of ye christen liberty.Theffectes of our fulfyllyng. Now
theffectes of our fulfillyng which Christ
hath purchased for vs & which the holye
gost fourmeth & fasshioneth ī vs be these
To haue a cōsētīg minde vnto outward
workes. To fere god hertely. To beleue
god hertely. To brydle the hert and the
mind frō slaughter. Not to steale actually

& also to haue a minde repugnafit and
striuing wt any such affections of pluckīg
away frō other mē their goodes. These
& semblable effectes of our fulfyling forasmoch
as they be weake & imꝑfite, may
not be pleaded for rightousnes againste
god, yet neuertheles they please god by
cause of Christ, & be vnto him most commendable
& thankfull sacrifices, yea and
so they be called in holy scripture. These
effectes of our fulfyllyng y• law serue to
none other ende but to gyue thankes by
them for the rightousnes which Christ
hath purchased vnto vs by his perfite
fulfyllyng of the law & finally to prouoke
others by our fulfylling to receyue
the gospell lyke as heretofore I haue declared
in theffectes of good workes.
            ¶ContraryesCōtraries or errours. to the fulfyllynge of the
lawe be these. To saye the fulfyllynge
of the law is onely an outwarde keping
of the same.
            
               TO say the fullfillyng of the law for a
rightousnes before god is & hath ben alwayes
in mās power, To graūt y• these
is made a perfite fulfyllyng of ye law for
rightousnes before god, yf we do as
moch as lyeth in vs. To say yt thē y• law
is ꝑfitli satisfied, whē at lest our wyl by
any maner of wise is added to outward

workes albeit a pure consenting minde
altogither be not had to ye same, to deny
yt the perfite fulfyllyng of ye law whiche
is accepted before god for rightousnes requyreth
not a consentinge & pure hert beside
thexecuciō of outward workes. To
holde that vnder the old testamēt was
requyred a pure & consenting minde, but
in the new testamēt that god gaue place
to our infirmytye & weakenes. so yt now
it is ynough in the fulfillyng of ye lawe
onely to kepe outward workes.The errour of certayne papistes. To saye
in the newe testamente the commaundementes
of god chaunged in to counsels,
and that it perteyneth not vnto all
men to satisfye the law with consenting
affectiōs, but only to such as be of more
perfection, and can do the same. This erroure
is contrary to y• wordes of Christ.
Math. v. where yet styl in the new testament
(which Chryst came to ordeyen) he
calleth them the leest in the kingdom of

                  •
               euen, which breake one of the leest commaundementes,
wherfore also through
out all the hole chapiter Chryst requyreth
pure affections to the fulfilling of y•
lawe. beside the outward execuciō. Also
Christ cōmaūdeth there that the law of
god be not destroyed & abrogate for our
infirmitie. It is also an erroure to saye

that the conscience of men can not be saued
& kept from desperacion, oneles, we
wyl snstre and permyte the commaundementes
of god to be turned into counsels
& giuen onely to men of more perfection
to be fulfylled. I answere. It
wolde haue besemed these p̄iudicatours
of Christ (I call them so which run before
ye iudgemēt & sentēce of Christ, coū
               ting
thē selues better clerkes than he)
which of preceptes haue made counsels
y• whan they saw yt ye perfecte fulfilling
of ye law was not ī our powers, to haue
sēt rather our cōsciēce vnto Christ, who
hath fulfilled the law for vs to y• exacte
& perfyte rightousnes, so that thus they
myght haue saued the cōscience frō despayre.
To denye that it was onely the
office of Christ to fulfyl the law vnto ꝑfect
rightousnes, contrary to the text of
Mat.Math. v. I am not come to destroy the law
but to fulfil it. To holde that the lawe
was for this cause gyuē, that it shold be
fulfilled of vs to the ꝑfecte iustcie, wheras
this honoure was appoynted of the
father vnto Christ, as testify the ꝓmises
gyuē of Christ lōg before y• law. To sayeThis errour is at this day maynteyned of some.
y• Christ did ons satisfy the law only for
al sinnes past, & that we now ought to
fulfyl the law vnto the perfite rightousnes

to be infused by the same. To argue
by the place of paul,Collos. i.d col. i. That ye fulfillyng
of Christ is not ꝑfite for rightousnes,
but is made ꝑfecte whē our fulfylling
is put thervnto. The wordes of ye
apostle be these. Now ioye I in my sufferinges
& fulfil againe yt which is behind
of y• passiōs of christ ī my flesh for his bodyes
sake whiche is the congregacion.☞
This proueth not that the passion of
Christ was lackīg or īperfecte to our saluacion
but it signifieth that y• passion of
Christ & of his membres is all one passion
& that we suffce for his sake sith we
haue ꝓfessed & are appointed to suffce wt
Christ. To denye yt the fulfillyng of the
law of Christ indureth for euermore for
al such as beleue. To deny that Chryste
by his perfecte fulfillīg of the law hath
deserued vnto vs the gift of fulfilling y•
lawe after a maner, not yt it sholde serue
for a ryghtousnes before god whiche as
many of vs as be iustified haue alredy ī
Chryst but yt it sholde declare vs thākefull
for Chrystes fulfylling wherin we
haue foūd our perfecte rightousnes. To
graūt y• the fulfylling of the law in such
as be iustyfyed which Christ hath deserued
vnto vs can be so perfecte as it may
be set against gods vengeaunce. To deny

that onr fulfilling of the law whiche
was purchased & deserue by Christ is alwayes
ful of weakenes & imperfection.
To hold that one fnlfilling of the law
purchased vnto vnto vs by Christ dothe
therfore please god bycause we do performe
it & not rather bycause it ꝓcedeth
of faith in Christ. To deny that our fulfillīg
displesech god if the same de done
wtout faith. To deny that our fulfillīg
of y• lawe is done for any other ende thē
yt we sholde declare & exhibite thankfulnes
and grauytie towardes god for the
ryghtousnes receyued in Crhyste.
         
         
            Of the abrogacyon of the
lawe. CA. XXIX.
            THrought the hole scripture in my
opynyon there is no harder place
thē is this place or title of abrogaciō
of the law, not only bicause of it self
it is hard but bycause (onles it be well
vnderstād) it is the foūtein & groūd of al
erroure, & a very pestiferous occaciō of y•
carnal liberty. Horrible exēple herof we
haue had lately in experiēce ī our dayes
in Monetarius Piperiue & diuers other
sedicius preachers going about & studiēg
partely to bring vs backe againe vnder
Moses, & partely to breake & cut asōder

               
                  •
               l lawes, as well gods as mens vnder
the pretence of abragacion. An bycause
I trust easly vnder this brefe forme of
doctrine, to declare & opē ye hole difficulty
concernyng abrogacion of the law, therfore
I thought good next vnto yt place
of fulfylling of the law, which of it self
also sufficiētly declareth the vse of Abrogacion
to put to this place of abrogaciō
of the law, to thintent that here by a seueral
treatye it myght more clearlye appeare,
which done. I wyl adde also an other
title of Christen lyberty which .iii.
tytles treate in maner all one thing. For
they becauses & effectes togither amōg
them selues as forthwith shal appeare.
            ¶Abrogacion of the law therfore is a
disanullyng an abolisshment or extinguyshment
of the curse of the law madeThe diffinicion of abrogacion.
by Chryst so that now al such as beleue
in Christ be enfraunched & ryd from the
power of the lawe accusīg contynually
the conscience & damnyng it before god
for the imperfecte obedience.
            
               ¶Probacions of the
diffinicion.
               ¶Christ,Gala. iii.c. saith Paule, hathe reduced vs
from the curse of the law while he was
made for vs accursed. For it is written
cursed is euery one that hāgeth on tree,

that the blyssing of Abrahā might come
on the gētyles through Iesus Christ. &c.
Christ is the person by whome the lawe
is disanulled ꝓmised ī scripture to that
intent. Hither pertayne all the ꝓmyses ī
the prophetes of that new leagge or couenaunt,
as Ieremy. 33. Ezech. xxxv. gen
xxxix. deu. xviii. The rest in the dyffynycion
is proued by Paul where he saith.Roma. viii.
                        •
                     
                  
There is no condemnacion now to thē
whiche are in Christ Iesu whiche walke
not after the flesh but after the spirite.
&c. But forasmoch as I sayde the curse
or power of y• lawe is takē awaye I addes
(to suche as beleue in Chrst Iesu) lest
perchaunce I might be thought to bold
that olso the wicked be made free frō the
curse of the law. For the law is ordeyned
for the vnrightous, that is,Note vpon whome the lawe hath stil her power & operation. for y• vnfaithful
& such as be not yet vnder grace
or by faith haue take hold of Christ neyther
receyued the holy ghost of whome
they myght beguyded, Upō these I saye
the law still exeryseth her office now accusing
now condemnīg theyr conscience
euē as it did in times past vnder Moses
For no doubte to suche as beleue not in
Christ y• lawe is not abrogate but shall
be still in her force, tyll y• tyme they be
cōuerted to Christ accordīg to Paul, the

lawe is our scholemaster tyl the commyng
of Christ.Gala. iii. d I
                     •
                  ē where the spirite of
the lorde is,ii. Cor. iii. d there is freedome, as who
sholde laye where the spirite of Christ is
there ceaseth & is abrogate the tyranny
power & cursse of the law. I added the
cause of the accusing or condemnyng of
the law that thou myghtest know that
such as beleue in Christ be no longer accused
& condēned by the law. Albeit the
kepe not the law to the perfect obediēce
according to Paul.Roma. viii. a There is no condemnaciō
now to such as be plāted in christ
Iesu.Roma. vi. c An therfore the apostle calleth to
be vnder grace whē the conscience is delyuered.
               
                  THE causes of the law abrogate be
these the promise,Causes of a
                     
                        •
                     brogation. Christ, & our weaknes
The promyse is cause▪ bycause god hath
promysed this intinguysment of y• law
to be in Christ. And to this cause belong
such places of scripture as treate of the
newe kingdome or couenaunte of grace
Chryst is the cause that the law is abrogate,
forasmoch as by hym it was abrogate.
Finally our weaknes is cause, for
that it ministreth an occacion that the
law sholde be abrogate.
               
                  FOR as witnesseth Pet.Act. xv. 
                        •
                     . neither our fathers
nor we were able to bere it. Thus

the cōmaūdemēt that went afore is disanulledHebre. vii.
bicause of her weaknes & vnꝓfitablenes.Hiere. xxxi.
Also the ꝓphet Hieremie bryngeth
in this cause (that is to wite) y• the
fathers kepe not the olde couenaunt or
testament but brake it,Roma. viii. 
                        •
                     
                   & therfore a new
was gyuen, whervnto agreeth Paule,
sayng: what the lawe coulde not do, in
asmoch as it was weak bycause of the
flesshe, y• ꝑformed god, & sent his son. &c.
               
                  VVE must thynke holly that the holePartes of abrogacion b
                        •
                      none
lawe is abrogate. For els he that wyll
cōtende that but a parte of the lawe is
disanulled, & saueth a parte vnabrogate
is gyltye of the hole lawe,Gal▪ v. 
                        •
                     . accordyng to
Paule, who sayth. I testifye agayn to euery
man which is circūcised that he is
become dettour to kepe the hole lawe.
Yea moreouer to requyre a ꝑte of y• law
as necessary to iustificacion after Chryst
is to make Chryst the ministre of syn, as
wytnesseth the same Pau. sayng. Therfore
we haue byleued on Iesu Chryste,Gala. ii. 
                        •
                     
                  
that we myght be iustifyed by the faith
of Chryst▪ & not by the dedes of the law
forasmoch as by the dedes of the lawe
no fleshe cā be iustifyed. If thē while we
seke to be made ryghtous by Chryst we
our selues are foūd sīners, is not thē christ
y• minister of syn? god forbid. Undoubtedly

I can not denye but y• the gospell
kepeth styl y• parte of the lawe which cō
                  sēteth
 wt nature, not bicause of Moses,
or bycause it teacheth y• men be iustifyed
therbi, but bycause it wolde (yf Moises
neuer had bē) kepe the lawes of nature
to thintent there myght be workꝭ to declare
our grauitie and kyndnes for the 
                     •
                  
                  cedyng
benefytes receyued in Chryste.
               ¶Theffectes of disanullynge the lawe,Theffectes or workes of abrogation.
be fetched forth of y• cōmodities which
we haue by the abrogacion, & be these:
To bryng vs a newe testament or couenaūt
of grace wherby we be made fee
                     •
                  
from the tyranny & curse of the lawe, as
wytnesseth the prophet Hiere. saing. Lothe
days shall come (sayth the lorde) I
shall stryke wt the house of Israell & the
house of Iuda a newe bargayne,Herem. xxxi. f not accordynge
to the couenaūt which I haue
couenaūted wt your fathers. &c. The prophet
vnderstandeth by the couenaunte
made with the fathers, that couenaunt
cōdicionall, by which was sought tyghtousnes
vpon condicion, & yet was not
found, without the promyse of the new
couenaunt of grace, in which frely synnes
be forgyuen without condicyon.
               To bryng a couenaūt of remissiō of synnes
 wtout ceasyng, For y• gospell is a fre

tidynges of forgyuenes of synnes. To
make vs fre from the hole lawe, accordyng
to Pau.ii. Corin. iii. d Gala. v. a where the spiryt of y• lorde
is, there is libertie. Item he sayth. He y•
is circūcised, is dettour of the hole lawe
Ergo either the hole lawe ought to be
kept, or no parte. Now we be made free
from the hole lawe, as perteyneth to y•
purchase of ryghtousnes, whiche vnder
this newe couenaūt or testament is gyuen
for no lawes or workes. To take a
way the tyrāny domyniō power & curse
of y• law accordīge to Pau.Gala. iii. 
                        •
                     
                   Chryst hath
redemed vs from y• curse of y• lawe. To
brīg a sure iustificacyō which is of faith
For iustificaciō is therfore gyuē by faith
(sayth S. Paul that it may be sure.Roma. iiii. 
                        •
                     
                   To
translate vs frome vnder y• lawe vnto
grace. Ro. vi.Roma. vi. 
                        •
                     
                   For ye be not vnder y• law
but vnder grace. Truli to be vnder gracis
to please god bycause of Chryst, & to
be fre from y• law, to thyntēt y• sholdest
no lenger seke wt an vncertayne & doubt
full cōscience to be iustifyed ī the lawe.
To bryng & gyue tholy ghost wherby y•
deleuers are quyckned, guyded, & defēded
agaynst the cruelty of the deuel, of deth
of syn, & of law, laboryng to damne vs,
vnto euerlastyng life accordyng to that
saing of the abrogatour of the lawe. I

wyll not leaue you comfortles as orphanes
or fatherles chyldrē.Iohan. xiiii. c To make y•
our fulfyllyng of the lawe wherby we
testifye our thankfulnes towardes god
may please god bycause of Chryste.
               ¶Cōtraryes to thabrogaciō of the law
be these.Contraryes or errours. To holde that thabrogaciō of
the lawe is onely a disanullyng y• letter
of the lawe. To say the disanullyng of
the lawe is onely an expyryng or extynguyshement
of Moses polycye or cōmō
                  welth.
To say thabrogacyō of the lawe
was not spokē of before in the ꝓphetes
whiche errour spyngeth of not merkyng
the cōdicyō added to the lawe, as yf ye
shall kepe my cōmaūdementes. &c. Also
the places heretofore cyted in the proue
of the diffinicyō which be of the ꝓphecies
of ꝓphetes cōcernyng a newe kyngdome
to be set vp, teache the cōtrary of
this errour. To deny y• our infyrmitye
gaue occasiō of abrogating the law. To
holde yt the abrogacyō of the lawe ꝑteyneth
also to suche as beleue not ī Christ
or haue not the holy ghost. To graunt
with the Cerynthyans y• the hole laweThe heresye of the Cerynthians.
is so abrogate y• no ꝑte of the same is ꝓfitable
to the Chry
                     •
                  tians. To say wt the
Nazereys all thynges of the olde lawe
about Chryst are to be kept.Nazarees. To graunt

with the Hebionites y• the carnall commaundementesNevyonyte
                        •
                     .
of the lawe as circūcysion
& such lyke are yet to be kept of the
Chrystians.The errour of scholeme
                        •
                     . To say onlye a parte of the
lawe is abrogate, y• is to wyce, the iudicyall
& ceremonyall cōmaundementꝭ
To this errour answereth Pau.Ephe. ii. 
                        •
                     . which
sayth that the lawe of the cōmaundementes,
which stand in decrees is abrogate,
in which place vndoubtedly thapostle
speaketh of the hole lawe. More
ouer to saye yt onely a parte of the lawe
is abrogate by Chryst a mynistre of syn
as Paule teacheth to the Galathians.Gala. ii. d
In which epistle he teacheth in dyuers

                     •
                  laces that euen the hole lawe is abrogate
in so moche also that he rebuked
Peter which compelled the gentyles to
playe the Iues, To holde that the lawe
is in suche wyse abrogate as neyther y•
two tables of Moses cōteynīg the .x. cō
                  maundementes
are to be kepte amonge
chrystē men. But for asmoche as y• law
of the .x. cōmaūdementes e
                     •
                  pounde the
lawe of nature, yea and is al one wt the
lawe of nature and furthermore setteth
forth with a certeyn goodly and siguler
ordre the true worshyp of god & the tru
workꝭ: Therfore it is cōuenient to kepe
the same, not for Moses sake but by

cause of the mutuall consent & agremēt
of the lawe of nature & the two tables.
To say that onely the ceremonyal & iudiciall
lawes be abrogate bycause that
for the multitude of thē no man coulde
kepe them but that the decalogie cōteynynge
the .x.This errour is papisticall. cōmaundementes is not abrogate
sithēs the same is natural, and
therfore easy to be kept. To graūt that
some cōmaūdemētes of the lawe are to
be kept styll bycause of the plenarye or
full iustificacyon, as be the cōmaundementes
of sacryfices for synnes. To affyrme
y• euen therfore the lawe of the .x.
cōmaūdemētes is not abrogate bycause
it is yet kept of y• Chrystyās. To which
errour I answere, y• īdede it is kept not
as Moses lawe but as a lawe consentyng
with nature.Papisticall. To holde y• the lawe
of the .x. cōmaūdemētes is kept amonge
the Chrystyans to iustifye them. This
errour is agaynste the finall effectes of
thabrogacyō of the lawe which dec
                     •
                  are
the lawe to be therfore abrogate y• we
myght be iustifyed frely by Christ & that
for no lawes or workes.Iudicialles be suche lawes as be for the conseruacyon of tranquylite in the cōmon welth To saye y• the
iudicialles or at lestway not all of thē
be abrogate bycause some yet remayn amonge
y• Chrystyās as of wedlocke of
distinction of dominions & so forth, I answer.

These iudicials be therfore kept
amōg christiās, bicause they agre wt the
lawes of nature. To hold y• in stede of
Moses lawes haue succeded popes lawes,
namely concernyng ceremonies.
This arrour shall be brought to lyght
better in the title of mēs tradiciōs.The heresye of papystes. To
deny yt the chefest effect of abrogacion
is y• we be frely iustified for Christ. To
say the law is abrobate wt a cōdiciō annexed
or cōdicionaly, as if we shall do
this or yt. &c. To hold yt the curse & power
of the law hāgeth stil aswel vpon
the good as vpon the bad. This errour
is cōfuted sufficiently among theffectꝭ
of abrogaciō, & is directly against scripture.
To bring agayn wt Storky,Storkie. Monetary,Monetarie.
PiperyPiperie. & other heretikes y• hole
law of Moses. To dreme wt the wretched
AnabaptistesAnabaptistꝭ. y• the time shal ones
come when the kingdom of Israel shal
be restored agayn with al the lawes of
the same. This erroure is all togyther
Iudaical.
            
         
         
            Of the christen lybertie.
CA. XXX.
            NOw ensueth the placeof y• christē
liberty, which is the most propre
effect of y• abrogaciō. For to this

purpose was the law anulled or abrogate
y• we might be fre by Christ Iesu
                  •
               
our cōsciences, & enfraunchised frō all
outward thīgꝭ, like as Christ also saith
My kingdom cōmeth not wt markīg or
obseruing (y• is to wite) rightousnes is
not gyuē for any outward thinges, for
any workes, for any cōdiciō, but frely
for Christ. Of this fredō speketh christ
in the gospel of Iohn̄ where he saith,Iohn̄. iii. a. if
the son shal make you fre, then ye shall
truly be fre.
            Wherfore the christē liberty is a fre claymeDiffinycion.
ī the spiritual kingdom thrugh
Iesu Christ, by which we be fre frō the
bōdage & curse of the law, frō y• power
of syn & deth, & to be short, frō the outward
keping of al thīges in the mater
of iustificaciō before god, which frākly
is giuē to al bileuers bicause of crist
But forasmoch as we forthwt dye not,
after we be set ī such liberty, but must
yet liue ī this world: therfore to thītēt
good order & publique trāquilite might
be kepte, we be bound still to kepe outward
ordinaūces in this worlde.
            
               THE christē liberty taketh his nameProue of the dyffinicion.
of christ y• author, which caused & ordeyned
this liberty, or bicause this liberty
apꝑteyn only to such as truly & in dede

be christiās I haue added (in the spsiall
kingdom of Christ) y• ye might know y•
the christen liberty ꝑteyneth not to the
kyngdom of the world, but cōsisteth in
the deliuery of cōsciences, against certeyn
frantike ꝑsons which make of the
christē liberty a certein carnal loosnes
voyd of al honesty & godlynesse.
            
               NOVV what maner of thynge the
christen libertie is, & to what kingdom
it ꝑteyneth theffectes of it do sufficiētly
declare, which shew that we be fre frō
the bondage & curse of the law, frō the
power of syn & deth, and finally from
the outward keping of thinges concerning
the mater of iustificacion before
god, which frankly is giuen to such as
bileue bicause of Christ.Gal. iii. b. 
                     •
                  
                For as Paul testifieth,
Christ hath redemed vs frō the
curse of the lawe, made for vs a curse.
Item to the Rom. he sayth.Roma. viii. 
                     •
                  
                The lawe
of the spirite that bryngeth life thrugh
Iesu Chryste hathe delyuered me from
the law of syn and deth. Also. Luke. 17
The kingdom of god cōmeth not with
wayting for, wherfore neither the christen
libertye, whiche is the pryncypall
part or effecte in the kyngdome of god
commeth not with waytyng for or obseruynge.
            
               
This word frankly or frely excludeth
al maner cōdicion of law. For the christen
liberty is against al obseruaciōs &
cōdicions of law, by whiche vnder the
law ryghtousnes was soughte but not
found, so y• now we be assured y• ryghtousnes
frely chaūceth vnto vs, bicaus
                  •
               
of Christe, yea thought we kepe not the
law,Ioh. iii. b so y• we byleue in Christ, y• he hath
enfraūchesed vs & deliuered vs frō the
bondage of the law, according to this,
he y• byleueth me, hath euerlasting lyfe.
Now, if he hath euerlastīg life, ergo he
hath rightousnesse, sith thone is incidēt
to y• other.Roma. iii. d Paul also vseth these termes
frely wtout the workes of the law. &c.
Finally, bicause the christē liberty hath
only respect to the conscience, therfore
forth of the cōscience, it deliuereth not
from outward ordinaūces, be they tē
               poral
or eccliastical, ordeyned for y• cō
               seruaciō
of good order & cōmon quiet,
though we be fre also frō these in 
                  •
               scieēre,☞
so y• suche ordinaūces aswel ciuil
as eccliastical in the mater of iustificaciō
cā do nothīg, as heretofore hath bē
thought very wickedly, namely cōcerning
rites & ceremonies of the church,
of which many be also wicked.
            
               THE self same causes may be of theCauses
               
christē liberty, which be of the abrogacion
or of the fulfilling of the law. For
these thre places be in maner all one, 
                  •
               
haue welnere y• same effectes, takē forth
of the ꝓfit & cōmoditie, neuerthelesse I
thought good seuerally to handle the
                  •
               e
thre places bicause of the great vtilitie
therof. Also bicause the cōmon vsage is
seuerally to dispute of these thre places
what the fulfilling of the law is, what
thabrogaciō, what y• christē liberty is.
Now the causes of y• christē liberty be
these: The ꝓmise of god 
                  •
               cerning this
liberty. Christ, for he is the ꝑson y• delyuereth,
& for whō we be deliuered, accordīg
to his own sayīg,Ioh. viii. 
                     •
                  
                if y• son shal make
you fre, you shall be ī dede fre. Also accordīg
to this of Paul.Roma. viii. 
                     •
                  
                The law of the
spirit of life thorugh Iesus Christ hath
made me fre. &c. Finally our, weyknes
in keping the law is a cause of y• christē
liberty, bicause it gaue occasiō of our
deliuery frō y• thraldō of y• law, which
burthē nether our fathers nor we (saith
Peter) could beare.Act. x v. 
                     •
                   Hebr. Vii▪ 
                  
                     •
                  
                For y• cōmaūdemēt
which wēt before is disanulled, bicause
of the weyknes & vnprofitablenes. Finally,
the holy ghost may also be said a
cause of this liberty, forasmoch as he is
the gouerner & p̄seruer therof.
            
               
               THE christē fredō is one only thing
not cut in to ꝑtes,Pa
                     •
                  te
                     •
                   of the christen fredome be none., euē y• wherby we be
fre ī our 
                  •
               sciēces frō al outward thīgꝭ
cōcerning the mater of iustificaciō. Yet
neuertheles this liberty hath relaciō to
two sūdry effectes, frō which we be fre
(y• is to wite) frō inward thīgꝭ, whiche
exercise their powers in the 
                  •
               sciēce, as
be these: the curse, the dominiō, the power
& execration of the law, the deuyl,
syn, deth, & so forth. Frō outward thinges
as be ceremonies, iudicial lawes, almēs
tradiciōs which we know to be in
differēt, I mean which may be omitted
in case of necessitie wtout synne. Beside
this there is an other liberty which the
scripture remēbreth,Libertie of fleshe. called the liberty
of flesh, & is 
                  •
               trary to y• christē liberty.
Of this speaketh Paul writinge to the
Gala.Gala. v. c. saying. Brethrē ye were called in
to liberty, only let not your liberty be
an occasiō vnto y• flesh, but ī loue serue
one an other. Truly y• liberty of y• flesh
is by which we think any maner thing
is la
                  •
               ful for vs to do. The author herof
is Satā, the disturber of al honest & peasible
ordinaunces.
            Theffectes of the christē liberty be deriued
& fetched out of the cōmodityes,Theffectes of the christē lybertie
which we receyue by it. And they be of

two sortes by reasō of the two sondry
thingꝭ of which they be formed. For we
be fre, not only frō inward thynges wt 
whiche the cōscience is vexed, but also
frō outward thinges. And to these thinges
of two sūdry sortes may be al such
thinges aptly referred, as we be deliuered
of by this christē fredom. Theffectꝭ
y• ꝓcede of y• cōmodities as wel of thinges
inwarde as outwarde be these. To
haue remissiō of syn̄es bicause of Christ
by fre imputaciō for no lawes sake or
cōdicion sake or any outwarde keping
sake, to thintent the promesse (as Paul
sayth) may be certeyn & stedfast.Roma. iiii. 
                     •
                  . To deliuer
the byleuers in Christ frō the power
of syn & of death.Roma. viii. To be deliuered
frō the curse of the law.Gala. iii. c. To be assured
y• god is pacified and merciful vnto vs
through Christ.Roma. v. To be vnder grace, as
Paul recordeth, that is no longer to be
tossed wt the stormes and curses of the
law which they styl do fele that be vnder
the lawe. To be endowed with the
holy ghost, whiche quickeneth vs to a
new lyfe, ruleth & defendeth, after we
be ones enfraunchesed by Chryst. For
Chryste beinge gotten by fayth gyueth
the holye ghoste. To fulfyll the lawe
truly, bycause the vayle or couerynge

is takē away by Christ vnder which in
tymes past was cloked so great fulfilling
of the law in mere hypocresy: euē
as yet at this day fained & cloked y• fulfillīg
of the law, by such as frō whom
the couerīg is not takē away by christ.
To be deliuered frō the hole law of Moses,il. Cor. iii. c. Ephe. ii. c.
according to Paules saying. Abrogating
the law of the cōmaūdements y•
stādeth in decrees. Certeinly to thinke
otherwise against this effect & to saye y•
we be deliuered onely frō a part of the
law, to make Christ the ministre of syn
the said Paul testifieth to the Gal.Galathi. ii. d. To
be made fre frō al lawes, tradiciōs, ordinaūces
& outward obseruaūces ī the
mater of iustificaciō, by this effect yet
is not takē away our obediēce toward
such lawes, tradiciōs & ordinaūces as
be not wicked, & may be kept wtout sin
bicause all thinges ought to be done in
the churche (as s.s. Cor. xiiii. 
                     •
                  
                Paul cōmaūdeth) semingly
and in order. Furthermore, we
ought to kepe the ciuil or temporal lawes,
to thintent tranquillitie and publique
honesty might be kept & conserued
in the worlde.
            Cōtraries to y• christē liberty be theseCōtraries to the christen libertie.
To graūt y• the christē liberty is a iayle
deliuery & fre ryddaunce frō al maner

obedience to which we were bound before
the knowlege of the gospell. To
hold y• the christē libertye is a deliuery
only frō inward thīges, as frō y• curse
of the law, the power of syn & of deth, &
so forth, & a binding vnto good workꝭ
wherby mē deserue to be iustified. To
saye the christē libertie is an infraunchisemēt
frō the law of Moses, but not
frō the law of Christ cōcernīg charite,
which is reserued for iustificaciō. To
deny that the christē liberty is a fre enfraūchemēt
as ꝑteyneth to iustificaciō
frō al thynges. To graūt that there is
some cause in vs of the christē liberty.
To say the christē liberty may be gottē
by our desertes.Anabaptists. To hold y• the christē liberty
taketh away obediēce due to prī
               ces
& chaūgeth cōmō ordinaūces. This
errour caused in Germany aboute☞ .xij.
yeres ago the great rising of y• cōmons
in which were slayne aboue .xxx. M. of
thē. To hold wt certeyn scholemē,Scholemen y• albeit
we be fre frō y• ceremonials & iudicials
of Moses, yet not fro the law of
the .x. cōmaūdementes, called the moral
lawes, which as they say be left for cristen
mē for their plenary iustificacion
To say the christē liberty may stād wt 
o
                  •
               t faith in Christ. To say the wicked

be ꝑtakers of y• christē liberty. To hold
that y• law may truly be kept,The causes of the Crosse 
                     •
                  . Peter. ii. Prouer. iii. Thoccasiō of the Crosse. so that y•
maist byleue god, & loue truly god, although
y• be not trāslated ī to this libertie
by Christ. For wtout this liberty, the
vaile, y• is to say hypocresie, is not takē
away ī the fulfilling of the law, according
to Paul. 2. Cor. 3. To say y• christē
liberty may stand wtout a new life. To
graūt y• we be deliuered frō the lawes
of Moses, but y• the popes tradiciōs become
in their places vnto rightousnes.The heresie of papistes
To bynd mēs 
                  •
               sciences to the kepingꝭ
or obseruaūces of outward thinges vnder
hope of iustificaciō,The heresie of obseruaūtꝭ or vnder dedly
syn. To disturbe vnder y• p̄tence of this
liberty al tēporal & politique ordinaū
               ces.Anabaptistes
To disanul vnder cloke of this liberty
the publique nourture disciplyne
& obediēce. To despise vnder the p̄text
of the christē liberty al honest maners.
To bynde vs agayn vnto Moses law,
saue as farforth as the same agreeth wt 
the lawe of nature.
         
         
            Of the Crosse. CA. XXXI.
            
               THE Crosse is any maner of affliction,The description of y• crosse of Christ.
be it inwardly in the mind,
or outwardly in the body, which
chaūseth by the grace of god for y• gospels

sake or for Christes name, y• by it
the faith of the holy ꝑsons might be ꝓued,
the loue of god knowē, & the godly
glorified & renowmed, by a wonderful
deliuery before theyr ꝑsecuters.
            
               EXEMPLES of the inward afflictiō
appere euerywhere in the psalmes,Probacions of the definicion.
where Dauid complayneth of synnes,
and of the horriblenes of deth, as ī the
vi. psalme,Psal. vi. 
                     •
                  . where he sayth. O lorde rebuke
me not in thy anger, chasten me
not in thy heuy displeasure. These inwarde
afflictions and crosses we call
commonly tribulacions or anguysshes
of mynde.
            
               EXEMPLES ynough of the outward
affliction or crosse be neyther at
this day lackyng, sithēs the tyme y• the
pure word of god hath of late spronge
vp agayne, wherwt also came forth the
crosse, which is accoūted to be always
most faythful cōpaniō of gods worde.
The grace of god is the cause of this
crosse, accordīg to the saying of Peter.i. Pet. ii. d.
For this is the grace of god, & ī this we
be called. &c. I added (for y• gospel sake
or name of Christ) lest a mā shold think
here that it is the crosse to be punisshed
as a murther
                  •
               r, felon, blasphemour,
heretyke. &c.i. Peter. ii. d. And so Peter disserneth

the crosse of y• christē innocētes frō the
crosse of thē, which haue deserued it by
their wicked dedes. Also Christ saith, ye
shall be hated of all men for my names
sake. Furthermore these wordes, for y•
gospel sake, or the name of Christ do exclude
such crosses as be deuised & chosē
by mans wit,These be erouched fryers. holy obseruauntes and such other gloryous hypocrytes. which certeyn ioly work
masters & iustifiers of thē selues do lay
vpō thē selues to merite by y• same euer
lasting life. For y• true crosse is a thing
annexed to the gospel, which who so euer
receyueth, shal haue no nede to laye
a crosse vpō him self, sithēs of the own
accorde it foloweth the ꝓfession of the
gospell. For yf y• be a ryght gospeller,
yea a right christē mā, for one deuyll y•
shalt receiue infinite, for one ꝑsecuter a
gret multitude of ꝑsecuters which shal
lye in awayt of the continually.
            Theffectes of the crosse, which I haue
put in the diffinition shal be euident by
the places & exēples folowing .i. Pet. i.
Saluaciō (sayth s.i. Peter. 
                     •
                  . b. Peter is p̄pared alredy
to be shewed ī the last time, at which
time ye shal reioyse, thoughe now for a
seasō (yf nede requyre) ye are in heuines
through manyfold temptaciōs, y• your
fayth ones tried, being moch more p̄cious
thā gold y• perissheth, thoughe it be

tried wt fyre, might be found ī to praise
glory & honour. Itē the wise mā sayth:Pro. iii. 
                     •
                  
               
whō god loueth he cha
                  ••
               eneth. He scourgeth
euery son whō he receyueth. This
effect of the crosse is most excellently &
& godly set forth thrughout the hole. 12
chap. to the Hebr. Now exērles be these
The tēptacion of Abrahā,Gene. xxii. where god
bad him offre his son Isaac for trial of
his faith.Iob. 1. 2. 3. 4.Iob also was tēpted, & sore afflicted
for his ꝓfe of faith.Math. xxiiii. c Christ called
vnto hī Peter on the see to proue & try
his fayth.Iudic. ii. d. Moreouer in the boke of Iudges
it is red how god destroyed not certeyn
naciōs of the gentyles to thintent
he wold try through thē the chyldrē of
Israel whether they wold kepe y• way
of the law, & walke in it or no. Finally
very many exēples of y• glorious deliuery,
appere ī the scripture ī which a mā
may se that god for this purpose hathe
brought the faithful & godly ꝑsōs to y•
crosse or tribulaciō, to thintēt he wold
glorify & set out their name & renowme
before their ꝑsecutour. Hither belōgeth
thexēple of the wōderful deliuery of y•
childrē of Israel,Exod. 7. 8
                     •
                  
                of Ioseph out of prisō
of Anna the mother of Samuel,Gene. 
                     •
                   li. of Dauid,i. Reg. i.
& infinite other.i. Reg. xvii.
            
            
               THE cause of y• crosse or tribulaciō,

is y• kynd wil, grace, or charite of god
cording to the saying of Peter. This is
the fauour of god, & to this ye be called
Also of y• wise mā, whō god loueth him
he chasteneth. The occasiō of the crosse
is the self gospel which detecteth the hypocritical
& false worship of god, whiche
thing the hypocrites can not beare
& therfore they hasten thē selues to ꝑsecute
the louers & folowers therof. The
formal cause of the crosse, or forme and
maner of bering the crosse, is pacience,
according to Christes saying:
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . viii▪
                By pacience
ye shal possesse your soules. Also accordīg
to the saying of Paul, to al sufferaūce
& pacience wt ioy (as who shold
say)Philip. ii. b. y• the hert be not angry wt god ī tribulacion.
Itē to the Phil. Do ye al thinges
 wtout grudging. Grudging & grefe
in the crosse be cōtraryes to ioy & reioysyng.
For surely the godly ought to ioy
& reioyse in the crosse & in afflictions in
y• they be suche as god wil let thē suffre
for the gospels sake. And therfore s. Iames
sayth:Iacob. i. 
                     •
                  
                My brethrē count it for an
exceding ioy whē ye fal in to sundry tē
               ptacions,
knowing this, yt the triall of
your fayth bringeth pacience, &c. Ro. 5.
And not only y• but also we glory vpon
our afflictions.
            
               
¶Now, y• pacience is the gyft of tholy
ghost, testifieth Paule, where he sayth.Gala. v. 
                     •
                  .
The frute of y• spirit is loue, ioy, peax,
paciēce. &c. Itē. Psal. 61. Al my thinges
be subiect to god. For from him cōmeth
my pacience.
            
               CROSSE or tribulaciō may be deuided
ī to the outward &Partes of the Crosse inward crosse
The inward cōpriseth thafflictiōs & tē
               ptaciōs
of the ꝯscience. The outwarde
crosse cōteyneth al outward ꝑsecuciōs
Howbeit the inward & outward crosse
be very greatly cōioyned & knyt thone
to thother so yt the outward afflictions
be seldom wtout the īward. For whē we
suffre tribulacion outwardly, we be inwardly assayed & tried also wt tēptacions.
Certes, it is right expedient to reteyn
& know this diuisiō of the crosse,
lest whē we hear yt the crosse is a thing
incidēt & annexed to ye gospel, we shold
forthwt iudge that he can not be a good
chrysten person whiche suffereth not
outwardly eyther persecucion or deth,Anabapti
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
lyke as at this daye the Anabaptystes
play the foles in a right weyghty & ernest
mater whiche styfflye do contende
and saye we can not be true chrysten
men, onlesse we suffre deth & be slayne,
and to thintente we myghte be slayne,

they cōmaūde vs to seke occasions. In
dede y• crosse as a thīg annexed to y• gospel,
shal neuer fayle the christē mē.The inward crosse is moch more greuoꝰ then the outward. And
albeit it shall not vexe thē outwardly,
yet inwardly there shal be alwais infinite
tēptaciōs of such payne & greuāce
y• there is no man but had rather suffre
deth most extreme & greuous ꝑils that
might outwardly chaūce then suche tē
               ptacions,
so y• the same temptacionk be
true & vnfained terrours and feares of
the mynde.
            Theffectes of the crosse be these.Theff
                     •••
                  es To
proue & try a mās fayth, as y• scripture
witnesseth. i. Pe. i. Iac. i. Also in y• boke
of Iudges god in his anger sayth ꝯcerning
the children of Israel, y• he wolde
not cast forth the childrē of the gētilesIudic .ii.d.
to thintēt to proue Israel throughe thē
whether they wil kepe the waye of the
lorde to walke therin as their fathers
did or not. Itē in Exo. xvi. he saith. To
try thē whether they wil walke in my
law.
                  
                     •••
                  ter. viii. 
                     •
                  
                &c. Finally in the boke of Deut. it
is red. Thinke on all the way which y•
lord thy gad led the this .xl. yeres ī wil
dernes, for to hūble the & to ꝓue the, to
wite what was in thyne hert whether
y• woldest kepe his cōmaūdementes or
no. &c.Prouer. iii. b To be a token of the loue of god

towardes vs. For whom god loueth, 
                  〈◊〉
               
he chasteneth. To be a signe yt we be the
sōnes of god. He. 12. Yf ye be not vnder
correct
                  •
               od, wherof al are ꝑtakers, thē
are ye bastardes, & not sonnes. To be a
signe y• we be in the kingdom of heuē, &
y• the kingdom of heuen ꝑteyneth vnto
vs.Math. v.b▪
                For blessed be they (saith Christ) whiche
suffre persecucion, for rightousnes
sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heuē,
as who shold say, they y• suffre ꝑsecuciō
be sure they be in the kyngdom of heuē,
and y• the kingdom of heu
                  •
                belōgeth vnto
thē. To haue a glorious deliuery annexed
vnto it, of whiche effect there be
many exēples in scripture. As of y• thre
chyldren in the buring furnace.Daniel. iii. Itē of
the deliueraūce of the childrē of Israel,Exodi. xiiii.
of susanna,Daniel. xiii. of Ioseph,Gene. xxxvii. of Ionas of our
sauiour christ,Ionas. ii. iii. & of many other.Math. ii. To haue
euerlastīg lyfe aft this as a quiet frute
of rightousnes to it annexed. For euer
lasting life thapostle calleth the frute
of rightousnesse as a thyng incident to
rightousnes, where he saith.Nebre. xii. c. No maner
chastifyng for the 
                  •
               sent time semeth to
be ioyous, but greuous, neuertheles afterwarde
it brnigeth the quiet frute of
rightousnes vnto thē which are therin
exercised. To haue a certein & sure ioy

associate vnto it, & that by promesse. As
appereth in the gospell of Iohn̄ where
Christ sayth:Iohan. xvi.d verily verily I say vnto
you, ye shal wepe & lamēt, & the worlde
shal reioyse, ye shal sorow, but your sorow
shall be turned in to ioy. To be a
signe of our blesse. Mat. v. Blessed be ye
whē mē shall reuile you & ꝑsecute you.
&c. To haue euerlasting ioy & glorificaciō
 wt Christ associate vnto it, accordīg
to Paul,Rom. viii. c we suffre wt him to thintent y•
togither wt him we mighe be glorified.
Also to Timo.ii. Timo. ii.b. Yf we be deed wt hī, we
shal togither lyue wt him. Yf we be paciēt
we shal togither reigne wt him. To
encrease our hope in god, wytnessynge
Paul:i. Corin. iiii. c. to this purpose we be betrayed
& reuiled, yt we might haue sure hope in
the liuing god. Also Ro. v. We reioyse
ouer our afflictiōs, knowing y• afflictiō
gendreth paciēce, pacience trial, triall
hope.
            
               BVT these & sēblable effectes of the
crosse namely such as ꝓcede of rewardes
do not folow, euē bicause of y• crosse
as thīges ꝓprely due to ye same, but bycause
such effectes be ꝓmised to the bearers
of y• crosse. Wherfore ī the .v. cha.
of Mat. & in diuers other places of scripture,
we ought diligently to cōsidre y•
               
causes why they y• suffre ꝑsecutiō be called
blessed,Math. v. 
                     •
                  
                as wher Christ saith, blessed
be they y• suffre ꝑsecucion for rightousnes
sake, for theirs is the kingdō of heuē.
Here we must note that the cause of
blesse is to be ī the kingdom of heuē, so y•
the meaning & sēce of this text is, that
such as suffre y• crosse be blessed, bicause
they be in the kingdom of heuē, & not bicause
they suffre ꝑsecution.Math. v.d. Also Chryst
sayth blessed are ye whē mē reuyle you
& ꝑsecute you, & shal falsly say al maner
of euils agaīst you for my sake reioyse
& be glad for your rewarde is great in
heuē, here yf ye wil set the cause before
ye shal easely haue the meaning & explicacion
of this place in this wyse. Bycause
they that be ꝑsecuted reuiled for
christes cause, know y• they be regarded
of god, & haue a sure rewarde by ꝓmise
layd vp for them in heuē, therfore they
be blessed.
            Contraryes to the crosse be these.Contraryes or errours. Anabaptistes To
graunt wt the Anabaptistes that by the
name of crosse is only mēt an outward
persecucion. To graunt that the crosse
or persecucion of the godly ꝑsons chaū
               seth
casuallye. To impute the crosse of
the godlye vnto Sathan. To denye
that the crosse chaunceth of the boūtiful

wil of god, of the grace & charite of
god. To beare the crosse vnpaciently &
grudgīgly against the forme of bearīg
the crosse. To curse god ī ꝑsecuciō, or ī
the crosse.Chiliastes. To be angry wt god ī tribulaciō.
To hold y• the godly ꝑsons shall
not be subiect to the crosse euē to y• end
of the world, but y• the crosse of y• godly
shal ons cease here ī erth, y• they may
reigne here peasibly wtout al maner of
trouble or affliction to thende of a .M.
yeres, al tyraūtꝭ & wicked ꝑsons slain.
This errour long ago began of y• Chiliastꝭ,
which now of late the wretched
Anabaptistꝭ haue renued.Anabaptistes Itē rashly to
run vpō ꝑsecucion & the crosse. To lay
the crosse vpō thē selues. To holde y• it
is syn to flee the crosse, where escape or

                  •
               eing maye be wtout preiudice of gods
name. To hold y• the crosse may be resisted
 wt the swerd, and wt violēce, agaīst
the manyfest exemple of Christ, & of al sayntes.
To rush hedling in to the daū
               gers
of the crosse, & to pray to haue the
crosse & ꝑsecuciō, as long ago y• Donatistes
did,Donatistes. Anabaptistes & as y• Anabaptistꝭ do at this
day. To graūt y• he can not be a christē
mā,The errour of monkes & fryers. which either suffreth not outward
ꝑsecuciōs or dye for y• gospel. To mainteyn
the opiniō of freres & mōkes, y• the

punishmētes of wycked malefactours
stand for theyr saluaciō. To hold y• the
crosse as a good worke iustifyeth. To
hold y• theffectꝭ of y• crosse which ꝓcede
of rewardes, chaūce vnto y• godly, euē
for the very ꝑsecucion or crosses sake, &
not bicause of the promesse.
         
         
            Of humilitie. CA. XXXII.
            HUmilitie or lowlynes towardes
god is y• true fear of god,Diffinition. wherby
the ꝯsciēce being terrified & made
affrayd wt the iudgemēt of god, cast frō
thē their hole cōfidēce of theyr own powers
of their owne wisdome, of theyr
owne ryghtousnes. &c.
            
               THIS diffinition is ꝓued sufficiētly
by the ꝓphet Esaie,Proue Esay. 
                     •
                  xvi. 
                     •
                  
                saying. Thus saith
the lord, heuen is my seate, & the erth is
my fote stole, wher shal now the house
stand yt ye wil buyld vnto me? & where
shal be y• place y• I wil dwel in? As for
these thinges my hand hath made them
al, & they are al created sayth the lorde.
which of thē shal I regarde? euen him
that is a lowly troubled spirite, & standeth
in awe of my wordes.ii. Reg. xii. 
                     •
                  
                An exemple
of this humilitie is excellent i
                  •
                Dauid
who being rebuked of the prophet Nathan,
espieth his syn, & not trustīg y• by

his own ꝓpre iustice, he might appease
the wrath & displeasure of god, whē he
saw he shold he put out of his kingdom
he knew y• the thing was done by gods
coūseyle & prouidēce, wherfore he trusted
not to his own powers or wisdom
that he mighte retayne & kepe styll his
kyngdome. The vessel wherin this humilitie
reposeth is the mynd, and therfore
s.
                  
                     •
                  . Pet. v. a. Peter calleth it the lowlynes of
mynde, saying: se ye haue lowlynes of
mynde fixed in you.
            
               OF humilite the cause is tholy ghost
whose gift it is.Causes To which is also gods
worde added, for the word of god teacheth
& instructeth vs to distrust & condemne
our selues, & to commyt our selues
holly to Chryst.Barnar. suprant. serm̄. 37 S. Bernarde maketh
the knowlege of a mans selfe the
cause of humilitie, for thus he saythe. I
know that no man wtout the knowlege
of him self is saued. For of this knowlege
of a mans owne self springeth humilitie
mother of saluacion, & also the
feare of the lord which in lykewyse as
it is the beginnyng of wisdom, so also
it is of helth.
            
               THIS humilitie,No partes of which we speke
hath no ꝑtes. For it is one certeyn mociō
of mynd towardes god by which y•
               
cōsciēces feared by y• iudgemēt of god
distrust thē selues, to thītēt they might
be holpē by the mercy & ayd of god. The
ciuil humilite or lowlynes wherby we
despise not other before oure selues, is
theffect of this humilitie towardes god
For who so euer knoweth his own vnclēnes
and wickednes shal neither contēne
ne despyse other.Humilitie of religious personnes. Certes an hypocritical
& coūterfeyt humilite is y• whiche
our mōkes, freres, chanōs & nūnes
haue fayned in ceremonies & outwarde
apparel. This humilitie may be rather
called arrogaunce or pryde.
            Theffectes of this lowlynes of herte
or humilitie in scripture be knowen to
be these.Effectes of lowlynes. To fear god truly. To be frayed
by y• knowlege of a mās own sin truly.
To cast away in the sight of god al
his own rightousnes, holines, wisdom
confidence.Gsaye. lxvi. To be a cōtrite & humbled
hert.Psalm. l. To be a token that god wil haue
mercy on vs.
                  
                     •
                  . Petr. v. 
                     •
                  
                For god resisteth y• proude
but to the lowlyons he gyueth grace.
To be a signe yt we be in the kyngdom
of heuen, accordynge to the sayinge of
Chryste. Blessed are the meke. Nowe,
the humble be called blessed, not bycause
of the verye worke of humilitye,
but bycause they be in the kyngdome

of heuē.Iudith. ix. c Itē to be herd of god, as Iudith
sayth. There was neuer proude ꝑson y•
pleased the (oh lord) but ī the prayer of
the hūble & meke hath thy pleasure ben
euermore. Also ps. 101. God hath loked
vpō the praier of y• hūble, & hath not despised
their peticiōs. To be exalted of
god. Lu. i. He putteth downe y• mighty
frō their seates & exalteth the lowlye.
To bere y• weyknes of others. Of this
effect s. Paul treateth manifestly to the
Gala.Galath. vi. a. saying. Brethren, if any man be
fallē by chaūce ī to any fault, ye which
are spūal, help to amēd hī in y• spirit of
mekenes. &c. Also Christ Mat. 7.
            
               CONTRARYES to humilitie be
these.Cōtraries. The errour of Religiouse personnes. To hold y• humilitie or lowlynes
stādeth in outward gestures, clothing,
ceremonyes, rytes, & outward thinges.
To say lowlynes of mynde before god
is our owne worke. To saye humilitie
euen of it selfe giueth remission of synnes.
To make decrees of humilite, and
certayne rewardes of them in the lyfe
to come.
         
         
            Of sacramentes. CA. XXXIII.
            SAcramentes be visible signes,Difinition. institute
& ordeyned to testify of y• boū
               tifull
wil of god towarde vs, & to

moue & excite our hertes of faythe toward
the ꝓmyses of god.
            I cal the sacramētes visible signes for
ij.Probacion. causes, thone bicause they be layd opē
to y• eyes, thother bicause like as thī
               ges
set before the eyes do moue the sight
to the sacramētes moue the hert to byleue.Augustine.
Therfore s. Aug. very ꝓperly calleth
a sacramēt a visible word. For like
as the worde is a meane wherby tholy
gost moueth y• hertꝭ to bileue, & is cause
togither wt the holy gost of faith (accordyng
to Paul. Fayth is by hearing,Roma. x. c hearyng
by the word of god) So also the sacramētes
be meanes wherby tholy gost
moueth hertes to byleue, & be in maner
causes of the very fayth.
            Theffectꝭ of sacramētes haue no ābiguite
or dout,Theffectis or operaciōs of the acramentes. but be most clerely espied
by y• vse of circūcisiō which was a sign
yt testified & bare witnes of y• fauour of
god towardes Abrahā. It admonished
hī of the ꝓmise. It lifted hī vp in tēptaciō
vnto fayth, & therfore this signe is
called of y• apostle the seale of rightousnes,Roma, iiii. a
not yt it iustified Abraham, but yt it
assured, & as it were sealed vp his hert,
& kept hī in a sure faith towardes ye promesse
which was made vnto hī. Vndoubtedly
no mā wil wōder at these effectes

of the sacramētꝭ if he vnderstādeth the
vse of y• word wherfore y• word serueth
And where as a sacrament is a visible
word, who shal doubt but yt a sacramēt
may worke y• thing in the eyes, which y•
word workes in the eares.
            According to the varietie &Diuision of sacramentes. diuersite
of sacramētꝭ, we diuide thē in to signes
vniuersal,Uniuersall sacramentes & signes ꝑticular. Vniuersal
signes be such as ꝑtein to al mē alike, &
be not bound to certeyn ꝑsons, as baptisme
& the souper of ye lord. Under baptisme
we may cōprise absoluciō, which
ꝓprely belōgeth to penitētꝭ or repētaūt
ꝑsōs, for baptisme also is a signe of repētaūce.
Truly these signes I mean baptisme
(vnder which I also cōprise absoluciō)
& the souper of the lord be ꝓprely
called sacramētꝭ, bicause besides yt they
be signes of grace, they haue also remissiō
of sīnes annexed. But forasmoch as
we se yt al those thinges in a generalite
may be called sacramētes which ꝯteyn
ꝓmises to thē annexed, as be praier, the
crosse, almes matrimony, gouernāce, &
suche like, therfore these and semblable
ought to be referred to the vniuersal sacramētes.
For prayer ꝑteineth to al mē
indifferētly, lyke as also y• rest namely
in respect of power. Signes ꝑticuler be

such as be giuē to priuate or peculier ꝑsōs,Signes or sacramentes perticuler.
or to some certeyn people, as circū
               cisiō
was giuen to the Iues. Also there
were signes giuē to Gedeō, Ezechias, &
to other. In dede yt these ꝑticuler signes
although they were signes of grace, yet
they had not ꝓmises annexed vnto thē
of remissiō of sīnes, as haue yt sacramē
               tes
of the new testament.Causes
            
            
               THE signes or sacramentes of the
new testament, which pertein proprely
vnto vs were ordeined and institute of
Christ. Our weyknes gaue the occasiō
of instituting thē. For mans minde after
the fal of Adā, being of such weyknes
yt by y• bare word it could not haue
stedfast bileue, therfore crist moued by
our weyknes, added to y• word certeyn
lignes to help our infirmite, to thintēt
we might be led felyngly, as it were by
the hād vnto fayth & the byleue of gods
ꝓmises, as testifieth also s. Aug.Augustine. where
he sayth: Man before syn saw god, vnderstode
hym and trusted vnto him. After
synne, man can not conceyue god,
onlesse he be holpen by som meanes. To
these causes is added the worde,☞ accordynge
to this sayinge, yf the worde
be put to the element, so is made the sacrament.
            
               
Theffectes of the sacramētes be gatheredTheffectes of the sacramentes
of theyr propre vse whervnto they
serue, which who so marketh, togither
wt the circūstances & occasiō of thordinaūce
of thē shal easely se what be theffectes
of the sacramentes. Surely they
may be these. To testify of gods wil towardes
vs, or to be signes of grace. To
aduertise vs of y• ꝓmis
                  •
               s of god. To exercise
& moue y• hert to byleue the ꝓmises
of god. To lift vp the godly in tē
               taciō
vnto fayth. To be tokēs of ꝯfessiō
by which we ꝯfesse what god we serue.
To be signes of thākes giuing. To be
allegories & as a mā wold saye watche
wordes of good maners, which myght
ꝓuoke vs to serue one an other, and to
chaūge our life in to better.
            Cōtraries to the sacramētes be these:Cōtraries or errours.
To hold yt sacramētes be only markes
of our ꝓfessiō, wherby y• christē mē are
discerned frō the hethen.Anabaptistꝭ. To say wt the
Anabaptistes yt sacramētes be only tokēs
or watch wordes of good maners.Enthusiasts.
To graūt wt the Enthusiastes yt the holy
gost is sufficient, & that we nede no sacramētes
in the ꝯgregaciō. To hold wt
the scholemē yt there be only seuē sacramētes,Scholomen
if we cal al those thīges in generalite
sacramētes which haue ꝓmises

ānexed. To cal wt the scholemē som
sacramētes which haue no ꝓmises annexed.
To graūt wt the Donatistes &Donatiste
                     •
                  
                other
heretykes yt the sacramentes maye
not be hādled of euil ministers. To deny
y• sacramētes to be signes of grace.
To adde any thīg to the sacramētes or
plucke any thing frō them. To deny yt
the sacramētes be made by the cōming
of the word vnto thē. To deny yt sacramētes
be meanes to moue the hert vnto
byleue. To deny yt the propre & prīcipal
effectes of sacramētes be to testify of y•
louing wil of god towardes vs, and to
stire our hert to faith which receyueth
forgyuenes of sin̄es ānexed to y• signes
of the new testamēt. To graūt yt the sacramētes
be not ratifyed or sure wtout
fayth or our addiciōs. To this errour
answereth s. August.S. Augustine ☞ in his boke of baptysme
 wt these wordes. It skylleth not
whē we treat of the ꝑfection & holynes
of the sacramēt, what he bileueth or wt
what fayth he is endued, which receyueth
the sacrament. In dede it skylleth
very moch as touching to y• way of saluaciō,
yt is, that yu sholdest obteyn theffectes
annexed to the sacramēt. But it
skylleth nothing as concernyng to the
question of the sacrament. And euen in

the same boke of baptisme he wryteth
thus.☞ Manifestū est fieri posse, vt nō fide
integra, maneat sacramentū integrū.
That is, it is manifest it may be, yt faith
not being ꝑfect, yet the sacrament may
remayne ꝑfect. To hold yt theffectes added
to the sacramētꝭ may be take wtout
faith.☞ To adore & suꝑsticiously to worship
the sacramētes, neuertheles in the
meane seasō a reuerēce towardes the sacramētes
is not prohibite. To wrest &
straūgely to interp̄te y• wordes by whiche
the sacramētes be institute. Al whiche
cōtraries yu shalt fynd debated & cō
               futed
in my Catechisme or institution
of a christen man.
         
         
            Of baptisme. CA. XXXIIII.
            BAptysme is a signe or sacramente
institute of Christ for remission of
synnes.
            
               ¶The proue of this diffinition.
               
                  GO ye and teche (saith Christ the instituter
of this sacrament) al nacions,
                     
                        〈…〉
                      viii. d.
baptising thē in the name of the father
the son, & the holy gost. Also Mark. 16.
Who so bileueth & is baptised shall be
saued, yt is shal haue remissiō of synnes.
Lykewise Pe
                     •
                   preaching to the people
sayd.Act. ii. 
                        •
                     
                   Repēt ye, & be ye euery one of you

baptysed in the name of Christ for remission
of synnes.
               
                  THE causes farre and nere of baptisme
be these,Causes of baptisme. the worde, the water, the
ministre, the person to be baptised, the
godfathers and godmothers. Of these
some be of the substaunce of baptisme,
as the word & the water, accordyng to
the ordinaunce of Christ.Augustine. S. Augustine
of the word speketh thus. Accedat verbum
ad elementū, et fiat sacramentum
That is, let the worde be put to the element,
and so let the sacrament be made.
Also in an other place he saythe. Verbo
baptismus consecratur,August. vpon Iohn. detrahe verbum,
et quid est aqua nisi aqua, that is:
By the worde is baptisme consecrate,
plucke awaye the worde, and what is
the water but water? Now y• minister
the person to be baptised, and the godfathers
and godmother, be not the substaunce
of baptysme. For baptysme is
made neyther the better nor the worse
by reason of persons.☞ Faythe whiche
the Anabaptystes requyre as pryncypall
cause to the full perfection of
baptysme, is not of the substaunce of
baptysme bycause the entiertie and perfection
of the sacramēt dependeth only
of the worde and the water, whiche

two thinges being p̄sent it is not to be
disputed further of the entiertie of baptisme.
For baptisme is entiere & perfect
whether the ꝑsons be baptised, the minister,
godfathers or godmothers do bileue
or not byleue. Neuertheles this is
true thobteynīg of forgyuenes of synnes,
whiche is theffect annexed to baptisme
is requyred faith assenting to the
ꝓmesse of remissiō of sīnes. And this is
it y• s. Aug.Augustine. sayth: It skylleth not as touching
the entiertie of y• sacramēt what
he bileueth, or wt what fayth he is endued
which receyueth the sacramēt. Gret
diuersitie doubtles there is as ꝑteineth
to the way of saluacion. But as to the
questiō of the sacramēt there is no difference.
S. Aug. calleth the way of saluacion
which I cal thobteyning of the
effect annexed to baptisme ꝯcerning remission
of synnes, howbeit after what
maner and how the infantes receiue remission
of synnes in baptysme, where
as they haue not fayth by hearing of y•
worde, I haue sufficiently declared in
my cathechisme or institution of a christen
man.
               
                  ONE onely thing vndiuided is baptime
of which we here speke,No partes that is to
wite the baptisme of water.
               
                  
                  THE propre effect of baptisme is remissiō
of sinnes,Theffectes of baptisme. Act. ii. b according to y• saying of
peter repēt ye, & be euery one of you baptised
in the name of Christ for remyssiō
of sinnes. Item of Christ.Mar. xvi. 
                        •
                     
                   He that byleueth
& is baptised shall be saued, that is
to saye shal haue remyssions of sinnes.
The rest of theffectes which folowe, do
spring originall of thinges incident to
baptisme, & of the propre vse of sacramē
                  tes,
as: To be a signe that we be delyuered
from the deuyll, sinne, deth, hell, &c.
To be a signe of our remouinge out of
the kingdome of Sathan into the kingdome
of Christ. To testifye of the bountiful
wil of god towardꝭ vs. To be a tokē
that we be recōcyled to god. To be a
wasshing, in which is giuen vnto vs the
holy ghost, who beginneth to mortify y•
concupiscence which neuerthelesse abydeth
in vs, although the giltye of originall
sin be taken away. To exercyse and
moue y• hert to byleue as oft as we remēbre
baptime & the vse therof. To witnesse
yt we be christiās & sworn to Christ
& so baptisme is a signe of oure ꝓfession.
To testify y• we be borne to the waues
of perilles, & to the chaunge of lyfe, to
thintent we sholde dye contynually, as
long as we lyue, from syn, & rise agayne

lyke new mē vnto rightousnes as declareth
Paul, & so is baptisme an allegory.
               ¶Contraryes to baptisme be these.Contraries or errours. To
considre baptisme without the promyse
to it annexed, which errour gēdreth the
contēpt of baptisme. To deny baptisme
with the Seleucians.Seleucians. Enthusiasts. To graunte with
the Enthusiastes, that the holy ghost is
ynough, & that baptisme nedeth not in
the churche. To holde that worde and
faith suffice to saluacion, & therfore we
nede not baptisme. This erroure presumeth
aboue the iudgemēt of Christ whiche
ordeyned baptisme, which doubteles
wolde neuer haue ordeyned it if he
had knowen no vse of it in the churche.
To hold y• baptisme is onely a signe of
our profession.Anabaptists. To saye with y• Anabaptistes
y• baptisme is onely an allegory or
watch word of good maner. To say baptisme
is only an outward wasshīg of y•
body which the outwarde satisfactiō is
forgyuen. To mainteyne y• baptisme is
perfyte & entyer although the water be
not there. This eroure is agaīst y• mater
of baptisme. To say y• spiritual baptisme
sufficeth, wherby we be baptised of tholy
ghost. To hold that baptisme is hole &
ꝑfite wtout the word. To say that baptisme
is not perfyte or sure, but is to be

renued againe, onlesse faith be present.
This erroure is confuted sufficiētly wel
in the causes of baptisme by the wordes
of S. August.August. cōte
                        •
                      Crescencium grāmaticu
                        ••
                     
                   To say that euil ministers
make baptisme not good, which errour
saint Angust. consuteth. To grasit that
for the vnfaithfulnes or vnworthynes
of the godfathers or godmothers baptisme
lacketh of his perfection. To deny
that a man is apte & mete to be baptised
at any tyme of his age, which errour bīd
the kingdome of Christ vnto obseruaciō
or merking. For if the kingdome of christ
cōmeth not (as Christ hym selfe witnesseth)
 wt merking, Ergo neither baptisme
cōmeth by merkinge which is a parte of
the kingdome of Christ. To holde that
eyther we be otherwise to be baptysed
thē in the name of the father, the son, &
the holy ghost, or that this forme suffyseth
not. This errour is against y• forme
of baptisme. To holde that to be dipped
thryse in the water is by gods law. To
hold that baptisme is good ynough out
of y• congregacion, althoughe the ꝑsons
baptised returne not vnto the cōgregacion,
vndoubtedly if they do not returne
their baptisme is to their destruction as
sheweth s. Aug. To say y• baptisme madeAugust▪
                  
with corrupt wordes is of no force, but

oughte to be done againe. To deny y• in
necessite it is lauful for euery ꝑsō to baptyse.
To take rasshely or wtout calling y•
office of baptising, no necessite constrayninge
thervnto. To holde that suche as
be baptised of herelikes ought to be baptised
againe. To holde that theffectes of
baptisme do folow baptisme for other
causes then for faith cōcerning the promise.
To say baptisme taketh awaye in
vs the naturall cōcupi
                     •
                  cēce or iust. This
errour is openly false against cōmon experience,
albeit the gilt of originall syn
is taken away. To say that the gilte is
takē away by baptisme, but not y• paine
or punyshment. To say that baptisme is
not a cōfortable thing vnto vs through
out our hole lyfe, so that by it we maye
lift vp & solase our selfes. To deny that
theffectes ofbaptisme do endure contynually
vnto vs to our cōsolacion. To deny
repentaunce vnto such as fall after
baptisme wt the Nouacians & Anabaptistes.Nouacians. Anabaptistes Catharians,
To deny mortificacion & regeneraciō
after baptisme with y• Cathariās.
This errour springeth of ignoraunce of
originall concupisceuce or sin stickinge ī
vs. To deny y• ceromonyes added to baptisme,
by mans authorytye, be thīgꝭ indifferent,
that is to wete, which may be

left vndone or may be done so y• same be
not wicked without daūger or scruple of
cōscience To make but a trifle of y• misticall
sacramēt of baptisme.Anabaptists▪
                   To holde that
men ought as often tymes to be baptised
as they fall into sin. To holde that
bicause of theffecte of baptisme which is
remission of sinnes, baptisme is the oftrner
to be vsed, to thintent we maye the
oftener receyue forgiunes of our sinnes
To hold that children not yet borne are
to be baptysed in theyr mothers wombe
or those which partly be borne & partly
yet sticke in their mother. Against this errour
saith saint Agust. in this wyse.Angust ad darvanum. Nothinge
can be borne againe, which is not
yet borne. To say that infauntes which
be baptised at home in time of nede according
to the forme appoīted of Christ
conteyned in these wordes, in the name
of the father & the son & the holy ghost,
ought to be baptised againe in y• templeAnabaptistes
To hold with y• Anabaptistes that childrē
are not to be baptised, tyl they come
to thage of discrecion. This erroure is
new and was neuer herd ī the church of
Christ before.
               
                  THESE cōtraryes & other more I
haue cōfuted in my Catechisme or institucion
where thou shalt finde a cōplete

and entyer treatise of baptisme.
            
         
         
            The supper of the Lorde.
CAPI. XXXV.
            THe supper of y• lord is a sacramentDiffinycion.
ordeyned of Christ him self, y• such
as haue faith in these wordes of
Christ y• ꝓmyser (that for you is giuen &Math. xxvi. c
shed for the remyssion of sinnes) may receyue
pardō of all their sinꝭ to thintēt y•
also they may forgiue their neighbour &
do thē good frely after thexēple of christ
            
               ¶Probacions of this diffinicion.
               ¶That the supper of the lorde is thordinannce
of Christ,Math. xxvi. 
                        •
                     . Mar. xiiii. c Luc. xxii. b i. Cor. xi. e teache thre euangelistes,
Mathewe, Marke, Luke. To whō
also Saint Paule agreeth. Remission of
sinnes is theffecte added by the ꝓmyse of
Christ vnto this supꝑ. But is not here
takē but by hauing faith vpō y• wordes
of Christ the promyser, which be these:
giuen for you or shed for the remyssion
of sinnes. Finally, for asmoch as this sacrament
is a signe of mutual charitie as
thapostle techeth, therfore I haue made
the finall frute of remyssion of sinnes,ii. Cor. 
                        •
                     .
y• we sholde so loue our neighbour, & studye
to do him good,Causes of the Eucharistie or lords louꝑ as Christ loued vs
& dyd vs good.
               ¶The causes of y• sacrament of the lordes

supper be these: Christ the institutor
y• worde, bred, wyne, the receyuer, & the
minister. The word the breed & wine be
of the substaunce of this sacramēt, whiche
beinge present it is not further to be
disputed concerninge the entiertie or ꝑfection
of the sacrament. The receyuer &
mynister wether they be good or euyll,
whether they beleue or not, byleue by
their noughtynes or vnbylefe nothinge
is detracted or plucked from y• ꝑfection
& holynes of this sacrament, likewise as
nothīg is added by the goodnes & faith
of them. Albeit in the meane season▪ it is
true, that theffecte annexed to the lordes
supper, concerninge remyssion of sinnes
doth not folow y• eaters and drinkers in
this supper, onles they eat also by faith
y• wordes of Christ the ꝓmyser. The materyal
causes of this sacramēt be y• breed
& wyne, of which this sacrament the body
& blood is made. The formal causes
be to eat & to drinke.
               ¶The lordes supper is not deuyded in
ꝑtes,No partes onles a mā wil draw partes out of
the mater of which it is made, I meane,
of y• breed & wine or of other thīges p̄sēt
of whiche consisteth y• bodye & blood of
Christ. Certes of y• coniunction or rather
S
                     •
                  lutinacion of these thinges, is risen

the errour of one kinde, contrary to the
ordinaunces of Christe, & the vsage of y•
auncient church.
               
                  THE fathers,Of the two tortes of eatinge. folowīg y• apostle haue
not vnaptly made two maner of eatinges
of the lordes supper. The one they
corporal or sacramentall eatinge which
is done with the mouth onely without
faith,August & as S. August. saith, which no spiritual
refection foloweth. This eatinge
maketh vs to vse the lordes supper vnworthely.
And of this Paul maketh mē
                  cioni. Corin. xi. f
writing to the Corinth. in this wise
wherfore who so euer eate of this breed
or drinke of the cup vnwothely, shall be
giltye of the body & blood of y• lord. Also
he saith, who so euer eteth or drinketh
vnworthely eateth & drinketh his owne
dānacion bicause he maketh no differēce
of the lordes bodye. The other they called
the spiritual eating whiche is doneThe spirituall eating.
by faith & which the spirituall refection
doth folow. This maketh vs to vse the
lordes supper worthelye.i. Corin. xi. f Of this, thus
writeth paul, let a mā therfore examine
him selfe & so let him eate of the breed &
drinke of the cup. Nowe, be examine to
him selfe, which by faith commeth to y•
lordes supper & pōdereth wel wt him self
the vse & ꝓfite of this supper, & so discerneth

this supper from a fleshly soupper.
Doubtles this spiritual eating Christē
                  ☞
persons do dayly vse although they receyue
not the sacrament, when spiritually
they be implāted & graft in Christ by
faith, that they may abide in Christ and
Christ in them. Of this eating speaketh
Christ throught the hole sixt chaptre of
Ioh.Iohst. vi. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   But to eat togither with y• mouth
and also with faith this onelye maketh
the worthy and holsome eatyng of this
supper.
               ¶This supper forasmoch as it is a sacrament
of the new testament,Theffectes of the lordes souper. therfore
remyssion of sinnes is the propre effecte
therof, whiche is purchased by faith or
credite giuen to these wordes of Christ
the promiser. Gyuen for you,Math. xxvi. c & shed for y•
remyssyon of sinnes. To this effect these
also folowinge may be added. To haue
ryghtousnes. To haue euerlastinge lyfe.
For these two effectes be annexed to remyssion
of sinnes. To testify of the boū
                  tyfull
wyll of god towardes vs. To testify
that Christ dwelleth in vs. To admonysh
vs of the promyses of god. To
be a signe that god is appeased. For such
as beleue that they receyue in this supper
forgyuenes of sinnes, be also assured
that god is pacified, and wel contented

 wt thē cōfortīg thēselues wt this sacramēt,
as a signe of most certaine grace &
attonemēt. To bring ioy vnto the consciences,
whē apꝓching by faith to this
supꝑ we be throughe ꝑswaded y• we receyue
remyssion of sinnes. To kīdle raise
& styre vp our faith. To prouoke vs to
mutual loue & charitie for the supper of
the lorde is a token of brotherly charitie
To moue vs to worke well leest we polute
& defyle againe our bodyes whiche
be nowe ioyned to the body of Christ.
For to this intent we be iustifyed or receyue
remission of synnes in this sacrament
that we sholde worke well accordinge
to Paul, we be his workmanship
created in Christ Iesu to good workesEphe. ii. v
so that thende of iustificaciō is to work
wel,Roma. vi. To testifye y• we be chrystyans, and
apperteine to Christ. Thus the supper of
the lorde is a token of oure ꝓfessiō.why this sacramēt is called Eucharistia. Testice
vs to giuīg of thākes. And therfore
of y• aūcient fathers this supꝑ is called
Eucharistia, y• is to say a thankes giuīg.
               ¶Cōtraryes & errours against this supper
be these.Contraries. To brīg, forth suꝑsticiously
 wt the Thomistes sondry fygures and
types of this s
                     •
                  uper out of y• olde testamētThomistes. 
                        •
                     
                  
Albeit y• eating of y• pascal lābe may
be a figure of this sacramēt. To holde y•
                  
the souꝑ of y• lorde is onelye a marke to
discerne the chrysten frō the hethen. To
say with y• Anabaptistes y• the souꝑ of y•
                  Anabaptistes
lorde is onely a sygne of brotherly frenshyp
or loue amonges the godly ꝑsons.
To hold with the papistes y• the souperPapistes▪
                  
of y• lorde is an oblacyō or sacrifice to be
applyed for other both quyck & deed so
that this sacrifice may deserue & meryce
vnto thē remissyō bothe of pena & culpa
y• is, of the peyn & of the blame or faulte.☞
This errour shal be sufficyently espyed
by the cōparyng togither of the cōmon
& euangelical soup, & of the priuate andPapisticall masse.
papisticall masse, in which cōparysō we
se that the popishe masse agreeth in maner
nothyng at all with the lordes soup
which Chryst instituted. To deny that
mans reason is not forthwith offended
by this sacrament whē it neglecteth the
worde & cōmaundement of Chryste the
institutour. To denye that mans reasō,
is not forthwith offended with the vilitie
of this souꝑ when it considereth it
wtout the ꝓmys annexed vnto it. To denye
ī this louꝑ that vnder bread & wyne
is ministred vnto vs y• true bodye & true
bloode of our lorde Iesus Chryst. To
dispute suꝑsticyously (as of certayn scoleScholemon.
men hearetofore it hathe ben disputed

of the presence of the body & bloode
of Chryst of howe & after what fassyon
the body & blode of Chryst is there presēt
or howe great & howe lytle it is. To
interprete the wordes of the lordes souper
allegorycally. To put to, or take fro
the souper of the lorde. To denye that
the cause of puttyng to a & takyng from
in this souper is the selfe reason.☞ To steale
from the lay persons the one kynde,
euen the blode of the lorde, contrary to
the ordynaunce of Chryst. To saye that
a sufficyent cause of the foresayd theft is
the feare of daungers leest any thynge
myght be shed out of the chalyce. This
errour for the moost parte I am wount
thus to answere,☞ lyke as the testamēt or
laste wyll is not chaunged bycause of y•
feblenes of the heyr neither the heire is
depryued of his īheretable goodes not vs
standyng his feblenes or ī
                  
                     •
                  yrmytie. So
neyther we sholde haue ben spoyled and
robbed of y• one kynde for any maner of
our īfirmyte. To holde y• y• lordes souper
is not truly mynistred or euyl ministers
To denye the .ii. sortꝭ of eatyng y• lordꝭ☞
souper, the one wherby we vse this souper
worthely, the other wherby we vse
the same vnworthely. To deny that in
our tymes the cōfusyon of the spirytual

eatyng, which yet dayly chrysten men do
vse by fayth, althoughe they approche
not to the sacramēt by y• sacramētal eatyng,
hath īgendred y• errour of this souper.
To appoynt & lymyte p̄cysely a certeyn
tyme to take the lordes souper.
               To cōpell with the Manichees the takersManichees.
of this souper to take it tēpered wt
mans sede.The cursed errour of the Cataphriges To wrynge out blode wt the
Cataphrigis out of chyldren of a yere
olde) which blode they fetche out of the
hole body of the chylde by lytle small
prickynges (& myngle the same wt flowre
makīg breed therof which they vse ī the
souꝑ of the lord. To vse wt the AquariesThe heresie of Aquaries. The heresye of the Artotirytes.
water ī stede of wyne. To mynystre in y•
lordes souꝑ wt the Artotyrites breed wt 
these. To holde that outwarde p̄paracyons
make vs worthy to y• lordes souꝑ
To approche to this souꝑ wtout all reuerence
& sobrenes. To deny that suche
are to be dryuē away frō the lordes souper
accordyng to the vsage of the aūciēt
church as be notoryous synners & visyous
ꝑsōs: To holde yt this souꝑ is not ā
entyre & ꝑfecte sacrament onles y• fayth
of the receyuer be presēt, I āswere with
S. Augu. as before in the tytle of sacramentes.
To saye yt we maye receyue remissyō
of synnes, which is the propre of

fecte of this souper, without faith or 
                     〈◊〉
                  
any other thyng, then bycause of fayth.
To denye the foresayd effecttes of the
lordes souper or to admitte some of thē
& to reiect & damne other some. To holde
that the souper of the lorde euen for theThe 
                        〈…〉
                      papistes
very workes sake doth iustifye & that wt
                  out
any good mocyon of the vser, that
is to saye, without the fayth of the receyuer
of this sacrament, To assygne or
impute theffect of this souper cōcerning
remyssyon of synnes partely to the selfe
souper & partely to fayth. To meynteyn
with Thomas of Aquyne that the bodyThe heresye of a romyshe 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
of the lord was ones offered ī the crosse
for oryginall synne and is nowe contynually
offered in the aultar for daylye
trespaces.
            
         
         
            Of sacrifice. CA. XXXVI.
            SAcrifice in a generalite is thoblaciō
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
of our worke which we rēdre to god
whō we haue knowē to be such one
to whō we giue deseruīgly this worship
THAT sacrifice is ā oblaciō is certain.
For to sacrifyce signifieeh here to offre,P
                     •
                  ons.
& where as I added, of our worke, I note
y• differēce bitwen such thingꝭ as we of
fre to god, & such thingꝭ as god offereth
to vs. The wordes y• folow in the diffiniciō
               
shewe thoccasiō of sacrifice, which
is the knowlege of some god amonges
men. For whō euery men euē from the
beginynge of the worlde hath knowē or
decreed wt hī selfe to be god, hī he hath
studyed to worshyp, to honour, to gyue
thāks vnto, & to testify this knowledge
 wt some certeyn worshyp toward y• fame
god thus knowē. And bycause sacrifyce
is the pryncypal parte of worshyp, therfore
by it they haue declared theyr stud
                  •
               
& zele towardes the same god. Finally,
I added deseruyngly to thītent I wold
shew y• powers of our knowlege, which
not onely consyst ī knowyng hym to be
god, but also y• he createth, gouerneth, &
cōserueth al thynges creat. This knowlege
of god, which out of the lawe of nature
is after a maner knowē, engēdreth
in men a mynde whiche beleueth that
we ought to duty, & not without cause
to worshyp suche a god.
            
               THE effycyent causes of sacrifycesCause
                     •
                  
               
be the selfe offerers. The materiall causes
he takē of the thynges offered, as be
the beestes, the frutes. &c.
            
               NOVV thoccasyō of sacrifyces was y•
               Thoc
                     •
                  asiō of sacrifices,
natural knowlege of god ī all mē, as I
haue said before. Of this knowlege cert
                  •
               
               neth
vs thapost.Roma. i 
                     •
                  
                And euē there where as

he sayth that the gētyles glorifyed not
god whō by y• law of nature they knew
by this he also cōmēdeth a certeyn worshyppynge
of god naturally put in the
gētyles. Of this worshyppyng is sacrifyce
a parte. wherfore I conclude thoccasyō
of sacrifyces was vnyuersally by
nature in al mē, euē as there was naturally
a certen knowlege of god. I speke
vere of the generalloccacyō of sacrifyces
cōmō to all mē euē of nature, that they
shold worshyp such as they take for god
I speak nothyng here of the true worshyp
of god. I speake nothyng of those
sacrifyces which of a fayth haue ꝓceded
amonges the godly before y• lawe gyuē
or after y• law by spe
                  •
               yall cōmaūdemēt.
But I disput here▪ generally of the indifferent
& cōmō occasyō of sacrifyces cō
               cernyng
the lawe of nature wherby euē
frō the begīnyng of ye worlde, mē haue
worshypped such as they haue ben perswaded
to be goddes, although not wt y•
true worshyp or acceptable sacrifices to
god. But cōcernyng y• worshyp & sacrifices
of y• godly by which they haue rightly
worshypped god, & whose sacrifices
haue ben acceptable to god & as the s
                  •
               ipture
sayth. In odorē suauitatis▪ that is
to saye for a swete sauour or sauour of

swetnes,A distinction betwene the worshyppes or sacrifyces of the godly and of the vngodly. ye shall vnderstand y• a distinction
is to be had betwen the true & ryght
worshyp & betwene that generall worshyp
ꝓcedyng of nature, & agayn betwē
the sacrifices of the godly whiche plese
god & betwen the generall sacrifyces ꝓcedyng
of the lawe of nature. The true
& ryght worshyp of god hath no accasiō
of nature. For nature is corrupted. So
neyther y• sacrifyces of the godly which
please god can haue occasyon of nature.
wherfore we ought to thynke that tholy
ghost & fayth were causes of the true
worshyp of god & of the sacrifyces of 
                  〈◊〉
               
godly, tholy ghoste as gyue
                  •
                (for all our
good workes be gyftes of tholy ghoste)
Fayth as a cause mouyng to gratitude &
kīdnes, forasmoch as faith cā not be vnkynde.Gene. iiii. 
                     •
                  .
So Abel wtout doubtinge rightly
instructed of his parentes cōcernyng
the ꝓmys made of sede & being iustified
by fayth wyllynge to declare vnto god
his kynde hert offered vnto hī sacrifices,
of which god loked bicause thei were offered
ī faith as teacheth th apostle were
he saith.Hebre. xi. By faith Abel offered vnto god

                  •
                more plē
               
                  •
               ous sacrifyce thē Cayn. But
Eaī offered sacrifices not moued by any
faith of which he had no speek, but by y•
general occasiō of nature wherby al mē
               
be īpelled vnuiersally to some worshipping
of that god that they knowe. For
this cause god regarded not y• sacrifice of
Cayn,Gene. iiii. a. lyke as he allowed not y• sacrifice
of y• other gētiles or worshippes wher wt
they worshipped god whom they knew
other whiles by the ymage of mā other
whiles of beestes as witnesseth Paul to
the Roma.Roma. i. d. Gene. viii. d.
            
            ¶Noe buylded an altar to the lord, & of
al the cleane beastes & cleane fowles of
fered a sacrifice vpō y• altars & this was
a iust & perfite mā wherfore he had also
faith which moued him to declare again
his kinde hert towardes his god for the
great benefyte of p̄seruacion frō drownīg.
And forasmoch as Noe offered these
sacrifices by faith they were exceptable
to god, wherfore it foloweth in y• text, &
y• lord smelled a swete sauour I cōclude
therfore of these exēples, y• faith gaue occasionGene. viii. d
vnto the godly aswell before the
lawe giuen as after by commaundemēt
of sacrifice & worshipping god & further
more caused y• the same worshippes & sacrifices
were accepted of god.
            ¶There be also some ꝑsons in this opinion☞
& that not without sure groūdes y•
refer the first & original beginnīg of seruing
god by sacrifices vnto y• godly fathers

of whome they wyl that y• gētiles
had their begynning by folysh coūterfeyting
to offre their sacrifyes but as cō
               monly
it cōmeth to passe, folowinge the
outward worke of y• fathers wtout their
faith euē as yet at this day they folowe
many workes of saintes but their faith
they folow not. Thus it is very lykelye
that y• gētiles in sacrificing of their own
children folowed Abrahā which by a specyall
cōmaūdemēt was cōmaūded to offre
his son Isaac.
            ¶Sacrifice takē in a generality for a seruicePartes.
of god īdifferently amōg al men, ꝓcedinge
of y• knowlege of some god, is of
one only sort, y• is to wice, a sacrifice of
praise, whiche aswell the godly as the
hechē, sithens the beginnīg of the world
haue studyed to vtter their kindnes towardes
him, whō they haue knowē for
god, saue yt y• godly haue had other occasions
or causes & also an other intent of
theyr sacrifices which were acceptable
vnto god bycause they ꝓcede of faith. Afterward
in the law came sacrifices of redēpciō
which be called ꝓpiciatory sacrificesSacrifyces propiciatorie or of redemption,
which redemed rightousnes ī the
comonalty of Moses.
            
               BESIDE there is yet an other sacrifice
of redēption whiche is a sacrifice

for sinnes made to recōcyle & pacyfy god.
This toke his occaciō of the fal of Adā
which after he had sinned & againe receyued
by grace a promyse that his fall
shold be redressed forthwith in the self:
promys this sacrifice of redempciō begā
to stande for the sinnes of Adā, through
faith vpon Christ that was to come, the
offerer of this sacrifice, who shulde offre
in the latter dayes a ꝓpiciatory sacrifice
for the sinnes of the hole worlde for a ꝑfecte
& euerlasting rightousnes. In this
offerer or preest,☞ I meane Christ beleued
y• fathers & became partakers of this sacrafice.
            ¶Theffect of sacrafice takē in a generalitieEffectes
is one onely, & hath ben generall amonges
all men, that is to wite, to offre
sō thing to god y• might testify their
louīg hert towardes hī. Neuertheles it
is not all after one fassiō ī y• godly & in y•
vngodly gētiles which folishly haue coū
               terfayted
y• godly. But to the intent all
thinges may be made the clerer in this behalfe.
I wyl set forth seuerally y• spices
or kindes of sacrifice, wherin ye shall se
openly the finall effectes of all sacrifices
The cōtraryes of sacrafyce in a generalitie.
I shal brīg forth after y• treaty of y•
kindes.
            
               
               ¶Of sacrafice propiciatory or
of redempcion.
               
                  I Thīke it good to begin with y• sacrifices
of redempcion. For this began before
y• sacrafice of praise, euen thā whan
Adam receyued the first promyse of the
seed to come, which promise Adam beleued,
& bycause of his faith which he had
vpō Christ the bisshop & offrer of this sacrifice
of redempcion to come,☞ he was saued
as al y• rest of the fathers that came
after were. Now this faith afterwarde
brought forth sacrifices Eucharisticall,
y• is to say, sacrifices of prayse or thankes
giuing, wherby the godly wold vtter
their gratitude & louing kindnesse towardes
god for the remyssion & grace ꝓmysed
them in y• offerer of y• sacrifyce of
redemptiō to come. Truly there be two
sorces of sacrifyces of redēption. The
one which serueth in the comynaltye of
Moses to redeme the ryghtousnes of y•
law. The other whiche was auaylable
alwayes before god, & is yet auaylable
cōtynually bycause the prest or offerer of
it▪ I meane Christ, is eternall, & euerlastinge
for y• redempcion of sinnes & to obteyne
vs the fauour of god.
            
            
               ¶Of the ꝓpiciatory sacrifice
of Moses lawe.
               
                  
                  A Sacrifice of redemcion in the cō
                  mon
welth of Moses,Of the ꝓpiciatorie sacrifyce in Moses lawe. is a worke
y• redemed the iustice of y• law, y•
he which had cōmitted sin sholde not be
excluded out of y• cōmon weale of Moses,
& it is a fygure of the true sacrifice of
sinnes before god.Proue
               
               ¶This diffiniciō is certeine by the epist▪
to the hebrues. capi. ix where the apostle
plucketh from all the sacrifices of Moses
law al maner of perfection in y• cōscience.Hebre. ix. b.
For he saith thus. Into the secōd
table went the high prest alone ones euery
yere, & not without bloode, whiche
he offered for hym self, & for y• ignoraūce

                     •
                  f the people, wherfore the holy ghost

                     •
                  his signyfyed, that y• way of holy thin

                     •
                  es was not yet opened, while as yet y•
                  
                     •
                  irst tabernacle was stāding, which was

                     •
                  simylitude for the tyme then presēt &

                     •
                   which were offered gyftes & sacrifices y•
shulde not make y• ministre perfyte, as
ꝑteynynge to the cōsience, &c. But Christ
being an highe preest, &c. shal purge your
conscyence frō deed workes for to serue
the lyuing god. Also it foloweth in the
x. chap. Euery preest is redy dayly ministring
& often times offereth one maner
of offering which can neuer take awaye
sinnes. &c. By which wordes thapostle

taketh away frō the ꝓpiciatory sacrifices
of Moses the purgacion of sinnes,
wherfore forasmoch as suche sacrifices
coulde not take away sinnes, it is certein
y• suche sacrafices of Moses lawe onely
serued to make men rightous in the eye
of the lawe. Finally that these Mosaicall
sacrifices of redēption were figures
of the trtue sacrifices for sinnes in the
sight of god, is manifest by the epistle to
y•. hebr, namely in the .x. chap
                     •
                  ter.
               ¶The causer of this sacryfyce is god,Causes
which cōmaunded this sacrifice to the
children of Israel, to admonysh them of
true sacrafices of redēpciō which Christe
the high byshop in tyme cōmyng sholde
off
                     •
                  e Moses was the pupblysher of this
sacrifyce. And the high byshop was the
offerer of it.
               ¶Of this sacrifyce be not partes,Partes onles a
mā wil take the dyuers kindes ī stede of
partes. For vnto this sacrifice belong all
such sacrafices as were made for sinnes
or trespaces as sin offringes. &c. of which
mēcion is made in the .iiii. & .v. cap. of Leuiticus.
               ¶Theffectes of the sacrifice of redemciō
                  Effectes▪
                  
in Moses law were these. To reconcile
y• Iues to their comynaltye againe. To
redeme the iustice of y• law. These effectꝭ

be certaine by thexēples of such as haue
be reconcyled by these sacrifices vnto y•
publyque weal
                     •
                   of Moses. Also where
as y• epistle to the Hebrues plucketh frō
thē redemciō of sinnes before god it leaueth
vnto them the redempciō of iustice
in the polycye of Moses. Itē to puryfye
or sanctify to y• purgacion of y• fles heb.
ix.☞ For if the blood of oxē & of gotes, and
the ashes of an heifer, whē it was sprīkled,
puryfyed the vncleane as touchinge
the purifieng of y• flesh, how moch more
shal the bloode of Christ which through
the eternal spirite offered him self wtout
spot to god, purge your cōsciences frome
dead workes to serue the lyuīg god. To
be figures of y• true sacrifice of Christ as
testifieth the saide epist.Hebre. x. a to the Heb. For
the law which hath but the shadowe of
good thinges to come▪ &c.
            
            
               ¶The sacrifice of redemption
before
god.
               THe sacrifice of redempciō y• serueth
before god,Diffinicyon. is a satisfactory worke
for the sinnes of other, reconcylyng god
& appesing his wrath.
               ¶In this diffinicion is no difficulty,Probacion. of
which who so doubteth is no christē mā
Heb. ix. How moch more shall y• bloode

of Christ which thorow y• eternal spirite
offered him selfe wtout spot to god, purge
our consciences frō deed workes. Itē in
the same chap. Christe was ones offered
to take away the sinnes of many.
               
                  THE causes of this sacrifice be,Causes. god
the ꝓmyser, & Christ the high bisshop or
offerer.
               ¶This sacrifice is not ꝑted. For there is
one onely sacrifice of redempcion for sinnes
before god,Partes herof be none. appeasyng the yre of god
& satisfying vnto god, concerninge ꝑfyte
rightousnes ēduring for euer. hebr. ix. he
entred ones for all into the holy place &
found eternall redempcion.
               ¶Theffectes be taken of the aduauntages
&Effectes. cōmodityes which this sacrafyce
hath brought vnto vs and be these. To
driue away sin as witnesseth the said epistle
the. heb. where it is thus said.Hebre▪ ix. s. But
now in thende of the world hath he appered
ones to put sin to flight by y• offerīg
vp of hī self to put out sinꝭ. esay. liii.
After he hath giuē his lyfe a sacrifice for
sinnes. Ro. ix. Of sin he cōdemned sin. y•
is to say, be put out sin by sacrifice which
by the hebrue phrase is called sin as to y•
Cor. him which knew not sin he madde
to be sinne that is to saye a sacryfyce

for sin.Hebr. ix. d To purge our consciences frome
deed workes. To purifye or sanctify the
beleuers accordīg to the sayīg of Christ
in the gospel of Iohn where he saith,Iohn̄. xvii. c. As
thou dyddest send me into the world euē
so haue I sent thē into the worlde, & for
their sakes sāctifie I my selfe, that they
also myght be sāctified through y• truth.
Finally hythervnto may be referred all
theffectes or vtilitys of the deth & passiō
of Christ.
            
            
               ¶Of sacrifice of thankes
or praise.
               SAcrifice eucharistical that is to say aDiffinicyon.
sacrifice of thankesgiuing or of praise
is an oblacion of our kindenes wherby
after we be ones reconcyled to god by
the sacrifice of Christe we honoure god,
prayse him, & giue him thankes.
               ¶This diffiniō is certein for it is euidēt
by the epist.The ꝓbacyō. to the heb. that there is one
onely purging sacrifice for sinnes. wherfore
it foloweth that al the other workꝭ
in which such as be reconcyled to god do
declare their obedience towardꝭ hym by
honorynge praysinge & giuinge thankes
be sacrifices of praise, and not of redemcion.
               ¶Of which sacryfice there beParticyon. .ii. kīdes y•
                  
one is Mosaycall, the other is of the
newe testament.
               
                  THE Mosaycall sacrifyce of prayse,Diffinicyon.
was wherby oblacyons were offered of
the chyldren of Israell to testifye theyr
obedience & thākfulnes towardes god.
               
                  OF this diffinicyō no mā shall doubtProue.
after he shall perceyue that there is one
only sacrifyce of redempcyō for synnes.Causes.
               
               
                  THE causes of this sacrifyces be these
God the institutour▪ Moses the publissher,
the preestes the offerers, also the in
whose name this sacrifyce was offered,
and fynally the cōmaūdement to offre.
               
                  THE sondrynes of sacrifices ꝓcedyng
of such thynges as were offered &Partes. of the
circumstaūces of them suffyseth here in
stede of partes▪ For albeit there were sō
                  dry
kyndes of this sacrifyce, yet they tē
                  ded
to this ende, euen that the Israelitꝭ
sholde by them declare theyr obedyence
towardes god. Hyther belōge oblacyōs
retribucions▪ fyrst frutes, tenthes. &c.
               ¶Thēffectꝭ of this Moysaical sacricyce
were these:Effectes. To declare theyr obedience
towardes god. To render thankes to
god: To prayse god, and semblable.
            
            
               ¶Thankfull sacrifyces of the
newe testament.
               
                  
SAcrifyce of prayse of the newe testament
is wherby we honour,Diffinicyon. prayse,
& thanke god for y• receyued remissyō of
synnes in Chryst & his other benefytes.
               
                  IN the new testament outward sacrifyces,The ꝓbaciō.
slaughters of beeltꝭ, or other ceremonyes
be no longer in force & strength,
but onely spirituall workes of the herte
& of thaffectiō of such a ꝑson as is borne
agayn in herte by tholy ghost, accordyng
to this of saint Peter.i. Peter. ii. a. As lyuyng stones
ye are made a spirituall house, & an holy
preesthode,Roma. xii. a for to offer vp spirituall sacrifyce
acceptable to god by Iesu Chryst
Also accordyng to this of saynt Paule.
Make your bodyes a quycke sacrifyce,
holy & acceptable to god, euen your reasonable
sacrifyce,Iohn. iiii. c. Itē. Hebr▪ xiij. By hym
let vs offre y• sacrifyce of prayse always
to god, that is to say, the frute of those
lyppes which cōfesse his name. Itē. the
true worshyppers (sayth Chryste) shall
worshyp the father in spirite & trouthe.
All these places do shewe yt the thanfull
sacrifyces in the new testament be spirytuall,
wherin we offre our thankfulnes
by good workes vnto god for our ryghtousnes
and other benefytes receyued in
Chryst. For thankfull sacrifyces be nothyng
elles thē good workes of y• godly

which serue for the declaracion of their
kyndnes towardes god, and for to prouoke
other to gyue credyte to the gospell,
and thankes to god.
               ¶Causes of this sacrifice be these.Causes The
holy ghost. The cōmaūdemēt & fayth.
Tholye ghost is cause, forasmoche as he
createth in vs new mociōs & new myndes
mete to do spirytuall workes or sacrifyces.
And therfore also I suppose yt
y• sacrifices of chrystē mē be called spirytuall
sacrifyces not so greatly bycause
they be spirytuall sacrifyces as bycause
the holy spiryte worketh thē in vs. The
commaundemente is cause, forasmoche
as we be wylled by gods cōmaundemēt
to worke well, by which also we be assured
that our sacrifyces or good workꝭ
be pleasaūt & acceptable to god. Nowe,
fayth is y• cause, inasmoche as it is a degre
to the receyuyng of tholy ghost. For
fayth taketh holde of Christ, Chryst gyueth
vs tholy ghost. Tholy ghost engendreth
ī vs new myndꝭ & spiritual which
be hable to offre spiritual sacrifices. Furthermore
fayth is y• meane wherby our
sacrifices please god according to Paul
what so euer is not of fayth is syn.Roma. xiiii. 
                        •
                     
                   Also
It is īpossyble to please god wtout faith
The īpullsyue cause to these sacrifices is

taken of the cōlynes or cōuenience. For
sithēs we be the people of god & prestꝭ,
it is cōuenient y• we haue some sacrifyces.
To formal cause of these sacrifyces
putteth Paule Rom. xii. where he sayth
the lyuely and holy sacrifyce.
               
                  OF one sorte be all thankfull sacrifices
in y• new testament,Partes. euē ꝓcedynge of
spiritual affections of the herte which is
renewed & agayn borne by tholy ghost.
Howbeit bycause the good workes of
sayntꝭ or godly ꝑsons be of .ij. sortꝭ, som
of the fyrst table, which prescrybe aswel
the inwarde as the outwarde worshyp
of god, & some of the second table which
cōteyn the cyuyle & honest maners or offyces
towardes the neyghbour. Therfore
we maye also make two kyndes of
eucharistycall sacrifices in the new testament,
not yt they be double & of two sortes
of theyr owne ꝓper nature, but bycause
they cōsyste in two kyndes of workes,
to the ꝑfyte executynge wherof, be
requyred the selfe same pure affections &
the selfe same holy ghost to make those
workes holy & lyuely sacrifices.Thankfull sacrifices of the first table The sacrifices
therfore out of the fyrst table be
these. Fayth towardes god, feare of god
Prayer or callyng on god. Loue or charite
of god. Preching of y• gospel. Thākes

gyuyng. Cōfessyng of god & sēblable ꝑteynyng
to thynwarde & outwarde seruyng
of god. The scripture is ful of places
whiche teache these sacrifyces to be
moste acceptable to god, & therfore oftē
tyme they be called odours or sauours
moste swete placable sacrifyces, acceptable
offerynges to god.
               
                  OF y• later table be takē forth these sacrifices.Thankfull sacrifices out of the .2. table
To helpe y• neyghbour. To honour
the parentꝭ & rulers. Not to slaye,
Not to cōmyt adultery. To absteyn frō
theft, & suche lyke whiche albeit they be
outward thīgꝭ or workꝭ yet they be called
spiritual sacrifices forasmoch as for
y• most parte they be done by y• worke of
tholy ghost, & wt a cōsētyng mīde. To be
short all y• workꝭ of sayntꝭ ought to be
referred hither, yet euē y• vilest & moost
base workꝭ. For the
                     ••
                  ēd al vnto .i. mark
¶Forasmoche as the eucharisticall or
thankefull sacrifyces of the newe testamentEffecte
                        •
                     .
be nothynge elles but good workes
of the godly: therfore they haue the
same effectes in common that good workes
haue with these. To prayse, to honoure
god with these sacrifyces. To
render graces to god aswell for the receyued
benefyte ī Chryst as for al other
which god doth bestow dayly vpon vs▪
                  
To exercyse by these sacrifices our faith
To prouoke others by these sacrifices y•
they may beleue y• gospell & gloryfy god
Many more effectꝭ of this sacrifice may
be brought hyther out of theffectꝭ of our
good workes.
            
            
               ¶Contraryes to the hole
sacrifice.
               ¶Contraryes to sacryfice be these. To
graūt yt sacrifice generally takē, is a purging
sacrifice for the redempcion of our
sinnes. To denye y• the gētiles receyued
theyr custome of sacrificing either of nature
which teacheth a certaine worshipping
of suche god as it knoweth, or of
the folowinge and imitacion of the godly
fathers. To hold yt ye sacrifices of the
godly & of y• rude gentiles were al ones
of lyke vertue before the lawe was giuē
To hold that the godly before the law
giuen were moued by any other cause to
do thankeful sacrafyces thē by faith inforcing
theyr kindes as her ꝓpre effecte,
Abraham cōcerning the offeringe of his
owne son had a speciall cōmaūdemēt of
god, To say that y• godly fathers before
y• lawe was giuen,☞ deserued rightousnes
by theyr sacrifices & that after the lawe
was gyuen fyrst began the propiciatory
sacrifice of Christ for rightousnes. To

ny that forthwt euē in the very promise
made vnto Adā the sacrifice of Christ
stode for the sines of Adā:Gene. iii. e whē he herd
the voice of god saying vnto him yt the
seed of the womā shold trede downe y•
hede of the serpēt.The errour of papistes, To maynteyn more
sacrifices for purging of synnes than
the only sacrifice of Christ. To mainteyn
more sacrifices of redēption then
two, y• one Mosaycal thother of Christ
This for the fines before god, thother
for the redēption of rightousnes in the
cōmon wele of the Iues. To hold yt the
Mosaycal sacrifice of redēption redemed
synnes before god. To holde yt the
new testamēt do yet after a maner requyre
aswel purging sacrifices for sines,
as the eucharistical or thankful sacrifices
of Moses. To say y• our thākful
sacrifices there, is some cause ī vs.
To hold yt sacrifices of prayse do plese
god in other then such as he recōciled.
To hold yt our sacrifice of praise do satisfie
for sinnes, & do iustifie.Papistes and scholemen, To maintein
yt our thākful sacrifices may be applyed
for others, so yt they may deserue
vnto thē remissiō of synnes euē for the
very workes sake. To cōfounde wt the
papistꝭ sacrifice & sacramēt togithers,Papistes▪
                  
where as god offereth in this his grace

vnto vs and in the other we offre laudes
and thankes to god.
            
         
         
            Of repentaunce. CA.
XXXVII.
            REpentaūce is wherby by true contriciō
we dye vnto synnes,Diffinition. & lyft
vp again our selues frō sines for
the receyuing of forgiuenes of ye same.
            
               THIS diffinitiō which is made of y•
ꝑtes of repentaūce is very certein.The ꝓbaciō. of ye diffiniciō
                For
of repentaūce there be two ꝑtes, cōtriciō
& fayth, which two if I can proue y•
they cōcur & mete togither ī repētaūce
& can not be plucked thone frō thother
then my diffinitiō shal be most certein,
notwtstanding yt al the schole doctours
be against it. In Marke .i. Christ saith.
Do repentaūce & byleue the gospel. In
the gospel of Mathew he sayth.Math. xi. d. Come
vnto me al ye yt labour & are laden, & I
shal refresh you. Here labour & burthen
signifie cōtriciō. To come vnto Christ
is to bileue that for Christ synnes be released,
which thing Christ calleth to be
refreshed. Itē Mat. 3. Repēt you of your
formar lyfe. This ꝑte is cōtricion, for
at hand is the kingdom of heuē. This
ꝑte requyreth faith, wherby we com to
the kingdom of heuē, & wherin is foūd

remissiō of synnes. S. Paul euerywhere
maketh mēciō of these two ꝑtes whereas
he ioyneth togither mortifienge and
quickening, as Ro. 6. Col. 2. And ī other
places of scripture oftētymes these .ij.
ꝑtes of repentaūce be coupled togither
as in the boke of kingꝭ, where it is said.i. Reg. ii. 
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
The lord killeth & maketh alyue, bringeth
down to the graue, & fetcheth vp agayn.
Exemples herof be these.ii. Reg. xxiiii. Dauid
being chidde of the ꝓphet Nathan, and
made afrayd sayth. I haue sined agaīst
the lorde. This ꝑte is cōtricion. Afterward
the ꝓphet addeth absoluciō sayinge.
The lorde hath taken awaye thy
synne, thou shalt not dye. This worde
comforted & lyfted vp Dauid agayne,
and by fayth, helde him vp iustified, &
receiued him. In the boke of Nu. ca. xxi.
The people punysshed for theyr synnes
do come vnto Moses, sayinge: we
haue synned. This is contricion. Afterwarde
by the commaundemente of
Moses they resorte by fayth to the brasen
serpente, whiche the lorde caused
to be rered vp, and so were made hole.
Item in Exod. xiiij. The people feare
the lorde. This is a part of contricion.
After this, they byleue the lorde.Iosue. v
                     ••
                  
                  ▪
                Agayne
Iosue is sory for his sinnes, that

done, he rayseth him self by faith, & putteth
god ī remēbraūce of his promises.
Finally, yt there be two ꝑtes of repentaūce
or penaūce, it appereth most euidētly
euen of the very authors of baptisme.
S. Iohn̄ y• baptist baptised to repētaūce,
yt is, he preched mortificaciō.
Christ baptiseth by the spirite & fyre, y•
is, he quickneth y• hertes. The final effect
of fayth is remissiō of synnes, & to
which ende repentaunce was institute.
Now yt there be two ꝑtes of repētaūce
cōtricion & fayth,Probaciō by doctours that there be these two ꝑtes of penaunce Gregorye. is sufficiently declared
before. But lest it might be thought
of the papistes yt the aūcient fathers be
agaīst this diffinitiō I wil bring forth
some testimonies of them.
            Greg. in the third boke of dialoges. Of
cōpunctiō, yt is repentaūce, there be two
kyndes, by which the soule thurstīg after
god, is first pricked to feare god, &
afterward to loue god. This fear is cō
               triciō,
loue theffect of fayth.
            Amb.S. Ambrose writeth thus: wherfore we ought
to bileue yt both repentaūce is to be had
& ꝑdon to be giuē, to thintent we might
hope for ꝑdō as it were by faith, which
pardon fayth obteyneth, as it were by
an hand writing or indenture of couenaunt,
            
               
Tertulliā agreeth to the same,Tertulian. where he
saith: It is good to be always penitēt.
what doubtest yu? God hath so cōmaū
               ded.☞
And he hath not only commaūded
but also ꝓuoketh & allureth the by the
rewarde of euerlasting saluaciō,Ezechi. xviii. yea, &
addeth also an oth, saying: I lyue, he y•
swereth wold be bileued. O happy and
blessed be we, for whose cause god swereth.
On the 
                  •
               trary ꝑte most wretched
be we if we bileue not the lord, neither
when he swereth.Barnard.
            
            
               BERN. in the third sermon of the anūciaciō
writeth thus. Let euery mā in
his fear & anguish of minde say, I shal
go downe to y• gates of hell, to thintēt
y• now we shold not loke vp for cōfort
but in the only mercy of god.
            
               CAVSES of penaūce or repētance
be. Tholy ghost & the word.Causes of penaunce. The holy
ghost, lest in true penaūce we shold ascribe
any thyng to our owne powers.
Of this cause testifieth these scriptures
Hiere. 31. After that, o lord, yu shewedst
my offences vnto me, I strake my selfe
vpon the thigh .i. reg. ij. The lord kylleth
& maketh alyue. Item Christ saith:Iohan. xvi. b
whē tholy gost cōmeth he shal reproue
the world of syn. &c. The worde is the
cause, bicause it is the meane wherby y•
               
holy ghost moueth to repētaūce accordinge
to y• exēple in Dauid who by the
word being rebuked of Nathā, sayd:ii. Reg. xii. b I
haue sīned agaīst y• lord. Now I do not
seuer here the law frō y• word, but vnder
the word I cōprise both y• law & gospel.
The law sheweth the syn, it killeth
& driueth down the 
                  •
               sciēce. The cōscience
at last seketh cōfort. Then the gospel
cōmeth & ꝓmiseth to y• bileuers therof
remissiō of sīnes & helth, if they lyue
a new life accordingly.
            Theffectꝭ of penaūce be takē either of
the ꝑtes of the same,Effectes of repentaunce. either of thīgꝭ annexed
as cōmodities which do chaūce ī
               
                  •
               enaūce, or which folowe it bicause of
fayth an other ꝑte of penaūce. So yt for
the most ꝑte, these effectꝭ do ꝓcede ioyntly
of theffectes of cōtricion & of fayth.
For to be sory for sīnes, maketh not the
ꝑfect effect of repētaūce, onlesse yu also
addest faith which lifteth vp it self frō
the sīnes, wherfore theffectꝭ be these. To
be sory in y• hert for thy sīnes, & to lifte
vp thy self agayn by fayth to thintēt y•
mayst receyue remission of synnes. To
bewayle euē frō the hert for thy sīnes:
to cōfesse thy synnes & agayn to cōfort
thy self by fayth, to thende y• mayst receyue
forgiuenes of sīnes. To acknowlege

wt thy hert thy sīnes, to dāne them
& agyne to aspyre by fayth vnto grace.
To dye vnto synnes by cōtricion, & agayne
by fayth to rise vp vnto the newnes
of lyfe, to thintent yt mightest be renued
by the spirit, & put on a new man.
To mortify the old Adam, & agayne by
fayth to be renued 
                  •
               y the spirite of the
myndes.Ephe. iiii. 
                     •
                  . To lay downe lyes, & to speke
the trouth. To tremble & quake for the
horriblenes of sinnes, & agayne to seke
by fayth the discharge of the same. To
be sad and heuy wt the brosyng and beating
of the hert, which beating I cal cō
               tricion,
and agayne to be glad & ioyful
because of fayth, to eschew euil and do
good. To damne al our owne workes,
our rightousnes, iudgementes, yea and
the best thynges in vs, and from thens
by faith to fle vnto grace. For to be truly
penitent, is not only to forsake euyl
workes, but also to damne al such thinges
as thou hast before trusted in. Therfore
Chryste sayth,Iohn. xvi. b. that the holy ghost
shall come to thintent that he maye repreue
the world of synne, of rightousnesse,
and of iudgement, all which thinges
the worlde oughte to condemne in
them selues, yf they wyll be partakers
of the ryghtousnes of Christ. This effect

of penaūce Iohn̄ the baptist also requyreth,
where he saith.Mark. i. b. Repēt ye & byleue
the gospel, yt is, distrust your own
rightousnes & imbrace Christ who is ꝓmised
in the gospel. To receyue y• holy
y• is gyuē. For whē by faith Christ is takē
hold of in repētaūce, the sīnes be released
& the holy is giuē, who af
                  •
               ward
ruleth defēdeth & createth new mociōs
to draw wt it wiping out of synnes, according
to the saying of Peter in y• act.
Be ye repētaūt & turne,Act. iii. d. yt your synnes
may be wiped away. To draw wt it quietnes
of cōscience & helth, according to
the ꝓphete Hieremy.Hiere. z. d. g Be ye turned yt ye
may rest & be saued. To bring life wt it
according to Ezech.Eze. xviii. c Yf the wicked shal
repēt frō al his synnes whiche he hath
done, & shal kepe my cōmaundemētes, &
do that thing that is egal & right. &c. he
shal be saued. Certes these & such sēblable
effectes of penaūce takē forth of the
cōmodities annexed to the same, do folow
euē for y• penaūce sake, but eyther
bycause of the promesse of god added
thervnto, or for fayth sake thother ꝑte
of penaūce, which cleueth to the promises
of god.
            
               FINALLY, forasmoch as fayth is
an other ꝑte of penaunce, & charite is a

thing allied to faith, therfore also charite
fyrst towardes god, & sithens towardes
the neyghbour must nedes folowe
penaūce. Frō hens do flow forthe
now also outward good workꝭ, which
testifye y• penaūce to be true. For what
outward thinges so euer penaūce requireth,
yea, & what outward thīges so euer
foloweth penaūce, y• same bear witnes
only of the true penaūce, accordīg
to s. Aug.Augustine. in his boke of penaūce, which
sayth. Sicut penitēcie comes est dolor,
ita lachrime sūt doloris, that is: like as
the cōpagnion of penaūce is sorow, so
the teres be witnesses of sorow. Hereof
it cōmeth yt to worke well outwardly,
to giue almes, to fast to subdue y• flesh,
& to do sēblable workes or exercises cō
               ueniēt
for repētaūce, we iudge symplely
to be testimonies of y• true repētaūce
in the hert which be done euen for this
very purpose, yt the flesh maye be tamed
by thē, to thintent yt hensforth it might
the lesse offende. Also forasmoch as we
rede in scripture diuers exēples which
testify yt through repentaūce, temporal
peynes be here mitigate ī this life therfore
we attribute also this effecte vnto
penaūce yt it doth mitigate tēporal peynes
in this lyfe, according to thexēple

of the Niniuites & of the childrē of IsraelIonas. iii. Iosue. vii. a
where god turned away his furye
frō them after ye Achan was punysshed
which toke away of the excōmunicate
thīges. Itē in the boke of iudges. cap. x.
the childrē of Israel do 
                  •
               fesse theyr sinnes,
and wt outward factes also declare
that they truly repēted, & therfore they
threw away their ydols, wherfore god
deliuereth Israel frō the bondage of y•
Philistins & of Amō. But this mitigaciō
of tēporal peynes chaūceth not merely
euē for y• penaūce sake, as tofore I haue
said of the other effectꝭ, but for faythes
sake thother ꝑte of penaūce. To this effect
of penaūce belong al such places of
scripture as either do ꝓmise mitigaciō
of tēporal peynes bicause of repētaūce
or declare y• the mitigaciō of temporal
peines haue folowed vpō repētaūce, as
be these, if we wil cōdemne our selues,
we shal not be cōdemned of y• lord. Itē
almeses deliuer frō synnes, yt is to wite
as apꝑteyneth to the remissiō of peyne
in this lyfe.
            Cōtraries to penaūce be these.Contraryes to repētaūce. Catharans Nouacians. To deny
wt the Catharās & Nouacians that such
as fall agayne after baptisme can forthink
thē selues or be penitēt, 
                  •
               trary to
the manifest exēples of Dauid, of Manasses,

of Peter, & infinite others. To
hold, y• by this worde penaūce is onely
signified a sorowe for sinespast, which
errour cōmeth of the ꝑtes of penaunce
not rightly vnderstand. To holde that
penaūce is only a bewayling or wepīg
for suche synnes as be past. To saye penaūce
is only a ceasing from outward
vices wtout the sorow of the hert. To
ascribe penaunce to our own powers.
To graūt y• penaūce cōmeth by any other
cōmon mean, thā by the word preached,
wherby the holy ghost dāncth our
wickednes, yea & our own rightousnes
iudgementes & opiniōs. Al which thinges
the worlde lay agaynst the iustyce
of Chryst. To affyrme yt there be other
partes of repentaunce, or more then cō
               tricion
& faith.Schole men. To put with the schole
men thre partes of penaunce, contrici
                  ••
               
confession, and satisfaction. To mainteyn
that there is one & the self same penaunce
common to al maner of ꝑsons.
This errour confoundeth the true and
fayned penaūce togyther, where as vndoubtedly
besyde the true repentaunce
whiche consysteth in the true sorowes
of the herte, lyftynge vp it selfe wt sure
faythe towardes the promyses of god
concerning the frank remission of sinnes,

               ☞there is also a feyned & hypocritical
penaūce, which mē lay vpon theyr
owne backes and diuise it wt outward
workes or outward chastitie wtout the
true terrours of the hert & of the cōscience
and wtout faith. In the meane seasō
to what purpose these outward thī
               ges
serue, I haue declared before ī theffectes
of penaūce. To hold yt penaunce

                  •
               uē for the very workes sake do iustify
wtout fayth, or cōferreth grace. To say
theffectes of penaūce ꝓceding of the cō
               modities
therof do folow for any other
thinges then for faythes sake an other
ꝑte of penaūce. To hold y• by repētaūce
or as they cal it penaūce, only y• actuall
blame is remitted, & not the peyne whiche
they say is done away by satisfaction.
To hold y• theffectes of penaūce doPap
                     ••
                  sticall errour.
folow bicause of the preestꝭ absoluciō,
although the penitent lacke fayth. To
maynteyn y• by repētaunce though the
hole blame be released, yet not always
the hole gilt, yt is to wite, that which is
due to the hole payne.The 
                     •
                  eresye of papistes. To say y• in repentaūce
all the drosse of actuall syn is
not remitted, onlesse penaūce be perfect
according to al his papistical ꝑtes, yt is
to wite, cōtricion, cōfession, & satisfaction.
To hold y• true repentaunce can

stande wtout y• workes of charite or other
good workes. To deny yt penaūce
ought to endure throughout y• hole life
for sithens we do dayly cōmit synnes,
therfore so long as we liue we nede repentaunce.
         
         
            Of cōtricion a parte of penaūce.
CA. XXXVIII.
            COntricion is a true remorse or
fearfulnes of 
                  •
               science,Diffinition. which feleth
yt god is angry wt syn, & therfore
it soroweth for synnes.
            
               MANY places of scripture there beProbacions.
which make vs certeyn of cōtricion, y•
it is a remorse & terrour of conscience.
The ꝓphet Ioel saith.Iohel. ii, c. Rent your hertꝭ
& not your clothes. Itē Ps. 6. haue mercy
on me lord, for I am weike, heale me
lord, for my bones are troubled. 2. co. 8
Ye be made sad vnto repentaūce.☞ This
word (true) excludeth hypocresy which
fayneth 
                  •
               triciō in fastingꝭ, watchingꝭ
& sēblable outward workes, all which
neuertheles do folow, if so be the 
                  •
               triciō
be true, but wtout the true feares of
cōscience, al suche outward workes be
nothīg worth. Finally faith also ought
to approche to y• outward workes whiche
make thē quicke & true.
            
               
               THE causes of ꝯtriciō be tholy ghostCauses of contricion.
& the word. The holy ghost moueth & ledeth
vs to ꝯtriciō, according to his office,
while he rep̄ueth vs of our syn,Iohn. xvi. b. of
iudgement, & of our rightousnes. The
world is y• mean wherby tholy gost ledeth
to ꝯtriciō:
                  
                     •
                  i. Reg. xii. a So Dauid being rebuked
by gods worde of Nathan, sayth. I
haue synned agaynst the lorde.
            
               THE true ꝯtricion is one only thingPartes none
ꝯsisting in the ꝯsciēce, endued wt true remorses
& trobles springīg forth thrugh
the preching of gods word, repreuīg vs
of our sines, & is the gift of tholy gost.
Besidꝭ this there is also a coūtrefet or
hypocritical cōtriciō, which mē do lay
vpō thē selues by outward workes wt
               out
the true troubles of cōsciēce. This
is reiected of scripture.
            Theffectes of cōtriciō,Effectis be none other
thing thā true fearingꝭ & troubles of cō
               sciēce,
rising by ye knowlege of sinnes,
as these, To sorow wt the herte for the
sines acknowleged, & outwardly to testify
this sorow wt good workes, e
                  •
               ēple
of Mary Magdaleyn,Luc. vii. 
                     •
                  
                which in her hert
sorowed for her synnes, & declared outwardly
this griefe of herte wt teares &
workꝭ of loue towardes Christ. To be
wayle euē frō the hert thy synnes, & to

cōfesse y• same. Thus Dauid (as is said)
being chidden of Nathan soroweth forii. Reg. d.
his synnes, & sayth wt a mournful herte
I haue synned agaynst the lord. And to
the true cōtricion of synnes is necessarily
requyred the cōfessiō of synnes before
god.Psal. xiii. Kyng Dauid witnessynge the
same wher he saith, I shal 
                  •
               fesse agaīst
me myne vnrightousnes before y• lord,
and y• hast ꝑdoned the wickednes of my
hert. To acknowlege in hert our synnes,
to whiche knowlege verye egrely
ꝓuoketh vs the ꝓphet Hier. ca. 2. 3. & 4.
To dāne thy synnes euē wt thy hert. To
dye vnto syn euen wt the very hert. To
sorow hertely for thy sines wt purpose
to chaūge thy hole life ī to better. Now
outwarde thinges, as fastynges, watchynges,
chastitie, wepynges, & (to be
shorte) all maner of outwarde thinges
make nothing to the cōtricion of hert
saue yt they be markes or testimonyes
of the contricion of hert, profitable to
subdue the flesh that hensforth it maye
synne the lesse.
            Cōtraryes to 
                  •
               trīciō be these.Cōtraries or errours. To say
cōtricion is nothing els but a volūtary
sorowing for synnes wt a purpose of
cōfessing & satisfyeng.Scholemen. To trifle with
certaine scholemen of the difference of

attricion & cōtricion.Attricion & contricion To dispute suꝑsticiously
wt the scholemē whether sinnes
be remitted by attricion or cōtricion.
They cal attricion an imꝑfite displeasaūce
for sinnes yt be cōmitted. To
say cōtricion is our owne worke. To
maynteyn y• there be other causes of cō
               tricion
thā the holy ghost & the worde.
To hold yt contriciō is cōuersaūt essentiallyScholemen.
in the hert, & virtually in cōfessing
& satisfieng outwardly. To make
folish distinctions bitwene a first 
                  •
               triciō,
yt must be a moderate sorow, & a second

                  •
               triciō, yt must be the greatest sorow,
but not to moche. To hold yt contricion
according to grace, requyreth
sorow & meryte. This errour I graūt
iudgeth aryght of sorowe & grace, but
of meryte it iudgeth amysse, as perteyneth
to y• remission of the blame, & euerlastyng
payne. To graūt yt contricion
ought to be had for euery offēce which
we know, but for such as we haue forgotten
the cōmon contricion suffyseth.
To say y• contricion be it neuer so litle
euē of it self wipeth away al the blame
and peyne. To hold yt the outward nurture
or disciplyne of workes & exercises
serueth for part of penaūce or true
remorse of cōscience. To say 
                  •
               tricion

always requyreth of necessitie teares,
or other outward gestures. To defend
that thobseruing of outwarde thinges
serue to an other purpose thē to testify
of the true 
                  •
               triciou of hert, & to bridle
the flesh y• it be no more so prone to sin.
To hold yt contricion by reason of charite
wypeth away the blame, & by reason
of sorow quencheth the peyne. To
maynteyn yt contricion wtout fayth is
any other thing then very desperaciō,
for doubtles it can be nothing els whē
the conscience do fele theyr synnes and
se no remedyes howe to be discharged
of the same.
         
         
            Of fayth the other parte of repē
               taunce.
CA. XXXIX.
            FAyth thother & necessary ꝑte of penaūce,Diffinition.
is yt wherby the 
                  •
               sciences be
agayn deliuered out of the fearfulnes,
vnto the certeyn & sure remissiō of
synnes, lest they shold despayre, being
made afrayde by the greatnes & abundance
of synnes.
            I thought good here seuerally to handleProue.
also fayth as it is thother ꝑte of penaūce,
to thend yt the vertue of penaūce
may be y• better knowē. But what thīg

properly fayth is, I haue before in the
title of faith declared sufficiētly, which
treatise maye be also referred hyther.
Now, how necessarily faith is required
vnto penaūce, & how & in what wise y•
cōsciēces be deliuered out of their fear
by fayth these reasōs folowing which
be groūded vpō ye word, shall ꝓue wel
ynough. For take me awaye faith & the

                  •
               sciēces being dep̄ssed by sines haue no
thing wherby they may raise vp thē selues
agayn out of 
                  •
               triciō. Furthermore
sines being by 
                  •
               triciō bewayled & detested
cā yet not be remitted wtout faith.
Finally penaūce is vtterly vnꝓfitable
yea and also full of despayre wtout this
faith:Melācthon loke more of this mater in y• cō
               mō
places of Philip Melāchton.
            Faith as it is a ꝑte of penaūce is not diuidedNo partes
ī to ꝑtes. For it is one certeyn affectiō
of mynd of a sure 
                  •
               fidēce app̄hending
remissiō of sinnes by Christ.
            
               THE causes of faith be as before theCauses.
holy gost & the word. To these also may
be added absoluciō, which neuertheles
is y• self word, which word whē the cō
               sciēces
do hear cōcernīg remissiō of sinnes,
they raise thē selues by faith which
afterward receiueth theffect of y• word
euen remission of synnes.
            
               
               HYTHER maye well be referredEffectes.
theffectes of fayth, so that thou applye
the same hither vnto repentaunce. For
fayth as a parte of penaunce differeth
nothing frō faith iustifieng. Of which
I haue heretofore seuerally entreated.
Theffectes be these. To attayne remyssyon
of synnes acknowleged, and
detested in contricyon, for fayth iustifyeth.
To rayse vp, to quycken, and to
releue the dismayed conscience in contricion.
To delyuer the concyence frō
desperacion. To make quyete conscyences,
whiche be assured they be released
of theyr synnes throughe Chryste.☞
To brynge with it the holye ghoste to
be our leader, and the creatour of new
affections and mocyons in vs vnto a
newe lyfe. For Chryste yf he be cleaued
vnto by faythe, gyueth vnto vs the holye
ghoste. To cause a ryghte loue towardes
god and the neyghboure. For
charitie can not be true and accepted,
before there be an attonement made by
faythe. To engenōre of it selfe al good
workes, & to cause that they may plese
god, accordynge to this texte, withoute
faythe it is impossyble to please
god.Roma. xiiii. Item, all that is not of faythe is
syn. To shewe the difference bytwene

frutful cōtriciō & vnfrutful, helthsom
& dānable, bitwene the 
                  •
               tricion of Iudas
& of Peter, of Dauid & of Saul. For
the 
                  •
               tricion of Iudas and of Saul was
therfore vnꝓfitable & dā
               
                  •
               able bicause
it lacked faith the necessary ꝑte of repē
               taūce.
To shew the difference bitwene
the seruile & the filial fear. The seruile
fear is fear wtout fayth: the filial fear
is ioyned with fayth.Cōtraries
            
            Cōtraries to the faith be these. To deny
y• faith is thother ꝑte of penaūce. To
say penaūce auayleth wtout fayth. To
hold yt penaūce wtout faith is any other
thing then very desperaciō. To hold yt
fayth thother ꝑte of repentaūce is our
worke. To defend yt the foresaid frutꝭ
of penaūce do folow by reason of any
other thing then of fayth.
         
         
            Of confession. CA. XL.
            COnfession is of four sortꝭ.Diuision of confession. One is
before god. An other opē. The .iii
priuate, but yet of open crimes, &
which folowed in stede of opē 
               
                  •
               fession.
The fourth auricular.
            
               ¶Of confession before god.
               
                  CONFESSYON which is madeDyffinicion.
before god is wherby we dayly cōfesse
before god our synnes, cōdemning our

selues for vniust & wretched siners, to
thende y• by the mercy of god on which
we cal, we may obteyne forgyuenes of
our synnes.
               
                  NOVV,
                  Probacion. that there is a confession to
be made before god, we be certified by
many places of scripture. The ꝓphete
saith:Psal. xx
                        •
                     i. Mine offēce I haue knowleged vnto
the, & mine vnrightousnes I haue not
hyd frō the. I said, I wil cōfesse against
me my vnrightousnes vnto god, & thou
hast forgiue the wickednes of my hert.
These wordes of the prophet besides y•
they ꝓue this cōfession, they do also set
forth theffect, which foloweth such as
cōfesse thē vnto god, yt is to wite remission
of synnes. This diffinition also is
approued by the hole. 50. psalme of the
ꝓphet.i. Iohan. i. 
                  S. Iohn̄ agreeth to y• sane where
he sayth. Yf we cōfesse our synnes, god
is faythful yt he wil forgiue vs our sinnes.
To this cōfession euerywhere we
be exhorted by the ꝓphetes, namely of
Hiere. ca. 2. 3. and. 4.
               This confession is a dayly cōfession
bycause we synne daylye,Math. vi. e Luc. xi. a and therfore
Christ did put it in the prayer whiche
be taught vs to praye, named the Pater
noster, wherin we saye forgyue vs our
synnes. &c.
               
                  
                  THE causes of this 
                     •
                  fessiō be tholyCauses
gost & the word. For while tholy gost rebuketh
vs according to his office of sin
iudgemēt & rightousnes, & yt by y• word
it cōmeth to passe yt we be brought to y•
knowlege of our synnes, & aft we haue
knowē thē, yt we 
                     •
                  fesse the same before
god, which he forgiueth whē his ꝓmise
of mercy is ones layd hold of by faith.
accordīg to his own saying by y• ꝓhet
Ier.Hiere. 3. d. Know yu thine iiquite bicause y• hast
forsakē ye lord thy god,☞ & hast made thy
self ꝑtaker of strange goddes vnder al
grene trees, but hast had no wil to hear
my voyce saith the lord: oh ye shrinkīg
childrē, turne agayn saith the lord, & I
wil be maryed wt you. &c. Itē a litle before
he sayth.Hiere. iii. b Therfore at the lest way
frō hensforth cal on me in this wise. O
my father, y• art he which hast brought
me vp in my virginitie, wilte y• then be
angry for euer? &c.
               
                  TO the foresayd causes also the commaundementes
of god is to be added,
whiche comaundeth vs to confesse our
synnes to god, wherby we be certified
that this cōfession pleaseth god. This
cōmaundement is openly espied in this
place where Christ saith. Repēt ye. For
this confession is theffect of contriciō
                  
whiche is an other parte of penaunce.Mark. i. a.
In the gospell of Marke it is red that
all were baptised of Iohn̄ in the floude
Iordane, confessynge theyr synnes.
Furthermore, contricyon is cause of
this confessyon. For he that is contryte,
shall necessarily also confesse his
synnes.
               
                  THERE be no ꝑtes of this cōfessiō.No partes.
For it is one certeyn confession before
god of synnes euen frō the hert, which
neuerthelesse is done of diuers persons
with diuers and sundry gestures.The cōfessiō of hypocrtis. It is
an hypocriticall confessyon whiche is
made onely with the mouthe, without
the true terrours of cōscience without
fayth. &c.
               
                  YF fayth be put to this confession,Effectes. so
that yu confessest thy synnes before god
vnder a certeyn confidence had vpon y•
promises of god, by whiche he hath promised
to penitentes & suche as confesse
theyr synnes remission of the same, thā
thou receyuest forgyuenes of synnes.
Wherfore the chief effect of this cōfession,
is forgiuenes of sinnes purchased
by fayth. Thother effectes be common
wt theffectes of contricion. For 
                     •
                  fession
before god dothe nothynge differ from
contricion, but as the causes & effectes

differ. And he y• is cōtrite, neuer forgetteth
confession.
               Cōtraries to this 
                     •
                  fession before godCōtraries.
be these. To say cōfessiō which is made
before god is not by gods law. To say
this 
                     •
                  fession before god is ynough, & so
to despise the keyes & absolucion ministred
by thy brother.☞ To say y• this confession
before god, taketh away 
                     •
                  fessiō
y• ought to be made to thy brother lerned
ī gods worde, to thintēt yu mightest
be instructed ī the knowlege of yt word
& receyue by the word absoluciō of thy
sinnes. To hold yt confessiō before god
done as it shold be is our work. To say
this cōfessiō hath none expresse cōmaū
                  demēt
in scripture.The errour of papistes. To hold yt cōfessiō
before god is vnprofitable, bicause we
be vncerteyn of absoluciō. This errour
is great, for this cōfession hath his absolucion
by the worde. And hitherto ꝑteyn
such places of scripture as do remit
synnes vnto the repentaūt ꝑsons &
which testify yt by this cōfession the holy
fathers haue obteyned remissyon of
synnes, as psal. 31. And yu hast remitted
the wickednes of my hert. To holde y•
forgyuenes of synnes which folow the
cōfessiō before god, doth folow for any
other thing then fayth.
            
         
         
            
            Of open confessyon.
CA. XLI.
            
               OPEN confession is by which inDefinicy
                     •••
                  
               
times past the cōmitters of open
crymes did cōfesse theyr sines before
the hole cōgregaciō, ernestly ꝓmising
yt they wold hēsforth amend theyr
lyuing, which done, they were pardoned,
and admitted agayne in to the congregacion.
            
               VVE be certeyn of this diffinitiō byProbacion.
thexēples of scripture, which do aswel
testify yt this cōfession was in vre in ye
church as also ꝓue the residue of y• diffinitiō
               
                  •
               cerning the forme of this 
                  •
               fessiō
Thexēples hereof be. 1. Cor. 5. &. 2. Cor.
2. In the first place thapostle wryteth
thus.i. Corin. v. a. It is reapported cōstātly yt there
is fornicaciō amongꝭ you, & such fornicaciō
as is not ones named amōgꝭ y• gē
               tiles,
yt one shold haue his fathers wife
And ye swel, & haue not rather sorowed,
yt he which hath done this dede might
be excluded your cōpany. For I veryly
as absēt in body, yet ꝑsent ī spirit haue
determined alredy, as though I were p̄
               sēt,
of him y• hath done this dede. In the
name of our lord Iesu Christ, when ye
are gathered togither, & my spirite, wt
               
the power of the lord Iesu Christ deliuer
him vnto Satan for the destructiō
of the flesh, yt the spirit may be saued in
the day of the lord Iesus. &c.ii. Cor. ii. b In the seconde
place he writeth thus. It is sufficiēt
for y• same mā yt he was rebuked of
many, so yt now cōtrary wise ye ought
to forgiue him & cōfort him, lest y• same
ꝑson shold be swalowed vp with ouermoche
heuynesse. &c.
            
               TO this confession was not added satisfaction,
as openly teacheth Paule by
these wordes: It is sufficiēt for the mā
that he was rebuked of many.
            
               IN asmoch as this confession semethCauses. Mat. xviii. c.
to apperteyn to the forme of repreuing
the brother yt sinneth taught by Christ,
it hath the commaundement of god for
the cause. For albeit Chryste speaketh
there of the synnes of priuate persons,
yet bycause we be commaunded there
to disclose the synnes of our stubborne
brother vnto the churche, therfore it semeth
that this publique or open confession
toke her occasion & beginnyng of
the said commaundemēt. Furthermore
this confession in the respect of absolucion
hath gods word for the cause. The
circumstaunces and ceremonies of the
thyng was instituted by the authoritie

of man.
            
               THIS confessiō is not diuided in toNo partes.
ꝑtes, but is one symple thing, euen a publique
& open disclosyng of notorious
crimes accordīg to the maner & forme
aboue specified.
            
               THEFFECTES of open confession
be these.Effectes. To wyn the brother yt falleth,
as Chryste sheweth Math. 18. To
reconcile him that is fallen in to synne
vnto the churche agayne. Of this effect
monissheth vs thapostle where he saith
Wherfore I pray you do so that charitieii. Cor. ii.
may be wrought vpō him, meanyng
the person that was fallen in to sinne.
To warne others by this open confession,
and to fraye them from commyttynge
the lyke enormytyes. To be a
token of earnest repentaunce, or a triall
whereby theyr stomackes be examined
whether they haue earnestly repented.
            Contraries to this confession be.Contraries. To
deny open confession to be of gods law
as hauing regarde to the .xviii. chapiter
of Mathewe. To holde that open
confession hathe satisfaction annexed
vnto it. To saye that this open and publique
confession, which in tymes past
hath ben vsed of the fathers,☞ is not to

be brought agayn in to vre,☞ specialy as
farforth as it is of gods law.
         
         
            Of cōfessyon pryuate of opē crymes
before a priuate preest.
CA. XLII.
            COnfessiō priuate of open crimesDiffinicyon.
before a priuate preest, is whiche
hath succeded ī place of publique
cōfessiō before remēbred by which opē
synners were wont to cōfesse their sinnes
before som one prest appointed out
of the nōbre of the elders for yt purpose
which to such as were in wil to repēt,
enioyned a certeyn punishmēt (whiche
coruptly thy cal now penaūce) before
the 
                  •
               gregaciō, by which they were tried
whether they wold ernestly forthik
and forsake theyr old lyfe, which done,
they were then fyrst receyued vnto the
congregacion agayne.
            
               OF this diffinitiō such writers are toProbacions
be sought & loked vpō which haue writē
of this cōfession.S. Cyprian. Cypriā maketh menciō
of this in his sermō De lapsis, & els
where.Tripartita historia. Also y• tripartite history whose
wordes yu shalt fynd in y• cōmon places
of Melanchtō. Also an exēple somwhat
like vnto this cōfession remayneth yet

in such places as ꝑdons be had, whervnto
murtherers or other opē synners resort,
& there making a priuate cōfession
before some certein prest be afterward
caried aboute the tēple, holding vnder
theyr lefte arme a rod, & in their ryght
hand a bre
                  •
               nyng tapre, wt the rod they
be beatē of euery one of the cōfessours,
al which thīges done, they be enioyned
certein fastinges & prayers, & so at last
be admitted to the cōpany of the faithful.
Certeynly of this cōfessiō a like exē
               ple
remayneth yet at this day in Rome
where is a special place appoynted for
penitētes, & where they stand euen like
vnto mourners. Itē certeyn west churches
are reapported to kepe styl a lyke
vsage of this confession.
            
               THIS cōfession depꝑteth further frō
               Causes.
the word of god thē the opē cōfessiō afore
mēcioned, wherfore y• cause of this
cōfessiō we may laufully make mās authoritie
by which it was fyrst ordeined
as the tripartite history also declarethTripartite hystorye.
where it saith.☞ It was sene to y• aūcient
bisshops, yt as it were ī a stage play notorious
crimes shold be layd opē to the
testimony of y• church, & for this cause
they appoynted forth a prest of a good

                  •
               uersaciō, a faythful kepe
                  •
                of coūsel, &

a wise mā, vnto whō such as had offēded
might approche & cōfesse their enormities.
And ye prest accordīg to euery mās
fault enioyned punishment. &c.
            
               THIS confession hath no ꝑtes,No partes. but is
of one sort, according to the forme before
prescribed.
            Theffectes hereof be not vnlyke to y•
               Effectes.
effectes of open cōfession set forth heretofore,
as. To wyn the brother yt is fallen.
To recōcile him to the church. To
monish and feare other from lyke fallynge.
To be the tryall of true repentaunce.
            Contraryes be these.Contraries To say this cō
               fession
is by gods law although ī some
parte I can not deny but it had occasiō
of the former confession. To hold that
the penaltie or punishment is added to
this confession that the penitent by the
same might satisfye for his synnes. To
hold that this confession in whiche the
preest enioyneth penaltie or punishmēt
(which they folyshly call penaunce) is
of necessitie to be vsed, wheras in dede
the same is not cōmaunded by the law
of god.
         
         
            Of auricular or eare confession.
CA. XLIII.
            
               
AUricular or eare confession isD
                     •
                  ffinicion.
wherby doubtfull consciences &
loden wt synnes seke by y• worde
assurance, instructiō, cōfort, & a certeyn
way to com to remissiō of sīnes, which
the bileuers also receyue bicause of absolucion
& the power of the keyes.
            
               THE necessary vse of this confessionProbacyon.
proueth sufficiently this diffinitiō. For
man being laden wt the burthen of sinnes
for the most parte can not comfort
him selfe, eyther bicause he is not well
taught in the worde, or bycause the batayls
of his conscience be greater then
that it can wel ryd it selfe of the same.
Wherfore by al meanes this cōfession
is necessary & ꝓfitable, to thintent y• by
it the conscience may be instructed and
taught where it ought to seke for comfort,
yt it may obtein remissiō of sinnes.
Nowe, yt remission of synnes foloweth
this confession bycause of absolucion,
and the power of the keys, these places
teache vs. He that heareth you, heareth
me. Item to whome so euer ye shall remyt
synnes,Math. xviii. 
                     •
                  
                they shall be forgyuen in
heuen.
            The cause of this 
                  •
               fession,Causes. I graūt, is
mās authoritie. But forasmoch as god
approueth absolucion, & euery mā hath

nede of it, therfore this confession is to
be kept still in the churche, yf so be we
wil that there be any vse of the keyes ī
               ☞ the churche. Neyther do I se why men
shold be greued wt this cōfession, onles
I suppose bicause they haue no delite to
be instructed in the word, where as yet
they most of al glory of the gospell, or
bicause remissiō of synnes is vnthankful
vnto thē, which is offred in this cō
               fessiō
by absoluciō. Thou therfore whiche
hast yt gospel, which disdaynest not
to run to sermōs, imbrasing the same wt
great admiracion & delectaciō of mind
why dost yu shrinke back frō confessing
or askyng counsel cōcerning thy helth
and saluacion, and frendly to talke wt
the curate or shepeherde, to thintente
thou mayste lerne of hym euen the selfe
same thynge that thou hearest at sermons
by the open preachynge of the
worde.
            
               EARE confession is not diuided intoNo partes.
ꝑtes but is one simple cōfessiō wherby
the cōsciences do seke cōfort institution
& remission of synnes, through absoluciō,
which is by the worde.
            Theffectꝭ of auricular cōfessiō ꝓcedeEffectes
of the ꝓfyte & necessitie of the same as.
To be institute & instructed better in y•
               
christen doctrine. To receyue a stronger
comfort by further instruction. To here
of remyssion of sinnes by ye power of the
keyes. To receyue remyssion of sinnes by
the word throuh the power of the keyes
there may also be gathered other effectꝭ
of eare confession forth of the commodities
of the same which helpe to repre
                  ••
               e
the occasions of sinnes when the conscience
do here in cōfession the heynousnes
of sinnes & how horryble god punisheth
sinne. On the contrary part how greate
rewardes he will giue to good workes.
            ¶Contraryes to eare confession be theseContraryes
To holde that eare confessiō is by gods
lawe. Albeit I graunt that god approueth
absolusion. To dispise auryculer cō
               fession
or to neglecte it which although
it be not commaūded by the law of god
yet for the foresayde commodities it is
not to be dispised ne neglected, oneles
a man thinketh that he nedeth not the
worde whiche he heareth in the institucion
and absoluciō. To bynde auricular
confession to to a time certaine. To saye
that the rehersal & rekening vp of al sinnes
is requyred in confession by goddes
law. To say eare confession is therfore
necessary that the penitent may receyue
satisfaction for his sinnes. To hold that

all y• sines are to be cōfessed vnder paine
of deedly sin.Papisticall To hold that auricular cō
               fession
without satisfaction added to y•
same is in vayne & nothinge worth. To
holde that all sinnes are to be confessed
to gither with all the circumstaunces be
longinge to the same. To saye eare confession
of it selfe concerneth necessite of
helth as ꝑteyneth to the remyssion of y•
blame but not to the remyssiō of y• paine
for whiche they holde that satisfaction
is to be had.Papisticall errour. To holde that eare confession
euen of it self wypeth away sinnes
aswell concerning the blame as yt paineThe errour of scholemen.
To saye eare confessiō maketh of a deedly
sin veniall sin. To holde that auricular
confession as a worke of it self delyuereth
frō the euerlasting peine & dimynissheth
y• temporall peyne,The heresye of. S. Thomas worshipped mought he be. To holde wt
Thomas y• scholeman yt the pryncypaul
effectꝭ of eare 
                  •
               fession be to delyuer from
euerlasting peyne & frome the peyne of
purgatory in which y• sayd Thomas sayeth
yt suche as be confessed be more easly
pūysshed thā such 
                  •
               s be but only cōtrite.
         
         
            Of satisfactiō. CA. XLIIII.
            SAtisfaction is of two sortes the oneA diuision of satisfaction.
whiche in tymes past was added to
opē penaūce y• other is deuysed by ye
               
scholemē, & by reason of many opinions
added to the same is vtterly wicked and
vngodly.
            
               ¶Of satisfaction vsed in times past
in open repentaunce.
               ¶Satisfaction vsed ī old time ī opē penaūce,Diffinition.
is a certaine peyn or punishment
which in olde time was enioyned by y•
preest to the penitent persons for their open
sinnes to try thē whether they were
ernestly repentaunt.
               There is no doubt of this diffiniciō whicheProbacion.
is takē forth of y• triꝑtite histo. whiche
sheweth y• originall begīning of this
satisfactiō ēioyned by y• prest, accordinge
to the qualitie of thoffēce, by which y• penitētꝭ
exercised thē selues vntil the time
appointed by the bishop, whē y• bysshop
being p̄sent they were admytted againe
to y• ꝑtaking of y• lordes supper, y• finall
effect cā not be called ī to doubt, for we
must kepe stil this dorctin y• by only faith
we obteyn remissiō of sinꝭ, thorow christ
& not through our owne workes.
               ¶The cause of this effectiō is mās authorytye,Causes.
according to y• of the tripertite
history. It was sene to the auncient bisshops.
&c. as before in the title of cōfessiō
of open crymes before a pryuate preest yt
cause also of this satisfactiō is the preest

which enioyned the payne or punishmēt
for which folowed satisfactiō, which lasted
tyll the tyme prescribed of the prest
Furthermore the cause of this satisfactyon
is y• penitent, which ꝑformed y• same.
Thoccaciō of this satisfactiō was giuenOccasion.
by the malyce & noughtines of mē, whiche
by their false & feyned repentaunce
disceyued the church.
               ¶Sūdry sortes of satisfactiō there werPartes.
accordīg to y• qualytie & gretnes of thoffence.
And as ye sinnes were, so had they
canons rules & lawes for the same.
               ¶Theffectes be these.Effectes or workes of satisfaccion in olde tyme vsed. To try by y• enioyned
satisfactiō whether the penitētꝭ wer
truly sory for their sinꝭ. To attēpt them
whether they wysshed hertely to come againe
to y• cōgregaciō. To tame the flesh
frō the wātonnes of sinning. To be an
īpedimēt to the flesh that it fal no more
so sone into vices.
               ¶Cōtraryes be these.Contraryes To say satisfaction
ī old time was by gods law, to holde
that there is an other satisfaction for sinnes
thē the merites of Christ.Papistical erroures. To meynteyn
two maner of satisfactions, one for
veniall sinnes & an other for deedly. To
say satisfactiō stādeth not of due workꝭ
but superogatiue y• is of suꝑfluous workes
& more than nede by which be redemed

the paynes of purgatorye or other
temporall peynes. This is a papistical
satisfactiō of which I wyl entreate her
after.Purgatorie men. To holde that satisfaction chaungeth
eternal peines into peynes of purgatory
or other tēporal paines. To hold
that such peynes be remytted partly by
the power of S. Peters keyes & partly
by satisfactiō. To say satisfactiō taketh
awaye the blame & giueth remyssion of
sinnes.Good Saint Thomas. To meynteine with Thomas y•
the confessour doth laudablye when he☞
sayth to his gostly childe. What so euer
good yu do by satisfactiō y• same mought
be vnto the for remyssion of sinnes. To
holde that satisfaction suffiseth for the
purginge of the peine eyther eternall or
temporall, To defend that the penitent
obteyneth by satisfaction the ꝑfite frute
of grace. To defende that satisfaction is
called a price raunsom or recompence for
sinnes. To holde that one man maye satisfye
for an other as well for the peyne
as for ye blame. To graūt that satisfactions
do yet serue when they be done in
deadly sin. To hold that the satisfactiō
of Christ serueth for y• hole nature of mā
but yet y• euery man ought to satisfy for
his owne sinnes. To maynteyne y• there
he superogatyue or suꝑfluous workes

which be not vtterly wycked & abhomynable.
To holde that fastinges & other
exercises to brydle the ryote of the flesh
be not due workes to be done dutīg life
& not at times appoynted.
            
         
         
            Of satisfaction dyuised by scholemen.
CA. xlv.
            SAtisfaction diuised by scholemen isDiffinicyon.
which stādeth of workꝭ not due but
suꝑrogatiue or suꝑfluous wherby be
redemed y• peines of purgatory or at lest
way other temporall peyne.Probacions
            
            ¶The reasons which yt scholemen brīgforth
for the cō
               
                  •
               irmacion of their heresy
be these. Iniuryes cōmytted must be recō
               pensed
or satisfyed accordīg to the egaltye
of iustice. Etgo say they workes not
due but superogatiue are requyred. Also
where as god is mercyfull he remytteth
y• blame & wheras be is a rightous iudg
he chaungeth the euerlastinge peyne in
to y• peyn of purgatory or other tēporal
peines. Now, part of these peynts they
say is relesed by power of ye popish keit
                  •
               
& parte is to be redemed by satisfactions.
¶The cause of this satysfactiō is thautorytieCauses.
of mā which besides gods worde
yea agaīst ye most opē word of god hath

dyuysed satisfaction. Thoccasion of this
deuyse was the confession in olde tyme
vsed of publique crimes before a priuate
prest not rightly vnderstād which added
to the penitentes a certayne penalty or
punyshment not that by the executinge
of the same they sholde satisfye for their
sinnes but that beinge now realesed of
theym by the power of the keyes they
myghte declare before the hole churche
y• they ernestly repented. The causers also
of this satisfaction be y• popish prestes
that enioyne this satisfaction or penaū
               
                  •
               
as they call it to suche as be confessed of
thē.Out holy relygions parsons laye penaunce vpon them selues. Itē they which say it vpō thē selues
as hertofore hath ben vsed to be done of
workemen, I cal thē so which stryue to
wyn heuē by theyr owne good workes
as they cal thē, The mater or substaūce
of this satisfaction is takē forth of the
self workes which they cal supererogatyue
or suꝑfluous (ī dede they be suꝑfluous
& veine) as be pilgremages, rosaries
of our lady, vygilles, tormentaryes & betīges
of their owne bodyes wearing of

                  ••
               y
                  •
               ces made of heer rope girdels goīge
wolwarde & barefote or wt windowes ī
their shoes, & such other most vyle workꝭ
yea and often times most folysh.Partes. ¶The

                  •
               umysshe schole doctours of later tyme

which write that satisfaction deserueth
remission of sinnes make two ꝑtes therof.
The one which satisfieth for veniall
sinnes for which they dreme that pytter
patteringes dayly sayde be sufficiēt. The
other, which satisfieth for deedly sinnes
& for the peine of purgatory.Effectes
            
            ¶Effectes of this scholastical, or rather
diabolycal satisfaction, they wyll haue
these. To chaunge the euerlasting payne
into paines of purgatory, of which part
is remytted say they, by the power of ye
popish keyes & part by satifactions. To
redem themporal paines to merite remissiō
of sinnes or of the blame. To merite
(for they be greate meriters) lyfe euerlasting.
These two last effectes, the rude
and folysh monkes haue put to, deuising
them out of theyr drowsy pates.
         
         
            Of pardons or indulgences,
CA. XLVI.
            INdulgences or ꝑdons were in timesDiffinicion.
past forgiuīges of open penaūces (as
they call them) or satisfactions.Proue.
            
            ¶This diffiniciō takē forth of ye maner &
custome of open penaunce, & therfore it
is certein and sure.
            ¶THE cause of pardons is the preestCauses.
which released the inioyned penaūce or

satisfaction.
            ¶Indulgēces haue no partes which neuerthelesPartes.
according to the state of the ꝑsons,
& necessitie of the thīg were otherwhiles
graūted more, otherwhiles lesse
vnto the penitentes.
            Theffectes of ꝑdons were these.Effectes. To vnburdē
y• penitēces, either bycause of their
weaknes, or for other causes, To serue ī
y• stede of satisfactiō, that was inioyned.
¶Contraries to this auncient ordinaū
               ce
be these.Cōtraries or erroures. Papistes. To graūte with ye papistes
that pardōs is a release of payne which
deseruingly we sholde suffre for our own
sinnes, taken oute of the treasure of the
church, to pay home the iustice of god.
To say with ye holy man S. Thomas ofThomas of Aquyn.
of aquyne, that indulgences by gyuē by
satisfactions to the honour of god & common
profite of the church. In dede it is
to great profite & aduauntage of the popish
church which is ecclesia malingnā
               tum,
euen the church of harlotꝭ. To hold
with schole clerkes, that pardons be not
giuen for corporall thinges of thē selues
but as temporall thinges be ordeyned
vnto spiritual, se how pretely they cloke
their stinking gaynes.☞ To defende that
pardons by the power of S. Peters keyes
do delyuer soules out of Purgatory

To say pardons do good seruyce for the
remyssyō of temporal paynes.Rome Pardones. To graūt
out pardons with the bysshop of Rome
and his reuerende clergye, for suche as
gyue theyr helpyng handes to the buyldynge
of chapels & churches. To holde
that pardons be auaylable for those y•
dyed in grace,Papistes. or also oute of grace. To
mayntyne with the disgysed papystes, y•
pardons take awaye both culpā & penā,
the syn & the punysshmēt due 
                  •
               or y• same.
         
         
            Of the ecclesiastical power or power
of the churche. CA. XLVII.
            THe ecclesiasticall power or power
of the churche,Diffinicion. is whiche standeth
in teachynge the gospell, admynistratyng
y• sacramētes, & excōminicating
such as 
                  •
               e opē synners, & agayn in assoy
               
                  •
               ing
y• same whē they demaūd absoluciō
               THE realme of Chryst is spyritual,Probacyon
                     ••
                  er of. not
ruled by the swe
                  •
               de, by the armours, &
other thīges apperteynynge to a worldly
polycye: wherfore this chyrchly power
is ryghtly descrybed by ye wordes aforesayd.
Furthermore Chryste which is
both the 
                  〈◊〉
                & maker of this churchly
power remoued all worldly gouernaunce
bothe from him selfe, & from his
discyples vnto the prynces of the world

frō hīself which wolde not be chosē to
be kyng, but fled away frō his apostles
& disciples where as he sai
                  •
               h vnto thē,Ioh. vi. d
y• rulers of the gētyles haue dominiō on
thē but so shall it not be amonges you.
Now S. Peter him self, whō y• papistes
make the need of theyr popysshe power
or rather tyranny, vsed no worldly or tē
               poral
power,i. Pet. ii. c. yea on the cōtrary ꝑte S.
Peter wryteth that we ought to obey ye
temporall rulers ordeyned of god for
the defence of such as be good, & punyshment
of the wycked.i. Peter. v. a. Also S. Peter exhorteth
his felowe preestes to fede the
flocke of Chryst & to play the ꝑtes of bisshopsSome of our bysshps had nede be constrayned to this.
(for so it is ī the greke) not cōstreynedly
but wyllynglye, not for fowle lucouts
sake but of a prompte mynde, not
as though they bare rule ouer theyr flocke
alotted to theyr spiritual charge but
in such wyse as they may be exēplers vnto
theyr flocke. Neyther doth his felow
s. Paule dyssēt frō hī who also testifyeth
vnto the Corynth. of hī selfe sayng.Corin. xxii. d
Not that we are lordes ouer your fayth
but we are helpers of your ioye Now to
teache y• gospell they be commaūded of
Christ who saith,Mar
                     •
                  . xvi. d Iohn. xx. f. go ye īto y• hole world
& preach the gospell. Item as my father
hath sent me, so send I you.
            
               
¶By sacramētes I vnderstād here baptisme,
the souꝑ of the lord,Mat. xxviij. d & absolucyō.
Of baptysme speaketh Chryst thus. Go
& teache all nacyones, baptisyng them ī
the name of the father & the son & tholy
ghost. Of the souꝑ of the lorde he sayth,Math. xxvi. c. Mat. xviii. c
Eate ye drynke ye, &c. Of absolucion he
sayt
                  •
               
               ▪ Uerely I say vnto you, what so
euer ye bynd vpō erth it shall be bounde
in heuen, &c. The diffinicyō also appeareth
certayne by the partes of the ecclesiastical
power which be these, y• power
of doctryne or order, & the power of excōmunicacyō
& absolcuyō. Of excōmunycacyō
speaketh Chryst in the .xviii. chap.
of Math. Exemples of excōmunicacyon
appeare in the fyrste epistle to Timoth.
cap. i. in the ꝑsons of Hymeneus & of Alexander
whom saynt Paule betoke to
Sathā that is to say he excōmunitatedi. Timot. i. d.
that they shuld lerne not to blaspheme.
Itē thapostle blameth y• Corinth,i. Cor. v. a. that
they accused not, that is yt they put not
out of theyr cōpany the mā yt had cōmitted
adultery wt his owne fathers wyfe.
And agayne afterward he blameth thē
after they had excōmunicate hī whā he
toke greate sorow for his offence yt they
receyued him not in to their cōpany, Finally
such as haue fallē & he repugnaūt

ought to be taken agayne accordyng to
thexemple of Peter, & infynyte other.
            ¶Chryst is the prīcipal cause of this power.Causes of the power of the church.
For he ordeyned it & cōmytted it to
the cōgregaciō, as appeareth. Mat. xvj.
& xviii & in the gospell of Iohn̄. cap. xx.
After Chryste, the churche is a secōdarye
cause of the ecclesiasticall power, which
hath authorite do cōfer & to exerciyse it.
No pryuate ꝑson, no bysshop, no archebysshop,
or what so euer name he beateth
or taketh vpō hym hath no power,
onles it be cōmitted to suche pryuate ꝑsons
by the hole cōgregacyō, not taken
awaye agayne for the abusynge of the
same.The vsurpacion of the bishop of Rome. wherfore the bysshop of Rome is
not a lytle to blame that he draweth ye
power of the churche to his owne ꝓpre
ꝑson & vsurpeth vpon the authoritie of
the same moost tyrānously. For onely ye
churche hath the keyes, & therfore it also
hath the power to electe & nominate
suche as ought to administre the keyes
of the churche where the pure worde of
god is bad & the ryght vse of the sacramētes.
The maner &The aunciēt vsage of the churche: forme of callyng &
chosyng y• ministers in olde tyme vsed ī
the churche was this. The people dyd
those &☞ afterwarde came ye next bysshop
adioynynge to that diocese & approued

the election. Testimonyes of this election
thou shalte fynde in common places
of Melancthon. And saynt Paule commaundeth
Titus to ordeyne preestes in
the places nere aboute hym. Afterward
by authorytie of the counsayle of Nyce,
the confyrmynge of the bysshop electedDist. lxiiii. 
                     ••
                  a. Episcopi
was gyuē
               ▪ to all the bysshops of y• same
prouynce, which constitution bycause it
semed very harde, was chaunged to the
confyrmacyō of thre, eyther beyng there
present, or elles by wrytynges agreynge
thervnto.
            ¶Hable persons to the ministration ofParsones. mete to be the ministres of the congregation.
gods worde be described of thapostle in
his epistles to Timo. & to Titus, which
descriptiō is approued. Dist. xxv. Hyther
pert
                  •
               ine also other decrees, as dist. xxiiij.
where it is cōmaunded that suche be ꝓmoted
to the dignitie of a bisshop as be
apꝓued of longe tyme, as well by the
word of fayth, as by thexemple of ryght
cōuersacion. Item dist, xxiij. cap. Tales.
Let suche be elected to be ministers of ye
churche as can worthyly handle the diuyne
sacramētes. Also dist. xxiij. cap. Hiis
igitur. Let them studye & endeuour
them selues to kepe ꝑpetually the chastyte
of an vndefyled bodye, or at leestwaye
let thē be coupled with the yoke

of one onely matrymonye.
            ¶It is ā olde diuisiō of the churchly orPartes
ecclesiasticall power, to deuyde it īto power
of order or doctrine, whervnto ꝑteyneth
p̄chyng of y• gospel, declaryng of remyssyō
of syunes, & cōmunicatyng therof,
administrynge of the sacramentes.
            And īto y• power of iurisdictiō, to which
belongeth excōmunication & absoluciō.
¶Theffectes of the ecclesiastical powerEffecte
                     •
                  
               
be these. To teach y• pure worde or gospell,
accordyng to the sayng of Chryst, I
sēd you, as my father hath sent me, but
Christ was not sēt to teach lyes, ergo nether
y• p̄chers be sēt to teche lyes. To teche
repētaūce & remissiō of synꝭ ī ye name
of Chryst, for these be ye ꝑtes of the pure
worde or gospel. To ministre remissiō of
synnes to others, for this is y• chefe effect
of y• gospel. To ministre sacramētꝭ, accordyng
to ye word. To assoyle by y• power
of y• keyes al true penitentꝭ demaūdyng
ye same. To excōmunicate opē siners, amōgꝭ
whom I reckē blasphemours, fals
techers.i. Tiom. 
                     •
                  
                &c. Sēblably Pau. excōmunicated
Hymeneus & Alexāder for their blasphemie.
To receyue agayn such as couet
to returne agayne vnto y• churche, & so
to assoyle thē, according to thexemple of
the aduout
                  •
               er mēcioned of thapostle in

the seconde epystle to the Corī.ii. Cor. ii. Nowe,
these effectes & offycies they may not exercyse
in a corner, but opēly & in y• syght
of the congregacyō. For the doctryne of
the gospell is an open &ii. Cor. xiiii. manyfest preachynge.
Neither is it lefull for euery pryuate☞
person to exercyse these offyces, but
onely to suche as be appoynted & called
thervnto by the churche, that all thyngꝭ
maye be done in the cōgregacyō semyngly,
& in due ordre. Neuertheles euery mā
may, yea & is bounde preuely to teache &
instructe his neyghbour, to declare vnto
affrayed cōscyences remyssyō of synnes
& that by the word & so to assoyle them.
Also in case of necessitie it is lawfull for
euery ꝑson to minister the sacramentes.
But to excomunicate is not lawfull for
any pryuate ꝑsō as it is neyther lawful
to ossoyle the excomunicate ꝑson. For
these thynges bycause they be publyke
iudgmētꝭ & spectacles ought to be done
before the hole church. And therfore thapostle
wryteth to y• hole churche of Corīth.
& not onelye to the mynystres of y•
churche that they sholde receyue hym agayne
into theyr companye which had
commytted thaduoutrye.
            ¶I thought good amōges y• cōtraryesCōtraries
herof, cōpendyously to touch the ecclesisticall

power which vnto this daye the
byshop of Rome hath vsed or rather abused
with horible tyrany, which thing
I wil the gladlyer do bycause I knowe
that the true ecclesiasticall power shall
the better be espied, when on the cōtrarye
side the false & tyrannycal power of
this monstre is set forth.
            
               ¶Of the popish power.
               
                  THE power of the church which hythervntoDiffinicion.
the pope hath vsurped is a domynion
in thinges spiritual & temporal
yea rather a power aswell vpon all the
laytie as vpon the clergy with authorytye
of making & statuting lawes to rule
men withal, aswell in spirituall as temporall
thinges & where lawes haue no
place there to exercise the swerd for the
mayntenaūce & defēce of y• goodes both
spiritual & temporal of the church mylytaunt.
               
                  THE first ꝑte of the diffinitiō is apparauntProbacyon.
dist. xix. capt. Ita dominus. Also ī
the decretalles de electione. ca. significasit.
Also ī the decretales de hereticis ca.
A
                     •
                   abolendam. Nowe of his dominion
vpon the layty, there be exēples ynough
ī which we se the tyrany of the bisshops
of Rome vpō emperours & kinges, pope
zacharye deposed Hilderich the frenchezacharie.
                  
king & made of a king a monke. Innocēt
the .iiii. dyd put downe Frederike the .ii.
from the empyre & in his place set vp an
other,Alexander the thyrde. pope Alexandre the thirde before
hī did trede with his fete vpō Frederike
the first emperour of yt name surnamed
Barbarossa father to the said Friderike
the .ii. And of thauthorytye of making &
inactinge lawes at their pleasure which
they bynd mē vnto more straightly thē
to y• gospel certifieth vs Leo,Leo. Dist. 4. ca.
de libellis, Now, BonifaceBoniface. the .8. raised
great warres in Italy. Grego.Gregorie. moued al
warres vpō the emperours of Rome for
maynteyning the confyrmacion of y• bisshop
of Rome.Iulius. Pope Iulius bicause he
made many warres is honoured of som
for a Saint & a blessed mā. The false &
traytorous warres or rather cōspiracyes
of Clement be not vnknowen.Clement.
               
               ¶This popish ecclesiastical powerParticion of the popishe power. they
diuide īto ordre wherby they chose their
mynistres that may proclayme & preach
this power furnyshed with lyes & tirannye,
& in great abuse distrybute y• sacramentes.
And into iurisdiction spirituall
and temporal.
               ¶Of this power y• causes be TirannyCauses.
& a mere lust to raign wherby Boniface
the thyrd obteyned of y• emperour Phocas

the name of the vniuersall bisshop,
which obteyned by litle & litle to his powers,
he encreased the same, and to thintent
it myght be the more sure & stable &
also extende the farder, his successours
bysshops of Rome studyed y• same that
Bonyface dyd, tyll at last they were become
in worldly power far myghtyer
thē kinges & ēperours, whō other whyles
they vtterly deposed of thempyre, fynally,
I call the popish power a tyrranny,
forasmoch as it is a power gotten wt
                  out
righte & vnrightlye possed of them,
namely sithens they also glory & bost to
be y• vica
                     •
                  s of Christ, by which facte they
declare them selues to be very ātichristꝭ
that is to say agaynst Christ.
               ¶Their effectes &Effectes. workes be these. To
d
                     •
                  uise & make lawes, statutes, ceremonyes,
articles of y• faith, & now these nowe
those rites which the bisshops of Rome
do lay vpon the fely congregacion as oracles
of god or gospels with this condicion
annexed therunto y• who so euer
transgresseth the same shall be depryued
of y• name of a christen mā as openly testifieth
Leo. dist. iiii. ca de libellis. To cō
                  fyrme
the highest temporall ruler ī erth
dist. xxii.C. Omnes, where it is red that
S. Peter receyued of Christ the admynynistraciō
                  
both of the erthely & of the heuenly
empire. To administre wordly powers
whch power y• bysshops of Rome
take vnto thē of Peter their p̄decessour
accordyng to their lawe aforesayd. To
make temporal lawes. To giue sentēce
of deth accordinge to y• same. To make
warres for defēce of the church goodes.
These tēporal office & be nothing mete
& conuenient for bysshops especially sythens
(as I sayd) they wyll be vyca
                     •
                  s of
Christ ī y• kingdom of christ which was
altogyther estraunge from this worlde.
To ordeyne & electe blynde bousardes,
cōtrary to theyr owne decrees, as well
to preache impute doctrine defoyled wt
mans inuencions & for the most part repungnaunt
to the sincere worde of god
as to distribute y• sacramētes in an horyble
abuse. To curse & excōmunicate euery
man at their owne pleasure, as testifye
exēples of themperours of whome
there hath ben in maner none before our
tymes which hath eskaped their thunderboltes.
            
            
               ¶Here folowe the rest whiche be contraryes
to y• true ecclesiasticall
power.
               Contraryes therfore to y• true powerContraryes
of the churche be these. To holde that y•
                  
right of conferring the ecclesiastical power
remayneth only with the pope and
not with the churche whiche hathe the
keyes giuē vnto them of Christ.Papistical To say
no mā ought to be admitted to ministre
the word onlesse he be elected ordinate
& cōfyrmed of the pope or his deputies.
To deny that euery ꝑticular congregacion
hath power to elect their ministres
of the word by the authorite of the keyesThe detestable heresie of papistes.
cōmytted vnto thē. To say that only
to S. Peter & his successours bysshops
of Rome were gyuē the keyes of the ecclesiasticall
power & not to the churche.
To denye that the principall effectes of
the churchely power be, to teache gods
worde, to preache remyssiō of synnes by
Christ, to bestow the same vpon such as
couer it to distrybute ryghtly & purely y•
sacramētes.☞ To hold that the power of
the church stādeth not but amōges the
annoynted prestꝭ.☞ To hold that priuate
persons may not priuatly exercyse thoftyces
of the ecclesiasticall power as to ī
                  struct
theyr neyghbour ī gods worde, to
speake & talke of the gospel, ī necessitye
to distribute y• sacramentes. &c. To hold
y• open confession is not necessary.The erruor of phantasticall persons To do
away priuate absolucion & be contē
                  
                     •
                  ed
with an absolucion phātastical. To say

that publyque absolucion cā not stande
with pryuate absolucion but yt thone or
thother is to be abolyshed. To defend y•
excommunycacion apꝑteyneth to priuat
persons that they maye excommunicate
of theyr own authoryty whom they lust
To holde that excomunycacion may duly
be done althoughe it be not openlye
done before the congregacion. To say yt
only such as preach euyll doctrine are to
be excomunicate & not such as giue euill
exemples of lyuyng.Errour of Anabaptists. To deny that such
are to be receyued againe into ye congregacyon
which haue repented. To seke any
other thing by the ecciesiasticall power
then the execucion of the fore saide
effectes. To exercyse the officies of the eclesiastical
power opēly without lawfull
callīg by the church to ye same. To resiste
rashely the mynisters of the church contrary
to y• cōmaūdement of Christ who
sayth.Math. xxiii. a All thinges yt they cōmaunde you
to do that do ye, y• is to wyte, as longe
as they sit in the chaire of Moses.What is to sit in Moyses chayer. Now
to sit in y• chayre of Moses is to expown
the lawe of god purely & sincere
                     •
                  y. To
holde that y• vse of the ecclesiasticall power
is leted or taken awaye through euyl
ministers, so yt they sit in ye chayre of
Moses. Therfore Christ signifieth that

there sit in the chaire of Moses scribes &
pharises both good & had. wherunto accordeth
Paule writting to the phi.Philip. i. thus
Some preach Christ of enuy and contē
                  cion,
some also of a good wyll. &c. But
what forceth it, saith Paul, so y• Christe
be preched by any maner of wayes whyther
it be by occasiō or of true meanīg I
therin ioye, yea & wyl ioye. To abuse the
offices of y• eccliastical power for gaines
& foule lurce. To hold that the ecclesiastical
power is of no force.Heresie of purpatorye men. To holde y•
by the power of the keyes soules be delyuered
through pordons out of purgatory.Popishe errour.
To say in reseruacion of cases not
only y• canonical payne but also the offence
maye be reserued, yea and in suche
as be truly repentaunt.
            
         
         
            Of mens tradiciōs in the churche
CAPI. XLVIII.
            
               I Wolde not put y• place of mens tradiciōs
amonge theffectes of y• ecclesiastical
power, as though it shold ꝓtain
ꝑprely thyther, forasmoch as to cōstitute
humane tradicyōs in the churche, is not
the propre effecte of y• churchly power,
but which myxed therwith for certayne
and necessarye causes, as hereafter shall

more playnly appeare.Discription.
            
            Mens tradiciōs in the churche therfore
be ordinaunces of men which they
make, which haue a commyssyon of the
churche to the same, to thintent that althinges may be done in the congregacion
with comelynesse and in ordre.
            
               THIS diffiniciō is playne.Probacion. For they
be not gods whiche ordeyned humane
tradiciōs in y• churche, or yet do ordeyn.
Furthermore certayne it is y• the tradicions
be not of the lawe diuyne, bicause
they be not expresly mencyoned of in the
worde. And thapostle, i. Corynthi. vij.
where as he had not an open worde of
god to serue for his purpose durste not
but call his tradiciōs coūsels & not cō
               maūdem̄tes
where he sayth: Cōcernīg
virgyns I haue no cōmaundemēt of y•
lorde,
                  
                     •
                  . Cor. vii, c but I gyue counsel, &c. Wherfore
we ought diligently, accordynge to the
maner of Paule, to discerne mens tradiciōs
frō the expresse cōmaūdementes of
god, For thus the apostle alwayes ꝑte
               
                  •
               eth
before his tradiciōs: I speake this
of fauour,i. Cor. vii. a. & not of cōmaundemēt. Item
to y• rest speake I (sayth Paule) and not
y• lorde.i. Cor. vii. c. The finall effect putteth Paule
where be saith:i. Cori. xiiii. g. wherfore brethrē ēdeuer
your selues to this, y• ye ꝑphecy (he calleth

prop
                  •••
               ye interpretacion of scrypture)
& forbyd not to speake with tonges,
and let al thynges be done honestly
and in ordre. So there Paule doth institu
                  •
               e
lessons or redynges in the churche.
Itē yt women speake not in the congregacion
but kepe sylence. Also in the .xi.
chap. y• womē haueth eyr hedes couered
and y• mē be bare heeded whē they pray
Item in the vij. chap. that the man and
wyfe abstayne one from an other for a
tyme, but not so but they come agayne
togyder afterwarde. lest Sathā myght
tēpt thē for incōtinēcie. Also y• the faithfull
husbāde forsake not his vnfaithful
wyfe, so y• she wyl agree to tary wt him.
And thapostle addeth the finall effecte
wherwith he cōcludeth his tradicyons,
saying: Not yt I should cast a īnare vpō
you,i. Cor. vii. e but y• ye myght folow that whiche
is honest & comely. &c. Hereby it also appeareth
y• humane tradiciōs be no sacrifices
or seruyce of god, but thīges indifferēt
which may be chaūged, altred, correct,
& reiected, accordynge to thoccasion
of y• tyme, euē as the same selfe thynge
was done in coūsels, folowyng whiche
customably haue corrected & oftentymes
reiected y• cōstitucyons of their predecessours
which thing they might not haue

done yf humane tradicions had ben of
gods lawe.
            
               THE causes of humane tradiciōs in y•
               Causes.
churche be these. Thauthorytie of mā, &
the power which the pastours & mynysters
haue that be called of the churche.Partes.
            
            ¶Humane tradicions be of all one sorte
in the churche which som mē call rytes,
som cerymonies. And forasmoch as som
ordynaūces apertayne to ordre, & other
some to instituciō, therfore they may be
diuyded in to tradicyons ordinall & institutory.
Unto ordinal may be referred
holy dayes, fastyng dayes, dyuersitie of
garmentes. &c. Unto institutorye lawes
may be referred lessons & songes, wherwith
the youth & the rude people be instructyd.
The papystes diuyde the trudycions in to vniuersall & perticular. The
vniuersall they say ought not to be corrected
ne chaūged but the ꝑticular may.
            ¶Theffectes of humane tradicyons inEffectes i. Cor. xiiii.
the churche be these. To make that all
thinges (accordyng to the rule of Paul)
be done in the churche honestlye and in
ordre.i. Corin. vii. f. Also in an other place he saythe:
This I speake for your profyte not to
intangle you in a snare but yt ye myght
folow that is honest & comely. Item to
make ye confusion vnmete for ye churche

be eschued. To cause that soberly & quyetly
all thinges be executed in y• church.
To brynge to passe that the youth and
vulerred people maye be instructe, and
brought vp in the worde of god.
            ¶Cōtraryes to mens tradicions in theContraryes
churche be these. To hold y• humane tradicyōs
be institute in the churche to be a
true seruyce of god. To say mēs tradicyōs
in the churche yf they be repungnaūt
to y• worde ought not to be cast forthe.
To say all humane tradiciōs ordeyned
of popes in the churche are to be kepte
vnder payne of deedly syn,The most dā
                  nable heresie of papistes. bicause popꝭ
be hedes of the church & bycars of christ
To hold y• mens tradicyōs must be had
in suche pryce yt we may not ones doubt
or aske the questyon whether they be repungnaunce
with the worde or no. To
hold that it is in the bysshop of Romes
power to make tradiciōs and lawes of
lyke strength with the cōmaundemētes
of god. To holde yt humane tradicyons
deserue grace or remyssyon of synnes.
To meyntayne y• mens tradicion in the
churche serue to pacify god & to satisfye
for synnes. To say mens tradicions in y•
cōgregacion may not be brokē in case of
necessitie. To cast forth of yt church al humane
traciciōs, yea & those also whiche

be not repungnaūt to the word whiche
rashnes is cause of great dissencion & of
manifold incōmodities. To denye that
we ought to obey mēs tradiciōs which
be not cōtrary to the gospel but ordeyned
to this onely ende y• all thinges be
done in the church semyngly & in ordre.
To raise discorde for mens tradiciōs ini. Cor. xi. c.
y• church. Against these speaketh Paule
where he sayth. But if any man seme to
be contentious amonges you, let hym
know y• we haue no suche custome neyther
the cōgregacions of god to meynteine
y• this lyfe may be ruled wtout ceremonyes
& rites. To auaunce & extoll
humane tradiciōs aboue the cōmaundementes
of god as they haue done which
haue dreamed superfluyitie of ceremonyes.
To snarle the cōsciēce by humane
tradiciōs against whome writeth Paul
i. Corin. vii. To denye mens tradicionsCeremonies be thinges in different.
whether they be rites or ceremonyes to
be thinges indiff
                  •
               rent. I call y• indifferent
wherin consisteth neither rightousnes
neither sin. To trāsgresse the tradicions
of mē in the church after a sedicious
maner and to y• sklaūdre of others.
To say y• scriptur only dāneth humane
tradiciōs amōg yt Iewes where Christe
saith: They worship me in vayne wt the

cōmaundementes of men. &c. To lade y•
church wt humane tradicions. To kepe
& obserue tradicions of mē supersticiouslye.The errour of supersticious persones.
To say mens tradicions may not be
of diuers sortes in dyuers places. To
saye that of necessitie of saluaciō al humane
tradiciōs ought to be in al places
alyke.☞ To deny yt honest ceremonyes &
rytes vsed hitherto in y• churche whiche
be not against the worde may more ꝓfytably
be kept styl then new ordeyned.
To denye yt the chaunginge of humane
tradicions onles necessite or vrgent commodite
moueth to the cōtrarye, is cause
of īfinite myscheues & īcōmodities. To
cōdēne such as haue throwē out of their☞
churches vnꝓfitable & wicked ceremonyes.
To denye yt charitie & necessite be
the meanes wherby all mens tradiciōs
in the churche ought to be measured.
         
         
            Of the churche of congregacyon.
CA. XLIX.
            THe place or title of churche foloweth
very cōueniētly y• ecclesiasticall
power. For the churche is the
kingdom wherin is exercised this ecclesiastical
power, & from whēs it procedeth
originaly by resō of y• keies cōmitted by

the churche vnto the mynisters of the
same. But for asmoch as the church cō
               sisteth
īdifferētly, as wel of yt true fayth
full ꝑsons, as also of hypocrytes & false
harlots. it is hard so to descrybe yt churche
y• thou mayst therby knowe wherin
the godly do dyffre frō the coūterfayte &
disgysed game players (we call such hypocrytes)
namely sythens these two sortes
of men haue in outwarde apperaūce
al thinges alyke. I neuerthelesse to thī
               tent
I may shew som differēce bytwene
the true mēbres of the churche & the disgysed
hypocrytes haue to my power seuered
thē in the causes & effectes, leest I
shuld gyue occasyō of sklaūdre to the papystes
which be euer barkynge & crying
out against vs, of yt one church we make
two, bycause we make dystinction bytwene
the true and the coūterfayte.
            ¶Wherfore y• churche in a generalytieDiffinicion.
is y• cōgregacion of all suche as professe
y• gospel, only y• excōmunicate excepted.
            I thynke it vnknowen to no man y•
               Probacions.
the churche taketh his original beginnyng
of the professyon of the gospell, &
that then it began when the fyrste promyse
was made of the gospell, whiche
forasmoche as it befell euen in Adams
tyme, and vnto Adam, it is certayn that

the churche began euen then, & that frō
Adam vntyll this day it hath stande amōgꝭ al
the ꝓfessours of the gospel, & yet
it standeth with all suche as professe the
same. I Added (in a generalitie) bycause
I wolde make a distinction & difference
bytwene the true bylyuers or ryghtous
persons, & bytwne false hypocrytes and
dysceyuers. And albeit the scrypture nameth
aswel the bad as the good vnder
the name of churche, as the parable of
the nette casten in to the see teacheth in
which be takē bothe good & euyl fysshe,
yet euery man wyl iudge that the good
fysshes are to be p̄ferred before the bad.
Wherfore no man oughte to merueyle
though we bicause of y• opē testimonies
of scrypture, haue seperated ye church of
y• true bylyuers frō y• hypocrytes, which
churche king Dauyd calleth ecclesiā malignantium / 
the churche of the euyll
& wycked persons, whiche he wolde not
haue done yf there were only wtout dyuersitie
one generall churche, & besydes
it none other which may truly be called
the churche as hereafter I shall declare
in y• causes. Now the excōmunicat persons
be no longer of ye churche accordīg
to y• saying of our sauyour Chryst. That
yf he wyll not here y• churche,Math. xviii
                     •
                  
                let him be

vnto the as a hethē person, & publyca
                  •
               .Partes.
¶There is one churche in a generalitie
(as said is) throughout al christendome
in which church be two sortes of mē 
               
                  〈◊〉
               
be holy in dede, some coūterfait holy or
hypocrites. The congregacion of those,
the scripture otherwhiles calleth y• co
                  •
               
               saile
of the rightous, as. psalm. ci. other
whiles the immaculate or vndefyled
church, as cātt, v. now wtout wrincle as
Ephe. v. now y• seat of Dauid, as Esay.
ix. now the kingdome of Dauid, as euen
in the same place, now the body of christ
as .i. Cor. ii. now y• church of the saintes
as. psalm. lxxxviiii. now the membres of
Christ, now y• multitude of beleuers. &c
But ye church of the other y• scriptur calleth
y• congregacion of y• vngodly & of
disseueraunce.
            
               THE true & ꝓprely called church is
thus discribed of Paul. Ep. i.The discription of the true churche. The churche
of y• rightous is which Christ loued
so wel y• he bestowed euē him self for it
to thintēt he might sanctify it being purged
wt the washing of water by y• word
y• he myght make it a gloryous churche
not hauinge eyther spot or wrincle & y•
it might be holy & wtout fault. And this
true church is not laid opē to y• eyes but
is byleued accordinge to the article of

our Crede. I byleue the holy church catholyke,
the cōmunion of sayntes. The
church of hypocrites describeth the ꝓphet
Esaie wt these wordes.Esa. xxvi. d. This people
(saith the lord) approcheth vnto me
wt theyr mouth, & with theyr lyppꝭ they
honour me, but their hert is far frō me
in vayne they worship me, teaching doctrynes
& cōmaundementes of mē. This
church cōtraryly is open & apparaunt
to the eyes, for al her workꝭ, al her worship
wherwt it thinketh to serue god is
outward. It is an outward hue or vysour
of the pure churche, wt mens tradiciōs
in stede of the syncere doctrine, wt
the mouth & lyppes only wtout thaffections
of the hert worshipping god.
            
               AND forasmoche as I sayde in theCause
                     •
                  
               
churche to be two sortes of men, true
faithful, & con
                  •
               itrefet or hypocritꝭ, therfore
now also two sortes of causes are
to be set, ꝓceding neuertheles of al one
mater, to thintent it may appere why
these be hipocrites, and thother verily
faythful. These causes therfore ensuing
of the true churche, whiche otherwhiles
the fathers haue called y• piller
of the trouth. The ꝓmise of god or the
gospel,Causes of 
                     •
                   true churche., Christ faith, tholy ghost, y• pure
doctrine hole & perfite in al her effectes

and iurisdiction. THE ꝓmise of god
or the gospell is the cause of the true
churche, forasmoch as through the promise
of the gospel it had her beginnīge
whervpō it was foūded. For forthwt as
the ꝓmise of the gospel was ones made
the church began to sprīg, & whervnto
as sone as Adam gaue credite he becam
a mēbre of the same.☞ So euē at this day
such as by faith take hold of y• glad tidyngꝭ
of Christ (for y• is the gospel) ar
                  •
               
become the true mēbres of the churche.
I speke here of fayth as it is an assured
cōfidence vpō the ꝓmise of the gospel,
and not of the fayned faith of hypocrites,
which is only a knowlege without
true mociōs of hert, wherof I shal here
after speke in the causes of the hypocritical
or coūterfet church. Now, Christ
is cause of the true congregacion, for
asmoch as of him the ꝓmise of y• gospel
was made, & who also satisfied y• same.
Also bicause he is y• heed of the churche
wherof the taketh al her sustentacion,Ephe xv. Colos. i. Ela. viii. i. Cor. iii. Gala. ii.
increase ryghtousnesse, glory, clennes,
holynes, Item bycause he is the fundacion
of the churche. The holy ghost is
cause of the true churche, forasmoche
as he gyuen vnto the churche of Christ
to be the ruler and gouernour callethe

the churche by the worde, gathereth it
togyther, sanctifyeth or maketh it holy
(wherof also he hath his name) furnissheth
it with sundry gyftes, comforteth
& rayseth it vp agayne in tribulacion,
maketh it apte & mete to do liuely
and true workes, whiche maye please
god, and which be most acceptable and
thankfull sacrifices vnto hym, full of
good sauoure, and finally whiche preserueth
it in the trouthe acknowleged,
that it fall not away agayne from the
same.
            
               THE formal cause of ye true churcheThe formall cause
is the pure doctrine being absolute and☞
perfite in all effectes and iurisdiction.
For this doctryne is a sure signe and a
certein marke wherby the true congregacyon
is knowen frome the forged
churche. I vnderstande vnder this doctryne
the pure preachynge of the gospell,
and the lyuely effectes of the same
in the conscyences. For so dothe oure
shepeherde Christ discerne the doctrine
of false prophetes or hypocrites frome
the true doctrine where he saith.Math. viii. c. Take
hede of false prophetes whiche come
vnto you in shepes clothes, that is to
saye, in outwarde apperaunce of true
doctryne. For all that hole place muste

be referred to doctryne, but inwardly
saith Christ) they be rauenous wolues
y• is, tearing & plucking peces mēs cō
               sciēces
wt their wicked & false doctrine
by their frutꝭ ye shal know thē, y• is, by
theffectꝭ of their doctrine. Whether do
mē gather grapes of thornes, or figges
of breres, whether can hipocrites gyue
rest vnto mēs 
                  •
               sciēces wt their doctrine.
For by fygges & grapes be vnderstande
most swete frutꝭ of 
                  •
               science, as be peax
ioy, & tranquillitie. So euery good tree
maketh good frutes, y• is, good techers
wt their true doctrine, bring vnto the cō
               sciences
peax, ioye, tranquillitie. &c. A
corrupt tree maketh euil frutes, that is
the impure doctrine of hypocrites disseuereth,
confoundeth and disturbeth
the consciences. &c.
            I refer also vnto the pure doctrine y•
lauful vse of sacramentes, for this is a
parte of the pure doctrine. Item fre remission
of synnes which is theffecte of
pure doctrine. Also absolucion & excō
               munīcaciō
formed of the word of god,
all which I make here to be signes and
sure markes wherby the true churche
is kowen.
            
               ¶The causes of the hypocriticall
churche.
               
                  
                  AS to the outward shew & apperāce
the false & coūterfet church hath y• selfCauses.
same causes y• the true church hath.The churche of Rome. For
it hath the same gospel, the same bibles
the same sacramentꝭ, they ꝓfesse y• same
Christ, they glory of y• same fayth, they
ꝑscribe the same holy gost vnto al their
coūsels, & the same they dreme to be the
author of all their affayres & doinges.
But loke neuertheles how moche diuersitie
there is bitwene trouth & dissimulacion,
bitwene apperance of thīges &
the thīges self, bitwen a painted face &
a natiue colour, euē so moch difference
there is bitwene the causes of the true
churche & the causes of the feyned & hipocriticall
churche.Fryer forestꝭ churche. A lyuely exemple
of this hipocriticall churche is at this
day the popish assēble. For the papistes
do ascribe their church to be a societie
or felowship of outward thīges & rites
&c. wherfore they thē selues make their
church thexēplar of y• hypocritical cō
                  gregacion
& not I, namely sith it is apparaūt
yt the true churche is spiritual,
not of this world, neither cōmeth it wt
appointing & marking, & which is not
open & layd out to the eyes, but bileued
only by faith, accordīg to tharticle of
y• Crede, I bileue the catholike church.

Thexēple also of the ꝓphet Elias teacheth
the same,ii. Reg. xxi. c Roma. xi. a▪ This Baall amonges vs is the byshop of Rome the greate god of the erthe. who
                     •
                   when he sawe the
outwardly apparaunt membres of the
church, said to the lord, I only am left,
but the lorde answered, I haue lefte me
seuē thousand in Israel of which neuer
one mā bowed his knees vnto Baal, nor
kyssed him wt his mouth.
            
            
               ¶Theffectes of the true
churche.
               
                  DOVBLE effectes do aryse of theEffectes.
two sundry kyndes of men in one general
churche. But to ye true church these
effectes ensuing apꝑteyn which the true
churche worketh by thassistence & gouernaūce
of tholy ghost. To heare the
pure word truly. To receyue the word

                     〈◊〉
                   the hert. To byleue the word wt cōfidence.
To vnderstād truly the worde
herd receyued & bileued,Math. xiii. c. according to y•
parable of the sower where Christ expowneth
y• good seed the true churche.
To vse the sacramētꝭ laufully accordīg
as is appointed by y• word. For who so
reteyneth the pure worde, kepeth also
the sacramentes in the ryght forme being
a ꝑte of the word.Iohn̄. x. a. To loue the pure
word, accordīg to the saying of Christ.
My shepe do hear my voyce. To deꝑte
in no wyse from the true worde forasmoch

as the church is the pyller of the
trouth, bicause it is buylt vpō Christ y•
stone. To fle the vnpure word, none otherwise
then shepe do fle euil pastures
and yt by the commaundement of theyr
shepeherde Christ who byddeth thē beware
of false ꝓphetes & also of the leuē
of the pharysees.Math. vii. 
                        •
                      Math. xvi. To knowe & receyue
onely Christ for theyr herdman, heed,
iustifiour, sāctifiour and sauiour. For
what so euer holines the churche hath,
what so euer iustificacion, what so euer
clennesse, it taketh it al togither of
Christ. To be ruled of the holy gost to
thintent yt al the workes of the churche
maye be bothe lyuely and affectual and
also pleasaunt to god. To exercise the
keyes gyuen vnto them of Chryste and
to commytte the same to pryuate personnes,
to thende that the pure worde
maye be preached, and the free remissyon
of synnes in Chryste publysshed,
that men maye be comforted by absolucyon,
and brydled by excommunicacion.
To sacrifyce vnto god sacrifycesi. Pet. ii. H
                        •
                     bru. xiii. Roma. xii. Mat. xviiii. c.
of prayse, and spirituall sacrifyces,
euen of our owne bodyes, and the
frute of our lyppes. To be kepte from
erroure,rindx; accordynge to the sayinge of
Christ that the false ꝓphetes shal arise

and shal bring in to errour, euē the very
elect or chosē ꝑsons may erre finally
or to thende, euen bycause they be in
the hand of Christ, out of whose hande
no mā can take awaye. To obey euery
humane creature for y• lordes sake. To
haue of ꝓmise euerlasting life annexed,
and other īfinite rewardes ī this life.
To folow thrughly Christ as capiteyn
and leader in the doctrine & maners of
life. For so is Christ ꝓpowned in ye scripture,
as an exēple for the church to folow.
Sēblable effectes very many may
be yet gathered of the true churche, all
which y• scripture expresseth in ye name
of spouse by which the churche is signified.
Now,The propertes of a spous or bryde the offices & ꝑtes of a spouse
or bryde be, in all thynges to obeye the
brydegrome, to loue the brydegrome, to
haue a good hope & cōfidence in ye bridegrome,
to cleue only vnto him, to obeye
him, to fear & honour the brydegrome,
to be agaynst the dihonestie of y• bridegrome,
& to do all thinges yt may tende
to the honest fame & worship of him, to
reuerence, to magnifie & auaunce him,
to reioyse in the brydegrome, to be obedient
to his cōmaundement, to execute
his pleasure louingly & wt gladnes, to
vse in cōm
                     •
                  ne all his goodes togyther

with hī. &c. Al these thinges also ought
to be appropriate and be the very partes
of the churche towardes Christ the
brydegrome.
               
                  BVT now, albeit the spouse performeth
all these thinges truly & is made
handfast by tholy ghoste, yet is she not
called euen for these workes sake a
church īmaculate or vndefyled, holy, &
wtout wrincle, but for Christꝭ sake, who
hath halowed it,Ephe. v. putting him self in to
the vtter perils of death for his spouse
sake. Also bicause y• churche hath tholy
gost, yeuen her as a tuter or defensour
who by christ p̄serueth & gouerneth her
to thobteining of euerlasting life & the
hereditary goodes of Christ, to whō she
is espoused, which goodꝭ she alredy possesseth
in sure & certeyn hope.
            
            
               ¶Theffectes of hypocrites
in the churche.
               Theffectes of hypocrites in y• churche
be taken by the cōtrary of theffectes ꝑteyning
to the true church, as be these.
To hear the word but not purely. To
receyue the worde but not wt the herte.
To bileue the word, but not only. To
vnderstād after a maner the word, but
wtout frut. To vse the sacramētꝭ vnlaufully,
& wickedly to abuse thē. To loue

the word embrued wt mens tradiciōs, 
                     •
                  
 wt thē to cōtaminate the pure word. To
p̄fer or at lestway to matche mēs tradiciōs
wt the self word of god, and wt the
same to defete gods word. Of this effect
Christ accuseth the hypocrites in ye gospel
of Mat.Math. xv. b. where he saith: ye haue disanulled
the cōmaūdemēt of god thrugh
your tradiciōs. To deꝑte frō the pure
worde, according to the parable of the
sower, where Christ declareth the hypocrites
to be shrinkers frō the word,
bileuing only for a tyme. To embrace
workes besides Christ, & by the same to
seke rightousnes. To deny remission of
synnes by only fayth in Christ. To bost
& brag of the holy gost, but wtout regeneraciō
wtout liuely workes & pleasing
god. The reason is bycause hypocritꝭ
imbrace not purely christ, therfore the
holy ghost is not giuē thē, wtout which
all the workes of hypocritꝭ be deed. To
preche the vertues & benefitꝭ of workꝭ
euē as the godly preche ye powers vertues
& benefites of Christ.i. Pet. ii. To exercise
the keyes of y• church after their lust as☞
manye cruel factꝭ of bisshops of Rome
do testify. To abuse the keyes horribly
to y• oppressiō of the sincere word & effectes
of the same. To be holly conuersaunt

in outward & carnal thinges, according
to the saying of Chryst:Math. xxiii. Wo
be to you pharisees & hypocrites, for ye
make clene the outwarde partes of the
cup. &c. loke vpon the hole .xxiij. chap.
of Math. To worke without all frute.
For lyke as wt frute the true byleuers
worke their workes, bycause they byleue
truly, and bycause they be regenerate
& borne agayne of tholy ghost. So
the hypocrites bicause they wāt fayth
bicause they haue not tholy ghost, therfore
al theyr workes be deed and plese
not god. To sacrifyce vnto god outward
sacrifyces, by which they studye
to pacifie god. To haue alwayes troubled
cōsciences & full of feare,Esaye. xxxi. according
to the prophet Esaie. The siners
in Syon be made affrayd, fear hath possessed
the hypocrites.Mat. vi. xxiii Math. xxiii. To do workes to
thintent to be sene of men, and to be cō
                  mended.
To couet to be glorified before
men. To erre, according to Christ
where he sayth: False prophetes shall
aryse and bring in to errour. &c. Moreouer
god punissheth hypocritꝭ for their
vngodlynes, wt other sinnes & errours.
To be prompt and redy to suche thynges
as perteyn to this worlde, accordynge
to the sayinge of Chryst:Math xvi. a ye hypocritꝭ,

the face of y• skye ye can iudge,
and can ye not discerne the signes of y•
times. To take vpō thē tēporal power
as many exēples of bysshops of Rome
do teache, yea & the mēbres of the hole
popish church. To be frustrate of euerlastinge
lyfe, accordinge to the sayinge
of Iob.Iob. viii. Spes imperiorum peribit. The
hope of the vngodly shal perish. For the
ꝓmise of euerlasting life, ꝑteyneth only
to y• true bileuers, according to this
of Chryst.Iohn̄. viii. Who byleueth in me, hath eeuerlasting
life. Finally theffectes of hipocrites,The ꝓpertis of the aduoutrous church
or of the paynted & hypocritical
churche do appere most euidētly of
proꝑties of the bride y• is an harlot, for
she semeth in outwarde apparaunce to
loue the brydegrome, to bileue his wordes.
&c. where as in dede she doth in her
hert nothing lesse but rūneth a hooring
yea she cā not hertly loue y• bridegrome
bicause she receyueth no dowry for the
spousels of tholy ghost the handfaster
but rēneth a horing after straūge goddes,☞
namely y• pope the great god ī erth
& Babylonical strompet.
               Cōtraries to the church be these.Contraries. To
hold yt the churche began fyrst whē the
gospell was disclosed at the byrthe of
Christ. To say they be true mēbres of y•
                  
church which only do hear, & with the
mouth ꝓfesse y• gospel. To cut y• church
in to ꝑtes saue only for the. ij. kindes of
mē which vnder the generall terme of
churche be cōprised, yt is to wite of the
rightous & of the hypocrites. To holde
that the true mēbres of the church may
be deed in whom worketh not Christ n
                     •
                  
tholy gost.Popish
                        •
                      errour To mainteyn yt the churche
as it is truly & proꝑly takē for the congregaciō
of the holy is a tēporal kingdom,
which nedeth a secular arme worldly
defences, & that ought to be ruled by
mēs tradiciōs to the helth of their soules.☞
To deny yt the sayntes & true bileuers
be only the true church. To say y•
true churche which is of the faythfull
may be sene wt the bodyly eyes cōtrary
to y• article of faith I bileue y• catholike
churche. &c. To define the church to be
a felowship of outward thīges & rites.
To defend yt the true church may stād
wtout the pure gospel & lauful vse of sacramētꝭ
onles tyrāny letteth the same.Papisticall.
To say the church is only an outward
policy of good & bad, which errour defaceth
the kyngdom of Christe & ryghtousnes
of the hert, & taketh awaye the
holy ghost gouernour of the catholike
churche. For then it is byleued that the

churche is nothing els then a kepīg of
certeyn rites or seruices. To bind the
catholique cōgregaciō to certein obseruaūces,
against this of Christ.Obseruaun
                        •
                      The detestable heresye of papistes. My kingdom
cōmeth not wt obseruaciō or wayting.
To hold yt the catholique churche
is left to the bisshop of Rome or to any
other priuate ꝑsō to be administred at
his pleasure. This errour is against y•
euerlasting bisshopryche of Christ. To

                     •
                  old wt the fabryle Faber,The errour of Faber. yt the catholyque
churche doth not always p̄ferre
the word of god before mēs tradiciōs.
To say the catholique churche apꝑteyneth
to mē by reasō of power of dignitie
either ecclesiastical or secular.Papistes. To
hold wt the papistes, yt the churche is an
outward & sup̄me monarchie or raigne
of the hole worlde, in whiche the pope
hath a power irrefragable aswel vpō
the laytie as vpon the clergie, agaynst
whom it is leful for no mortal man to
resist eyther in dedes or in wordes. To
say the general churche may stād wtout
hypocrites. To bynd the true churche
to outward sacrifices. To say y• hypocrites
in the church be any other thinges
then a graue paynted outwardly &
wtin ful of deed mēs bones, yt is to saye
ful of vngodlynes. To make the hypocrites

the lyuely mēbres of the true
churche. To say hypocrites may be in
the churche wtout the foyle & contaminacion
of gods word, & of the sacramē
                  tes.
To deny yt the parte in the churche
of hypocrites is the cloke, visour, and
counterfeyture of the trouth. To make
here in earth a churche, wherin be not
both holy mē & hypocrites, cōtrary to
the place in Mat.Math. xiii. f. So shal it be ī thende
of the worlde, the aungels shal come &
seuer the bad frō the good. &c. wherby
is signified y• in the kyngdom of heuen
here in erth, yt is to say in the church be
both good & bad. &c.
            
         
         
            Of sklaunder or offence.
CA. L.
            SKlaunder bycause it ryseth in the
churche, therfore very cōueniently
it may be put af
                  •
                the title of church
which of necessitie is vexed with many
sclaunders & offences, according to the
saying of Chryst:Math. xviii. a wo be vnto ye world
bycause of offences, howbeit it can not
be auoyded but that offences shall be
giuē. &c. wherfore forasmoch as Christ
saith that offences or sclaunders do necessarily
chaunce, let vs diligently enserche

the causes of this necessitie. Ce
                  •
               
               tes
of thē selues sclaūders be not necessary,
neither ought they to be giuē, sith
Chryst hath ꝓhibite thē, but that they
shold perish which by y• iust iudgement
of god ought to perish, it must nedes be
that sclaunders be gyuen, which be as
it were meanes wherby the vngodlye
hypocrites be called away, & frayd frō
the trouthe, but it is a verye perillous
thing to gyue offendinges or sclaūders
vnto the godly, according to the cōmunicacion
of Christ in the sayd place of
of Math.☞ which although they be in the
hand of Christ, neither can be takē out
of his hand, yet wt offēces or sclaūders
to vexe & trouble their myndes, and to
make thē either to doubt of the trouth
of gods word, or to be the more remisse
or slacke in regardyng the same is vndoubtedly
a right haynous syn.
            
               ¶The diffinition of offending or
sclaūder in a generalitie.
               Sclaūder therfore in a generalitie isDiffinicion.
an offēce or greuaūce wherby the consciēces
are frayd away frō the doctrine
that they haue receyued and maners of
lyfe, & be prouoked & led away to the folowynge
of an other opinion and maners
of lyfe, eyther by doctryne or by

maners of lyfe.
               This general descriptiō of sclaūder
shal appere in y• declaraciō of ꝑtes. And
throughont the new testamēt testimonyes
do appere of y• doctrine & maners
of lyfe, whiche be principall causes of
sclaunder, as orderly shall be declared
hereafter.
               
                  THERE be two sortes of sclaūderDinision of sklaunder.
one wherby hipocrites or pharisees be
offēded, an other wherby the godly brethren
be offended: Of this sclaūder or
offence the scripture speketh more oftē
then of thother.
            
            
               ¶Of thoffending of hypocrites.
               Thoffending of hypocrites is a greuaūcewhat thoffending of hypocrites is.
of the right doctrine or necessary
workes cōmaunded in the word, which
the godly do gyue frely without synne
whyle they care rather to obeye god,
then men.
               Thexēples which throughout al theProbacyons
euāgelistes be recoūted do approne this
descriptiō of which the euāgelist Iohn̄
hath before other a gret nōbre, namely
in the second, thirde, fyfth, seuenth and
ryght chap. where Christ ꝑtly teacheth
partly healeth the sycke in the Saboth
daye. Also hyther perteyn all sclaunders
throughoute the newe testament,

where the hypocrites & pharisees togither
wt the scribes were greued wt crist
eyther bicause of his doctrine, or for necessary
workꝭ. For doctrine & necessary
workes be causes of this offendinge. I
cal necessary workes which either necessitie
or charite requyreth.Mark. ii. d. Math. xii. a Of necessitie
an exēple thou hast where the disciples
of Christ on the Saboth day passing
through the cornes, began to pluk
the eares of corne, at which the pharisees
were offended & cryed vnto Christ
lo why do they on the Saboth dayes yt
which is not lawfull?Mat. xii. 
                        •
                     . An exemple of
charitie yu hast where Christ healed in y•
Saboth day a man hauing a withered
hand & dryed vp.
               
                  VNTO necessary workes ꝓtein also
al fre maners and exemples of lyfe, yea
though they be not p̄scribed ne appoynted
expresly in gods word which neuer
thelesse be done of the godly wtout syn,
but the hypocrites be offēded wt thē by
reason of their 
                     •
                  stitutiōs. Thus were
the pharises & scribes offēded wt Christꝭ
apostles,Math. xv. a. only bicause they wasshed not
theyr hādes, whē they eate breed according
to the tradiciōs of y• elders. Thus
at this day while our hypocrites do seHoly water.
y• we suffre no lōger the water to be cō
                  secrate☞
                  
they be offended as thoughe we
had cōmitted a great offence. The cō
                  maundement
of god excuseth the godly
in this pharisaical offending. For they
haue for them a cōmaundement of god
concerning the pure & right doctrine, &
concerning necessarye workes wherwt
the neighbour for the most part is holpen.
This commaundement we oughte
to obey symplely, and these hypocrites
ought not to be regarded according to
this texte.Act. iiii. It behoueth to obeye rather
god, then men.☞ Nowe suche thynges as
the open & special commaundement of
god, excuseth not in the godly concerning
this kind of offēding,The christen libertie excuseth. yet the christē
libertie excuseth wherby the godly
be fre from al mens tradicions which
oftentymes the hypocrites preferre, or
at leest matche with gods worde, I am
moued to speake this of the christen libertye,
bycause the hypocrites requyre
speciall commaundementes of god for
euery work that the godly do.☞ For they
crye oute agaynste vs, that we haue no
commaundement of god to despyse or
neglecte the holywater and lyke tradicions.
               
                  THE causes of this offending,Causes. be the
holsom doctrine and necessary workes

wherby for the most ꝑte the neighbour
is holpen eyther in a tyme or in a place
which ought not to be done after y• tradiciōs
of the hypocrites or done agaīst
their fastīgꝭ or sēblable their 
                     •
                  stitutiōs
yea or agaynst the very Saboth day the
law of god, which neuertheles god setteth
behynd the vse & help of the neyghbour,
as many places & exēples of scripture
do wytnes, as yt of the prophete
Osee.Osee. vi. 
                        •
                     
                   Misericordiā volo, nō sacrificiū.
I wil haue mercy,Math. xix. b. & not sacrifice. Item
the Saboth daye (sayth Christ) is made
for man,Marc. ii. d. & not man for the Saboth day.
Wherfore the son of man is lorde euen
of the Saboth day. Also in the prophet
Esaie god sayth:Esay. i. d. offre me no mo oblacions
for it is but lost labour, I abhor
                     ••
                  
your sensing, I may not away wt your
new mones, your Sabothes & solempne
dayes, your fastinges also are in vayne
I hate your new holy dayes & fastingꝭ
euen from my very hert. They make me
wery, I can not abyde them. &c. Lerne
to do righte, applye your selfe to equitie,
deliuer the oppressed, helpe the fatherles.
&c.Math. v. d. Likewise Christ sayth: whē
thou offrest thy oblaciō at the aulter, &
there remēbrest y• thy brother hath any
thyng agaynst the, leue there thyne offring

& go first be at one wt thy brother
and then come & offre thy gyft.Necessarie worke what it is. Finally
by necessary workes ought to be vnderstand
not only such workes wherwt the
neyghbour is holpen, but also wherwt
we helpe our selues in necessitye, for yf
it be leful for me to help my neighbour
in y• Saboth day, how moch more may
I helpe my selfe.
               
                  THE partes of this sclaūder wherbyPartes.
hipocrites be offēded may be takē of
the foresaid causes, so that yu mayst diuide
the offēding of hypocrites in to y•
offēding which riseth by doctrine or teching,
& in to y• which ꝓcedeth of workes
or maners of lyuing.
               Theffectes of this offending Christ semethEffectes.
with one word to expresse where
he sayth:Math. xxi. d. who so euer shal fall on this
stone, he shall be broken, but on whome
so euer it shal fal, it shal grynde him to
poudre. So yt the chief effect of this offending
by Christes wordes is yt the hypocrites
be confoūded & destroyed whiche
by the iust iudgement of god ought
to perysh.Luc. ii. e For Chryst is put vnto suche
for a fall. &c.
               Other effectes also of this offendinge
may be fetched forth of the thinges annexed,
as induraciō of hert & cruel tyranny,

which the hypocrites being offended
wt holsom doctrines & necessary
workes do exercise against the trouth,
& against the prechers & publisshers of
the same. And albeit these effectes be euil
& horrible, yet the godly oughte not to
regarde thē.Act. iiii For it behoueth rather to
obey god, then men: though the guttes
of the hypocrites sholde brust, & of the
hole worlde.
            
            
               ¶Of offending the brethren.
               
                  THE sclaunder or offēce wherby the
brethren be offended,Diffinicion. is cōmitted when
weyke cōsciences be plucked away frō
the simplicitie & purenes of gods word
vnto these & those opiniōs & maners of
lyfe, either by false & vncerten doctrine
or by maners & exemples of liuing.
               
                  THIS diffinition is certeyn of gods
word.Probacion. For ye scripture alwais giueth cō
                  maūdemēt
of this sclaūder. As touchīg
doctrin Crist mouisheth wher he saith,Math. xviii. a Luc. xvii. a
who so euer offēd one of these litleones
which byleue in me, better it were for
him yt a milstone were hāged about his
necke, & that he were drowned in the
depth of the see, yt is to say, who so euer
ledeth away these litleons frō the purenes
&☞ simplicitie of gods word. &c. For
this worde sclaūder or offending signifieth

here proprely a griefe or a stomblinge
stocke wherby we be led awaye
frō the symple trouthe of gods worde,
through the diuersitie of opiniōs, whiche
he brought agaynste the same.Marke how the weake be offended. For
who is he in maner yt can fynde in his
herte to become a chylde agayne in the
kyngdom of Christ, but wil sauour beyonde
the worde of god, whiche thyng
whē the weyke ꝑsons se done: forthwt
they be offenctd, yt is, they be brought away
& plucked frō the symple worde,☞ &
yf vtterly they byd not farewell to the
gospel, at lestway they begin somwhat
to doubte of it, till at last they shrinke
clene awaye from the ryght & true doctryne
vnto straunge opinions. As touching
maners or exemples Paule euery
where maketh menciō namely. Ro. 14.
& 15. 1. Cor. 8. Gal. 6. Phil. 1.
               
                  ALBEIT it had bē ynough to haue
shewed false doctrine &Causes of the offending of the weake brethren. vncerteyn and
the euil maners or exēples of lyfe as general
causes of this sclaūdre, yet there
be other causes which may be brought
declarynge the very oryginall roote of
those general causes, which be these. Satan,
the euyll vnderstandynge of the
chrysten lybertie, dissencyon, lacke of
lernyng, presumption of the teachers,

batred of the neighbour, & sēblable causes.The de
                        •
                     yll
Now Satā is the cause of this sclaū
                  der
or offēding forasmoch as he impelleth
& stireth to y• same, & furthermore
he maketh the true doctrine to be suspect
bringing all thynges in to a rore.Mistaking of the christen libertye The
misvndestanding of the christē liberty
is cause, forasmoch as the rash christēs
whyle they bileue yt they be fre frō all
outward thinges as ꝑteyning to iustificaciō
which is tied vnto no obseruaciōs
or ceremonies, furthwt of y• christē
& spiritual libertye they make a fleshly
liberty, & thinke now al thīges to be lefull
vnto thē especially in the maners
of lyfe,☞ by meanes wherof inumerable
offendinges and sclaūders do aryse, of
which at this day Germany is ful:Dissen
                        •
                     ion of preachers. this
dissencion of the teachers is cause also
of this sclaunder, whyle they defende

                     〈◊〉
                   wicked & oftentymes folysh opinions,
as they do at this day, which wt
sondry heresyes disturbe the pure doctrine.
The lacke of lerning also of techers
is cause,Syr Iohan lacke lerning dothe moche harme. in asmoch as blind bouserdes
rush out at all aduentures suche
stuffe as they haue, & declare not sufficiently
the maters as they haue purpsed,
but leue the consciences of the hearers
doubtful & in the brires. For this cause

thapostle Paul wil y• a bisshopi. Timot. iii. 
                        •
                     
                   (that is
to say a teacher, a pastour, an ouerseer)
be apt to teache, yt is to say, which hath
the feat & cūning hansomly & properly
to declare his maters. Certes, the apte
& propre way of teaching, is to folowe
in teching the methodical forme of doctrine,
whiche is naturall indifferently
cōmon to all men, saue yt it excelleth in
some, & is more apparaūt by reason of
p̄ceptes & instructions which they haue
lerned to induce them. Frō which trade
& forme of teaching, who so euer abhorreth,
vndoubtedly shal neuer hansomly
instruct the cōsciēce of mē, neither shal
vtter & declare sufficiētly his purpose.
Neither do there wāt at this day exemples
herof in the church.Arrogancie. The arrogācie
of techers is cause of this offēding whē
one swelleth, whē one enuieth an other
whē euery mā wold be coūted best lerned,
whē no man wil be made a chylde
in the churche, & while they thus striue
for preeminencie & primacie, in y• mean
season the weyke brother is offēded, occasiō
is giuē either to forsake y• symple
& pure worde, or at lest to sclaūder it, &
bringe all thynges in doubte. But this
cause toucheth not onely the teachers,
but generally al that of hye mynd and

statelynes offēd y• weike brethrē, while
they declaring thē selues to moch spiritual,Hatred.
thinke al thīges lawful vnto thē.
Hatred to y• neibour is cause forasmoch
as sclaūdersarise of it, while y• brother
hateth the brother. The 
                     •
                  trary to this
cause s. Iohn̄ putteth charite,i. Iohn̄. ii. where he
saith, he y• loueth his brother dwelleth ī
light,Partes. & sclaūdre is not in him.
               
                  OF one sort is this sclaūder, wherby
the brethren be offēded of the false & to
fre brethrē, yet hauing respect to y• causes
this sclaunder may be deuided in toDiuision.
sclaūdre yt riseth of doctrine and y• ryseth
of maners or exēples of lyfe. Also
to the place of ꝑtꝭ of this sclaūdre may
be referred also an other sclaūdre whiche
the godly do suffre through y• happy
lucke of the noughty ꝑsons & hypocritꝭ
whyle they se y• al thinges ꝓspere with
thē. This offeding now adayes entangleth
many, whiche measure & wey the
goodnes of lernynge by the successe of
noughty hypocrites, as though their doctrine
were therfore sound bicause they
be in best reputaciō, & be coūted ye wise
the mighty, the ryche & great mē in the
world. Against this sclaūdre Christ oftentymes
armeth his disciples, cōforting
thē agaynst the sclaunders of the

crosse. Item thapostles euer among do
arme good myndes agaynst this offending.
And among other places this text
of s. Paul is notorious,i. Cor. i. d where he sayth:
Uyle thynges of the worlde and thynges
which are despised, hath god chosen.
&c. To this kynd of sklaunder perteyn
al bountiful thinges in the world
as wysdome, power, rychesse, greate
men. &c.
               
                  EFFECTES of sclaūder wherby
good mē be offended be these.Effectes of offendinge the weake. bretherne. To pluck
away the weyke brethren from the simple
worde. To make doubtful consciences
of the trouth of the christen doctrine.
To styre weyke myndꝭ to sclaū
                  dre
the true gospell, & to receyue false
opinions.Spritishe r
                        •
                     
                     
                     
                        •
                     our. To brynge to passe y• weyke
brethren shal folow euill exemples and
maners, which the rash brethren, & for
the most parte to moche spritish vse amonges
suche as haue not yet herd the
pure kynde of lernynge, or be not yet
throughly entred in the same. To chase
away weyke myndes from the gospell
causing them to condemne & vtterly to
disalowe it, and to returne agayne to
popyshnesse and wicked doctryne. For
the auoyding of these effectes the thretes
of Christ are to be red Math. xviij.

Item Ro. xiiij. and .xv. where amonge
other thinges thapostle saith: lose not
him with thy meate, for whom Christ
hath dyed.
            
            
               ¶Contraryes to the hole offendyng
or sclaunder.
               Contraryes to sclaunder be these.Contraries. To
say sclaunder only cōmeth of doctrine.
To holde y• vnto doctrine & maners of
lyfe all sclaūders can not be 
                     •
                  ueniētly
referred. To say of power, wisdom, riches
& other great thīges in the worlde
sclaūder neuer ryseth, where as in dede
these thinges be for the most parte causes
of euil maners. For power, wisdom
& ryches do chaunge verye oftentymes
the maners of mē. To deny the pharisaical
or hypocritical sclaūder wherby
the pharisees & hypocrites be offended.
For there is one general church in
which be bothe good & bad, godly and
hypocrites. To say no mā can so be offended
that he shal vtterly be destroyed
and lost. To hold y• the cōmaundement
of god ought not alwayes to be preferred
before sclaūder. To say the weyke
consciences haue always iust causes to
☞be offended, when they se cloked religion
& vngodly destroyed, or therfore cō
                  corde
bisturbed, debate raysed in the

church, cōminalties & empires brought
to nought, when the weyke cōsciences
se this thing done, they ought to cōfort
them selues wt this sayinge. It is better
to obey god then men. To hold yt scripture
forbyddeth al sclaūder.Scripture▪ forbyddeth not al man
                        •
                     r offendynge. For here
is ye sclaunder excepted, wherby hypocritꝭ
be offēded, which offending ought
not to be eschued ī such wise as we shal
deny the true doctrine, or leue necessary
workꝭ.Libertie is not alwyes to be vsed. To hold y• we must vse y• christē
liberty euery where ī al thingꝭ, & amō
                  ges
al mē, whether the weike be offēded
or not. This errour thapostle destroyeth
sufficiētly wher he saith. I am made
al thinges to al mē, weyke to the weike
&c. that I might wyn al men to Christ.Diffrence betwene maners and doctryne.
To say by the same reason we may vse
maners amonges all men as we vse the
right doctrine amongꝭ al. This errour☞
answereth s. Paul by his exēple,Act. xvi. 
                        •
                     
                   which
wt out doubt kept not in the pure word
& yet in the meane season thoccasion of
the weyke so requyring he suffered Timothe
to be circūcised. To hold it not
laufull to vse the libertie where stubburnes
is & not weiknes, or where mēs tradiciōs
or Moses lawes be matched
wt the gospell, or necessaryly requyred
vnto rightousnes. Against this errour

serueth the exemple of Paul,Gala. ii. a who durst
kepe Titus vncircūcised. To denye y•
charite is the maystres in moderating
& gouerning the sclaunders of maners
or in letting the same.
            
         
         
            Of the kyngdom or reigne of
Chryst. CA. LI.
            THe churche & the reigne of Christ
signifie al one thing wherin god
reygneth in his subiectes that be
godly by the word, & wherin the godly
do reigne ouer all spiritual ennemies,
ouer syn, y• deuil, deth, hel. &c. But forasmoch
as this word reigne or kīgdom
semeth to set out the name of church, &
to make it more triūphant & magnificent,
therfore I thinke it good to put before your eyes a cōpendious treatise of
the kyngdom of Christ.Discryption.
            
            The kingdom of Christ is spirituall
cōsisting in the cōscience, & making spiritual
subiectꝭ, yt is, which be led wt the
spirite, & in whom Christ reigneth by y•
holy spirite, & by his word here in erth,
but sitting on the right hād of god the
father to make intercession for his subiectes
& to defende them, yea & to gyue
them iustificacion & spirituall goodes
for euerlasting lyfe. This their kynge

as wel in doctrine as in maners of lyfe
is this spiritual kyngdom, his subiectꝭ
ought to folowe as their guyde & capteyn.
This reigne is begon here ī fayth
and spirite, and shall be fynysshed to
the ful perfection after this lyfe euerlastyngly.Probacions Iohn. 
                     •
                  viii. 
                     •
                  .
            
            
               THAT Christes reygne is spiritual
is proued by Christ where he saith: My
kyngdom is not in this worlde. Nowe
that whiche is spirituall agreeth onely
to the conscience, I call the reygne
of Chryste spirituall of theffecte that
it maketh spirituall eyther bycause the
subiectes of this kongdome be led and
ruled of this spirite, either bicause this
kyngdome onely stretcheth to spirituall
thynges, or finally bycause he maketh
his subiectes kynges ouer all spirituall
enemyes. It is called the reigne
of Chryste bycause Chryste is the author
of it, the preseruer and ruler in
this reygne or kyngdome. The holye
ghost and the worde be meanes wherby
and wherwith Chryste reygneth in
this kyngdome. For to this intent the
holy ghost is sent where Christ ruleth
that he shold glorify him, expound and
proclayme hym. Iohan. xiiij. xv. and
xvi. which mought lede in to al trouth,

that is, mought declare Chryst the kynges
wil in the hertes of the godly, his
ꝓclamaciōs, his cōmaundementes, his
benefites, and therwtall mought make
vs obedient subiectes. But al these thī
               ges
the holy ghost worketh not but by
the worde, as thapostle teacheth. Ro. x.
And left no man shold doubt eyther of
the power of Christ the kyng,The seats 
                     •
                   throne of Chryst. or shold
not know his seat, or wold thynke him
not to regarde his subiect, let hī know
that Chryste the kynge sytteth on the
right hande of god the father, of egall
power, and beyng with god the father,
bothe to defend his subiectes, in that he
is kynge, and to make intercession for
them in that he is preest.what rewardes the kyng christ sheweth to this subictꝭ Iustificacion
and euerlastynge lyfe be benefytes and
priuyleges of the kynge Chryst, wherwith
he hath rewarded, and yet dayly
dothe rewarde his subiectes, and whiche
by his continual sute, he obteyneth
and getteth for his subiectes. But now
what the subiectes ought to folowe in
this kyngdom, they must lerne of their
kynge Chryste as well in doctryne as
manours of life, and thus the scripture
propowneth our kynge Chryst vnto vs
for an exemplar whome we sholde folowe.
So Christ hath imbrased ye onely

wyll of god hath preached it & declared
the same to men.1. Pet. 
                     •
                  . So we in lyke wise beside
the pure & sincere worde oughte to
imbrase nothinge more desyreouslye ue
ought to prech & declare any thing more
often. And as ꝑtayneth to y• maners of
lyfe, so Christ being reuiled, reuyled not
agayne beynge euyll intreated, rendred
not euyl for euil. So Crist dysturbed not
temporal polycies, wherfore neither we
ought to disturbe them Christ bare the
Crosse paciently wherfore we ought also
paciently to suffre. Finally forasmuch
as this kīgdom is spritual & euerlasting
& not sene wt y• eyes. Therfore it is only
 wt faith & y• spirite espied & begon which
after this lyfe shal in the very thing self
be opened & made manyfest euerlastingly
& as thapostle saith euen face to face.
The causes of this kingdome be god theCauses of the reigne of Chryst.
father which ordeined it & with ꝓmises
confyrmed it christ in whome this kingdome
was constitute & whiche is y• king
herof. The holy ghost is cause in y• he sā
               ctyfyeth
& with sūdry gyftes furnisheth
this kīgdom. And lyke as these causes be
not carnall, but spirituall: so neither the
kīgdom institute of them can be carnal.
The meane wherby this realm is administred
is gods word by whiche the holy

ghost worketh in y• same. Now the way
that a mā may come ī to this kīgdom is
declared sufficiētly in the places before.
The kīgdom of christ is not diuided ī to
ꝑtes,One onely. spirituall kingedom of Chryst. for euē as there is one kīg of this
kīgdom, so his kīgdom is one y• is to say
spiritual cōsistīg in ye cōsciences of mē &
beginneth here ī faith to be cōsummate &
made perfecte after his life eternally.
            ¶Theffectes of the reigne of Christe,Effectes. be
partly taken of Christ the king, & partly
of the subiectes. Theffectes of the kinge
Christ be nothing els but benefites and
priuileges whiche god bestoweth vpon
his subiectes, & be these. To giue remission
of sinnes.☞ To delyuer & enfraunchese
the consciences from al outwarde thynges
as appertaining to iusti
                  •
               icacion. To
delyuer the subiectes from the power of
sinne & of deth. To defend the subiectes
frō the power of y• deuyl, of the world,
& frō a 
                  •
               uyls. To giue the holy ghost y•
may rule, defend, guyde, staye and kepe
his subiectes in his realme.Roma. viii. i. Iohn. ii. To make intercessiō vnto the father for his subiectꝭ
and play the aduocate. To make his subiectes
kinges ouer all spiritual enemyes
that is to saye, sinne, the deuill dethe,
hell, and the worlde also, accordinge to
the saying in y• reuelaciō of Iohn̄,Apoca. i. b where
is saide, that Christ made vs kingꝭ & prestes.

To make his subiectes prestes so y•
they may offre spritual sacrifices to god
accordīg to y• saiyng of pet.i. Pet. ii. 
                     •
                  
                Ye are made
a spiritual house & ā holy presthode for
to offre vp spiritual sacrifices acceptable
to god by Iesus Christ, & therfore y• subiectes
of this kīgdom be called a kingly
or royal presthode of ye saide Peter.1. Pet. ii. b And
of Iohn in his reuelacion they be caled
ye prestes of god.Apoca. i. b To reward his subiectꝭ
with euerlasting life which in faith and
spirite begineth here & shalbe ꝑfected after
this life eternally. Sēblable effectes
may be brought hither out of theffectes
of Christ set out before. Also out of the
places of abrogacion, & of the christen lyberty.Effectes procedyng of the subiectes. Theffectes of y• subiectes of this
kindome be gathered of thobediēce, whiche
they owe to their king Christ, to thī
               tent
they sholde folow him as wel in doctrine
as in maners of life, as. To loue &
imbrase the same word. To teach y• same
word that Christ taught. To cleue to y•
worde of Christ faithfully according to
thexemple of hym. To proclayme Christ
their king. To magnify him. To byleue
and haue affiaunce ī Christ that he will
saue. kepe and defende theym, and also
that he can do these thinges. Not to
shrīke ne swa
                  •
               ue frō Christe their kinge
trayterously vnto Sathan and his kingdom.

To execute louyngly al y• cōmaūdemētes
of theyr king Christ.☞ To deny thē
               selues.
& to thynk no goodnes of thē selues
ī respect of this christ their kyng. To
suffre by thexēple of Christ their kynge
paciētly. To fle vnto Christ their kyng
in tēptaciō or afflictiō, & not vnto weapōs,
vnto y• swerde wherwt y• mayst defēd
the, & that also by thexēple of christ
thy kyng, which whē he was afflicted ī
the crosse he fled by prayer in faith vnto
the father. To honour tēporal rulers, to
obey thē, not to chase thē away, not to
disturbe cōmō weyles, or to inuade empyres
& other mēs dominiōs, & al this by thexēple their kynge Christ. To loue
not only their frēd, but also their enemies
by thexēple of Christ, Not to rēdre euyl
for euyl, but good for euyl by thexē
               ple
of christ. To be seruaūt to al mē, & cō
               trary
to no mā, & y• by thexēple of chryst
theyr kyng. These & sēmblable effectes ī
numerable may be gathered of thobediēce
of y• subiectes of this kyīgdō whiche
for y• most part stādeth only ī imitaciō
yt subiectes shold folow Christ theyr
kyng in doctrine & in maners of life, & so
by all thinges obey Christ euē as he obeyd
ye father, &c. Itē ye tytle of church to
fore expoūded gyueth more effectes of
subiectes, for theris no difference bytwen

the church & the kingdom of christ
but y• in thexpounīg of the kingdom y• benefites
& pryuyleges of the congregaciō
be more euidētly espied which it taketh
at Christes hādes & him whō in this kīgdō
we cal king,Contrar
                     •
                  es. in y• church we called hed
¶Contraryes to y• kingdom of Chryste
are these. To graūt y• kingdom of ChristPapisticall Luke. xiii.
to be carnal or tēporal or of this worlde
To bynd Christes kingdom to outward
obseruacions contrary to this of Christ
My kingdome commeth not with markinge.
To say Christ the kinge of this
realme sitteth on the right hand of god
the father idle & nothing regarding here
in erth his subiectes.Therrour of Epicurians This errour is the
Epicurians erroure. To saye Christe ascending
vp to heuen left his kingdomeThe detestable here
                     •
                  ye of papystes.
here in erth vnto the pope his deputy to
be admynistred of him, which erroure is
againste the eternal reigne of Christ his
eternall byshoprich & presthode. To say
there may be true subiectes of this kingdom
which beleue not. To say Christ ruleth
his kingdom by other meanes thā
by the holy ghost & his worde. To deny
this kingdome to begin here in faithe &
in spirite & after this lyfe to endure eternally.
To hold that the subiectꝭ of this
kingdome owe an other obedience then
that whiche Christ their kinge vsed towardes

god y• father which was of all
y• most ꝑfect. To say Christ y• kīg in his
kīgdō is only to be folowed ī docrtine &
not ī maners of lyfe. To deny yt ī this
kingdō generally taken be hypocrites &
shalbe to thend of y• world.Chiliasts To bold wt
chiliastes y• Christ shal reigne here ī erth
a. M. yere wt y• godly in al kinde of pleasures.Anabaptystꝭ.
To graūt with the Anabaptistes
& the captaines of that errour yt is to say
Nicholas Storkey,Storkey. Monetary PiperyMonetarie Piperie.
& other new heretikes that y• godly here
in erth shal set vp a corporal & ciuyle kī
               dome
al the vngodly put downe. This
errour those furious ꝑsons haue taken
forth of y• psal where it is wri
                  •
               tē ī thisPsal. cxlix.
wise, let the saintes be ioyful with glory,
let thē reioyse in their beddes, let the
prayses of god be ī their mouth & 
                  〈◊〉
               
in their handes, that they may
be auenged of y• hethen & rebuke the people
that they may bynde theyr kinges in
chaynes & their nobles with lynkes of
yron. That they may be auenged of thē
as it is writen, such honour haue al his
sayntes. This psalm they haue carnally
wrested to their purpose wheras if it be
wel cōsidered it maketh nothinge with
thē al. Itē it is contrary to this doctrine
to forbyd vnto ye subiectꝭ of this kingdō
               
                  〈◊〉
                or ciuile workes. As to 
                  •
               er
                  •
                any

tēporal offyce, to play y• kyng, y• mayre,
the cōstable, y• sheryf, or any other īferior
rowmes, to bye to sel, or to exercyse any
maner of contracte in the worlde.
         
         
            Of resurrection. CA. LII.
            THe resurrectiō of y• deed is wherbiDiffinicion.
ī y• last day all mē shal ryse agayn
frō deth, y• good to euerlastīg lyfe
the wycked to euerlastynge punyshmēt.
            ¶Probacion of the diffinicion.
            Merueil not at this (saith christ) TheIoh v. e
hour shal come whē al y• are in y• graues
shal beare his voyce,Math. xxv. & shal com forthe,
they y• haue done good vnto the resurrection
of lyfe, but they that haue done euyl,
vnto the resurrection of dānacion.
            The vniuersall cause of y• resurrectiō
               Causes
is y• ꝓmyse of god, wherbi god ꝓmyseth
ī scripture y• resurrectiō. Hither also mai
be reduced suche places of scripture 
                  〈◊〉
               
treat of the resurrection, namely Esai.
36. 66 24. Dani. 12. Oseas. 13. Iob. 19.
            Beside the forsayd cause of resurrectiō
christ also is cause specially for y• godly,
according to Paul. i. cor. xv. where he ꝓueth
y• resurrectiō by thexēple of y• resurrectiō of
Christ ī this wyse. Chryst rose
frō deth to lyfe, ergo y• deed also shal rise
agayn. The same argum
                  •
               
               ̄t he vseth ī his
fyrst epystle to the thessa. ca. 4. wher he
sayth ī this wyse, for yf we bilyue y• Iesus

dyed & rose agayne, euē so them also
which stepe by Iesus, god wyl bryng againe
 wt him. In y• same place thapostle
also descrybeth the maner and forme of
the resurrection.Partes.
            
            The resurrection shall be one syngle
thing & cōmon to all men euen an vprysynge
aswell of the vngodly as of the
godly but vnto dyuers endes.
            Forasmoche as two sortes of mē shalEffectes.
ryse agayn a godly & vngodly▪ therfore
ther be .ij. sortꝭ of final effectꝭ to be made
of y• resurrection. The godly shall haue
these effectꝭ folowīg thē. To rise vp vnto
euerlastīg lyfe. To be wt the lord alwaies
according to Paules saying.Iohn. v. And
so shal we euer be wt the lorde.i. Thes. iiii.d The vngodly
shal folow these effectes. To ryse
again to euerlastīg punyshmētes.Iohn. v. To be
for euermore wt the deuyl & his aūgellesMath. xxv.
            
            ContraryesContraries to resurrection be these.
To deny with y• Sadduciās,Sadducians SymoniāsSymonians
Archōtykes,Archontiks HierarchytesHierarchits & other heretykes
the resurrectiō of the deed. To say
with the ChyliastesChiliastes. y• there shalbe after
the resurrection in erth a ciuyle kingdom
induryng a thousād yeres, in which shal
reygne the godly with Chryst in al kīde
of pleasure. To hold wt the SeleuciāsSeleucians y•
ther shal be no resurrectiō at all in tyme
to come but yt it is nowe dayly made in

the regeneracyon of the chyldrē of god
To saye with the heretykes of Araby y•
the sowle peryssheth togyther with the
bodye. To be of the same opinyon that
Many cheus was whiche sayd that his
hearers or disciples were resolued in to
y• electe or baytes of the elect & that the
other sowles returned in to wyld bestes
To hold with certayne heretykes y• the
sowles of wycked ꝑsons be conuerted in
to deuiles & ī to other beastes according
to theyr desertes. To say the deed forthwt
after theyr deth do rise agayn by thexemple
of Christ. Agaīst whō Tertuliā disputeth
ī his boke de resurrectione carnis, to
hold wt y• EpicuriāsEpicurians & wt certaī other philosophers
y• al thīges be at a poynt after
deth To hold with Marciō,Marcion Basilides,Basilides &
UalentinusUalentinus that we shal not rise again
in flesshe. To holde that the hole man
shal not rise againe but onely eyther the
flesshe eyther the soule eyther the spirite
against which errour disputeth copyously
Tertulian in his boke de resurrectione
carnis. To graūt a spirituall resurrectiō
after this life. To hold any other
causes of y• resurrectiō than y• promise
of god and the resurrection of Christ for
whose cause the godlye shall ryse again

                  •
                for whose contemte the vngodly shal
be dāned risinge againe to their eternal

damnaciō. To make two resurrections
one of y• flesh or body, an other of y• soul
or spirite. To holde with y• AnabaptistꝭAnabaptistes
that the soules of the damned persons
shall rise agayne the seconde tyme vnto
euerlasting lyfe whē they haue ones suffered
punishment ynoughe for theyr sinnes.
This erroure they haue takē by the
occasiō of that text in the psalm where
it is saide non imꝑpetuum irascetur deus
ne
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ineternū cōmouebit̄. God shall
not be āgry perpetually, neither shal he
be moued for euermore. Item out of y•
fourth boke of Esdras where hel is like
               
                  •
               ediiii. Es. iiii.d
to amatrix. To dispute fōdly & supersticiously byside the worde of god of the
maner & forme of the resurrection. To
iudge of the resurrectiō after the iudgement
of reason leauinge the word, like
as saduciansSaducians do iudge of the resurrectiō
in the gospel,Mar
                     •
                  . xxii.d. where Christ calleth them
backe againe frō the iudgement of reasonMath. xxii.c.
vnto the worde of god saying.Luc. xx.d Haue
ye not red in the boke of Moses. &c.
         
         
            Of euerlastinge life CA. LIII.
            EUerlasting lyfe is a certeyne & sureDiffini
                     •
                  ion.
knowlege of god & of our lord Iesus
Christ which beginneth here in
fayth vnder suer hope & in spirite & shal
be made manifest after this lyfe vnto ꝑpetual
ioye & imortall inheritaunce.
            
               
               ¶Probacions.
               As y• hast gyuē vnto him power ouerIoh
                        •
                     . xv
                        •••
                     
                  
euery flesh & all which y• hast gyuē vnto
him y• he may gyue vnto thē euerlasting
lyfe. Now this is the euerlasting lyfe y•
they shold know y• only to be y• true god
& whō thou hast sene Iesus chryst. The
rest of the diffiniciō ꝓueth thapostle Peter
in 
                     •
                  is first epistle. ca. i. Blessed be god
the father of our lord Iesus christ whiche
through his aboūdan̄t mercy begate
vs agayn vnto a lyuely hope by the resurrectiō
of Ies
                     •
                   christ frō deth, to enioy
an īheritaūce īmortall & vndefyled & vnperysshable reserued in heauen for you
which are kept by the power of god thorow
fayth vn to saluaciō which is p̄pared
alredy to be shewed ī the last tyme
whē ye shal reioyse, though nowe for a
seasō, yfnede requyre, ye are in heuynesse
thrugh manifold tēptaciōs, y• your faith
ones beīg moch more p̄cyous thē gold yt
perissheth, though it be tryed with fyre,
myght be foūde vnto prayse, glory, & honour,1. Corin. xiii.d
at the appering of Iesus christ. &c.
Also thapostle Paule, sayth: we se now
in a glasse euen in darke speakynge but
then shall we se face to face.
               Theffectes of euerlastīg lyfe appeare
also ī other places euery where ī scrypture,
as apoc. 21. 2 pet. 3. Esa. 36. 63. 66. &

they ought to be gathered by the cōtrary
of theffectes of euerlastyng punisshment
which abydeth for the vngodly.
               The cause of euerlastīg life is y• ꝓmisCauses.
of god. For bicause god hath ꝓmysed euerlastīg
lyfe to suche as bilyue in christ
therfore they receyue it. Therfore also y•
apostle calleth euerlastyge lyfe y• gyft of
god,Roma. vi. & in the fourth cha. to y• Ro. he ascribeth
the inherytaūce not to the law but
to the ꝓmyse. Christ is the ꝑsō for whō
god hath ꝓmysed eternal life & for whō
it is gyuē according to this of chryst.Iohn. v.
                        •
                     
                   Uerily
verily I saye vnto you he y• heareth
mi wordes & biliueth on hī y• sēt me hath
euerlastīg lyfe, & shal not come in to dā
                  naciō
but is eskaped frō deth vnto lyfe.
Itē, Chryst gyueth euerlastynge lyfe to
suche as cleaue vnto him by fayth according
to this.Iohn. xvii. All whom thou hast gyuen
vnto him he shal gyue them eternal lyfe
To these causes maye also fayth be added.
For fayth taketh holde of Chryste,
and so iustificacyon ensueth: but vnto
iustificacyon is eternall lyfe annexed.
               Eternall lyfe is not cut in to partesPartes.
but the scrypture calleth lyfe eternall
one certayne and perpetuall ioye in a
newe heauen and a newe erth in which
the godlye shall be euerlastynglye with
god and shal worshyp god according to

Esay the prophete:Esay. lxvi. And all flesshe shall
come to worshyp before my face.
               ¶Theffectes of eternal lyfe be takē chefly
of y• cōmodities and ioyes ensuyng inEffectes
the lyfe to come, & be these: To haue eternal
ioyes. For in the euerlastyng lyfe
shall cease all waylyng, all sorow, finally
all afflictiōs & sadnesse. Apoc. 21. And
god shal wype a way euery teare frome
theyr eyes.Esaye. lxv.
                        ••
                     
                   To ioy & reioyse euerlastyngly.Esaie. xxv.
To worship god perpetually not to
fele any more syn, deth, & persecucions.
For deth also shall be vtterly deuoured,Apoca. xxi.b
& god shal wype away euery teare, as a
fore I sayd. Certes these effectes & semble
of eternal lyfe be far frō all vnderstāding
of man. For euerlastynge lyfe is
suche a thyng as is beyond y• capacite of
mā, & aboue al humane thinges.Math. xxii.c As also
Chryst teacheth where he sayth y• in the
resurectiō of the deed,Luc. xx.d they shal neyther
mary nor be gyuen in maryage (that is
to say) no erthly nor carnall thyng shall
be in the euerlastynge lyfe.Mar
                        •
                     . xii.
               
               ¶Contraryes to eternall lyfe be these.Contraryes
To say there is any other more prīcipal
cause of euerlastīg lyfe then y• promyse
made to y• bilyuers in Christ.Papisticall To graūte
y• euerlastīg lyfe chaūceth for our workꝭ
or merites.Popishe errours To say euerlastīg life is a du
                  
                     •
                  eward
for our workes. To say frō purgatory

is y• way to euerlasting lyfe.The errour of the Anabaptistes To
hold y• y• wicked & the deuils shal ones at last
come to euerlastynge lyfe, after they
be ones sufficiently pourged. To drem,
any carnall thynge of euerlastyng lyfe
as of pypynge and dauncyng, of eating
and drynkynge, of delicate fare. &c. To
iudge of euerlastyng lyfe by natural reason,
leauyng the open worde of god.
            
         
         
            Of prayer. CA. LIIII.
            PRayer is an askynge with fayth of
some thyng of god,
                  
                     •
                  escriptino. with an effection
of hert, and is gyuyng of thankes
for benefytes receyued of god.
            
               THIS description of prayer is playn
bycause of the two kyndes of prayer,Probacion. peticion,
and thankesgyuyng: Concerning
the effection of the herte, we be aduertised
by the prophete Esaye.Esaye. xxix. d. This people
(sayth the lorde) approcheth vnto me wt
theyr mouth, and honour me with their
lyppes, but theyr hert is farre frō me. &c.
Concerning fayth Christ saith: Marc. xi.
Therfore I say vnto you, what so euer
ye aske when ye pray, b
                  •
               liue that ye shal
haue it, and it shall be done vnto you.
            There be two kyndes of prayer,Partes Inuocacion Peticion callyng
on, or petition & gyuing of thākes.
Callyng on or peticion is in which god
is called vpon in some thynge, or wherī
any thing is asked of god. To this kinde

of prayer perteyne suche psalmes as be
peticionarye or inuocatorye, in whiche
thou mayst very well beholde the force
nature, & forme of callynge on. Suche
be these psalmes. xi. xij. xxi. xxiiij. xxxiiij.
            Gyuynge of thankes is wherby weThankesgy
                     •
                  uynge
tendre and yelde thākes to god for the
hearynge of youre prayer, and for thynges
receyued of god. Unto this kynde of
prayer ꝑteyn suche psalmes as be demō
               stratyue conteynyng prayses and thankes
for the delyuery out of peryls, and
for other benefytes, as be these psalmes
the thyrde. xvij. xxix. xxxix.
            Causes of the hole prayer be, the cō
               maūdemēt,Causes.
ꝓmise, faith, & necessite.Iohan. xvi. 
                     •
                  
                Of y•
two former causes, thus speaketh christ
Aske & it shal be gyuen you. Item what
so euer ye shal aske y• father in my name
he wyll gyue it you. Of faythe speaketh
Paul Rō. x. How shall they cal on him
vpon whome they haue not bilyued
Itē Mar. xi. Christ sayth: what thynge
so euer in youre prayer ye aske, bylyue y•
ye receyue it & it shal be done vnto you.
Vndoutedly vnto christ for whose cause
we be herde of god ye father, is requyred
fayth▪ which taketh holde of the ꝓmyse
wherby god hath promysed y• we shalbe
herde in Christe. This faithe is espyed

very well in y• myracles of Christ in the
gospell, where alway before any myracle
was declared, fayth went before, although
y• euāgelystes haue not alwaye
set it out. Necessitie the fourthe cause of
prayer proueth Esay the ꝓphete where
he saythe.
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . Lorde in theyr straytes they
haue sought y•. So Susāna forsaken of
all begā to cry to y• lord:Daniel. xiii. Iones. ii. So Ionas the
ꝓphete being in y• whalles bely poured
out this prayers to god: so Dauid euer amōg prayeth in his necessitie & perils, he
is herde & gyueth thākes to god. So also
Christ ī the orchyarde prayeth.Math. xvi.
                     •
                   Mark. xiiii. d Luke. xxii. c And these
forsayd causes do ꝓprely belong to īuocaciō
or callinge on: Thākesgyuyng taketh
his propre cause of the duty. For in
that we be the people of god, god hereth
vs / yea & in maner he ouerwhelmeth vs
with his benefytes. Therfore we owe
of duty to rendre thankes, besyde which
god requyreth of vs none other recompensacion
or rewarde for his benefytes,
as euery where the scrypture testifyeth.
            ¶Theffectes of prayer yt demaundeth or
calleth on y• lord,Effectes of peticion and inuocacion. be these. To be herd of
god. To obtayn our demaūdes. To be delyuered frō euyls or perils. But these efectes
do not chaūce euē for y• selfprayer
sake, but for y• promyse sake added to the

praier, accordīg to this, aske & it shalbe
giuē you.Math. vii. d Now bicause Christ byddeth
vs pray, & hath ꝓmised hearing of y• father,
euē therfore we be herd. Furthermore
these effectes be brought forth of
god, & sōtimes they folow not y• praier
which thing neuertheles is not done wt 
out our gret vtilitie & ꝓfit.Note this s
                     •
                  
                  mylitude For like as
a wise &☞ prudēt father giueth not forth
wt al thinges to his son yt he asketh vnwisly,
or of other causes, so y• heuēly father
knoweth thopportunitie of tyme
whē to giue to graūt & to hear vs, and
y• for our incredible ꝓfyt, wherfore no
tyme of hearing ought to be appointed
vnto god. But when we haue made our
prayer, we must abyde wt al paciēce til
it pleseth god to graūt vs our requestꝭ,
frō whēs therfore ꝓcede these offices of
prayer. To pray alweis. Ec. 18. Be y• not
letted alwais to pray. Itē in y• gospel of
Luke we be cōmaūded of Christ still to
pray & not to faint.Luc. xviii. 
                     •
                  
                Loke there vpō the
parable of y• wicked iudge.Colos. iiii. i. Thess. iiii
                     •
                  
                Itē to be in
stāt in prayer. To pray wtout ceasing.
            Theffectes of giuing thākes of god be
these:Theffectes of thākesgiuing To praise god, to rēder thākes to
god, to magnify god, to 
                  •
               fesse his name:
These effectes be called in scripture y•
sacrifices of prayse, &Ebre. xii. f. frutes of our lippes,

which we offre to god for his benefites
towardes vs. Now as in theffectꝭ
of peticiō & inuocacion be excluded the
circūstaunces of time & of places, so al
               
                  ••
               
in thankesgiuing.
            Cōtraries to y• true prayer are these:
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . The erro
                     •
                   of fryers an monckes. The error of sayntment.
To make of prayer a worke yt of it self
deserueth iustificaciō, bearyng & other
thīges. To worship saintes: to cal on
saintes. To bind praier to certein circū
               stāces
of places, of times. &c. To pray
wtout faith & hope of hearing. To pray
wt a wauering mind. To pray wtout necessitie
or whē yu hast not occasiō to demaūde
any thing of god.☞ To mūble vp
certeyn psalmes or prayers ī vayne, cō
               trary
to the secōd cōmaūdemēt, yu shalt
not take y• name of god in vayn. Not to
pray or cal on god or giue thankes for
benefites receyued for hī, sith we haue
a cōmaūdemēt to pray, to call on, & to
giue thākes. To hold yt our prayers be herd of god euē for our workes sake bicause
we pray, & not bicause of y• ꝓmis
made yt the praiers shal be herd. To leue
praying whē god heareth vs not forthwt.The error of temple men. To expound y• cōmaūdemēt of scripture
of praying always, night & day
to kepe in y• tēple & to mūble vp prayers.
To pray to thītēt yu maist be sene &

praysed of mē, after the faciō of hypocrites
Mat. vi. To be a blaber & pytterpattererHypocrites Piterpatterynge
whē yu prayest. Mat. vi. To p̄
               fer
or matche prayers diuised of mē wt
the lordes prayer, named the Pa
                  •
               n
                  •
               . To
deny yt god doth defer the tyme of hearing
vs, to our own ꝓfite & cōmoditie.
To deny yt prayer maye be applied for
the necessities of other.
         
         
            Of rule. CA. LV.
            RUle is gods ordynaunce,Diffinicion. to appoynt
good and profitable thinges
to be done, to punish the fauty,
and saue the vnfauty, which is to be
obeied, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake.
            
               ¶Proues of this diffinition.
               
                  THERE is no power (saith Paul) but
of god,Roma. xiii. 
                        •
                     
                   the powers that be, are ordined
of god, who so euer therfore resysteth
power, resisteth gods ordinaūce. And
they that resist, shal haue to them selues
damnacion. &c. Hither ꝑteyn manysentences
out of the prouerbes of Salomō
which confyrme the ciuill & temporall
power to be the ordinaunce of god, as
this sentence: Per me reges regnant.
&c. By me the kynges reygne,Prou. viii. c and
prynces make iuste lawes, through me

lordes bear rule, & al iudges of the erth
execute iudgemēt. Here Salomō signifieth
y• the tēporal power is ordeined by
y• word of god.Prouer. xvi. b Itē he saith: Diuinacio
in labijs regis, ī iudicij
                     •
                   nō errabit oseius:
yt is, diuinaciō is ī the lippes of y•
king, & in iudgemēt his mouth shal not
erre. &c. The offices & ꝑtes of a ruler be
declared of thapostle Paul by these wordes:Roma. xiii. b
wilt y• be wtout fear of the power,☞
do wel thē, & so shalt y• be praysed of y•
same, for he is y• minister of god for thy
welth. But if y• do euil, thē fear, for he
beareth not y• swerd for nought, but is
the minister of god to take vengeaūce
on thē y• do euil. The selfe same offices
be put of Peter. i. Pe. ij. Furthermore the
ruler ought to p̄scribe & cōmaūd his subiectes
such thīges as be right ꝓfitable,
& to punish the euil, & saue the innocent
for the 
                     •
                  seruaciō of publique peax & honestie.
And lyke as rule is thordinaūce
of god, so the ordinaūce of the ruler &
his offices god ascribeth to hī self, lest
a mā sholde cōtemne thē or set them at
nought,Prouer. xxi. d accordīg to the said text of Salomō,
di
                     •
                  inaciō is ī the mouth of y• king
neither his mouth shal erre ī iudgemēt.
Itē a true measure & a true balaūce are
the lordes, & he is y• author or weightꝭ.
               
                  
Thoffice of the ruler 
                     •
                  cerning the p̄
                  scribing
of right & ꝓfitable thīges in a
cōmon wele is set forth by a goodly descriptiō
of Cicero in his. ij. boke de legibus.Cicero.
But 
                     •
                  cernīg our obediēce towardꝭ
y• ruler,Roma. xiii. b thus writeth thapostle ī his epistle
to y• Ro. wherfore ye must nedes obey
(saith Paul) not for feare of vengeaūce
only, but also bicause of cōsciēce,
y• is, y• the 
                     •
                  sciēce be not spotted wt syn.
Hither ꝑteyn such sētēces ī the ꝓuerbes
of Salomō as teche yt rulers are to be fered,
as Pro. 16.☞ Indignatio regis nūciū est
mortis, at vir sapiēs placabit. The
kinges displesure is y• messēger of deth,
but a wise mā wil pacify him. Itē in an
other place. The terrour of the king is
as the roring of the lyon, he y• offēdeth
him his soule synneth.
               
                  THE causes of rule be these:Causes. God
whose ordinaūce it is, & the ꝑsōs ordeyned
to elect the ruler (where as it goeth
by electiō) or a iust tytle of inheritaūce
(wher it goeth by successiō of blood) to
thintēt al thīges be done in order. The
formal cause is takē out of the priuileges
of themperours, kinges & princes,
or by any othervsage wherby the ruler
is constitute.
               
                  OF tēporal rulers,Partes. some is superiour

and heed, other be inferyours & vnder
powers.
               Theffectes of the magistrate or rulerEffectes.
be his selfe offices whiche he exerciseth
for the ꝓfite & auayle of his subiectꝭ, as
To p̄scribe yt is egall & profitable. To
ordeyn & institute a certeyn & sure policy
stablysshed wt good & honest lawes.
To defend y• giltles,
                     
                        •
                     . Petri. ii. to punish y• gylty,
to put of wronges. To maynteyn tranquilitie
& quietie. To defēd a peasible &
quiet life, for to y• purpose will thapostle
y• subiectes shold pray for their kynges,
euē yt we may lyue (saith he) a quiet
&
                     
                        •
                     . Timot. ii. b peasible life in al godlines & honesty.
To reuēge wrōges done to his subiectꝭ.
To punish euil.Roma. xiii. a To be dred of euil doers.
To p̄serue & 
                     •
                  serue a publique honesty
& peax ī the world. Of this effect & office
haue writtē many excellēt, wise, & politikely
lerned mē,Plato. Aristotle. Cicero as Plato, Aristotle, Cicero
& other. To accept y• word of god
according as is cōmaūded in y•. 2. psal.
Nūc regis ītelligīte. Now ye kinges be
ye wise, be ye lerned, ye yt are iudges of
the erth. Serue ye the lorde wt feare. &c.
Now, to serue the lord wt feare, is to receyue
& take his word. Itē thoffice & ꝑtes
of a prīce is to se the true & syncere
religiō of god be set forth to his subiectes,

according to thexēple of Salomō
                  ii. Pat. viii. c
who ordeined the offyces of the prestes
by certeyn courses and dayes. Item according
to thexemple of king Iosaphat
ij. Par. xviii. of Ezechias. ii. Par. xviii.☞
Item in the boke of Iosue. ca. viii. it is
writen how Iosue the capteyn red vnto
the people the boke of Deut. euen al
the wordes of the lawe, bothe the blessynge
and cursynge, accordynge to all
that is written in the boke of the lawe.
Finally it is the offyce of the ruler to
nourysshe and maynteyne the teachers
of the pure relygion, vnto whiche offyce
the prophet Esaye exhorteth the rulers,Esaye. xli
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     
                  
where he writeth that kynges shal
be the noursyng fathers of the churche
and quenes shall be the noursynge mothers.
               Cōtraryes to the lauful rule & temporal
power be these.Contraries and errours To deny that temporal
power is the ordinaunce of god,
contrary to the open place of Paul. Ro.
xiii. To saye in depressynge the dignitie
of temporall power that is thordinaunce
of nature. To hold that temporal
rule is a casual ordynaunce, which
men ordeyned amonges them selues by
fortune and chaunce, as they dyd other
thynges. To saye that an vngodly

ruler ought not to be obeyed in tēporal
or ciuil thinges,☞ cōtrary to thexemple
of Ioseph, of Daniel & other saintes
which haue lyued vnder wicked maiestrates,
in high obediēce. To hold that
the gospel dothe abrogate ciuil power,
wheras in dede y• gospel only ꝑteyneth
to the cōscience, & in such thīges as we
haue to do wt god.Euen tyrant oughte of a christen man to be obeyed. 
                        •
                     . Pet. ii. c To denye y• we owe
obediēce in al ciuil thīges vnto euil Magistrates
& tiraūtes, cōtrary to y• place
of Peter which requireth obediēce vnto
the heedes, not onely yf they be good &
curteous, but also yf they be froward.
To say there is any other cause of disobediēce
of som subiectꝭ towardes their
rulers then the iudgemēt of reasō. For
wheras reason vnderstandeth not y• the
tēporal power is the ordinaūce of god
it disdeyneth & thinketh it a thing vnworthely
to obey. To deny y• a good ruler
is a synguler gyft of god, 
                     •
                  trary to
the place of Ecclesiasticus where it is
said.Ecclesia. x. a. The power of y• erth is in the hād
of god, & whē his time is he shal set a ꝓfitable
ruler vpō it. To deny yt an euil
ruler is giuē for the synnes of mē, 
                     •
                  trary
to this of the ꝓphete. For the synnes
of the people hath he made hypocrites
to reigne, also the prophet Esaie. ca. iij.

I shal giue children to be their princes
(saith y• lord) & babes shal haue the rule
of you. Itē Salomō saith in his ꝓuerbꝭ.Pro. xxviii. a.
Bicause of syn the lād doth oft chaūge
her prince. To graūt y• subiectes may a
uēge thē selues of their own iniury, cō
                  trary
to this of Christ.Mat. xxvi. e Iohn. xviii. b He y• striketh wt
the swerd, shal wt the swerd perish. To
deny yt the coūsels, the statutes, iudgemētes,
& the reignes of kinges & rulers
be of god, cōtrary to these places folowing.
Pro. 6. Diuinaciō is in y• lippes of
y• king. Itē Iob. God casteth not away
the mighty ones bicause he him selfe is
mighty. Pro. 21. The hert of the king is
in the hād of the lord, lyke as y• ryuers
of water he may turne it whither so euer
he wil. Itē the weightes & euē measures
be the iudgement of the lorde. To
hold we ought to obey rulers, cōmaunding
wicked thinges,Act. iiii. d 
                  
                     •
                  trary to this of
Pe
                     •
                  . it behoueth rather to serue god thē
men. Neither wold Mathathias as we
rede ī the first of the Machabees ne hisi. Macha. ii. b
sōnes in any wise obey the king Antiochus
cōmaūding to sacrifice to ydols
agaīst the cōmaūdemēt of god. In lyke
wise neither y• ꝓphet Balaā wold obey
kyng Balaac.Numer. xxii. To say yt the electiō of publique
officers & magistrates doth not

rather ꝑteyn to prīces, aldermē or such
as be in authoritie, thē to the multitude
of subiectes, which for their rudenes &
lak of experiēce in ciuil thīges be for y•
most ꝑte voyde of iudgemēt & blynded.
To hold y• the felicitie of cōmō weales
stādeth in altering rulers. To disturbe
the cōmō peax for the electiō of y• ruler
To pluk violently vnto thē the electiō
of the ruler, agaīst y• old priuileges lawes
& customes. To vsurpe y• office of
a king or ruler wtout lauful calling or
electiō. To hold yt god doth ꝓspere such
ruler as violētly or tyrānically, y• is, wt
                  out
lauful vocaciō vsurpeth any rule,
cōtrary to the opē exēples of histories
& very experiēce. To graūt yt any impe
                  
                     •
                  eis
or kingdoms may be cōstitute & ruled
wtout heroicall mē īdowed wt noble
& heroical vertues, for which ma
                     •
                   loke
vpō Plato.Plato. ii. de Legibus. To diuide y• ciuil magistrate
or ruler in to the seculer & spiritual ruler.
To deny y• such subiectes as resist y•
tēporal power & refuse oftētimes light
burthens be not more greuously punisshed
of god,
                     
                        •
                     ier. xxviii. d as the ꝓphet Ier. also witnesseth.
Thus sayth the lord, y• hast brokē
the cheines of wod, and y• shalt make
for thē cheynes of yron.☞ To deny y• the
disobediēt & sedicious subiectes agaīst

their prynce & ruler be most greuously
punisshed of god, accordīg to thexēple
of Dathā, Abirō, & Chore, as is red in y•
boke of Nu. 16.ii. Reg. xv. Itē according to thexē
                  ple
of Zambry.
               
                  TO say there may be such a prince or
ruler as may plese al his subiectꝭ wheras
y• good king Dauid 
                     •
                  trarily was reported
of Absolō his own son y• he was
not egal ī iudgemēt vnto y• people, also
Salomō yt he greued the people to moch
To forbid wt the Anabaptistes tēporal
power vnto christē mē,Holy & godly persons haue borne rule. cōtrary to the
opē exēples of scripture wheras Ioseph
& Dauid which bileued ī Christ bare tē
                  poral
rules, Cornelius as we rede ī the
actes was an officer of Rome. Itē y• Cē
                  turiō
in the gospel wt infinite other. To
forbid vnto christē rulers batels in defēce
of their subiectꝭ, executiō of iudge
mētes wt the swerd vpō y• trāsgressours
& other ciuil offices wherby realmes &
īperies be kept, mainteined & cōserued.
So Abrahā was a christē mā for y• faith
which he had in Christ, & yet neuerthelesse
he made many warres. So king Dauid
& other. To say yt to play the ruler
is to play the thefe & robber.A wycked 
                        •
                      knauishe errour This errour
is against the honestie of y• offices
of kynges & rulers whose offices be to

defend his honest subiectes, to kepe cō
                  mō
peax. &c. whiche offices to do, is not
to play the thefe. For although there be
foūd some rulers which do exercise robberyes
pillagies & theftes, yet the office
remaineth of it self good, neither ought
it to be dispraysed, bicause of certeyn euil
officers.Math. xx. c. To hold by this place of y•
gospel, the kynges of the gētyles haue
rule ouer thē. &c. that a christē mā can
not bear office or rule. This errour sprī
                  geth
of the misvnderstāding of the cō
                  parisō
where Christ cōpareth the apostles
which were subiectes wt kinges cō
                  stitute
in lauful rule. To deny vnto rulers
their customs, tributes & taxes to y•
sustētaciō & maintenaūce of their empyre
or kingdō, cōtrary to the place of
Paul. Ro. 13. wher he saith, giue tribute
to whō tribute belōgeth, custom to whō
custom is due. &c. To deny due reuerēce
to the ruler,Roma. xiii. b cōtrary to Paul, who saith
giue honour to whō honour ꝑteyneth.
To depose & put downe the magistrate
& ruler by y• subiectes & to make new rulers,☞
where as their formar rulers wil
not receiue y• gospel, which errour was
in maner y• destructiō of a sort of cities
in Germany. To neglect the office cō
                  mitted
vnto hī, or negligētly to regarde

his office. For wheras the scripture p̄
                  scribeth
to officers and publique ministers
their offices, it wil haue them also
accordingly to execute the same, to defende
the good & punish the bad. Hither
ꝑteyn such exhortaciōs in the ꝓphetesErnest adm
                        ••
                     nistracion
as exhorte the rulers to ernest administracion
of the cōmon wele, as Esaie.☞ i.
Lerne to do right, apply your selues to
equitie, deliuer the oppressed, helpe the
fatherles to his right, let the widowes
cōplaint come before you. Itē the ꝓphet
Zach. ca. 7. Execute true iudgemēt. &c.
To regarde slouthfully y• offices of a ruler,
whē y• seest thy subiectes rebellious
& sedicioꝰ, which euil by litle & litle destroyeth cōmon weales.
            
         
         
            Of wedlocke. CA. LVI.
            WEdlok is the laufull couple of mā
& wife,Definicyon ordeyned indissolubly to
bring forth children, & to eschew
fornicacion.
            
               THAT matrimony is the couple ofProbacyon
                     •
                  
               
man and wife doubteth no man. This
word (lauful) excludeth al gyle & fraud
which may chaūce about ꝑsons cōtracting
matrimony. Now the formar effect
of matrimony, which is, y• it is ordeyned
to the procreacion of yssue, proueth

the place of Gene. ca. i. Cressi
                  •
               e et multiplicamini.
Encrease, & be ye multiplied.
The latter effect declareth Paul
to the Corin.
                  
                     •
                  . Corin. vii. writynge: It is good for
man not to touche a woman, neuerthelesse
to auoyde fornicaciō let euery mā
haue his wyfe, and let euerye woman
haue her husband. As touching the institution,
god did institute wedlocke. Ge.
ij. I added this terme (indissolubly) that
is to saye, vndepartably or wtout breakyng,
that a man shold not thinke that
wedlocke ones lawfullye made can be
vndone & broken, which thynge Chryst
him self forbyddeth saying. That god
cōioyned,Mat. xix. a let no mā separate. Howbeit
where aduoutry cōmeth bitwene, there
is no longer wedlocke. For the ꝓmesse gyuen
is broken, wherfore in such case
it is lawful, according to the doctrine
of Christ to seperate the persons whiche
before were contracted in matrymonye.
            Causes of wedlocke be these:Causes. God the
instituter, the cōsent of the parētes, or
of such as supply their rowmes, & of y•
ꝑsons cōtracting. Itē the lawes as wel
natural as politique, the customes of y•
coūtrey. &c. For matrimony belongeth
also to ciuil & politique thinges, wherfore

the lawes of nature, of prīces, the
customes of the coūtrey may not be neglected
about matrimony.
            Wedlok is of one kynde,Partes yt is to wi
                  •
               e,
the lawful couple of mā & wife, by the
agrement of bothe.
            
               THEFFECTES of wedlocke be
these.Effectes of matr
                     •
                  monye. To bring forth children. Gene. i.
This effect although it proprely belongeth
to wedlocke, yet it chaunceth not
without the singuler blessing of god or
gift of the lord, wherwith god rewardeth
suche as feare him, accordinge to
the prophete:Psal. cxxvi
                     •
                  . Blessed are all they that
feare the lord and walke in his wayes
thy wyfe shall be as the frutefull vyne
vpō y• walles of thy house, thy children
lyke the olyue braunches round aboute
thy table: lo, thus shal the mā be blessed
that feareth the lorde.i. Cor. vii. a To be a remedy
agaynst fornicacion. To be a signe of
gods wil towardes vs in yt we knowe
this kynd of lyfe please god, & therfore
is decked with the promises of god, and
wt the worde. To be a token of the spiritual
wedlocke and felowship, which
is bitwene the church and Christ,Ephe. v. 
                     •
                  
                according
to Paul. This is a great mistery,
but I speke bitwene Christ and the congregacion.
            
               
Cōtraryes to matrimony be these.Contraryes To
say matrimonye is not thordinaūce of
god, but mās inuēciō. To say matrimony
is a sacramēt, iustifieng euen of the
very worke selfe.Poligamie, that is, the hauing of many wyues togyther is forbydden. To holde a man may
haue by gods lawe mo wyues at ones
thē one, cōtrary to the first ordinaūce
of matrimony. Ge. 2. And they .ij. shall
be one flesh. &c. Neither is there red any
cōmaūdemēt in the old testamēt for the
hauing of many wiues, although exemples
do testify yt it was ī vre, & ꝑchaūce
also suffred at those times for increase
of yssue or for other causes. But y• newe
testamēt doth vtterly forbyd the hauīg
of many wiues, & that by thauctorite of
Christ, who bringeth vs back agayn to
the true instinct of nature, & right ordināce
of god.☞ To hold it a lauful matrimony
y• is cōtracted agaīst gods lawes
of princes, vsages of the coūtrey, 
                  •
               sent
of y• parētes, or of such as rep̄sent their
rowme, against the cōsent of the cōtractours
or whiche is cōtracted bitwene
ꝑsons impotēt vnhable & vnmete to the
same. To hold y• certeyn matrimonies
cōtracted agaīst some of y• causes afore
said ought to be dissolued & brokē after
they be made, & can not be vndone. To
hold yt it is lauful about matrimony to

vse al maner of gyle & fraud.Math. v. xix. To say y•
bare cōsent of the mā & wyfe ought to
make matrimony. To say matrimony
may be broken for any other causes thē
for only aduoutry. To say sycknes or
other chaunce of fortune,Forbydding of wedlocke is the doctrine of deuyls i. Corin. vii. 
                     •
                  
                either ꝓsperous
or aduerse may breke matrimony
ones laufully cōtracted. To hold yt the
infidelitie or vnfaithfulnes of eyther
of the ꝑsons in matrimony breketh matrimony,
cōtrary to the apostle. 1. Cor.
7. To say it were not better to marye
then to burne in outwarde concupisscence
& lustes. To exercise frowardnes
and vngentlenes in matrimony.
To regarde matrimony slouthfully,
or not to susteyn louingly
suche thynges
as pertayne
vnto it.
(?)
            ¶The ende of the common
places of Erasmus
Sarcerius.
            
               
                  •
               ELOS.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶The table of the common
places handled in this
presente boke.
            
               FYrst an epistle to y• kyngꝭ maiestie.
               Of God. Folio. i.
               Of god the father. fo. ii.
               Of god the sonne. fo. iii.
               Of god the holy ghost. fo. viii.
               Of predectinacion. fo. xii.
               Of contingencie. fo. xvii.
               Of creacion. fo. xx.
               Of creatures fo. xxii.
               Of aungels or good spirites. fo. xxv.
               Of euil spirites or aūgels. fo. xxviii.
               Of man. fo. xxxii.
               Of the olde man fo. xxxiiii.
               Of the newe man. fo. xxxvi.
               Of fre wyll fo. xxxviii.
               Of fre wyl before the fall fo. xxxviii.
               Of fre wil after the fall fo. xl.
               Of synne. fo. xliiii.
               Of oryginal synne fo. xlv.
               Of actual synne fo. l.
               Of venial synne fo. lvii.
               Of syn against tholy ghost fo. lviii.
               Of the lawe. fo. lx.
               Of the law of nature fo. lx.
               Of the law of god fo. lxiii.
               
                  
Of moral lawes fo. lxvi.
               Of lawes iudicial fo. lxviii.
               Of ceremonial lawes fo. lxviii.
               Of humane lawes fo. lxxi.
               Of the gospell. fo. lxxiii.
               Of fayth fo. lxxvi.
               Of iustificacion fo. lxxxii.
               Of hope fo. lxxxv.
               Of loue towardes god fo. lxxxviii.
               Of loue towardes the neyghbour. fo. xc.
               Of good workes fo. xcvi.
               Of fulfyllynge the lawe fo. cv.
               Of the abrogaciō of the lawe fo. cx.
               Of the christen libertie fo. cxv.
               Of the crosse fo. cxix.
               Of humilitie fo. cxxv.
               Of sacramentes or signes fo. cxxvi.
               Of baptisme fo. cxxix.
               Of the souper of the lorde fo. cxxxiii.
               Of sacrifice fo. cxxxix.
               Of repentaunce fo. cxlvii.
               Of contricion fo. cliiii.
               Of faythe the other parte of repentaunce. fo. clv.
               Of confession before god fo. clvi.
               Of open confession fo. clix.
               Of confession priuate. &c. fo. clx.
               Of auriculer or eare cōfessiō. fo. clxii.
               Of satisfaction fo. clxiii.
               
                  
Of pardons fo. clxvi.
               Of the eclesiastical power fo. clxvii.
               Of the popysh power fo. clxxij
               Of mens tradicions fo. clxxiiii.
               Of the church or 
                     •
                  gregaciō. fo. clxxvi.
               Of sclaunder or offending. fo. clxxxvi.
               Of the kyngdom of Christ fo. cxciii.
               Of resurection fo. cxcvii.
               Of euerlasting lyfe fo. cxcix.
               Of prayer fo. cciii.
               Of rule fo. ccv.
               Of wedlocke. fo. ccx.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            Imprinted at London by Iohū
Byddell, dwellyng in Fletestrete
at the sygne of the Sonne ouer
agaynst the Cundyte. In the
yere of our lorde god. M.CCCCC.xxxviii.
            
               Cum priuilegio.
               ❧
               ❧
            
            
         
      
   