
      
         
            
            
            The famous game of Cheſſe-play, Truely diſcouered, and all doubts reſolued; So that by reading this ſmall Booke thou ſhalt profit more then by the playing a thouſand Mates. An Exerciſe full of delight; fit for Princes, or any perſon of what qualitie ſoeuer.
            
            
               Newly publiſhed by A. S. Gent.
            
               If on your man you 
                     •
                  ight
               The firſt draught ſhall you play,
               If not tis mine by right
               At firſt to lead the way
            
            Printed at London for Roger Iackson, and are to be ſould at his ſhop neere Fleetſtreet-Conduit. 1614.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT Honourable and Vertuous Lady, the Lady LVCY, Counteſſe of Bedford, and one of the Ladyes of her Maieſties Priuie-Chamber, A. S. wiſheth all gifts of Honour, with eternall happineſſe.
            
            
               RIGHT Honourable and vertuous Lady, hauing receiued many courteſies from your Honourable Father, late deceaſed; whoſe miſse hath cauſed many to mourne for the loſſe of ſo Honourable and worthy a friend, and from your Honourable and worthy ſelfe, who in duty I doe euer reuerence, I haue in deſire of ſhewing thankfulnes made bould to preſent to your Honour this ſmall Booke, hauing no other gift to tender you; and knowing you euer to

be a fauourer of all Vertue: Therefore may it pleaſe you to accept this Worke, being a Princely exerciſe, whoſe grace will be a chiefe ornament to the ſubiect I treat of: It is the diſcouery of all the ſecrets of Cheſſe-play, which of all other games is the worthieſt that euer was deuiſed, and hath beene practiſed now 2227. yeers. This therefore being ſo excellent a game, and ſo much eſteemed of by the Nobility and Gentry of this our Kingdome, as alſo in all other Countryes in Chriſtendome. This conſidered, J haue therefore imbouldned my ſelfe to referre the peruſing hereof to your Honour, and my ſelfe to your good opinion, which I tender as that I eſteeme moſt deere: euer remayning in all duety at
            
               Your Honours commaund Arthur Saul.
            
         
         
            
            To the courteous Reader.
            
               THere haue beene diuers which haue written of the game of Cheſſe-play, who haue neglected to write the particulars of the Game, but haue ſpoken ſome thing which is as much as nothing, for the inſtruction of the Reader: therefore doe I imagine they wrote all they knew, or otherwiſe, not ſo much as they might; wherefore Courteous Reader, if it ſhall pleaſe thee to read this ſmall Booke, which to doe will ſoone be performed, thou ſhalt finde in it more then yet hath beene written by any other; in very briefe manner. In this booke ſhalt thou learne firſt; the manner how to place the men; next their quality or worth; after that to know how they ought to be playd: then followeth that you vnderſtand the Lawes of the game rightly: and after I haue ſhewed thee ſome reaſons that there can be no rule for this game (as ſome hold

opinion) then ſhalt thou finde many pleaſing playes to giue thee delight and incouragement to proceede in exerciſing this game Alſo thou ſhalt learne directly what a darke Mate is; and likewiſe what a Stale is, and how it falleth out that it is giuen; and laſtly, how to giue a Mate all the men being in the field at two draughts without a guard, ſo that the King checked ſhall haue no couer nor meanes to relieue himſelfe, but of force it ſhall bee mate.
            
               Vale. A. S.
            
         
         
            
            To the World.
            GOe forth my little Booke,
            Thou art no longer mine;
            Each man may on thee looke,
            The ſhame or praiſe is thine.
            But ſeeke thou for no praiſe,
            No thankes, nor yet reward;
            Yet all men for to pleaſe
            Haue thou a chiefe regard.
            The labour hath beene mine,
            The trauaile and the paine;
            Reproches ſhall be thine.
            To beare thou muſt be faine.
            For as to pleaſure many
            'Twas that I wiſhed euer;
            Right ſo to diſpleaſe any
            I purpoſe to doe neuer.
            But if thou pleaſe the best
            And ſuch as be of skill,
            I paſſe not for the reſt,
            Good men accept good-will.
            Hadſt thou remain'd with me
            Thou ſhouldſt haue had no blame;
            Since thou abroad wouldst be,
            Goe forth and ſeeke thy fame.
            
               Arthur Saul.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            THe order of the men in verſe,
            here alſo ſhalt thou finde
            Thy knowledge better to increaſe,
            and ſatisfie thy minde.
            Firſt, for the Pawnes here vnderſtand
            their march is right forth ſtill,
            And who ſo doth before them ſtand,
            they haue no power to kill.
            But as they march who ſo they finde
            doe in their colour ſtand,
            Such may they kill or checke a ſlope,
            to the right or left hand.
            Not any in the reare of them,
            they can once checke or ſpoile
            Forth muſt they march and not retreate,
            but keepe their rancke or file.
            Till by command they pointed are,
            their King for to releeue;
            Then muſt they bouldly vnto warre,
            his foes to vexe and greeue.
            And comming at the laſt in place,
            where Knights and Lords did dwell,
            Their King ſhall giue to them like grace,
            becauſe they ſerued him well.
            
               Thus being Biſhops, Knights, or Dukes,
            their Kings they'le better ſteede
            The Kings may make of them a Queene,
            if they haue any neede.
            Yet ere they can ſuch honour haue,
            all ſtormes they muſt a bide,
            And doe their beſt the Kings to ſaue,
            what danger ere betide.
            The Biſhops that attend the Kings
            a ſlope doe vſe to fight,
            The one in blacke doth helpe the King,
            the other in the white.
            Their checke in field extends as farre
            as any of the reſt,
            What colours they are placed in,
            there muſt they doe their beſt.
            The Biſhop blacke in blacke muſt march
            and therein vſe his skill,
            For in the white he may not come,
            no man to hurt or kill.
            The Biſhop white in white muſt ſerue,
            ſo long as he doth liue,
            To any which in blacke doth ſtand,
            he cannot one checke giue.
            The Duke in valew is halfe a Queene
            and halfe her draughts hath he,
            Right forth and backe and from each ſide,
            he can giue checke for thee.
            
               Through all the colours of the field
            in ſuch wiſe may hee checke,
            And alſo when occaſion ſerues
            relieue the King with necke.
            Like to a horſeman doth the Knight
            aſſiſt the King alwayes,
            And ouer ranke or file hee leapes,
            his honour for to raiſe.
            When hee giues checke vnto the King,
            and is not for it ſlaine,
            The King muſt moue out of his place,
            elſe-where for to remaine.
            The Knights being forth, and comming in
            ſuch houſes as are white
            May help or harme eight wayes them fro,
            during the time they fight.
            Like all the men within the field,
            the Queene may ayde the King,
            Yet like a Knight no ayde at all,
            ſhe can vnto him bring.
            Through all the houſes of the field
            the Queene may take her pleaſure,
            And vſe her power to help her King
            ſtill in a modeſt meaſure.
            If in the martch ſhe proue ſeuere,
            and taketh all ſhe may,
            'Tis for the ſafegard of the King,
            that ſhe makes cleere the way.
            
               For this ſhe may not blamed be,
            that ſeekes her King to ſaue,
            It is her glory for to ſtriue,
            her King in peace to haue.
            The King in Maieſtie doth martch,
            one ſtep at once he goes,
            Further no time can he goe forth,
            for feare of forraine fooes.
            If the blacke King ſhall bring a man
            vnto the white Kings ſide,
            And then and there giue him one guard,
            he may there ſtill abide.
            Without which help if he preſume,
            ſo neere the King to ſtand,
            If neede require ſuch one the King
            may kill with his owne hand.
            None of the Kings can take a man,
            that ſtandeth on a guard,
            'Twere checke at once if he doe ſo,
            therefore hee muſt be ſpar'd.
            Thus may you learne the Kings no time
            can into a checke goe,
            In places where no perrill is
            they may march too and fro.
            Know you that this ſhall read or ſee,
            I wiſh nought for my paine
            If it thee pleaſe I haue content,
            I ſeeke no other gaine.
            
               Arthur Saul.
            
         
         
            
            The contents of this Booke.
            
               OF the antiquitie, profit, and pleaſure of the game, and what it repreſenteth. Cap. I
               How to ſet the men. Cap. Cap. II
               Controuerſies reſolued. Cap. III
               To vnderſtand how the men guard each other. Cap. IIII
               For paſſing the guard of a Pawne that is aduanced into the fift houſe. Cap. V
               The difference, or the aduantage by playing the firſt draught. Cap. VI
               What difference there is in the great men and their true worth. Cap. VII
               The true valew of the Pawnes. Cap. VIII
               The deniall of rule-play. Cap. IX
               Aduiſes for the aſſailant or defendant. Cap. X
               How you may giue a Mate at two draughts, all the men being in the field. Cap. XI
               What benefit may begoten by exchanging man for man. Cap. XII
               The ſatisfaction of controuerſies by tediouſneſſe of play. Cap. XIII
               How a darke Mate, which ſome call a blind-Mate, is giuen. Cap. XIIII
               What a ſtale is, and how that is giuen. Cap. XV
               For retreating. Cap. XVI
               When aduantage is gotten how to make vſe of it. Cap. XVII
               A play which one author is of opinion not to be preuented, which I denie. Cap. XVIII
               The firſt way to defend that hard play before mentioned. Cap. XIX
               The ſecond way to preuent the former play. Cap. XX
               A third way to hinder the ſame play at two draughts. Cap. XXI
               For the checking of the King without guard. Cap. XXII
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FAMOVS GAME OF Cheſſe-play.
            
               
                  CHAPTER I. Of the Antiquity, Profit and Pleaſure of the Game, and what it representeth.
               
                  FOr the Antiquitie of this game, I finde vpon Record that it was deuiſed 614. yeares before the Natiuity of Chriſt, ſo that it is now 2227. yeeres ſince it hath beene firſt practiſed; and it is thought that Xerxes, who was a King, deuiſed this game. Secondly, there be ſome of opinion that it vvas made by learned and wiſe men, as may appeere by the wonderfull inuention of of the game, for it requireth the whole minde of man, during the time he practiſeth the ſame, otherwiſe hee ſhall not diſcerne the purpoſe of his aduerſary, vntill

it be too late. Thirdly, whoſoeuer he be that is deſirous to learne this game of Cheſſe-play, he ought to be of good apprehention, and a great memory, without the which hee ſhall neuer play well. Fourthly, if thoſe which play be of equall iudgement, the ſtanders by ſhall take great delight and pleaſure in behoulding them, if they haue knowledge in the game, when they ſhal ſee one Kings forces incounter with the other, ſometime the blacke King aſſaulting the white King, who valiantly defendeth the aſſault, and peraduenture putteth him to the worſt vpon the leaſt neglect that may be. O that this game were rightly eſteemed of, according to his worth: It is many yeeres ſince I could play this game, and as yet I neuer knew any fall out at the ſame: for a man cannot be offended with him who he playeth withall, but rather blame himſelfe for not gouerning his owne men better.
               Fiftly, it is apparant what quarrels and ſodaine ſtabbings happen at other games, with cheating and coſening one another, from all which enormities this is free, hauing

the glory aboue all other games, for a peaceable and a Princely exerciſe. Sixtly, it is to be vnderſtood that this game repreſenteth two Armies encountring each other: ſo that when the blacke King ſhall aſſault the white, the white King may preſently draw forth many of his men to make good the place aſſaulted. And for as much as the number of cheſſe-men are but few, you will ſay when an aſſault is made at any time there cannot many men be drawne forth to make good the place aſſaulted: for by bringing too much ayde to one place, you ſhall weaken another, ſo that thereby you may hazard all: to which I anſwere, that albeit the number of the men is ſmall, yet by the playing forth of one man you ſhall hinder the aſſault of two or three; as for example.
               Imagine that the blacke King for his firſt draught playeth his owne Pawne into the third houſe in his owne file, and that the white King entertaineth another purpoſe, not comming into the field in ſuch manner as the blacke King doth, but playeth his Queenes Dukes pawne into the

third houſe in his owne file, then the black King for his ſecond draught brings forth his Queene, and placeth her in the third houſe, in the front of his Biſhops pawne, entending at his fourth draught to giue mate to the white King, al which the white King ſeeth, & yet for his ſecond draught playeth careleſly ſomewhere els, and doth not ſeeme to take knowledge what the blacke King intendeth to doe: the blacke King for more aſſurance of preuayling bringeth forth his owne Biſhop into the fourth houſe, before his Queenes biſhop; all which is as much as nothing: for that the white King by playing his own pawne into the third houſe in his owne file, the blacke King by ſuch play ſhall fayle of his purpoſe: but if the white King ſhall forget to hinder the blacke Kings aſſault at his third draught, then the blacke King ſhall giue mate at his fourth draught to the white King by taking the white Kings biſhops pawne with his Queene, who ſhal be guarded with his owne Biſhop, ſo that it is a ſchollers mate, but there is no man of iudgement in Cheſſe-play will take ſuch a

mate; it may be called alſo a treacherous mate; for otherwiſe it were vnpoſſible a King ſhould be deliuered into the hands of his enemyes, without the loſſe of ſome men, vnleſſe the white Kings power would make ſleepe a defence for treaſon, and ſo ſuffer their King to be taken before they would take any knowledge thereof.
               
                  
                  
                     It on your man you 
                           •
                        ight,
                     The firſt draught ſhall you play,
                     If not 'tis mine by right,
                     At firſt to lead the way.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. II. How to place the men.
               THe boord ſtanding here as thou ſeeſt thou ſhalt place the blacke King in the fourth houſe being white, and the white King you ſhall place in a blacke houſe being the fourth houſe on the other ſide, iuſt oppoſite againſt the blacke King; then

place the white Queene next her King in a white houſe, which is the fourth houſe on that ſide of the field; Likewiſe you ſhall place the black Queene in a blacke houſe next to her king, which ſhall alſo be the fourth houſe on the blacke Kings ſide.
               Thus when you haue placed the Queenes next to their Kings, then ſhal you place on the other ſide of the Kings, firſt a Biſhop, then a Knight, and next to the Knight you ſhall place a Duke, whoſe place is in the firſt houſe of the field: the Queenes haue either of them likewiſe one Biſhop, one Knight, and one Duke; the Kings haue either of them foure Pawnes, and three Noble-men, and the Queenes haue the like, the Kings Pawnes are theſe: firſt, their owne Pawnes, next their Biſhops Pawnes, then their Knights Pawnes, and laſt of all their Dukes Pawnes: the Queenes they haue alſo three Noble-men and foure Pawnes, which are theſe: firſt, their owne Pawnes, then their Biſhops Pawnes, next their Knights Pawnes, and laſt of all their Dukes Pawnes. The Pawnes ſtand before the Noble-men from one corner of the

field to the other, the Pawnes haue all one manner of proceeding, which ſhall be ſhewed vnto thee, when wee come to ſpeake of the aduancing of the men and of the difference that is betweene them.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. III. A Controuerſie reſolued.
               ANd for as much as many times in play ſome men will be fingering and taking vp of his aduerſaries men, and then out of the abundance of his vvit, thinketh to play better in ſome other place, and ſo ſetteth downe his aduerſaries man againe, this is very fowle play, for albeit it is true he cannot play his aduerſaries man, ſo alſo it is true hee may not take him off his place, vnleſſe hee throw him out of the field, and inſtall his owne man in the ſame houſe where the other ſtood, for by the taking vp of a man in ſuch a faſhion and not to play it, ſome a iudge the player for his puniſhment,

to kiſſe the foote of the man which he ſo taketh vp, but indeed of right hee ought to looſe halfe his ſtake that at any time vſeth ſuch play, and if a man touch a man of his owne, and will not play him, then hee ought directly to looſe the game, and it is knowne vnto all men that can play, that if you touch any of your owne men you muſt play him, and looke what colour you touch with your man ſo taken vp, in the ſame colour or houſe ſhall hee ſtand; and if at any time the player which ſo playeth refueth ſo to doe, the other may lawfully take vp his owne ſtake and play no further of that game.
               
                  A chiefe leſſon to be obſerued in this play.
                  And for as much as ſome in the time their aduerſary is framing his purpoſe where to play, they will be talking, or ſinging, or vſing ſome apiſh trickes to trouble the minde of him vvhom they play againſt, this is held alſo very fowle play, and ought not to be vſed at this game, vpon paine of looſing the third

part of his ſtake, that vſeth it, for it is a game in which ſilence is to be vſed, and all deuiſes whatſoeuer layde a ſide, that may trouble one another in the time of their play: this being obſerued thou art freed from the penalty before mentioned.
               
               
                  A Caueate for ſuch as will condition to giue a Mate.
                  Imagine that two were a playing, and that many men on both ſides were loſt and no odes in the men of either ſide, ſo that the game were indifferent, that then I ſay, one of the gamſters ſhould giue ouer the game and draw his ſtake, the other at this ſeeming to be a grieued, thinking his men ſtandeth better then the others which hath giuen ouer, he ſaith, had you playd out the game I ſhould haue wonne it, & the other replying, demandeth what hee will lay more one the game, the party agrieued vpon this offereth a crowne more, that hee will winne the Mate, now here is a condition, which if hee performe

not he looſeth both his firſt and laſt ſtake: The way for him that taketh any man vpon ſuch condition, is ſtill to change, and to bring it vnto a dead game, and ſo ſhall he this way winne the ſtakes, by reaſon the other had tyed himſelfe by obligation to giue the Mate, wherefore let any one take heed how he entreth into ſuch condition; for who ſo doth it giueth the other aduantage, whether it be at the beginning of the mate, or after, it is all one.
                  
                     
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. IIII. How the men guard each other.
               THe Kings haue either of them ſeauen men a piece, and the Queenes as many to attend them: The King, whether hee be blacke or white, giueth guard to fiue perſons before hee goeth forth, and being once aduanced forward into the

field, although it be but into the ſecond houſe, hee then, and ſtill after, in all his march giueth guard to eight houſes, till he come to one ſide or other of the field againe. Now thoſe fiue whom hee guardeth before hee goeth forth are theſe: firſt of all hee guardeth his Queene, on whom his greateſt care dependeth: ſecondly his owne Biſhop: thirdly his owne Pawne: fourthly his Queenes Pawne; and laſtly his Biſhops Pawne. The Queene protecteth her King, her Biſhop, her owne Pawne, her Kings Pawne, and her Biſhops Pawne: by this you ſee the Queene guardeth as many as the King, before ſhe goeth forth, and after till the field be wonne or loſt: the Kings Duke giueth guard to his owne Pawne, and the Kings Knight, and to no more, till hee be from the ſide of the field, and then hee giueth guard to foure houſes, and in like ſort is the power of the Queenes Duke: the Kings Biſhop giueth guard to the Kings Pawne, and the Kings Knights Pawne: the Queenes Biſhop giueth guard to the Queenes Pawne, and the Queenes knights

Pawne, the Knights giueth guard but to three houſes before they goe forth, and after they are from the ſide of the field, they giue guard to as many houſes as the King or the Queene doth. Now thoſe houſes whom the Knights guard ere they goe forth, are theſe, the Kings Knight giueth guard to the Kings Pawne, and to the third houſe in the front of the Kings Biſhops Pawne, and to the third houſe in the front of the Kings Dukes Pawne: the Queenes Knight giueth guard to her owne Pawne, and to the third houſe in the front of her Biſhops Pawne, as alſo to the third houſe in the front of her owne Duke: The Biſhops of either ſide are tyed to one onely colour, out of the vvhich they may not goe, the vvhite Biſhops haue the command of the white field, and the blacke Biſhops the command of the blacke field, and they martch ſloping forward or backward if way be made for them, and can indanger or giue checke from one corner of the field to the other: The Pawnes who ſtand in rancke before the King and the Nobility, I ſhal ſhew you

their manner of guard which they giue before they be aduanced or moued off their places: The Kings Pawne giueth guard to the third houſe before the Queene, and the third houſe before the Kings Biſhop: the Queenes Pawne giueth guard to the thrid houſe before the King, & the third houſe before her owne Biſhop, the Kings Biſhops Pawne giueth guard to the third houſe before the King, and the third houſe before the Kings Knight: the Queenes Biſhops Pawne giueth guard to the third houſe before the Queene, and the third houſe before the Queenes Knight, the Kings Knights Pawne giueth guard to the third houſe before the Kings Biſhop, and to the third houſe before the Kings Duke: the Queenes Knights Pawne giueth guard to the third houſe before the Queenes Biſhop, and to the third houſe before the Queenes Duke: the Kings Dukes Pawnes, and the Queenes Dukes Pawnes giueth but one guard a peice, and that is to the third houſes before the Knights, by reaſon they ſtand on the ſide of the

field: Thus haue I ſhewed you from the King to the Pawne, how the men guard each other before there be any of them ſtirred off their places.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. V. For paſsing the guard of a Pawne.
               FOr as much as many times there is queſtion made, whether a Pawne of the white Kings, may paſſe the guard of the blacke Kings, at his firſt going forth, if the blacke King haue aduanced a Pawne into the fift houſe, without leaue of the blacke King: whereunto I anſwere no, for this is a rule ſtrictly obſerued in martiall diſſipline, from whence this game had his firſt beginning, that no man ſhall be permitted to paſſe by any guard without leaue firſt obtained, yet at this game the Pawnes may paſſe the guard one of another, this houſe, or houſes, onely excepted: for if a Pawne be aduanced into the fift houſe by the blacke King, and

that the white Kings Pawne might paſſe without leaue, it would many times be the ouer-throwing of the blacke Kings game: and further it is held fowle play, to play forth your Pawne by the guard of another Pawne ſo aduanced, vvithout crauing leaue: ſo then if the King, who hath aduanced a Pawne into the fift houſe, will ſuffer you to paſſe you may, becauſe there is power in him to deny you ſuch a fauour, as well as to grant you the priuiledge of ſuch a liberty: and thus much for the readers ſatisfaction, that you may not paſſe the guard of a Pawne that is aduanced into the fift houſe without leaue. Some therebe alſo that are perſwaded if the King be once checked, hee ſhall looſe the benefit of releeuing himſelfe in any of the Dukes quarters, what extremity ſoeuer he be driuen vnto, albeit the King checked doth couer the checke giuen him: ſuch as are of this opinion are in the wrong, for ſo long as the checked King can couer the checke giuen him, and not remoue to auoyd the checke, nor hath not moued before vpon

no occaſion he hath ſtill the benefit of exchanging vvith any of his Dukes, but if hee be once remoued from his place, whither it be for the releeuing of one of his men, or vpon compulſion for the auoyding of a checke, he ſhall then after ſuch time looſe the benefit of exchanging with the Duke.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. VI. Whether it be aduantage to haue the firſt draught, yea or no.
               FOr ſatisfying the reader in this point, it is certaine there is aduantage by playing firſt,The difference by playing firſt. for vvho ſo hath the firſt draught, if hee can play well, ſhall make the other ſtill defendant, and will viſit him vvith ſuch attempts and aſſaults, wherein if the King defendant faile in the leaſt point to anſwere, he ſhall aſſuredly looſe the field; but betweene ſuch as know not the game rightly, it is no matter which of them playeth firſt, by reaſon

they know not when they haue vantage one of another, and if it fall out that the one of them ſhould haue ſuch cleere eyes, as to diſcerne hee hath the better of the game, and cannot make vſe of his aduantage, betweene ſuch young ſcollers it skilleth not who playeth firſt.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. VII. What difference there is in the great men, and of their true worth.
               MAny there are who can play a little at this game,The valew of the men that perſwade themſelues if they can take one great man for another they ſhall doe well enough, but it is not ſo, for there is a great deale of difference in the men, and firſt of all for the King, who albeit he is King, and that his command is to be obayed of his ſubiects, yet it is in all the Counſaile of warre held vnfit for the King to hazard his perſon at any time, and therefore hee doth ordaine a Generall vnder him, to

haue the command of the army, which generall ſhall haue vnder him Coronels, Captaines, and other inferiour officers for his aſſiſtance, for the better gouerning of the army: Euen ſo at this game there is a generall, which is the Queene, for ſhee doth more ſeruice then any too Dukes can, and if it happen at any time that ſhee ſhould be loſt, the King, whoſe Queene is taken, muſt forſake the field of force, vnleſſe the aduerſe King, be a very ſilly King, and cannot make vſe of ſuch aduantage. And yet to make the Reader to vnderſtand this better, know this, if the white King ſhould in the taking the blacke Kings Queene loſe two of his Noble-men, as his two Dukes, or his two Biſhops, or his two Knights, yet the white King ſhall haue the better, for his loſſe is not ſo great as the blacke Kings, vvho hath loſt his Queene. Some that write of Cheſſe-play calleth the Queene the Amazon, becauſe the Amazonites goe to warre as familiarly as the men. Next to the Queene for valew is a Duke, for by how much a Queene is more in worth

then a Duke, by ſo much a Duke is more in valew then a Biſhop or a Knight, for a Duke is vvorth two Biſhops or two Knights, by reaſon hee can giue a Mate himſelfe with the help of the King, which a Biſhop or a Knight cannot doe. Now you ſay two Biſhops can giue a Mate with the help of the King, it is true, but the Duke will doe it ſooner: alſo a Mate is to be giuen vvith a Biſhop and a Knight, and this is alſo true, but hee muſt play well that can giue a Mate with them, yet you ſee euery Scoller at Cheſſe-play can giue a Mate with a King and a Duke Beſides a Dukes checke goeth from one ſide of the field to the other throughout all the colours, and a Biſhops checke ſerueth but for one colour in the field, therefore you muſt haue both the Biſhops to doe the ſeruice vvhich one Duke can diſcharge: and therefore I conclude, that a Duke is better then two Biſhops, and for the Biſhops they are better then the Knights, by reaſon they can giue a Mate vvith the King, vvhen no other men are left to help them, which

the Knights cannot doe, and therefore they are counted better then the Knights; but I had rather looſe a Biſhop at any time then a Knight, for his checke is more dangerous then a Biſhops: the Biſhop is tyed to one colour in the field, out of the which hee may not paſſe, the Knight paſſeth into all the houſes in the field: the Biſhops checke may be couered, the Knights checke cannot: there is couer for all the checkes in the field that may be giuen, from the Queene to the Pawne, the Knights onely excepted, for whoſe checke there is no couer: and if it fall out at any time that a Knight giueth checke, and the King that is checked cannot take the Knight without great loſſe, he muſt needes flye of force, there is no couering for his checke, as I haue ſayd before. I could ſay more in the behalfe of the Knights; as thus, when the one King hath no other men left but his Biſhops, and the other King no help but his Knights, the King that hath the Knights, may happely in checking the King that hath the Biſhops, take one of the Biſhops,

and ſo after by another checke take the other, by reaſon the Biſhops cannot guard one another, which the Knights can doe, and at the beginning of the game, I had rather looſe my Biſhops for my aduerſaries Knights, then that I ſhould exchange my Knights for the gayning my aduerſaries Biſhops: and thus much ſhall ſerue for the explaining of the difference of the great men.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. VIII. The worth of the Pawnes.
               ANd for the Pawnes, there is not ſo much to be ſaid of them, as there hath beene of the Noble-men, by reaſon there is not ſo much variety in their draughts, as there is in the great men: The Kings Biſhops Pawne is the beſt Pawne in the field, and therefore there ought more care to bee had ouer him, then any other Pawne in the field; for if it ſhould happen that the blacke King

ſhould looſe his Biſhops Pawne, for the gaining of the white Kings Pawne: yet the blacke Kings loſſe were the greater, for that hee after ſuch loſſe can neuer be able to make a rancke of Pawnes, with three in a rancke, no more on that ſide of the field, for his owne ſafty which is a great diſaduantage, vvherefore it vvere better for any of the Kings to looſe his owne Pawne, then to looſe his Biſhops Pawne. But you will ſay, if any of the Kings ſhould looſe his Biſhops Pawne, can he not releeue himſelfe on the other ſide of the field, by turning ouer into his Queenes Dukes quarter, where he ſhall haue Pawnes enough to ſuccor him: I anſwer he may doe ſo, but he will be longer ere he bring his purpoſe to effect, becauſe he hath more men betweene his Queenes Duke and him, then there is betweene him and his owne Duke by one draught, in the playing of which draught, ere hee can bring his King into ſafty, he ſhall be ſure to looſe the game, if hee play with one that can make vſe of any idle draught: thus much ſhall ſuffice for the

worth of the Kings Biſhops Pawne, the Kings Pawne is next vnto him in worth, then the Queenes Pawne after the Knights Pawne, and laſt of all the Dukes Pawnes, for they giue guard but to one houſe in the field: and thus I end with the Pawnes for their valew and worth.
               
                  The diuerſity of Mates, and which are worthy of praiſe, or diſſpraiſe.
                  THe Mate with a Queene, a louing mate.
                  A Mate with the Biſhop, a gentle mate.
                  The Mate giuen with a Duke, a gracious mate.
                  A Mate with the Knight, an honourable mate.
                  The Mate giuen with a Pawne, a diſgracefull mate.
                  A Mate by diſcouery, the worthieſt of all.
                  The Mate giuen in a corner of the field, was Alexanders mate.
                  A Mate in the Midea of the field, an vnfortunate

fortunate Mate.
                  The Mate giuen on the ſide of the field, a fooliſh Mate.
                  A blinde Mate, a ſhamefull mate.
                  The Stale, a diſhonourable mate.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. IX. That there is no Rule for this game.
               FOR as much as ſome are perſwaded there is a Rule for this game, I thought good to giue the Reader, as I may, ſome ſatisfaction to the contrary. If there were a Rule for this game euery Woodcocke would bee a Cheſſe-player; but indeede there is none: if there were a Rule for it, then there ſhould be but one manner of beginning, and one manner of ending, which cannot be; for hee that can play knoweth, ſometime the game is begunne with ſome of the Pawnes, another time with any of the Knights: againe, one while marching forth with ſome of the Pawnes, and ſome of the Noble-men; at

another time giuing an aſſault onely with Noble-men. Alſo if there were a Rule for the game how commeth it to paſſe that a Mate is to be giuen with any of the men in the field vpon guard, and ſome of the men will giue a Mate without a guard? and that is when the diſtreſſed King is driuen to the ſide of the field, or a corner of the field, the purſuing King lodging in the third houſe oppoſite againſt him: then the Queene aſſaylant, or one of the Dukes aſſailant, giueth the Mate to the diſtreſſed King, by falling into any of the houſes, in the ſame rancke where the diſtreſſed King ſtandeth; but vpon guard any of the Pawnes, or of the Biſhops, or any of the Knights can alſo giue a Mate: further, it is certaine, that a Mate may be giuen in any houſe in the field: now there are 64. houſes, then you will ſay there muſt be as many rules, to bring to paſſe that the King may be Mated in any of theſe houſes, and when you haue proued that, then you muſt bring forth ſo many ſeuerall rules as there are men in the field: for that they all can vpon guard

giue a Mate, after all this I will demand for rules how to giue a Mate vpon diſcouery, and then you muſt finde as many more rules for that, by reaſon euery man can diſcouer whereby a Mate may bee giuen. Thus mayeſt thou ſee courteous reader that I haue ſhewed thee, if there be a rule, there muſt be more then one, or a hundreth: and from the firſt time I knew this game to this preſent day, I neuer could meete with any man, that could ſhew me one rule for this game, for indeed it is according to the purpoſes of them that play, and not by any rule: alſo I doe perſwade my ſelfe, if any man would play with me, and obſerue a rule in his play, and not regard my comming forth againſt him, I ſhall aſſuredly giue him a Mate, doe what he can.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. X. Aduiſes for the aſſaylant and defendant.
               NOw for the Reader that is deſirous to practiſe this game, hee muſt obſerue one thing diligently, which is, if hee chance to haue the firſt draught, and find himſelfe able to aſſault, let him follow it well; if better able to defend, then giue the other leaue to aſſault; in both there is great pollicie to bee vſed: and firſt for him that aſſaulteth. Hee that aſſaulteth ought to hold his paſſages free, for him to retreat as occaſion ſhall ſerue; leaſt his negligence herein procure his ouerthrow when hee ſhall be conſtrayned to retreat. The defendant, if hee be excellent in the game, will not onely anſwere the aſſault ſufficiently, but hee will alſo deuiſe plots to grieue the aſſailant when he ſhall take occaſion to retreat. A pawne is ſoone intrapped, becauſe hee cannot goe backe to relieue himſelfe: the Biſhops and the Dukes are more harder to be intrapped,

becauſe they can flye from one ſide of the field to the other, if they feare any euill; but the Knights, and the Queene is the hardeſt of all to be betrayed, by reaſon they haue ſo many places for to relieue themſelues in, and ſpecially the Queene.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XI. How you ſhall giue a Mate at two draughts all the men being in the field.
               FIrſt, take the Boord, and all the men, and when you haue placed them right, then let the blacke King, for his firſt draught, aduance his Biſhops Pawne into the third houſe, before his owne Biſhop; then cauſe the white King for his firſt draught to play his owne Pawne into the third houſe before himſelfe: then the blacke King for his ſecond draught ſhall play his Knights Pawne into the fourth houſe, before his owne Knight, and then the white King for his ſecond draught ſhall play his Queene into the fift houſe,

before his owne Duke, where ſhe ſhall giue checke and mate to the blacke King. Here you may ſee a Mate may be giuen at two draughts; but ſeldome or neuer ſhall you ſee a good player receiue ſuch a Mate.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XII. By exchanging Man for Man, what benefit hee ſhall reape that vſeth it.
               VVHen you ſhall play with any one that playeth better with his Queene then hee can with his other men, with ſuch an one change Queene for Queene; for there are many after they haue loſt their Queene doe not know how to play, by reaſon they vnderſtand not the right vſe of the men: Other ſome will alſo in like manner play better with their Knights; with ſuch alſo vſe exchange, and for the other men doe the like. You ſee for example, ſome men can play very well with Rapier and Poniard, that cannot vſe

any other weapon; whereas he is eſteemed for a Maiſter that is ſkilfull at all manner of weapons: ſo at this game, he that hath the right vſe of all his men, with ſuch a one you ſhall profit nothing by exchanging man for man, yet who ſo vſeth ſuch play is not to be blamed, for there is much aduantage to be gotten by ſuch play, if you conſider rightly of it: this much ſhall ſuffice for the exchanging of men vpon euen termes, the men being both of one quallity and power.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XIII. For ſatisfaction of controuerſies by tediouſneſſe of play.
               THere are ſome of opinion, that a Mate may be giuen at fifty draughts, and if ſo be it be not giuen you at fifty draughts, you may take vp your ſtakes and beg on: to ſuch I anſwere, it is true, a Mate may be ſo ſoone woone and at fewer draughts alſo, but put the caſe

that any King being in a Citie or Towne, ſhould bee by ſome forraine King beſiged, and that after ſome ten, twenty, forty, or fift dayes were expired, the King within the Citie, ſhould ſay to the forraine King, for as much SYR King, as you haue continued now your ſige fifty dayes, and cannot make mee yeeld, nor take me your priſoner, therefore you muſt depart: no, this ought not to be imbraced, for if hee cannot winne it in fifty dayes, he will proue fifty weekes, or fifty months, but he will haue it: ſo alſo is this game of Cheſſe, if the one King cannot Mate the other at fifty draughts, he may proue a hundreth more, for hee is not to be tyed to any certaine number of draughts: for I haue knowne ſome haue beene a playing one game a whole day, and ſometime againe I haue ſeene fiue, or ſixe, played in one hower, but be it many draughts or few, if you giue the Mate you ſhall be ſure to winne.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. XIIII. How a darke Mate, which ſome call a blind-Mate, may be giuen.
               A Darke Mate, or a blind-Mate is all one, for if a Mate be giuen, and hee which giueth it ſeeth it not, you may ſay it was darke, he wanted light, or hee was blind, otherwiſe hee would haue ſeene it. When two playeth earneſtly, and that one of them followeth the checke vpon the other, and if it fall out that one of the checkes be alſo a Mate, and hee that giueth it ſeeth it not, as I haue ſayd before, then is ſuch a Mate called a blind-Mate: and for as much as there are ſome vvhich ſtand vpon this, that a blind-Mate ſhould be a loſt game, know this, it may not be ſo; for if a man hath a horſe that falleth blind, the owner thereof ſhall haue his former right in him, which hee had before hee was blind, and ſhall be eſteemed for a horſe for all his blindneſſe, ſo hee which giueth a blind-Mate

ſhall not looſe the Mate, but ſhall notwithſtanding winne. To end this controuerſie and blemiſh of diſhonour, let him that can giue checke at any time, ſee firſt whether it will not be Mate alſo to the other King, before hee giue the checke, and finding it will be a Mate, then to vſe theſe words, checke Mate, and ſtraight vvay the controuerſie is ended. Let this therefore reſolue the reader, that a Mate vvhich wee call a blind-Mate, is a Mate, and ſhall winne.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. XV. What a ſtale is, and how it is giuen.
               NOw for as much as a ſtale is very diſhonourable to him that giueth it, I will ſhew the reader, or any other that is deſirous to be reſolued what it meaneth, and for ſuch as vnderſtand the game already, they ſhall witneſſe with me whether I explaine it rightly vnto you or no: firſt, you ſhall vnderſtand a ſtale is a loſt game by him that giueth it, and no queſtion to be made further therof: therefore let him that followeth the flying King take heede that hee forbeare not a checke, if he doe ſee that the diſtreſſed King haue a place to flye vnto, for the nearer that the diſſreſſed King is brought to be mated, the ſooner a Stale may bee giuen.
               Imagine the white King were in the middle of the field, or any other place of the field, beſet round about, hauing onely

but one way to eſcape, which way the blacke King likewiſe ſtoppeth, without giuing checke, and this way commeth the Stale; for if the white King haue loſt all his men, or hauing any left he cannot play them, and himſelfe ſo incloſed about with the enemie, that now hee hath but one place to flye vnto, which his enemie the blacke King alſo ſtoppeth without checke, then this is a ſtale: wherefore I ſhall aduiſe thoſe which are deſirous to practiſe this game, that they take heede they giue not a ſtale, leaſt thereby they purchaſe vnto themſelues ſuch ſhame, which will not after be put away without much bluſhing.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. XVI. What care ought to be vſed in retreating.
               FOR retreating, if the blacke King maketh a retreate, and not vpon conſtraint, the white King may be aſſured it is to get ſome further aduantage againſt him, wherefore it is wiſedome not to be too earneſt in following ſuch retreat, leaſt your raſh purſuite be too late lamented.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XVII. For aduantage gotten, how to make vſe thereof.
               VVHen it ſhall happen that the blacke King hath gotten aduantage of the white King, let him weaken

the white King ſo much as hee can, by changing with him man for man, till he be aſſured his aduantage ſhall profit him, for we ſee if two Kings armies meete and fight, the one hauing gotten the better of the other, hee forth-with vſeth the ſword till hee maketh him that hath the worſt yeeld the glory of the field vnto him: I remember that a Noble-man vpon a time ſaid, too much mercy was rigor, wherefore he that hath the better of his enemy let him make vſe of it, hee ought not to be blamed, but that King is worthy of much blame, who after hee hath the better of his enemie, doth notwithſtanding looſe the ſame againe, by forbearing his ſword, when with praiſe and honour he might bouldly vſe it, and for reward be crowned King of the field.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. XVIII. A play which one author affirmeth that no man poſſibly can preuent, and this is the play.
               FIrſt take your boord and the men, and after you haue ſet vp the men, then play thus: let the white King for his firſt draught aduance his owne Pawne into the fourth houſe in his owne file, then the blacke King ſhall aduance his Pawne as farre forth in the ſame manner, then the white King for his ſecond draught playeth his owne Knight into the third houſe, before his owne Biſhop, and the blacke King for his ſecond draught ſhall bring forth his owne Knight in the ſame order: then the white King for his third draught, with his Knight taketh the blacke Kings Pawne, and the blacke King at his third draught, with his Knight taketh the white Kings Pawne; then the white King

at his fourth draught bringeth forth his Queene, which he placeth in the ſecond houſe in his owne file, this being perceiued by the blacke King at his fourth draught, his Knight to retreate into ſome place of more ſafty for feare of the white Kings Queene; the white King at his fift draught ſhall aduance his Knight into the third houſe, before the blacke Kings Queenes Biſhop, and ſo giueth checke by diſcouery to the blacke King, with the white Kings Queene, which checke the blacke King howſoeuer hee couereth it, yet hee ſhall looſe his Queene remedileſly, for the white Kings Knight at his ſixt draught ſhal ouerthrow the blacke Kings Queene, who cannot be played out of the Knights guard howſoeuer the checke be couered, this being the play which is ſo hard to be preuented, I ſhall ſhew you three ſeuerall wayes to make this eaſie euen at to draughts.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. XIX. The first way to make a defence for the hard play before mentioned.
               IMagine the white King for his firſt draught playeth his owne pawne into the fourth houſe before himſelfe, and the blacke King for his firſt draught playeth his Pawne in the like manner; then the white King ſhall play for his ſecond draught, his owne Knight, into the third houſe before his owne Biſhop, and the blacke King to hinder the comming on of the white Kings Knight, for his ſecond draught aduanceth his Queenes Pawne into the third houſe, before his Queene for to guard his owne Pawne, ſo that the white Kings purpoſe this way is made fruſtrate.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. XX. Another way to hinder the ſame play.
               SEcondly, imagine the white King for his firſt draught, playeth forth his owne Pawne into the fourth houſe before himſelfe, and that the blacke King doth the like for his firſt draught, then the white King commands his owne Knight into the third houſe before his owne Biſhop, then you ſhall play the blacke Kings Knight in the ſame order, then the white King with his Knight taketh away the blacke Kings Pawne, and the blacke King with his Knight at his third draught taketh away the white Kings Pawne, then the white King at his fourth draught aduanceth his Queenes Pawne into the third houſe before his Queene, whereby the blacke Kings Knight ſhall be forced to flye: after this the white King for his fift draught may couer his King,

as he will, for the game is equall, and this is alſo the ſecond defence for the play ſpoken of before.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXI. The third way to hinder the ſame play at the ſecond draught.
               IMagine the blacke King for his firſt draught aduanceth his Pawne into the fourth houſe before himſelfe, then ſhall you play the white Kings Pawne for his firſt draught in the ſame order, then the blacke King for his ſecond draught playeth his owne Knight into the third houſe before his owne Biſhop, after this the white King ſhall place his Queene in the ſecond houſe before himſelfe, for his ſecond draught: So then the blacke King dares not medle vvith the vvhite Kings Pawne, for feare of looſing his Knight, by reaſon the white Queene

guardeth the Pawne, and this is done at two draughts: I could ſhew you alſo other playes for the ſame; but this ſhall ſuffice.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXII. For the checking of the King without guard.
               IF a Pawne, or any other man in the field be ſo hardy, as to giue checke vnto any of the Kings without a guard, and that his checke bee giuen the King in ſuch a houſe where the King may indanger, thoſe men may the King deſtroy himſelfe, but if they haue guard he may not medell vvith them for going into checke: yet the King that is ſo braued by his enemie, may cauſe any of his vnder-officers, that hath guard vpon that houſe wherein the King is checked, to kill any ſuch one which ſhall preſume to checke the King without guard.
               
                  
                  For your laſt leſſon learne this.
                  The Kings, what danger ſoeuer they are in, may not preſſe one vpon another, for there muſt be alwayes one houſe free betweene them, neither can they checke one another: and when it ſhall happen that there is no place for the diſtreſſed King to flye vnto, but that hee muſt ſeeke for reliefe in his aduerſe Kings boſome, then is it Mate.
               
               
                  The Concluſion.
                  THus gentle Reader, after thou haſt learned to know thy men, and how to place them, which by this booke thou ſhalt eaſily doe, then not to play forth a man without a guard; after that to know well the difference and valew of the men, how much one is better then another, and what aduantage it is to play firſt, then to be carefull when you exchange

that you exchange not for the worſt; then to practiſe, and it ſhall ſuffice, for practiſe is the chiefeſt of all to bring thee to perfectneſſe. Read this booke often, and obſerue vvell vvhat thou findeſt in it, and it ſhall profit thee more then the playing of a hundreth games: as for the lawes of the game thou ſhalt finde them in this booke alſo. Thus hauing indeuoured my ſelfe to ſhew thee courteous Reader what I can, for thy inſtruction, wiſhing thy loue to this game may be equall to the worthineſſe thereof, then ſhall all other games by thee be little reſpected and leſſe practiſed, which no doubt ſhall giue thee much quietneſſe and profit. Farewell.
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   