
      
         
            
            
            DAIPHANTVS, OR The Paſſions of Loue. Comicall to Reade, But Tragicall to Act: As full of Wit, as Experience.
            
               By An. Sc. Gentleman.
            
               Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cartum.
            
            Wherevnto is added, The paſsionate mans Pilgrimage.
            
            
            LONDON Printed by T. C. for William Cotton: And are to be ſold at his Shop neare Ludgate. 1604.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MIGHTIE, LEARNED, and Ancient Potentate Quiſquis; Emperour of ✚ King of Great and Little A. Prince of B. C. and D. &c. Atiquis, wiſheth the much increaſe of true Subiects, free from Paſſion Spleene, and Melancholy: and indued with Vertue, Wiſedome, and Magnamuntis. Or, to the Reader.
            
               AN Epiſtle to the Reader; why? that muſt haue his Forehead, or firſt Entrance like a Courtier, Faire-ſpoken, and full of Expectation. His middle or Center like your Citizēs ware-houſe, beautified with inticing vanities, though the true Riches conſiſt of Bald Commodities. His Randeuow or concluſion like The Lawyers Caſe, able to pocket or any matter: But let good word, be your beſt Euidence. In the Generall, or Foundation he muſt be like Paules-Church, reſolued to let euery Knight and Gull trauell vpon him, yet his Particulars, or Lyneaments may be Royall at the Exchange, with aſcending ſtepe, promiſing Newe but coſtly deuices & faſhions: It muſt haue Teeth like a Satyre, Eyes like a Cryticke, and yet may your Tongue ſpeake fal
                  •
               e Latine, like your Panders and Bawdes of Poetrie. Your Genius and Species ſhould march in battle aray, with our Politicians: yet your Genius ought to liue with an honeſt ſoule indeed. It ſhould be like the Neuer-too-well read Arcadia, where the Proſe and Verce, (Matter and Words) are like his Miſtreſſes eyes one ſtill excelling another and without Coriuall for to come home to the vulgars Element, like Friendly Shake-ſpeares Tragedies, where the Commedian rides, when the Tragedian ſtands on Tip-toe: Faith it ſhould pleaſe all, like Prince Hamlet. But in ſadneſſe, then it were to be feared he would runne made Inſooth I will not be mooneſicke, to pleaſe: nor out of my wits though I diſpleaſed all What? 
                  
                     •
                  oct, are you in Paſſion, or out of Loue? This is as Strange as True:
               
Well, well, if I ſeeme misticall, or tyrannicall, whether I be a Foole or a Lords-Ingle, all
                  •
                one: If you be angry, you are not well aduiſed. I will tell you, tis an Indian Humour, I haue ſnuft vp from diuine Tabacco: and tis moſt Gentleman-like to puffe it out at any place or perſon. Ile no Epiſtle, (it were worſe then one of Hercules Labours) But will conclude, honeſty is a mans beſt vertue. And but for the Lord Mayor, and the two Sheriſſes, the Innes of Court, and many Gallants elſewhere, this laſt yeare might haue bene burned. As for Momus, Carpe and Barke who will: if the Noble Aſſe bray not, I am as good a Knight Poet, as Etatis ſuae, Maiſter An. Dom. Sonne in Law. Let your Cryticke looke to the Rowels of his ſpurs, the pad of his Saddle, and the Ierke of his Wand: then let him ride me and my Rimes as hotely an be would ride his Mistreſſe, I care not: We ſhall meete and be friends againe, with the breaking of a Speare or two: And who would do leſſe, for a faire Lady. There I leaue you, where you ſhall euer finde me.
            Paſſionate Daiphantus: Your louing Subiect,
            
            Giues you to vnderstand, He is A man in Print, and tis enough he hath vnder-gone a Preſsing (yet not like a Ladie) though for your ſakes and for Ladyes, proteſting for this poore Infant of his Brayne, as it was the price of his Virginitie borne into the world in teares; So (but for a many his deare friends that tooke much paines for it) it had ayed, and neuer bene laught at: And that if Truth haue wrote leſſe than Fixion, yet tis better to erre in Knowledge then in Iudgment. Alſo if he haue caught vp half a Line of any others, It was out of his Memorie not of any ignorance. Why, he Dedicates it to all, and not to any Particular, as his Miſtreſſe, or So. His anſwere is, he is better Borne, than to creepe into Womens Fauours, and aſke their leaue afterwards. Alſo he deſireth you to helpe Correct ſuch errors of the Printer; which becauſe the Authour is dead (or was out of the Citie) hath beene committed. And twas his folly, or the Stationers, You had not an Epiſtle to the purpoſe.
            
               Thus like a Louer, wooes he for your Fauor,
               VVhich if You grant then Omnia vincit Amor.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Argument.
            
               
                  DAiphantus, a yonger Brother, very honourably deſcended, brought vp (but not borne in Venice) naturally ſubiect to Courting, but not to Loue: reputed 
                  •
                man, rather full of Complement then of true Curteſie: more deſirous to be thought honeſt, then ſo to be wordiſh beyond diſcretion: promiſing more to all thē friend-ſhip could challenge: Mutable in all his Actions, but his affections aiming indeed, to gaine opinion, rather then good will, challinging Loue from greatneſſe, not from Merit: ſtudious to abuſe his owne wit by the common ſale of his infirmities: Laſtly, vnder the colour of his naturall affection (which indeed was very pleaſant and delightfull) coueted to diſgrace euery other to his owne diſcontent: a ſcourge to Beautie, a tray for to Women, and an Infidell to Loue. This He, th
                  •
               s creatures at length falles in loue with two at one inſtant: yea, two of his neereſt Allies, and ſo indifferently (yet outragiouſly) as what was commenda
                  ••
               le in the one, was admirable in the other: By which meanes as not deſpiſed, not regarded; if not deceiued not pittied; they eſteemed him as he was in Deed, not words: he proteſted, they ieſted: hee ſwore hee lou'de in ſadneſſe; they in ſooth beleeu'de but ſeemed to giue no crepence to him: thinking him ſo humorous as no reſolution could long be good, & holding this his atteſtation to them of affection in that kinde, more then his conteſting againſt it before time. Thus ouercome of that he ſeemed to conquer, he became a ſlaue to his owne fortunes: Laden with much miſerie, vtter miſchiefe ſeazed vpon him. He fell in

loue with another, A wedded Ladie: Then with a fourth, named 
                  Ʋitullia. And ſo farre was he imparadized in her beautie (ſhe not recomforting him) that he fell from Loue to paſſion, ſo to diſtraction, then to admiration, & contemplation: laſtly, to madnes: thus did he act ye tragical Sceanes, who onely pend the Comicall, Became, if not as brutiſh as Acteon, as furious as Orlando, of whoſe humours, and Paſſions, I had rather you ſhould read them, then I Act them. In the end, by one (or rather by all) hee was recouered. A voyce did mad him, and a Song did recure him▪ Foure in one ſent him out of this world, and one with foure redeemed him to the world. To whoſe vnuſuall ſtreynes in Muſicke, and emphaticall Emphaſis of Loue, I will leaue you to turne ouer a new Leafe: This only I will end with: 
                  Who of Loue ſhould better write,
                  Than he that Loue learnes to indita?
               
            
         
         
            
            DAIPHANTVS Proem.
            
               
                  I Sing the olde World in an Infant Storie,
               I ſing the new World in an auncient Dittie:
               I ſing this World: yea, this worlds ſhame and glory,
               I ſing a Medley, of rigor, and of Pittie:
               I ſing the Courts, Cyties, and the Countrey faſhions,
               Yet ſing I but of loue, and her ſtrange paſsions.
            
            
               I ſing that Antheme, Louers ſigh in ſadneſſe,
               I ſing ſweete tunes of ioyes in wo-ven Verſes:
               I ſing thoſe Lines I once did act in madneſſe,
               I ſing and weepe, (teares follow Births and Herſes.)
               I ſing a Dirge, a Furie did indight it,
               I ſing My Selfe, whilſt I my Selfe do write it.
            
            
               I inuocate (to grace my Artleſſe labor)
               The faithfull Goddeſſe, men call Memorie,
               
               (True Poets treaſure and their wits beſt fauour)
               To decke my Muſe with trueſt Poeſie.
               Though Loue write wel, yet Paſsiō blindes th'affecton,
               "Man ne're rules right, that's in the leaſt ſubiection.
            
            
               Sweete Memorie (ſoules life) new life increaſing,
               The eye of Iuſtice, tongue of eloquence;
               The locke of Larning, Fountaine neuer ceaſing,
               The Cabinet of Secrets, Caske of Sence,
               Which gouern'll Nature, teacheth man his awe,
               That art all Conſcience, and yet rulſt by Law.
               
            
            
               
               Bleſſe (thou) this Loue ſong-ayre of my beſt wiſhes,
               (Thou art the Parent nouriſheth deſire)
               Blow gentle winds, ſafeland me at my Bliſſes,
               "Loue ſtill mouats high though Louers not aſpire.
               My Poem's truth, 
                     •
                  ond Poets ſeigne at pleaſure,
               "A Louing Subiect, is a Princes treaſure.
            
         
         
            
            THE PASSIONS OF LOVE.
            
               IN Venice faire; the Citie moſt admir'd
               There liu'd a Gallant, who Da
                        •
                     phantus hight,
               Right Nobly borne, well Letter'd, Lou'd, Deſir'd,
               Of euery Courtyer in their moſt delight:
               'So full of Pleaſaunce, that he ſeem'd to be,
               'A man begot in Venus infancie.
            
            
               His face was faire, full comely was his feature,
               Lip't like the Cherrie, with a Wantons eye:
               A Mars in anger, yet a Venus Creature,
               Made part of Cynthia, moſt of Mercurie:
               A pittied ſoule, ſo made of Loue and hate,
               Though ſtill belou'd, in Loue vnfortunate.
            
            
               Thus made by Nature, Fortune did conſpire,
               To ballance him, with weight of Cupids Wings:
               Paſſant in Loue, yet oft in great deſire;
               Sudden in Loue, not ſtayd in any thing:
               He courted all, not lou'd, and much did ſtriue,
               To die for Loue, yet neuer meant to wiue.
            
            
               
               As Nature made him faire, ſo likewiſe wittie,
               (She not content) his thoughts thus very fickle;
               Fortune that gain'd him, plac'ſt him in this Citie
               To wheele his head, which ſhe had made moſt tickle
               
                  Fortune made him belou'd and ſo diſtraught him,
               His reynes let forth, he fell, and Cupid caught him.
            
            
               Not farre from Venice, in an Abbie faire,
               (Well wal'd about) two worthy Ladyes dwelt,
               Who Virgins were; ſo ſweet and Debonayre
               The ground they trod on, of their odour ſmelt:
               Two Virgin-Siſters (matchleſſe in a Pheare)
               Had liued Virgins, wel-nigh eighteene yeare.
            
            
               
                  Eurialae the Elder Siſter's nam'd
               The other was Vrania, the wiſe:
               
                  Nature for making them was ſurely blam'd
               
                  Venus her ſelfe, by them all did deſpiſe.
               'Such beauties, with ſuch vertue, So combind
               'That al exceeds; yet nought exceeds their mind.
            
            
               
                  Eurialae, ſo ſhewes as doth the Sunne,
               When mounted on the continent of Heauen:
               Yet oft ſhe's clowded, but when her glorie's come
               Two Suns appeare to make her glory euen.
               'Her ſmiles ſends brightnes, when the Sun's not bright.
               'Her lookes giue beauty, whē the ſun lends light.
            
            
               
               Modeſt and humble of Nature milde and ſweete,
               Vnmatched beauty with her vertue meeting:
               Proud that her lowly bezaunce doth regreet
               With her chaſt ſilence ("Vertue euer keeping.)
               'This is the Sunne, that ſets, before it riſe,
               'This is a Starre. No leſſe are both her eyes.
            
            
               Her beautie pearleſſe, pearleſſe is her minde,
               Her body matchleſſe, matchleſſe are her thoughts
               Her ſelfe but one, but one like her we finde,
               Her wealth's her vertue: (ſuch vertue is not bought
               'This is a heauen on earth, makes her diuine;
               'This is the Sunne, obſcures where it doth ſhi
                     ••
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Vrania next (Oh that I had that Art
               Could write her worth) her worth no eye may ſee:
               Or that her tongue (oh heauen) were now my hart▪
               
               what ſiluer Lines in ſhowres ſhould drop from me:
               My heart ſhe keepes, how can I then indite?
               'No heart-leſſe creature, can Loue-paſsions write.
            
            
               As a black vaile vpon the wings of morne,
               Brings forth a day as cleere as Venus face,
               Or, a faire Iewell by an Ethiope worne,
               Inricheth much the eye, which it doth grace,
               Such is her beautie, if it well be told,
               Plac'ſt in a Iettie Chariot ſet with gold.
            
            
               
               Her haire, Nights Canopie in mourning weedes
               Is ſtill inthron'd, when lockt within is ſeene
               A Deitie, drawne by a paire of Steedes
               Like Venus eyes, And if the like haue beene
               Her eyes two radiant Starres, but yet diuine;
               Her face daies-ſun, (heauen al) if once they ſhine.
            
            
               Vpon the left ſide of this heauenly feature,
               (In Curious worke) Nature hath ſet a Seale,
               Wherein is writ: This is a matchleſſe Creature:
               Where wit and beautie ſtriues for the appeale.
               The Iudges choſde are Loue & Fancie; They riſe,
               And looking on her, with her left their eyes.
            
            
               Her Wit and Beautie, were at many fraies,
               Whether the deepe impreſſions did cauſe:
               
                  Nature, ſaid Beautie; Art, her Wit did praiſe:
               
                  Loue, thought her face; her tongue had Truths applauſe.
               Whileſt they contend, which was the better part;
               I lent an Eie, She rob'd me of my heart.
            
            
               Siſters theſe two are, like the Day and Night,
               Their glories by their vertues they doe Merit:
               One as the Day to ſee the others might,
               The others Night, to ſhadow a high Spirit:
               "If all were Day, how could a Louer reſt?
               "Or if all Night, Louers were too much bleſt.
            
            
               
               Both faire. As eke their bodies tall and ſlender,
               Both wiſe, yet Silence ſhewes their modeſtie:
               Both graue, although they both are yong & tender:
               Both humble hearted: Not in Pollicie
               So faire, wiſe, graue, and humble are eſteem'd,
               'Yet what men ſee, the worſt of them is deem'd.
            
            
               'Nature, that made them faire, doth loue perfection;
               'What youth counts wiſdō, Age doth bring to trial,
               'Graue years in youth: in Age needs no direction:
               'An humble heart deſerues, findes no denyall.
               Faires ring their Knells, & yet Fame neuer dies,
               "True Iudgemēt's frō the hart, not from the eies.
            
            
               Theſe two, two Siſters, Cozens to this Louer;
               He often courts, As was his wonted faſhion:
               Who ſweares alls fayre ▪ yet hath no heart to proue her,
               Seems ſtill in Loue, or in a Louers paſſion,
               Now learn's this Leſſon, & Loue-ſcoffers find it,
               "Cupid hits righteſt whē Louers do leaſt mind it.
            
            
               Although his guiſe were faſhion'd to his mind,
               And wording Loue, As complement he vſde,
               Seem'd ſtill to ieſt at Loue, and Louers kind,
               Neuer obtainde, but where he was refuſde:
               Yet now, his words with wit ſo are rewarded,
               He loues, loues two, loues all; of none regarded.
            
            
               
               Now he that laught to heare true Louers ſigh
               Can bite his Lippes vntill his heart doth bleed:
               Who Iyb'd at al, loues al; ech daies his night,
               Who ſcorn'd, now weeps & howles, writes his own meed
               'He that would bandy Loue, is now the Ball,
               'Who fear'd no hazard, himſelf hath tane the fall.
            
            
               'Beautie and Vertue, who did praiſe the faſhion,
               'VVho Loue and Fancie thought a Comodie,
               'Now is turn'd Poet, and writes Loue in Paſſion,
               'His Verſes fits the bleeding Tragedie:
               In Willow weeds right wel he acts his part,
               "His Sceanes are teares, whoſe Embryon was his hart.
            
            
               He loues, where loue, to all doth proue diſaſter,
               'His eyes no ſooner ſee, but hee's ſtraight blind;
               His kindred, friends, or foes, he followes faſter
               Then his owne good; he's now but too too kind:
               He that ſpent all, would faine find out loues treaſure,
               Extremities are for extreams the meaſure.
            
            
               Thus thinkes he of the words he ſpent in vaine;
               And wiſhes now his tongue had Eloquence:
               Hee's dumbe, all motion (that) a world could gaine,
               A Centre now without circumference:
               
                  Cupid with words, who fought: would teach him Art,
               Hath loſt his tongue, and with it left his hart.
            
            
               
               'He ſweares he loues, (the heat doth proue the fire)
               'He weepes his Loue, his teares ſhew his affection,
               'He writes his Loue; his Lynes plead his deſire,
               'He ſings his Loue, the Dittie mournes the action,
               He ſings, writs, weeps & ſweares, that he's in ſadnes
               "It is beleeu'd, not cur'd, Loue turnes to madnes.
            
            
               'Loue once diſſembled, Oaths are a grace moſt ſlender,
               'Teares oft are heard Embaſſadors for beauty:
               'Words writ in gold, an yron heart may render:
               'A paſſion ſong ſhewes much more hope thē duty,
               Oaths ſpoke in teares; words ſong, proue no true Ditty,
               "A fained Loue, muſt find a fained pitty.
            
            
               Thus is the good Daiphantus like the Flie
               Who playing with the candle feeles the flame,
               "The ſmiles of ſcorne, are Louers miſerie,
               "That ſoule's moſt vext, is grieued with his name.
               Though kind Daiphantus, do moſt loue proteſt,
               'Yet is his croſſe, ſtill to be thought in ieſt.
            
            
               Poore torturde Louer, like a periurde ſoule,
               Sweares till hee's hoarſe, yet neuer is beleeu'd,
               "(Whoſe once a Villaine, ſtill is counted foule)
               "Oh wofull pittie, when with winde releeu'de,
               'Learns this by rote, Though Loue vnconſtant be
               'They muſt proue conſtant, wil her comforts ſee.
            
            
               
               Now to the humble heart of his dread Saint,
               
                  Eurialae, he kneels, but's not regarded:
               Then to Vrania, ſighes till he growes faint,
               Such is her wit, In ſilence hee's rewarded:
               'His humble voyce, Eurialae accuſeth,
               'His ſighing Paſſion, Vrania refuſeth.
            
            
               'Then lifts he vp his eyes, but Heauen frowneth,
               'Bowes downe his head▪ Earth is a Maſſe of ſorrow:
               'Runnes to the ſeas, the ſea, it ſtormes and howleth;
               'Hies to the woods, the Birds ſad tunes do borrow:
               Heauē, Earth, ſea, Woods & al things do cōſpire,
               'He burne in Loue, yet frieſe in his deſire.
            
            
               The Ladyes Ieſt, command him to ſeigne ſtill,
               Tell him how one day, he may be in loue,
               That Louers reaſon, hath not Loues free will:
               Smile in diſdaine, to thinke of that he proues.
               'Oh, me Daiphantus, howart thou aduiſ'd?
               'When hee's leſſe pittied, then he is deſpiſ'd.
            
            
               They hold this but his humour, ſeeme ſo wiſe,
               And many Louers ſtories forth do bring,
               Court him with Shaddowes, whileſt hee catcheth Flies,
               Byting his fingers till the blood forth ſpring,
               Then do they much cōmend his careles paſſion,
               'Call him a Louer of our Courtiers Faſhion.
            
            
               
               All this doe they in modeſtie; yet free
               From thinking him ſo honeſt as in truth,
               Much leſſe ſo kinde, as to loue two or three,
               Him neere allied, and he himſelfe a Youth:
               'Till with the ſweat which from his ſuffrings life,
               'His face is pearled, like the lights his eyes.
            
            
               Then with his looke-down-caſt, & trembling hand,
               A high Dutch colour, and a Tongue like yee,
               Apart with this Eurialae to ſtand
               Endeuours He; This was his laſt diuice;
               'Yet in ſo humble ſtraines this Gallant courts her,
               'The wind being hiē, his breath it neuer hurts her
            
            
               Speechles thus ſtandes he, till ſhe fear'd him dead,
               And rubbes his temples, calls and cryes for ayde:
               Water is fetcht and ſpung'd into his head,
               Who then ſtartes vp: from dreaming as he ſayd,
               And crauing abſence of all but this Saint,
               He gan to court her, but with a heart right faint.
            
            
               Bright ſtarre of Phoebus, Goddeſſe of my thought,
               Behold thy Vaſſall, humbled on his knee:
               Behold for thee, what Gods and Art hath wrought,
               A man adoring, of Loue, the loweſt degree:
               I loue, I honor thee: (no more) There ſtayde,
               As if forſworne: Euen ſo was he affrayde.
            
            
               
               
                  Eurialae now ſpake (yet ſeem'd in wonder)
               Her lips when parting, heauen did ope his treaſure,
               Oh do not, do not loue; I will not ſunder
               A heart in two, Loue hath nor height nor meaſure,
               Liue ſtill a Virgin; Then Ile be thy louer,
               Heauē here did cloſe: no toong could after moue her.
            
            
               As if in heauen he was rauiſh'd ſo,
               Oh Loue, oh Voice, oh Face, which is the glorie:
               Oh Day, oh Night, oh Age, oh worlds of Ioy,
               Of euery part true loue might write a ſtorie,
               "Conuert my ſighes, oh to ſome angells tongue,
               "To die for Loue is life, death is beſt young.
            
            
               She gone, Vrania came; he on the flower,
               But ſight of her reuiu'd this noble ſyre;
               And as if Mars did thunder: words did ſhower,
               "(Loue ſpeakes in heate, when tis in moſt deſire)
               She made him mad, whoſe ſight had him reuiu'de
               Now ſpeaks he plainly: ſtormes paſt ye aire is glide.
            
            
               Why was I made? to beare ſuch woe and griefe?
               Why was I borne? But in Loue to be noriſht?
               Why then for Loue; Loue of all vertues chiefe,
               And I not pittied, though I be not cheriſht?
               What? did my eyes offend in vertue ſeeing?
               Oh no; true vertue is the Louers being.
            
            
               
               "Beautie and vertue, are the twins of life,
               "Loue is the mother which them forth doth bring:
               "Wit with diſcretion ends the Louers ſtrife,
               "Patience with ſilence is a glorious thing.
               "Loue crownes a man, loue giues to al due merit,
               "Men without loue, are bodies without ſpirit.
            
            
               "Loue to a mortall; is both life and treaſure,
               "Loue changd to wedlocke, doubleth in her glory,
               "Loue is the Iem, whoſe worth is without meaſure,
               "Fame dies, if not in tombe within Loues ſtorie.
               "Man that liues, liues not, if he wants content,
               "Man that dies, dies not, if with Loues conſent.
            
            
               Thus ſpake Daiphantus, and thus ſpake he well,
               Which wiſe Vrania well did vnderſtand,
               So well ſhe like it, As it did excell:
               Now grac'd ſhe him, with her white ſlender hand.
               With words moſt ſweet, A colour freſh and faire,
               In heauenly ſpeech, ſhe gan his woes declare.
            
            
               My good Daiphantus: Loue it is no toy,
               
                  Cupid though blind, yet ſtrikes the heart at laſt,
               His force you feele whoſe power muſt breed your ioy,
               This is the meede for ſcoffs you on him caſt.
               You loue, who ſcorn'd: your loue with ſcorne is quite,
               You loue yet want, your loue with want is ſpight.
            
            
               
               "Loue playes the Wanton, where ſhe meanes to kill,
               "Loue rides the Foole, and ſpurs without direction:
               "Loue weepes like you, yet laughs at your good wil:
               "Loue is of all things, but the true confection;
               "Loue is of euery thing: yet it ſelf's but one thing:
               "Loue is any thing; yet indeed is nothing.
            
            
               Wee Virgins know this; (though not the force of Loue)
               For we two Siſters liue as in a Cell:
               Nor do we ſcorne it, though we it not approue,
               By Prayer we hope, her charmes for to repel.
               And thus adew: But you in Progreſſe goe,
               To finde fit place to warble forth your woe.
            
            
               "Who firſt ſeekes mercie, is the laſt for griefe:
               Thus did ſhee part; whoſe Image ſtayd behind,
               He in a trance ſtands mute, finds no reliefe,
               (For ſhe was abſent, whoſe tongue pleaſ'd his mind)
               But like a hartleſſe, & a hurtleſſe Creature,
               In admiration of ſo ſweet a Feature.
            
            
               At length look't vp; his ſhaddow onely ſeeing,
               Sighs to himſelfe and weeps▪ yet ſilent ſtands,
               Kneels, riſeth, walkes, all this without true being,
               Sure he was there; though fettred in Loues-bands:
               "His lips departed; Parted were his bliſſes,
               "Yet for pure Loue, each lip the other kiſſes.
            
            
               
               Reuiu'd by this, or elſe Imagination,
               Recalls things paſt, the time to come laments,
               Records his Loue, but with an acclamation,
               Repents himſelfe, and all theſe Accidents:
               Now with the wings of Loue he gins to raiſe,
               His Loue to gaine, thus women he doth praiſe.
            
            
               'Women than Men are purer creatures farre,
               'The ſoule of ſoules, the bleſſed gift of Nature,
               'To men a heauen, To men the brighteſt ſtarre,
               'The pearle that's matchles; high without al ſtature,
               'So full of goodnes, that bounty waiteth ſtill
               'Vpon their trencher, feeds them with free-will.
            
            
               Where ſeeke we vertue, learne true Art or glory?
               Where finde we ioy that laſteth, ſtill is ſpending?
               But in ſweet women of mans life the Storie,
               "Alpha they are, Omega is their ending:
               Their vertues ſhine with ſuch a ſun of brightnes,
               "Yet he's vnwiſe that looks in them for Lightnes.
            
            
               Oh let my Pen relate mine owne decay,
               There are, which are not (or which ſhould not be)
               Some ſhap't like ſaints, whoſe ſteps are not the way:
               Oh, let my Verſe, not name their infamie,
               "Theſe hurt not all; but euen the wandring eye,
               "VVhich fondly gapes for his owne miſerie.
            
            
               
               Theſe do not harme, the Honeſt or the Iuſt,
               The faithfull Louer, or the vertuous Dame:
               But thoſe whoſe ſoules be onely giuen to Luſt,
               Care more for pleaſure, then for worthy Fame.
               But peace my Muſe, for now me thinkes I heare,
               An Angels voyce come warbling in my eare.
            
            
               Not diſtant farre, within a Garden faire,
               The ſweet 
                     
                        •
                     rteſia ſang vnto her Lute:
               Her voyce charmde Cupid, and perfumde the Aire,
               Made beaſts ſtand ſtill, and birds for to be mute.
               "Her voice & beauty prou'd ſo ſad a ditty,
               VVho ſaw was blind, who heard, ſoone ſued for pitty.
            
            
               (This Ladie was no Virgin, like the reſt,
               Yet neare allied;) By Florence Cittie dwelling
               "Nature, and Art, within her both were bleſt,
               "‡Muſicke in her, and Loue had his excelling:
               To viſite her faire Cozens of ſhe came,
               'Perhaps more iocound, but no whit to blame.
            
            
               
                  Fortune had croſt her with a churliſh Mate,
               (Who Strymon hight) A Palmer was his Syre:
               Full Nobly borne, And of a wealthy ſtate,
               His ſonne a childe, not borne to his deſire.
               'Thus was ſhe croſt, which cauſed her thereby,
               'Daiphantus griefe to mourne by Simpathie.
            
            
               
               
                  Daiphantus hearing ſuch a Swan-tun'd voyce,
               VVas rauiſht, as with Angells Melodie,
               Though in this Laborinth bleſt, could not reioyce,
               Nor yet could ſee, what brought this Harmony.
               At length this Goddeſſe ceaſt; began draw neare,
               'Who whē he ſaw, he ſaw not, t'was her ſpheare.
            
            
               Away then crept he, on his knees and hands,
               To hide himſelf, thoght Venus came to plauge him,
               Which ſhe eſpying "like the Sunne ſhe ſtands,
               "As with her beames, ſhe thoght for to aſwage him:
               "But like the Sun, which gaz'd on, blinds the eie,
               "So He by her, and ſo reſou'ld to die.
            
            
               At this in wonder, ſoftly did ſhe pace it,
               Yet ſuddenly was ſtayd. His Verſes ceaz'd her
               Which he late writ, forgot, thus was he grac't,
               She read them ouer, and the writing pleaſ'd her:
               'For Cupid fram'd two Mottoes in her hart,
               'The one as Dian's, the other for his Dart.
            
            
               "She read & pittied, reading pittie taught:
               "She Lou'd and hated, Hate to loue did turne:
               "She ſmilde & wep
                     •
                  , her weeping ſmiling brought:
               "She hop't & fear'd; her hopes in feare did mourne:
               She read, lou'd, ſmil'd & hop't, but twas in vaine;
               'Her teares ſtill dread; & pitty, hate did gaine.
            
            
               
               'She could haue lou'd him, ſuch true verſes making,
               'She might haue lou'd him, and yet loue beguiling,
               'She would haue kiſt him▪ but fear'd his awaking,
               'She might haue kiſt him, and ſleep ſweetly ſmiling.
               'She thus afear'd, did feare what ſhe moſt wiſhed;
               'He thus in hope, ſtill hop'd for that he miſſed.
            
            
               He lookte, They two, long each on other gazed,
               Sweet ſilence pleaded, what each other thought,
               Thus Loue and Fancie both alike amazed,
               As if their tongues and hearts had bin diſtraught.
               
                  Arteſias voyce, thus courted him at length,
               The more ſhe ſpake the greater was his ſtrength.
            
            
               Good gentle Sir, your Fortunes I bemone,
               And wiſh my ſtate ſo happy as to eaſe you,
               But ſhe that grieude you, She it is alone,
               Whoſe breath can cure, and whoſe kind words appeaſe you,
               VVere I that She; heauē ſhould my ſtar extinguiſh,
               If you but lou'd me, ere I would relinquiſh.
            
            
               Yet noble Sir, I can no loue proteſt,
               For I am wedded, (oh word full fraught with woe)
               But in ſuch manner, as good loue is bleſt,
               In honeſt kindneſſe, Ile not proue your foe:
               Mine owne experience doth my counſell proue,
               "I know to pittie, yet not care to loue.
            
            
               
               A Siſter, yet nature hath giuen me
               A virgin true, right faire, and ſweetly kind;
               I
                     •
                   for her good, Fortune hath driuen me
               To be a comfort: your heart ſhall be her minde,
               My woes yet tells me, ſhe is beſt a maide:
               And heere ſhee ſtopt her teares, her words thus ſtaide.
            
            
               
                  Daiphantus then in number without meaſure
               Began her praiſes which no Pen can end,
               Oh Saint, oh Sun of heauen and earth the treaſure:
               Who liues if not thy honour to defend?
               "Ah me, what mortall can be in loue ſo ſtrange,
               "That wedding vertue will a whoring range?
            
            
               She like the morning is ſtill freſh and faire,
               The Elements of her, they all do borrow:
               The Earth, the Fire, the VVaters, and the Ayre,
               There ſtrength, heate, moiſture, liuelines: no ſorrow
               Can vertue change? beauty hath but one place,
               The hearts ſtill perfect; though impald the face.
            
            
               Oh eyes, no eyes, but Stars ſtill cleerly ſhining,
               Oh face, no face, but ſhape of Angells faſhion:
               Oh lips, no lips, but bliſſe, by kiſſe refining,
               Oh heart, no heart, but of true loue right Paſſion,
               Oh eyes, face, lips, and heart, if not too cruell,
               To ſee, feele, taſt, and loue, earths rareſt Iewell.
            
            
               
               This ſaid, he pauſ'd, new praiſes now deuiſing,
               Kneels to Apollo, for his skill and Art,
               When came the Ladies, At which he ariſing,
               Twixt lip, and lip, he had nor lips nor heart.
               'His eyes, their eyes, ſo ſweetly did incumber,
               Although awak't, yet in a golden ſlumber.
            
            
               Moſt like a Lion, raiſ'd from ſlumbring eaſe,
               He caſt his lookes full grimly them among:
               'At length, he firmly knit what might appeaſe
               'His Brow: lok't ſtedfaſtly and long
               'At one: till all their eyes with his eyes met alike
               'On faire Vitullia; who his heart did ſtrike.
            
            
               
                  Vitullia faire, yet browne, So mixt together,
               As Art and Nature ſtroue, which was the pureſt:
               So ſweet her ſmilings were, a grace to either,
               That heauens glorie in that face ſeem'd trueſt.
               "Venus excepted; when the God her wooed,
               "Was ne're ſo faire, ſo tempting yet ſo good.
            
            
               'VVonder not Mortalls, though all Poets ſaine,
               The Muſes Graces were in this She's fauour:
               'Nor wonder, though he ſtroue his tongue to gaine,
               For I leeſe mine, in thinking of his labour.
               "Well may he loue, I write, & all wits praiſe her,
               "She's ſo all humble; Learning cannot raiſe her.
            
            
               
               'Daiphantus oft ſigh't Oh; oft ſaid faire,
               'Then lookes, and ſighes: and thē cryes wonderfull;
               'Thus did he long: and truely t'was not rare
               'The obiect was, which made his mind ſo dull.
               'Pray pardon him; for better to cry Oh,
               'Then feele that paſſiō which cauſed him ſigh ſo.
            
            
               Now, all were ſilent, not alone this Louer:
               Till came Iſmenio, Brother to this Saint,
               Whoſe haſte made ſweate, his tongue he could not proue her,
               For this aga'ſt him that his heart was ſaint:
               Thus all amaz'd; none knowing any cauſe,
               "Iſmenio breathleſſe, here had time to pauſe.
            
            
               At length Iſmenio, who had wit and skill,
               Queſtion'd the reaſon of this ſtrange effect:
               At laſt related (Haſte out went his will)
               He told them, he was ſent them to direct
               VVhere hunting ſports their eyes ſhould better pleaſe,
               Who firſt went foorth, Daiphantus moſt did eaſe.
            
            
               They gone, Daiphantus to his Standiſh hies,
               Thinkes in his writs Vitullia's beauties weare,
               But what he wrote, his Muſe not iuſtifies,
               Bids him take time. "Loue badly writes in feare:
               Her worthy praiſe if he would truly wite,
               Her Kiſſes, Nector, muſt the ſame indite.
            
            
               
               (Art and ſweet nature, let your influence droppe
               From me like rayne; Yes, yes, in golden ſhowres:
               "(VVhoſe end is Vertue, let him neuer ſtoppe)
               But fall on her like dewe on ſprinkling flowers:
               That both together meeting, may beget
               An Orpheus, Two Iems in a ſoyle richly ſet.
            
            
               Thus Rauiſht, then diſtracted as was deem'd,
               Not taught to write of Loue in this extreame,
               In Loue, in feare, yea, trembling as it ſeem'd,
               If praiſing her, he ſhould not keepe the meane:
               Thus vext he wept, his teares intreated pittie,
               "(But Loue vnconſtant, tunes a wofull Dittie.
            
            
               Now kneels to Venus, Faithfulneſſe proteſted,
               To this, none elſe, this was his onely Saint,
               Vow'd e're her ſeruice, Or to be arreſted
               To Venus Cenſure; Thus he left to faint:
               His Loue brought wit, & wit ingrendred Sprite,
               True loue and wit, thus learn'd him to indite.
            
            
               As the milde lambe, runs forth frō ſhepheards fold,
               By rauenous Woolues is caught and made a praye:
               So is my Sence, by which Loue taketh hold,
               Tormented more then any tongue can ſaye:
               The difference is, they torturde ſo doe die,
               I feede the torment, breeds my miſerie.
            
            
               
               'Conſum'd by her I liue, ſuch is her glory,
               'Deſpis'd of her I loue, I more adore her,
               Ile ne're write ought, but of her vertues ſtorie,
               "Beautie vnblaſted is the eyes rich ſtorer.
               If I ſhould die; Oh who would ring loues knell?
               "Faint not Daiphantus, wiſe mē loue not ſo well.
            
            
               Like Heauens Artiſt the Aſtronomer,
               Gazing on Starres oft, to the Earth doth fall,
               So I Daiphantus, now Loues Harbinger,
               Am quite condemned, to Loues Funerall:
               "VVho falls by women, by them oft doth riſe,
               "Ladyes haue lips to kiſſe as well as Eyes.
            
            
               But tuſh, thou foole, thou lou'ſt all thou ſeeſt,
               VVho once thou loueſt, thou ſhouldſt change her neuer
               Conſtant in Loue Daiphantus ſee thou beeſt,
               If thou hope comfort, Loue but once, and euer.
               
                  Fortune, Oh, be ſo good to let me finde
               A Ladie liuing, of this conſtant minde.
            
            
               Oh, I would weare her, in my hearts heart-gore,
               And place her on the continent of ſtarres:
               Thinke heauē and earth like her, had not one more,
               VVould fight for her, till all my face were skarres.
               'But if that women be ſuch fickle Shees,
               "Men may be like them in infirmities.
            
            
               
               Oh no; Daiphantus, women are not ſo,
               Tis but their ſhadowes (Pictures meerly painted:
               Then turne poore louer, (Oh heauen) not to my wo
               Then to Vitullia: with that word he fainted,
               Yet ſhe that wounds, did heale, like her no heauen
               "Ods in a man, a woman can make euen.
            
            
               Oh (My) Vitullia, let me write (That) downe,
               Oh ſweete Vitullia; nature made thee ſweete,
               Oh kind Vitullia; (Truth hath the ſureſt ground:
               Ile weepe, or laugh, ſo that our hearts may meet:
               "Loue is not alwayes merry, nor ſtill weeping,
               "A drop of each, Loues ioies are ſwets in ſleeping
            
            
               (Her name) in golden letters on my breſt Ile graue,
               Around my temples in a garland weare,
               My art ſhall be, her fauour for to haue:
               My learning ſtill, her honour high to reare,
               My lips ſhall cloze, but to her ſacred name
               My tongue be ſilent, but to ſpread her Fame.
            
            
               In Woodes, Groaues, Hills, Vitullias name ſhall ring
               In Medowes, Orchiards, Gardens, ſweeteſt & faire,
               Ile learne the birds, her name alone to ſing:
               All Quires ſhall chaunt it in a heauenly Aire,
               'The Day ſhall be her Vſher; Night her Page:
               'Heauen her Pallace, and this Earth her ſtage.
            
            
               
               'Virgins pure chaſtnes in her eyes ſhall be,
               'Women, true loue from her true mind ſhall learne,
               'Widdowes, their mourning in her face ſhall ſee,
               'Children, their dutie in her ſpeech diſcerne:
               And all of them in loue with each but I,
               Who feare her loue, will make me feare to die.
            
            
               'My Oriſons are ſtill to pleaſe this creature,
               'My vallour ſleepes, but when ſhe is defended:
               'My wits ſtill Iaded, but when I praiſe her feature,
               'My life is hers▪ In her begun, and ended.
               Oh happy day, wherein I weare not willow:
               Thrice bleſſed night; wherin her breſt's my pillow.
            
            
               'Ile ſerue her, as the Miſtreſſe of all pleaſure,
               'Ile loue her, as the Goddeſſe of my ſoule:
               'Ile keepe her, as the Iewell of all treaſure,
               'Ile liue with her; yet out of loues controule:
               'That all may know; I will not from her part,
               'Ile double locke her, in my lips and heart.
            
            
               'If ere I ſigh, It ſhall be for her pittie,
               'If ere I mourne, her Funerall drawes neare:
               'If ere I ſing: her vertue is the dittie,
               'If ere I ſmile, her beautie is the ſpheare:
               'All that I doe, is that I may admire her,
               'All that I wiſh, is that I ſtill deſire her.
            
            
               
               But peace Daiphantus: Muſicke is onely ſweete,
               When without diſcord; A Conſort makes a heauē,
               The eare is rauiſht, when true voyces meete,
               "Oddes, but in Muſicke neuer makes things euen.
               In voyces difference, breeds a pleaſant Dittie;
               In loue, a difference brings a ſcornfull pittie.
            
            
               VVhoſe was the tongue, Eurialae defended?
               VVhoſe was the wit, Vrania did praiſe?
               VVhoſe were the lips Arteſias voice commended?
               Whoſe was the hart, lou'd all, al crown'd with baies:
               Sure t'was my ſelfe; what did I? O I tremble,
               Yet Ile not weep, wiſe men may loue diſſemble.
            
            
               Fie no; fond loue hath euer his reward,
               A Sea of teares, A world of ſighes and grones:
               Ah me, Vitullia will haue no regard
               To eaſe my griefe, and cure me of my mones:
               If once her eare, ſhould hearken to that voyce
               Relates my Fortunes in Loues fickle choyſe.
            
            
               But now, I will their worth with her's declare,
               That Truth by Error, may haue her true beeing,
               "Things good, are leſſned by the thing that's rare,
               "Beautie increaſeth, by a blackneſſe ſeeing.
               'Wo ſo is faire and chaſte, they ſure are beſt,
               'Such is Vitullia, ſuch are all the reſt.
            
            
               
               'But ſhe is faire, and chaſte, and wiſe, what then?
               'So are they all, without a difference:
               'She's faire, chaſte, wiſe, and kinde, yes to all men,
               The reſt are ſo: Number makes Excellence.
               'She's faire, chaſte, wiſe, kind, rich, yet humble,
               'They three her equall: "vertue cā neuer ſtumble.
            
            
               'Vtiullia is the Sunne, they ſtarres of night,
               'Yet night's the boſome wherin the Sun doth reſt:
               'The Moone her ſelfe borrowes of the Suns light,
               'All by the ſtarres take counſell to be bleſt,
               "The day's the Sunne: yet Cupid can it blind,
               "The ſtars at night: ſleepe cures ye
                   troubled mind.
            
            
               'She is a Roſe, the fairer, ſo the ſweeter,
               'She is a Lute, whoſe belly tunes the Muſicke,
               'She is my Proſe, yet makes me ſpeake all Meeter,
               'She is my life, yet ſicknes me with Phiſicke:
               'She is a Virgin, that makes her a Iewell,
               'She will not loue me, therein ſhe is cruell.
            
            
               "Eurialae, is like ſleepe when one is wearie;
               "Vrania is like a golden ſlumber,
               "Arteſias voyce, like dreames that makes man merry,
               "Vitullia, like a Bed, all theſe in comber.
               1 Sleepe, 2 Slumber, 3 Dreames, vpon a 4 Bed is beſt,
               Firſt, Second, Third, but in the Fourth is bleſt.
            
            
               
               Oh, but Vitullia, what? She's wonders prittie,
               Oh I, and what? ſo is ſhe very faire;
               Oh yes, and what? ſhe's like her ſelfe moſt wittie:
               And yet, what is ſhe? She is all but Aire.
               What can Earth be, but Earth? ſo we are all,
               'Peace then my Muſe; Opinion oft doth fall.
            
            
               ;Eurialae, I honour for humilitie,
               'Vrania, I reuerence for her wit,
               'Arteſia, I adore for true agillitie,
               'Three Graces for the Goddeſſes moſt fit:
               Each of theſe gifts are bleſſed in their faces,
               Oh, what's Vitullia, who hath all theſe Graces?
            
            
               She's but a Ladie, So are all the reſt,
               As pure, as ſweet, as modeſt, yea as loyall;
               Yes, She's the ſhadow (ſhadowes are the leſt)
               Which tells the houre of vertue by her Dyall:
               'By her, men ſee there is on earth a heauen,
               'By thē, men know her vertues are match't euen
            
            
               In prayſing all, much time he vainly ſpent,
               Yet thought none worthy but Vitullia;
               Then cal'd to minde, he could not well repent
               The loue he bare the wiſe Vrania.
               
               
                  Eurialae, Arteſia, all, ſuch beauties had,
               Which as they pleaſ'd him, made him well nigh mad.
            
            
               
               'Eurialae, her beautie his eye-ſight harmed,
               'Vrania, her wit his tongue incenſed,
               'Arteſia, her voyce, his eares had charmed,
               'Thus poore Daiphantus, was with loue tormented.
               
                  Vitullius beautie as he did impart,
               The others vertues vanquiſhed his heart.
            
            
               At length he grew, as in an extaſie
               Twixt loue and loue, whoſe beautie was the truer,
               His thoughts thus diuers as in a Lunacie,
               He ſtarts and ſtares, to ſee whoſe was the purer:
               Oft treads a Maze, runs, ſuddenly then ſtayes,
               Thus with himſelfe, himſelf makes many frayes.
            
            
               Now with his fingers, like a Barber ſnaps,
               Playes with the fire-pan, as it were a Lute,
               Vnties his ſhoe-ſtrings, then his lips he laps,
               Whiſtles awhile, and thinkes it is a Flute:
               At length, a glaſſe preſents it to his ſight,
               Where well he acts, fond loue in paſſions right.
            
            
               His chin he ſtrokes, ſweares beardles men kiſſe beſt,
               His lips anoynts, ſayes Ladyes vſe ſuch faſhions,
               Spets on his Napkin; termes that the Bathing Ieſt,
               Then on the duſt, deſcribes the Courtiers paſſion.
               Then humble cal's: though they do ſtill aſpire,
               "Ladies then fall, when Lords riſe by Deſire.
            
            
               
               Then ſtradling goes, ſaies Frenchmen feare no Beares
               Vowes he will trauaile, to the Siege of Breſt,
               
               Swears Captaines, they doe all againſt the heare:
               Proteſts Tabacco, is A ſmoke-dride Ieſt,
               Takes vp his pen, for a Tabacco-pipe;
               Thus all beſmeard, each lip the other wipe.
            
            
               His breath, he thinkes the ſmoke; his tongue a cole,
               Then calls for bottell-ale; to quench his thirſt:
               Runs to his Inke-pot, drinkes, then ſtops the hole,
               And thus growes madder, then he was at firſt.
               
                  Taſſo, he finds, by that of Hamlet, thinkes.
               Tearmes him a mad-man; than of his Inkhorne drinks.
            
            
               Calls Players fooles, the foole he iudgeth wiſeſt,
               Will learne them Action, out of Chaucers Pander:
               Proues of their Poets bawdes euen in the higheſt,
               Then drinkes a health; and ſweares it is no ſlander.
               Puts off his cloathes; his ſhirt he onely weares,
               Much like mad-Hamlet; thus as Paſſion teares.
            
            
               Who calls me forth from my diſtracted thought?
               Oh Serberus, if thou, I prethy ſpeake?
               Reuenge if thou? I was thy Riuall ought,
               In purple gores Ile make the ghoſts to reake:
               
                  Vitullia, oh Vitullia, be thou ſtill,
               Ile haue reuenge, or harrow vp my will.
            
            
               
               Ile fallow vp the wrinkles of the earth,
               Goe downe to Hell and knocke at Plutoes gate,
               Ile turne the hilles to vallies: make a dearth
               'Of vertuous honour to eternall Fate.
               Ile beat the windes, & make the tydes keepe back,
               Reigne in the ſea, That Louers haue no wrack.
            
            
               Yes, tell the Earth, it is a Murderer,
               Hath ſlayne Vitullia, oh, Vitullia's dead:
               Ile count blinde Cupid for a Conjurer,
               And with wilde horſes will I rend his head.
               I with a Pickax, will plucke out his braines,
               Laugh at this Boy, eaſe Louers of much paines.
            
            
               Oh then, Ile flie, Ile ſwim, yet ſtay; and then
               Ile ride the Moone, & make the cloudes my Horſe,
               "Make me a Ladder of the heads of men,
               Clime vp to heauen: yes, my tongue will force
               To Gods and Angels; Oh, Ile neuer end,
               Till for Vituillia all my cryes I ſpend.
            
            
               Then like a ſpirit of pure Innocence,
               Ile be all white, and yet behold Ile cry
               Reuenge, Oh Louers this my ſufferance,
               Or elſe for Loue, for Loue, a ſoule muſt die.
               
                  Eurialae, Vrania, Arteſia, Soe:
               Heart rent in ſunder, with theſe words of woe.
            
            
               
               But ſoft, here comes: who comes? and not calls out
               Of Rape and Murder, Loue and Villanie:
               "Stay wretched man, (who runs (doth neuer doubt
               It is thy Soule, thy Saint, thy Deitie:
               Then call the Birds to ring a mourning Knell,
               For mad Daiphantus, who doth loue ſo well.
            
            
               Oh ſing a Song, parted in parcels three,
               I'le beare the burthen ſtill of all your griefe,
               "Who is all woe, can tune his miſerie
               "To diſcontents, but not to his reliefe.
               Oh kiſſe her, kiſſe her, And yet do not do ſo:
               They bring ſome ioy, but with ſhort ioyes long wo.
            
            
               Vpon his knees; Oh Goddeſſes behold,
               A Caitife wretch bemoning his miſhappe,
               If euer pittie, were hired without gold,
               Lament Daiphantus, once in Fortunes Lappe:
               Lament Daiphantus, whoſe good deeds now ſlū
                  ber,
               Lamēt a louer, whoſe wo no tongue can nūmber.
            
            
               My woes: there did he ſtay, fell to the ground,
               Rightly diuided into blood and teares,
               As if thoſe words had giuen a mortall wound,
               So lay he foming, with the waight of cares.
               Who this had ſeene, and ſeeing had not wept,
               Their hearts were ſure from croſſes euer kept.
            
            
               
               The Ladies all, who late from hunting came,
               Vntimely came, to view this Mappe of ſorrow,
               Surely all wept, and ſooth it was no ſhame,
               For, from his grief, the world might truly borrow.
               As he lay ſpeechleſſe, grou'ling, all vndreſt,
               So they ſtood weeping, ſilence was their beſt.
            
            
               
                  Iſmenio with theſe Ladies bare a part,
               And much bemoan'de him, though he knew not why,
               But kinde compaſſion, ſtrooke him to the heart,
               To ſee him mad: much better ſee one die.
               Thus walkes Iſmenio
                  ▪ and yet oft did pauſe:
               At length, A writing made him know the cauſe.
            
            
               He read, till words like thunder pierſt his hart;
               He ſigh't, till ſorrow ſeem'd it ſelfe to mourne,
               He wept, till teares like yſacles did part,
               He pittied ſo, that piſtle hare did ſcorne.
               He read to ſigh, and weepe for pitties ſake,
               The leſſe he read, the leſſe his heart did quake.
            
            
               At length reſolu'd, he vp the writing takes,
               And to the Ladies trauells as with childe,
               The birth was Loue, (ſuch loue (as diſcord makes;
               The Midwife Patience, thus in words full mild
                     •
                  
               
               He writ with teares, that which with blood was writ,
               The more he read, the more they pittied it.
            
            
               
               They looke vpon Daiphantus, he not ſeeing,
               And wondred at him, but his ſence was parted,
               They lou'd him much; though little was his beeing,
               And ſought to cure him, thogh he was faint harted:
               
                  Iſmenio thus, with ſpeed reſolues to eaſe him,
               By a ſweet ſong, his Siſter ſhould appeaſe him.
            
            
               
                  Iſmenio was reſolu'd, he would be eaſed,
               And was reſolu'd, of no meanes, but by Muſicke,
               Which is ſo heauenly that it hath releaſed
               The danger oft, not to be cur'd by Phiſicke.
               Her tongue and hand, thus married together
               Could not but pleaſe him, who ſo loued either.
            
            
               But firſt before his madneſſe were alayd,
               They offred Incence at Dianaes Shrine,
               And much beſought her, now to be apayd:
               Which was ſoone granted to theſe Saints diuine.
               Yet ſo: that mad Daiphantus muſt agree,
               Neuer to loue, but liue in Chaſtitie.
            
            
               Thus they adjur'd him, by the Gods on high,
               Neuer hence foorth to ſhoote with Cupids Quiuer,
               Nor loue to feine; for ther's no remedie,
               If once relapſt, then was he mad for euer:
               Tortur'd Daiphantus, now a ſigne did make,
               And kinde Iſmenio, this did vndertake.
            
            
               
               Then gan Arteſia play vpon her Lute,
               Whoſe voyce ſang ſweetly, now a mourning Ditty,
               "Loue her admir'd, thogh he that lou'd were mute,
               
                  Cupid himſelfe feard he ſhould ſue for pittie.
               Oh, wondrous vertue! words ſpokē are but wind,
               But ſung to prick-ſong, they are ioyes diuine.
            
            
               'I heard her ſing, but ſtill methought I dreamed,
               'I heard her play, but I me thought did ſleepe,
               'The Day and Night, till now were neuer weaned,
               'Venus, and Dian rauiſht; both did weepe.
               'They which each hated, now agreed to ſay,
               'This was the Goddeſſe both of night and day.
            
            
               My heart and eares, ſo rauiſht with her voyce,
               I ſtill forgot, what ſtill I heard her ſing
               The tune: Surely of Sonnets this was all the choice,
               Poets do keepe it as a charming thing.
               'What thinke you of the ioyes that Daiphātus had,
               'When for ſuch Muſicke I would ſtill be mad?
            
            
               The Birdes came chirping to the windowes round,
               And ſo ſtood ſtill, as if they rauiſht weare,
               Beaſts forth the forreſt came, brought with the ſoūd,
               The Lyon layd him downe as if in feare.
               The Fiſhes in freſh Riuers ſwam to ſhore,
               'Yea, had not Nature ſtayd them, had done more.
            
            
               
               This was a ſight, whoſe eyes had euer ſeene?
               This was a voice, ſuch muſick nere was heard,
               This paradice was it, where who had bene
               'Might well haue thought of hell and not afeard.
               Sure hell it ſelfe, was heauen in this ſpheare,
               'Mad-men, wild beaſts, & all, here tamed weare.
            
            
               Like as a King his chaire of ſtate aſcendeth,
               (Being newly made a God vpon the earth:
               In ſtately amounts till ſtep by ſtep, be endeth,
               Thinkes it to heauen A true aſſending birth:
               So hies Daiphantus, on his legs and feete,
               As if Daiphantus, now ſome God ſhould meete.
            
            
               He lookes vpon himſelfe, not without wonder,
               He wonders at himſelfe, what he might be:
               He laughes vnto himſelfe, thinkes he's a ſlumber,
               He weepes vnto himſelfe, himſelfe to ſee:
               And ſure to heare and ſee what he had done,
               Might make him ſweare, but now ye world begun.
            
            
               Fully reuiued, at laſt Arteſia ceaſt,
               When Beaſts and Birds, ſo hideous noiſe did make
               That almoſt all turnd furie, feare was the leaſt,
               Yea ſuch a feare, as forc't them cry and quake.
               Till that Daiphantus, more of reaſon had,
               Then they which mon'd him, lately being mad.
            
            
               
               He with more ioy, than words could well declare,
               And with more words, than his new tongue could tell,
               Did ſtriue to ſpeake, ſuch was his loue & care
               Thus to be thankfull: But yet knew not well,
               'VVhether his tongue, not tun'd vnto his hart,
               'Or modeſt ſilence, would beſt act his part.
            
            
               But ſpeake he will; then giue attentiue eare
               To heare him tell a wofull Louers ſtorie,
               His hands and eyes to heauen vp did he reare:
               Griefe taught him ſpeech; though he to ſpeake were ſorrie.
               But whatſoeuer be a Louers paſſion,
               
                  Daiphantus ſpeakes his, in a mourning faſhion.
            
            
               As o're the Mountains walkes, the wandring ſoule
               Seeking for reſt in his vnreſting ſpirit,
               So good Daiphantus (thinking to inroule
               Himſelfe in grace, by telling of loues merit)
               VVas ſo diſtracted, how he ſhould commend it,
               VVhere he began, he wiſhed ſtill to end it.
            
            
               
                  Eurialae, my eyes are hers in right,
               
                  Vrania, my tongue is as her dewe▪
               
               
                  Arteſia, my eares, to her I dight,
               My heart to each. And yet my heart to you:
               To you Vitullia, to you, and all the reſt:
               VVho once me curſed; now to make me bleſt.
            
            
               
               1 Beauty & 2, wit did 1 wound & 2 pearce my heart,
               3 Muſicke and 4 Fauour 3 gain'd and 4 kept it ſure:
               Loue lead by 3 Fancie to the 4 laſt I part,
               Loue lead by Reaſon to the firſt is truer.
               3 Beautie and wit firſt conquered, made me yeild
               3 Muſicque & 4 Fauour, reſcued, got the field.
            
            
               To 1 Wit and 2 Beautie, my firſt loue I giue,
               Muſicke 3 & 4 Fauours, my ſecond loue haue gaind,
               All made me mad: and all did me relieue:
               Though one recur'd me, when I was ſuſtaind:
               Thus troth to ſay, to all I loue did owe,
               Therefore to all my loue I euer vowe.
            
            
               Thus to the firſt 1 & 2 his right hand he did tender,
               His left hand to the 3 & 4 laſt, moſt louingly, 4:
               His tongue kind thankes, firſt to the laſt did render,
               The while his lookes were bent indifferently:
               Thus he ſalutes all, & to increaſe his Bliſſes,
               From lip, to lip, each Ladie now he kiſſes.
            
            
               
                  Iſmenio (in humble wiſe ſalutes he)
               With gracious language he returnes his heart,
               His words ſo ſweetly to his tongue now ſutes he,
               As what he ſpake, ſhew'd learning with good Art.
               
                  Iſmenio pleaſde Daiphantus, Daiphantus all,
               "When loue, gaines loue, for loue; this loue we cal
            
            
               
               
                  Vrania now, bethought what was proteſted
               By yong Iſmenio at Dianas ſhrine;
               Coniur'd Daiphantus, That no more he Ieſted,
               With Loue or Fancie, for they were Diuine:
               And if he did, that there they all would pray,
               He ſtill might liue in loue, both night and day.
            
            
               This greeu'd him much, but follie twas to grieue,
               His now obedience ſhew'd his owne freewill:
               He ſwore he would not loue (in ſhewe) atchieue,
               But liue a virgin, chaſt and ſpotleſſe ſtill.
               Which ſaide: ſuch Muſicke ſuddenly delighted,
               As all were rauiſht, and yet all affrighted.
            
            
               Here parted all, not without Ioy and ſadnes,
               Some wept, ſome ſmilde, a world it was to here them:
               Both ſprings heere met, woe heere was cloath'd with gladnes
               Heauen was their comfort, it alone did cheere them.
               
                  Daiphantus from theſe ſprings, ſome fruit did gather,
               "Experience is an Infant, though an ancient father.
            
            
               Sweet Lady know "the ſoule lookes through our eye-ſights,
               "Content liues not in ſhewes, or beauty ſeeing,
               "Peace not from nomber, nor ſtrength in high ſpirits:
               "Ioy dies with vertue, yet liues in vertues being.
               "Beautie is maskt, where vertue is not hidden,
               "Man ſtill deſires that fruite he's moſt forbidden.
            
            
               
               "Iewels for Vertue, not for beautie prizde,
               "Whats ſildome ſeen breeds wonder, we admir'de it:
               "Kings Lines are rare▪ and therefore well aduiz'de,
               "Wiſe-men not often talke, Fooles ſtill deſire it.
               "Womē are books (kept cloſe) they hold much treaſure,
               "Vnclaſpt: ſweet ills: moſt woe lies hid in pleaſure.
            
            
               "Who ſtudies Arts alike, can he proue Doctor?
               "Who ſurfets hardly liues? Drunkards recouer:
               "Whoſe wils his law, that cōſcience needs no Proctor;
               "Whē men turn beaſts looke there for briutiſh Louers.
               "Thoſe eies are pore-blind, looke equally on any,
               "Thought be a vertue to hinder one by many.
            
            
               "Who gains by trauel, leeſe lordſhips for their Manors,
               "Muſt Tarquin-rauiſh ſome; Hell on that glory,
               "Whoſe life's in Healths, death ſooneſt gains thoſe Banors,
               "Luſt ſtill is puniſht, though treaſon write the ſtorie.
               "A rowling eye, A Globe, new worlds diſcouer,
               "Who ſtill wheels round, is But a damned Louer.
               
            
            
               "Doth Faith and Troth lye Bathing? Is Luſt pleaſure?
               "Can Commons be as ſweete, as Land incloſ'd?
               "Then virgin ſinne may well be counted pleaſure,
               "Where ſuch Lords rule, who liues not ill diſpoſ'd?
               "True Loue's a Phoenix, but One vntill it dyes,
               "Luſt is a Cockatrice, in all, but in her eyes.
            
            
               
               Here did he end, more bleſſed than his wiſhes.
               "(Fame's at the high when Loue indights the Story:)
               "The priuate life brings with it heauenly bliſſes.
               "Sweete Contemplation much increaſeth glorie:
               Ile leaue him to the learning of Loues Spell,
               "Better part friends, than follow Feends to hell.
            
            
               
                  Iſmenio, with Vitullia went together,
               Perhaps both wounded with blinde Cupids Dart,
               Yet duſt they not relate their Loue to either,
               "(Loue if once pittied pearceth to the Hart:
               But ſure Vitullia, is ſo faire a Marke,
               
                  Cupid would court her, though but by the darke.
            
            
               
                  Arteſia, ſhe muſt goe (the more ſhe's grieu'd)
               To churliſh Strymon, her adopted Mate,
               
                  Cupid though blind, yet pittied and relieu'd,
               This modeſt Lady with ſome happie Fate:
               "For what but Vertue, which doth all good nouriſh,
               "Could brook her fortunes, much leſſe loue & cheriſh
            
            
               
                  Eurialae, with good Vrania ſtayd▪
               
               '(VVhere Vertue dwels they onely had their being)
               "Beauty and wit ſtill feare, are not diſmayd,
               "For where they dwell, Loue euer will be prying.
               Theſe two, were one, All good, each could impart,
               One was their Fortune, and one was their heart.
            
            
               
               ("Beautie and Vertue, was true Friend to either,
               "Heauen is the ſpheare, where all men ſeeke for glorie:
               "Earth is the Graue, where ſinners ioyne together,
               "Hell keepes the booke, inrowles each luſtfull ſtorie.
               "Liue as we will, death makes of all concluſion,
               "Die then to liue, or life is thy confuſion.
            
            
               'Beautie and wit in theſe, fed on affection,
               'Labour and induſtry, were their Twins of life:
               'Loue, and true Bounty, were in their ſubiction,
               'Their Bodies with their ſpirits had no ſtrife.
               Such were theſe two, As grace did them defend,
               Such are theſe two, As with theſe two I end.
            
            FINIS.
            
               Non Amori ſed Virtuti.
            
         
         
            
            The Paſsionate mans Pilgrimage, ſuppoſed to be written by one at the point of death.
            
               GIue me my Scallop ſhell of quiet,
               My ſtaffe of Faith to walke vpon,
               My Scrip of Ioy, Immortall diet,
               My bottle of ſaluation:
               My Gowne of Glory, hopes true gage,
               And thus Ile take my pilgrimage.
            
            
               Blood muſt be my bodies balmer,
               No other balme will there be giuen
               Whilſt my ſoule like a white Palmer
               Trauels to the land of heauen,
               Ouer the ſiluer mountaines,
               Where ſpring the Nectar fountaines:
               And there Ile kiſſe
               The Bowle of bliſſe,
               And drinke my eternall fill
               On euery milken hill.
               My ſoule will be a drie before,
               But after it, will nere thirſt more.
            
            
               
               And by the happie blisfull way
               More peacefull Pilgrims I ſhall ſee,
               That haue ſhooke off their gownes of clay,
               And goe appareld freſh like mee.
               Ile bring them firſt
               To ſlake their thirſt,
               And then to taſt thoſe Nectar ſuckets
               At the cleare wells
               Where ſweetnes dwells,
               Drawne vp by Saints in Chriſtall buckets.
            
            
               And when our bottles and all we,
               Are fild with immortalitie:
               Then the holy paths weele trauell
               Strewde with Rubies thicke as grauell,
               Seelings of Diamonds, Saphire floores,
               High walles of Corall and Pearle Bowres.
            
            
               From thence to heauens Bribeles hall
               Where no corrupted voyces brall,
               No Conſcience molten into gold,
               Nor forg'd accuſers bought and ſold,
               No cauſe deferd, nor vaine ſpent Iorney,
               For there Chriſt is the Kings Atturney:
               VVho pleades for all without degrees,
               And he hath Angells, but no fees.
            
            
               
               VVhen the grand twelue million Iury,
               Of our ſinnes and ſinfull fury,
               Gainſt our ſoules blacke verdicts giue,
               Chriſt pleades his death, and then we liue,
               Be thou my ſpeaker taintles pleader,
               Vnblotted Lawyer, true proceeder,
               Thou moueſt ſaluation euen for almes▪
               
               Not with a bribed Lawyers palmes.
            
            
               And this is my eternall plea,
               To him that made Heauen, Earth and Sea,
               Seeing my fleſh muſt die ſo ſoone,
               And want a head to dine next noone,
               Iuſt at the ſtroke when my vaines ſtart and ſpred
               Set on my ſoule an euerlaſting head.
               Then am I readie like a palmer fit,
               To tread thoſe bleſt paths which before I writ.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   