
      
         
            
            
            Scoggins Ieſtes. VVHEREIN is declared his pleaſant paſtimes in France; and of his meriments among the Fryers: full of delight and honeſt mirth.
            LONDON, Printed by Raph Blower dwelling on Lambert hill neare old Fiſh ſtreet 1613.
         
      
      
         
            
            Certaine merrie Ieſtes of Scoggin, tranſlated out of French.
         
             How Scoggin was baniſhed out of England.
            
               VPon a time there was a Goldſmith, of ye Citie of London, that had a faite maid to his daughter with whom Scoggin fell in loue, and did long time ſeeke to winne her to his pleaſure, whom hee hunted in all places where ſhee went: not withſtanding ſhée ſlatly denied him, which bred the greater fire to his beaſtly deſire, and therefore in an euening as this maide went ſome two myle or, to a houſe that her Father had, Scoggin met her by the way attired in blew Sarcenet, ſet all ouer with little

ſtarres of golde hauing a lawne ouer his face, and with a counterfeit voyce ſhewed her that hee was ſome ſtrange fortune teller: declaring vnto her that ſtrange miſery would ſhortly fal vpon the people of the Citie for their ſinnes, with many other ſpeeches touching the ſame purpoſe, and further willed her to ſhew it to the people that they might with faſting and prayer pacifie Gods anger, telling her withall how ſhe had refuſed the loue and friendſhip of a good and vertuous man named Scoggin: who in the ſame place (a litle before) made ſute vnto her for that ſhée denyed him, and therefore if be ſought any thing a
                  •
                her hands hereafter, that ſhe ſhould obey him, and there ſhould great happineſſe follow her by it, and withall charging her that ſhe ſhould not diſcouer it to any creature liuing: the ſimple wench beléeued all for truth, and deliuered it as a Propheſie to her acquaintance to fore warne them of that which ſhould happen amongſt them: for the which cauſe (many at the firſt feared much, and in the meane time this poore wench yéelded to his wantonneſſe, which was ſhortly after ſpied by the wenches great belly, and the practiſe diſcouered, 
                  〈◊〉
                which cauſe Scoggin was brought before the chiefe Magiſtrates, and according to the law

was for euer baniſhed the land, as he was wel worthie.
         
         
            How Scoggin made an Oration at Calis.
            BEing thus baniſhed England Scoggin cloathed himſelfe like a Scholler, and croſſed the Seas from Douer to Calis: whether being come and lacking money: he laide a wager with one of the Burgomaſters, that he would make an oration in the middle of the market place, which ſhould make one halfe of his auditors to laugh, and the other halfe to weepe, for the which purpoſe and for the winning of his wager he put on a garment that was very ſhort behind, without any briches at al, he entred vp to a high Scaffold wherein the middeſt of the audience, he did ſo vehemently ſet foorth the ſtory of the wofull deſtruction of Ieruſalem, that the whole aſſiſtance wept teares at the pitifull remembrance of it, which Scoggin perceiued he then laid his hands a croſſe and ſeeming to ſhew a great deuotion he bowed his head ſo low, and lifted vp his taile ſo high, as he diſcouered his backe ſide, prouoking all thoſe that ſate behinde him to laughter, which was in my mind a pleaſant part to win a drunken wager with all,
         
         
            
            How Scoggin plaid the Phiſion.
            
               SCoggin trauelling further vp into the Countrey of France hée lodged in an old Abbey of Nuns, where there was one of them named Iſabel who being a ſweete ſmooth facſt girle, had by chance a great griefe in her thigh, and was greatly troubled therewith for the ſpace of fiue moneths (and in the end acknowleding her vnworthineſſe to pray vnto God or to be heard of him,) ſhe praied to S Dominick that he would be a mediator betweene God and her, that ſhe might recouer her health: after which the devotions, Scoggin perceiuing the matter how it went, apparelled himſelfe like to S. Dominicke, and came to her in her ſleepe, and with annointment that he had be annointed her thigh, and made her whole▪ & when ſhe aſked the nanie of ſo pretious a remedy, hee anſwered that it was the ointment and balme of loue for the further iudgement thereof, I leaue it to the deſcription of the Reader whoſe conceite therein, I ſuppoſe will ioyne with mine.
         
         
            How Scoggin got himſelfe an Office.
            WIthin a while after this: Scoggin came into Pickardie where liued a Knight of great liuings and had many good offices in the houſe, of which Scoggin had

great deſire to haue one, whereby he might the better maintaine himſelfe: whereupon he oftentimes made great ſute to the Steward and other chiefe officers in the knights houſe, and withall giuing them ſtill ſome one preſent or other, deſiring him euermore to remember him and they did anſwere him alwayes with one voyce, ſaying, ſtay awhile and thou ſhalt haue the firſt place that is voye. But ſtil when it came to the pinch, there was alwaies ſome excuſe or other, either that the office was too great, or that it was too little, and he ſhould haue a better, or that they were conſtrained to giue it to ſome of their brethrens kinſmen and without faile he ſhould haue the next that did fall and with theſe words they kept Scoggin ſtill off, ſo that the time went away, and he ſerued in the Knights houſe without any reward: in the end Scoggin perceiued himſelfe neuer the nearer, nor one whit the better but that he loſt his time, his mony & his paines determined to make no longer ſute but ſtudied how to flowt them for their vngratefulneſſe: whereupon after this when he eſpied conuenient time, he came to the chiefeſt among them, and praied them one after another to dine with him the next Sunday following at a houſe of one of his friends, for he could doe no leſſe then

beſtow a banquet of them in regard of their good wills towards him: They promiſed him one after an other to come together but yet fearing to haue a ſlender dinner of Scoggins prouiſion, giuing better credit to his wordes then his kitchin, each of them ſent his ſeuerall diſh of meate afore hand, the which Scoggin tooke and put all together in a great pot, but God knoweth in what order, for one had ſent a Capon in ſtewd broth, another Chickens in white broth, another powdred Beefe and Lurnups, another a legge of Mutton and ſuch like ſome ſent their meate ſodden and ſome roſted: when the ſteward and his fellowes came to dinner and ſaw this kinde of ſeruice, they had no ſtomackes to eate, but carried each man to ſo when their owne meat ſhould come in. Scoggin went to and fro very buſie, as one that was carefull to ſee them all ſerued, but at laſt one of them ſaid, I pray thée Scoggin take away theſe porridge and giue vs the meat that we ſent hither, why theſe are yours (quoth hee) ours ſaid they? that they are not yes truly quoth he to one, here is your beefe & turnups, to another hee is your ſtewd broth, to another here is your white broth & ſo forth, now truly ſaid they we were neuer thus vſed, now the diuel take all, for I thought this foole would

mocke vs: now I pray thée quoth one, where didſt thou learne to put our meat thus together for being by it ſelfe alone it had bene good, but mixed thus together it is quite ſpoyled & right naught: euen ſo (quoth Scoggin) are you my Maiſters, for when you be each alone by your ſelues▪ there is nothing better then you are, for then you promiſe mountaines, but when you are together, you are naught like your poſtage, and will performe nothing. They all perceiuing well what he ment, ſaid vnto him, ha Scoggin, we know well to what end this thy doing was, thou haſt good cauſe to be conſidered: But in the meane time ſhall wée not dine? Yes that you ſhall ſaid hée, better then you are worthy: then brought he them foorth other meate that he had prouided, and ſet before them, wherewith they were all pleaſed: thus when they had well dined, they went away and concluded, from that time foorth that he ſhould be made an officer in ye knights houſe, the which was done, for he was within few dayes made chiefe warrenner of all the Knights Parkes and Forreſts: And thus his inuention and deuice of pottage did preuaile more then all his importunate ſuites before time.
         
         
            
            How Scoggin feaſted the Knight his Maſter.
            THis Knight was a batcheler and delighted much in Soggins merriments, for in his lodge he would alwayes keepe good cheare, as commonly moſt warriners doe and withall a cup of good wine, and now and then a prettie wench to pleaſure the Knight his maiſter, ſo vpon a time this youthfull knight ſent him word that he would come the next day to ſupper to him in his lodge, but he would haue him to prouide nothing but light meates, becauſe he found himſelfe not well at eaſe, Scoggin ſent him word that he ſhould be verie welcome, and by and by he prouided good ſtore of calues ſkins, and ſheepe ſkins, & put them all to boyle in a great pan minding therwith to feaſt the knight his maſter, when ſupper time came and his Maiſter ſet at table, at the firſt meſſe he ſet before him, theſe 
                  •
               odden calue ſkins: to whom the knight ſaid: what meate is this thou bringeſt me? what doeſt thou meane thus to mocke me, Sir quoth Scoggin you ſent mée word yeſterday that I ſhould prepare for your worſhip light meates, but when it came to the dreſſing they went al to the bottome of the pan vntil at the laſt I found theſe ſkins that ſwam

aboue the water, and they are therefore the lighteſt meat that I could find qd. the knight thou waſt neuer good in all thy life, nor neuer wilbe: well ſirra for this knauiſh tricke I will teach thee with wham thou haſt to ieſt: Scoggin notwithſtanding had prouided other kind of meat for his maiſters ſupper the which hee cauſed to be brought forth and did ſo well vſe the knight his maiſter, that he was theerewith well pleaſed, and forgaue Scoggin for this time and ſo departed after ſupper againe home to his owne houſe.
         
         
            How the Knight was lodged in Scoggins houſe.
            ANother time as the aforeſaid K. had bin a hunting he grew belated, and becauſe he would not ride home in the night he and al his traine intented to lodge in Scoggins houſe for that night: whereupon after the Knight had ſupped with that he found there made readie he withdrew himſelfe to reſt: but Scoggin that knew his maiſters complexion prouided him a tender pidgion to lye withal at night the Knight going to bed well pleaſed with this his diet, had Scoggin vſe his men no worſe then he vſed himſelfe, and likewiſe (quoth he) let my Horſes be as well vſed as

myſelfe too, for I doe put my truſt in thee: Scoggin forgot not theſe wordes, but tooke his leaue of his maiſter till the next morning, and as he helped him to a bedfellow, ſo had he for each of his men a Goſ
                  •
               ip, that they might be vſed no worſe then their Maiſter: and likewiſe ſent ſtraight vnto the next town, to borrow good ſtore of Mares, and within a ſhort time, he found enough to ſerue his turne, the which Mares he put amongſt the Knights great horſes which began to fling, kicke, and keepe a ſoule ſtir, inſomuch that the Horſekeeper was faine to forſake his ſweete heart. to appeaſe the broyle betwixt the horſes and Mares. The next day in the morning the Knight would needes know what ayled his Horſes to keepe ſuch a coyle in the night: The horſekeeper thought to haue excuſed the matter but could not: Sir quoth the Horſekeeper, the occaſion was becauſe Scoggin had put Mares to your ſtond Horſes, whereupon the knight preſently ſent for him, and rebuked him with many reprochfull wordes, ſaying, wretch that thou art, wilt thou alwaies play the knaue with me in this manner? thou haſt ſpoyled my horſes and yet thou careſt not: why (quoth Scoggin) ſaid you not yeſternight to me, that your horſes ſhould be as well vſed as

your ſelfe: I haue done the beſt that I could doe to them, they haue had Day and Dates their belly full, and they haue had ſtraw vpp
                  •
                to the hard belly, ſo that they wanted but each of them their female which your worſhip had your ſelfe, and therefore I ſought them the like in the next towne. Now a vengeance on thee thou vngratious varlet, ſaid the Knight. doeſt thou tell me of ſuch things, hold thy peace, we will reckon together, and then I will reward thee according to thy beings and ſo went his way for that time and left Scoggin there deuiſing in his craftie mind, how to get his good will and fauour againe, but ſo it hapned that within two or thrée dayes vpon a further diſpleaſure which Scoggin wrought by his too much raſhnes, that hee was put out of ſeruices, and ſent away to ſeeke himſelfe a new Maiſter, thus you may ſee, how a man may looſe that in an houre that was not got in a yeare.
         
         
            How Scoggin was hired to be a Horſe courſers ſeruant with whom he dwelled.
            AS Scoggin after this came into a country village, there came vnto him a certaine

horſecourſer that hired him to be his man, who ſaid vnto Scoggin that he ſhould liue merrily, and eate of the ſame meate and drinke that he himſelfe and his wife did, and that he ſhould doe all things with halfe the labour that other ſeruants did, ſo Scoggin was content to ſerue him: within a while after the Horſecourſes wife dreſſed a couple of Chickens for her huſbands dinner, and had Scoggin turne the ſpit, and ſo he did, but when the Chickens were inough he pulled one of them from the ſpit, and eate it vp without any bread: of which the good wife complained of to her huſband, who preſently came vnto his man Scoggin and ſaid vnto him? Sirrah what is become of the other Chicken? marry quoth Scoggin I haue eaten it; for you ſaid that I ſhould eate and drinke of the ſame that you and your wife did: therefore I haue eaten one of them, and the other I leaue for you and your wife, for I was affraide, that you ſhould haue offended God in breaking ye promiſe you promiſed me: wherefore I haue deuided them betwixt vs equally. Then ſaid his Maiſter, ſirra, I care not for the Chickens, but I would haue you pleaſe my wife and doe after her commaundement, marry ſo I wil quoth Scoggin, whervpon euer after this, when ſhe had him doe

anything he did but halfe, for when ſhe had him fetch a bucket of Water, he went and brought it but halfe full of Water, and when he ſhould bring two logs to the fire, he brought but one, and when he ſhould giue the beaſts two bottles of hay hee gaue them but one, and when he ſhould fetch a pot full of beere he brought it but halfe full, and ſo he did of many other things more. Then complained ſhee againe to her huſband of Scoggins knaueries, who came vnto him, and ſaid, ſirra I badde you ſhould doe what ſhee commaunded you, Scoggin anſwered, I haue done as ye bad me, for you ſaid to me when I was hired, that I ſhould doe all things with halfe the labour that other ſeruants did: with that the horſecourer laughed, and then ſaid his wife: If you keepe this vngratious knaue any longer. I will not tarry with you, but depart away: then he turned Scoggin out of his ſeruice for his wiues ſake.
         
         
            
            How Scoggin ſet a whole towne together by the cares.
            AT Eaſter following Scoggin came to the ſame Village againe, at which time the Parſon of the towne (according to the order of the popiſh Clergie would néedes haue a ſtage play,) and as in that age the whole earth was almoſt planted with ſuperſtition & idolatry, ſo ſuch like prophane paſtimes was greatly delighted in, eſpecially playes made of the Scripture at an Eaſter, as I ſaid before) the Parſon of the Village would haue a play of the reſurrection of the Lord, and for becauſe the men were not learned, nor could not reade, hee tooke a lemman that he kept (hauing but one eye) and put her in the graue of an Angell which when Scoggin ſaw, he went to two of the ſimpleſt fellowes in the towne, that plaid the thrée Maries: and the Parſon himſelfe, plaid Chriſt with a banner in his hand. Then ſaid Scoggin to the ſimple fellowes when the Angell aſketh you whom you ſeeke? you muſt ſay the Parſons lemman with one eye, ſo it fortuned that the time was come that they muſt play. and the Angell aſked them whom they ſought? Marry quoth they, as Scoggin had

taught them, wée ſeeke the Prieſtes lemman with one eye, which when the woman hearde, ſhe aroſe out of the graue, and all to be ſcratched one of the poore fellowes by the face that plaid one of the thrée Maries: Whereupon hee ſoundly buffeted her about the eares, the prieſt ſeeing this threw down his banner and went to helpe his lemman, with that the other two fell vpon the Prieſt, the clearke likewiſe tooke the prieſts part, and many other of the pariſhioners on ehe contrary ſide, ſo yt in ſhort time the whole towne lay together by the eares in the middle of the Church, which when Scoggin perceiued he went his way out of the village and came no more there.
         
         
            How Scoggin made the country people offer their money to a dead mans head.
            VPon a time when Scoggin lacked maintenance and had gotten the diſpleaſure of his former acquaintance by reaſon of his crafty deelings and vnhappy tricks▪ he bethought himſelfe in what manner he might get money with a litle labour, ſo trauelling vp into Normandie, he got him a Prieſtes gowne and clothed

himſelfe like a Scholler, and after went into a certaine Churchyard, where hee found the ſcull of a dead mans head, the which hee tooke vp and made very cleane, and after bore it to a Goldſmith, and hired him to ſet it in a ſtud of ſiluer, which being done, he departed to a village thereby, and came to the Parſon of the Church, and ſaluted him, and then told him that he had a relique, and deſired him that he would do ſo much for him, as to ſhew it vnto the Pariſh, that they may offer to it and withall promiſed the Parſon that hee ſhould haue the one halfe of the offeringes: The Parſon moued with couetouſneſſe granted his requeſt, and ſo vppon the Sunday following told his Pariſhionars thereof, ſaying that there was a certaine religious ſcholler come to the towne that had brought with him a pretious relique: and hée that would offer thereunto, ſhould haue a generall pardon, for all his forepaſſed ſinnes and that the Schotler, was there preſent himſelfe to ſhew it them: with that Scoggin went vp into the pulpit, and ſhewed the people the relique that he had, and ſaid to them that the Head ſpake to him, and that it bad him that hée ſhould build a Church ouer him, and that the

mony that the church ſhould be builded withall ſhould be well gotten: But when the people came to offer ſo it Scoggin ſaid vnto them al you women that haue made your huſbands cuckolds, I pray you ſit ſtill and come not teoffer, for the head had mee that I ſhould not receiue your offerings, whereupon the poore men and their wiues came thicke & thréeſould to this offering, and there was not a woman but ſhe offered liberally, becauſe that hee had ſaid ſo, and he gaue them the bleſſing with the head: and there was ſome that had no money that offered their rings and ſome of them that offered twice or thrice becauſe they would bee ſcene: Thus receiued he the offrings both of the good and the bad, and by this practiſe got a great ſumm of money: After this when they had all offred, and were departed home: Scoggin went to the parſon and deuided the offering and gaue him a part thereof, where with the parſon was well content: And the women there about made very much of Scoggin and maintained him along time amongſt them.
         
         
            
            How Scoggin deceiued a Vintner at Paris in France.
            VPon a time after Scoggin was come vnto Paris the chiefe citie in France, hée heard tell of a wine, drawer that was ſo prond and arrogant in all his doings that few men could endure his company, and it was reported that there was no man that could deceiue him or ouerreach him by wit, wherupō 
               Scogin thought in his minde how hée might deceiue him, & then he tooke 2. gallon bottles ye one ful of water, & the other quite empty, the bottle of water he hid vnder his cloake that no man ſaw it, and ſo went with ye empty bottle in his hand and gaue it the Vintner to fill with Wine, the which he did, and when it was full he brought it vp to Scoggin and gaue it him, and then in the meane time whilſt the Vintner looked aſide, Scoggin tooke the bottle of water frō vnder his cloake and put the wine in the place, and then aſked the price of it. Marry quoth the vintner it comes to eightéene pence, then qd Scoggin it is too deare for mée, for I haue but twelue pence in my purſe, and ſo gaue him againe the bottle of water in ſtéed of the wine, the which hée tooke all in anger and bore it

downe againe into the ſeller, and powred out the water into the veſſell which he thought to be Wine, and then came and gaue Scoggin the empty bottele ſaying: make you me to fill wine, and haue no money to pay for it, belike you thinke to make me a foole, no quoth Scoggin you make a foole of your ſelfe, & with that word hee went away with the bottle of wine and drunk it merrily amongſt his companions
         
         
            How Scoggin got a twelue monthes boord of an Inne-keeper.
            
               SCoggin remaining ſtil in Paris, was gretly beloued for his ſubtill wit & crafty deceites by which meanes he got ſuch fauour of an-Inkéeper there, that he had meat drink, & lodging a whole yeere vpon credit, at the yeares ende, the Inkeper demanded his money or a ſurety for the payment thereof, ye which Scoggin promiſed to do, ſo gathering his wits together for the diſcharge of his debt, Scoggin goes vnto a certaine doctor of Phiſick, & ſaid vnto him good ſir this it is, mine hoſt where I lie, and haue this 12. month, was taken this night with an euill ſpirit, now I deſire you if you can by phiſicke to helpe him thereof, and you shalbe well rewarded maiſter doctor, that would by

the helpe of God cure him therof, and that very ſhortly: but (quoth Scoggin) you muſt tary two or thrée daies before you take him in hand, for it may not be done in haſt: therefore I wil goe fetch his wife, that ſhee may heare your promiſe, ſo Scoggin departed home to his boaſt, and tolde him that hee had found a ſuretie for his debt, and it was maiſter Doctor Dole a neighbour of his, whereof the Innekeeper was ioyfull and ſent his wife with Scoggin to witnes Maſter Doctors promiſe, and being both come to his houſe, Scoggin ſaid vnto him, and pleaſe you M. Doctor heare is the mans wife that I told you of, I pray you ſay vnto her as you ſaid vnto me, marry that I will qd. he, and helpe her huſband too, but I pray you good wife (qd. the doctor) let your huſband be content for at 3. dayes end ile come to him and performe your requeſt in all things. Vpon this promiſe away, went the woman with a merry heart to her huſband, and tould him that Maſter Doctor at three daies ende would fulfill your deſire vpon this, the Innekeeper reckoned with Scoggin, and ſo parted friendes. Now at the three dayes end hee ſent his wife to the Doctor for this money, who came vnto him & aſked him for the debt he had promiſed to

pay for Scoggin. Why quoth the Doctor did your Huſband bid you ſay theſe wordes to mee? he did (quoth ſhee) then ſaid the Doctor, that is the falſe diuell within him that would haue the money: then ſaid ſhe what falſe Diuell meane you? giue me my money: Then ſaid the Doctor, it was tolde mee that your huſband was poſſeſſed with a Diuell, goe, bring him to mee and by the Grace of God I will helpe him, whereupon the woman all in an anger hies her home, and tels her huſband of the Doctors ſpeeches, who ſitting then by the fire ſide, where meate was roaſting: in a furie vp he gets, and takes ſpit and toaſt, and all, & runs to the doctors houſe like a madman, thinking to runne him through. The Doctor ſeeing him, was afraid, and called to his neighbours to helpe him to take the man that was ſo beſet with the diuell. The Inkeeper ſtill cryed knaue giue me my money: the Doctor ſtill anſwered, auoide ſathan: the neighbours they can betwixt them, and kept the Inkeeper from ſpitting the doctor. The ſubtilty of Scogin at laſt being brought to light, they held themſelues ſatisfied, but as long as the Inkeeper liued hee aſked ſtill for his money, but the Doctor anſwered him ſtill, that hee ought him nought, and naught hee would pay him,

but alwaies ſaid, if you be taken with a diuell, I ſhall helpe you therof, but neuer after loued they one another.
         
         
            How Scoggin gaue a Dutchman a Purgation.
            
               SCoggin trauelling betwéene Paris and Orleance in Fraunce he hapned to lodge in a countrey Inne where many Hollanders likewiſe lodged, & Scoggin brought with him two Egges which he roaſted for to eate, for he was ſickely and weary with trauell, and could eate no fleſh, which when one of the Hollanders perceiued, he ſaid vnto him is it euen to my friend, wil not your Hoſteſſes meate ſerue you, but you muſt bring meate with you? and with thoſe worde he tooke the Egges and roundly ſupped them vp, and when hee had ſo done, he gaue Scoggin the ſhels againe, ſaying, hold here is thy boxe, but the reliques be gon whereat all the reſt of the gueſts laughed heartily: and ſo did Scoggin himſelfe, who in reuenge thereof, went preſently into the next roome, and fetched a faire Apple and cut all the coate thereof, and put therein a ſtrong purgation, and after roaſted

it in the fire, which being done, he cut in péeces vpon his frencher, and ſtrewed it all ouer with the powder of Ginger, and ſo ſetting it vpon the Table he went his way as though he would haue fetched more: but aſſoone as he had turned his backe, the Hollander tooke the Apple and eate it in as great haſte as he did the Egges before, and by and by, he fill to parbraking, and caſt vp all in his belly, and was ſo ſicke thereof, that the hoſt, and all his gueſts thought that he would haue died of the Apple. Then ſaid Scoggin to the gueſts, be not afraid of him, for it is but a little purgation that I haue giuen him, and the roaſted apple I ſee is an enemy to the Egges, and will not let them reſt in his maw, but that they muſt néedes come out againe, whereat the gueſtes made good ſport and laughed heartily, when the purgation had wrought what it would the Hollander amended, and after ſaid to Scoggin, roaſt, eate what thou wilt, & for ile neue eate any more with thée againe.
         
         
            
            How Sooggin frighted his hoaſt with the ſkin of a dead Beare.
            THE heaſt of the aforeſaid Inne was a merrie diſpoſed mocking fellow, and in a vaine glorie ſtill commended his owne boloneſſe, but ſo it fortuned the ſame night whileſt Scoggin remained there, there came riding late in the euening three Marchants of Paris to the ſaid Inne, but becauſe it was very late ere they came there, the hoaſt of the houſe angerly aſked them where they had beene ſo late, for (quoth he) it is no time now to take vp your Inne. Then the Marchants anſwered, be not angry ſir I pray you, for we haue beene hunted with a wilde Beare, and could not eſcape him till euen now. Then quoth the Innekeeper in mockage to them, what a ſhame Gentlemen is it for you three to bee hunted with one Beare: Now I tell you what, if there came tenne Beares to me (being but one) in the field, I would haue ſlaike them euery one, and thus mocked hee the Marchants all ſupper while.
            Scoggin ſitting by the fire ſide, and hearing all this, after ſupper concluded with the

Marchants, to ouer-reach the heaſt in his owne ſcoffes: whereupon Scoggin went into the towne and brought a Beares ſkin, that was but newly dead, and priuily brought it into his chamber: and when the Innekeeper and all his houſhould were gone to bed, hee ſtuffed the Beares ſkinne with ſtraw, and dreſſed him with ſtickes, to make it ſtand ſtiffe, and put two Childrens ſhooes in his mouth: and after ſet him vp in the Hall as though he had bene aliue: This reſted till the middle of the night, and then Scoggin bad the Marchants call very earneſtly for drinke, the which they did▪ Whereupon the hoaſt called vp his maide to fetch them ſome, who lighted a Candle, and going into the hall▪ ſhe ſpyed the Beare with two childrens ſhooes in his mouth, wherewith ſhee was ſo frighted that ſhe ranne downe into the Cale-houſe and hid her ſelfe, thinking that hee had eaten vp both her maiſters children. Then called the Marchants againe for drinke, whereat the hoaſt commaunded him man to ariſe, who likewiſe going into the Hall and ſeeing the Beare, for feere let fall his Candle, and ranne into the Seller, thinking the Beare had eaten vp the maide.
            
               Then called the Marchants the third time, and deſired the hoaſt himſelfe, to fetch them ſome drinke, for they ſaid as yet that no body came or elſe to giue them a candle, and they would draw it themſelues: with that the good man aroſe himſelfe, for hée thought that both his man & his maide were fallen aſleepe again, and then lighted hée a candle, and went likewiſe downe into the hall, where he ſpyed the Beare and was ſo frighted therewith, that he fell vnto the ground, and cride out mainely to the Marchants for helpe, ſaying. that the Beare had eaten both his man and his maide, who hearing their maiſter call for helpe, came vp ſodainely to helpe, ſo did the Marchants who exceedingly laughed at this hardy man, that would haue ſlaine ten Beares, and yet was made affraide of one dead Beares ſkin: when the Inne-keeper ſaw that it was done in mockerie, hee was ſo aſhamed that he wiſt not what to ſay, and ſo went to bed: and then in the morning aroſe the Marchants and paid their charges, and ſo rode their wayes, and after this, neuer would the Inne-keeper boaſt of his manhood any more.
         
         
            
            How Scoggin anſwered to all manner of queſtions that was asked him.
            AFter this Scoggin came vnto the citie of Cane in Normandie where William the Conquerour King of England was buried, and there ſet vp bils vp and downe the towne, vpon euery poaſt and Church doore, that hee would giue a right anſwere to euery queſtion that was put vnto him: whereupon came many learned men vnto him: whereof there was one that asked him how many Gallons of water was in the Sea? Then anſwered Scoggin, Stop all the Riuers that do run into it and then I will meaſure it, and tell you iuſtly how many gallons there hee: then thought the other that it was impoſſible to do, and ſo was content with that anſwere: Then aſked hee Scoggin another Queſtion, which was this. How many dayes were paſt ſince Adams creation till this time? Marry qd Scoggin there be but ſeauen dayes paſt: for when the wéeke is done, beginneth ſtill another ſeauen dayes, and ſo foorth to the end of

the world. Then ſaid the other, now fell and the third queſtion, which is? Where is the middle of the world? then anſwered Scoggin to him: That is here in the middle of this houſe: for if you will not beleeue mee, take a coard and meaſure it: whereat the propoſer grew angry, and aſked him how farre was the earth from heauen? Why quoth Scoggin that is hereby, let mee ſing neuer ſo ſoftly: here, but it is heard in heauen, and if you will not beleeue me: take a Ladder and goe vp into heauen, and I will here ſpeake very ſoftly: and then if you heare it not I will looſe my credit. Then quoth the other, how wide is heauen? and how broad is it? Why quoth Scoggin, it is twelue thouſand mile broad: and ten thouſand mile wide, and if you will not beleeue mee then muſt you goe take the Sunne, the Moone, and all the ſtarres, and we meaſure them, and if you finde it not as I ſay. I will giue the maiſtery to you: with that the learned man knew not what to ſay to Scoggin, but that he was to craftie for them, and to gaue him the victory and praiſe.
         
         
            
            Of the merry talke a country-woman had with Scoggin.
            AFter this Scoggin was eſtéemed in all places for a moſt wiſe and ſencible man, and the better beloued of the people, becauſe he loued to ſport and ieſt, and would take it in good part to be ieſted withall: vpon a time one came vnto him, and in this meanes ſaid vnto him, Sir this it is, you are a man of great wiſdome and therefore I come to craue your aduiſe in a matter of great waight: I haue a ſonne that is twenty yeare olde and better, and hath gone a yeare to Schoole in our Pariſh, therefore I would haue your counſell how I might doe to haue him made Prieſt, but I feare me the Pope will not ſuffer him by reaſon of one thing that he hath not, which will be great hinderance to him Scoggin takeing pleaſure in the womans ſimplicitie, ſaide vnto her, what is it good wife? Sir ſo it is that hee hath not: what is that he hath not▪ ſaid he, ha good ſic, ſaid ſhe, he hath not. I dare not tell it, for you know well enough what men carry? hath he no long hoſe? no, (quoth ſhée)

it is not that I would ſpeake, ſir he hath nothing: you underſtand me well enough, yet in the ende ſhe ſaid vnto him, and pleaſe you ſir, when he was a little Boy, he fell of a ladder and ſo brake them, that hée was faine to bée gelded and had it not bene for that miſchance, I would haue married him, for he is the talleſt of my children, (in faith) ſaid Scoggin that is a ſmal fault, and wil be no hinderance to him to be made a prieſt▪ but yet ſir, there is another thing that wil be hie hinderance, which is, he can ſpeake no latine: for that let me alone is teach him, therefore good wife when you pleaſe ſend him to me and I wil prouide him latine enough: whereupon the poore woman gaue him great thankes and ſo ſhe departed away.
         
         
            How Scoggin taught a French-man Latin to carry him to the Pope.
            THis young clowniſh Frenchman being a Norman borne, by his mothers apointment came vnto Scoggin, and told him that he had a deſire to become one of the Church, but hee could write and reade very little, neuertheleſſe hauing hard ſay, that money made

all, he breake him mind vnto maiſter Scoggin aſking his counſell how to rule and gouerne himſelfe in this matter, marry, quoth Scoggin the Pope (when thou commeſt to be admitted Prieſt) cannot vnderſtand thy Naturall ſpeach, I will learne thee to ſpeake ſo much Latine as ſhall ſerue thy turne when thou art before him, which being well placed, he ſhall thinke thee to bee a profound Scholler. The Frenchman was very glad to heare theſe tidings, ſo that in all haſt he would needs know theſe three wordes, Friend, ſaith Scoggin, ſo ſoone as thou art come before the Pope, thou ſhalt fall downe vpon thy knees▪ ſaying, Salue ſancte Pater: Then he will aſke thee in lattine, Vnde es tu? that is to ſay, of whence art thou? Thou ſhalt anſwere him, De Normania: then he wil aſke thee, Vbi ſunt litterae tuae thou ſhalt ſay vnto him, In Mentica mea, and preſently without any more adoe thou ſhalt be made a Prieſt: whereupon the Frenchman being ſo merry and iocund that he remained fiftéene dayes with Scoggin to learne theſe thrée Latine words, and when he thought that he had learned them well, he tooke his iourney towards Rome, & by the way he did nothing but repeat his Lattine, but in repeating it ſo

often he forgat the firſt word, Salue ſancte Pater: And knew not how to learne it againe, nor where to finde a man could do it: But ſee the lucke of it: he chaunced vpon a Saturday morning to come into a church to pray, where▪ as he heard them ſing the Maſſe of our Lady, which was ſalue ſancte parens, wherunto the Frenchman gaue eare: now God be praiſed and our bleſſed Ladie, ſaid he, I haue found my Latine againe, and ſo ſet forward with his Latin, ſalue ſacte parens, thinking it to be the right. And at length he came to Rome, before the Pope, & did his reuerence vpon his knees, ſaying vnto him, Salue ſancte parens, the pope ſaid vnto him Ego non ſum mater Chriſti: The Frenchman anſwered: De Normania: The Pope grew angry, and ſaid Daemonium habes? in manica mea, anſwered the Frenchman: and therewithall he put his hand into his ſleeue to pull out his lettrrs, the Pope began to be afraid, thinking he would haue pulled the diuell out of his ſleeue, and ran away as faſt as his legs would beare him. Thus was our poore ge
                  ••
               ed Frenchman diſappointed of his prieſthood, who for very griefe within a while after died and was buried by a company of Friers of the holy order.
         
         
            
            How Scoggin couſoned the Friers in Rome.
            PReſently vpon the Frenchmans iourney to Rome, Scoggin left Fraunce, and likewiſe went to ſee Rome: where he was no ſooner come, but inquiring of the Frenchmans proceedings, who had intelligence that he was dead for griefe, whereupon Scoggin in a mockery, went to a certaine company of gray Friers, who made them beleeue that the Frenchmans ſoule was in Purgatorie, and if hée would giue them ten Duckets they, would redeeme him from thence, the which he earneſtly promiſed: Whereupon the Friers fell all to their charmes and ſolemne maſſes, to redéeme as they relieued the poore Frenchmans ſoule out of purgatorie: which being done as they thought, they came to demand their ten Duckets of Scoggin, who aſked them if there was any danger of his returne againe to purgatory, being once by their good prayers deliuered from thence: They anſwered no? Why then quoth Scoggin, it were a néedleſſe charitie to giue any thing to him, that is alreadie in ſafety, and therefore I thinke it good policy to keep my money in ſtore to pleaſure ſome other poore ſoule not yet deliuered, and ſo ſent them away faſting without their money.
         
         
            
            How Scoggin ſate at the Popes table.
            VVIthin a month after Scoggins arriuall in Rome, he got ſo much fauour that he was vpon a time bidden to ſupper by the Pope himſelfe, and being in the midſt of their Iunkets, the Pope aſked his ſeruitors for the peacocke that was dreſſed for his dinner, which hee cōmanded to be kept for his ſupper, which not being done according he grew into a great rage for it. Scoggin ſitting then by him at board perſwaded his holineſſe not to bee angry: To whom the Pope replyed, ſaying: If God were ſo highly offended in Paradice, for caſting out our old father Adam from thence, and onely for eating an Apple: why ſhould not I, being his vicar on earth be more furious for a peacocke, knowing how farre it is in value aboue a rotten Apple.
         
         
            How Scoggin vſed a Taylor in Rome.
            VPon a time there was a ſimple Taylor dwelling in Rome, that vpon a day came

into a church where the image of Saint Iohn Baptiſt was honoured, who falling on both his knees, hée humbly deſired to know whether his wife (at any time) had wantonly abuſed him, and what fortune ſhould follow his young ſonne, Scoggin ſtanding by, (and well practiſt in ſuch knauiſh toyes) hapned to ouer-hears his petition? who ſecretly ſtepped behind the alter and faining the voice of Saint Iohn, anſwered him, my deare friend and faithfull follower for thy long reuerent worſhipping, and deuotion thou haſt done vnto me. I will truly tell thee: Thy wife hath many times borned thy head, and thy young childe within few yeares ſhall be hanged: wherefore depart in peace ſince thy prayers be heard? Whereat the Taylor riſing vp in a rage, tooke his leaue without a farewell but when he was a little paſt from him, without any reuerence, he turned backe and ſaid, what art thou for a Saint? Scoggin anſwered. I am thy good Saint Iohn Baptiſt: My Saint, (quoth the Taylor) thou art the diuell, a liar a ſlanderer, and a foule mouth'd ſlaue, as thou haſt beene ſince thy beginning: for that babling tongue of thine, cauſed Herod worthily to cut off thy head. I haue prayed to thee this

twenty yeares, and haue offered more candles before thee then I am worth: wherfore I will ſée thée hanged as thou waſt headed before I will come to thee againe.
         
         
            How Scoggin tooke a Frier tardie.
            IN Rome there was one Frier Thomas, who to obſerue the ſtraigt lawes of their religion, had his concubine cloſe in his bed to help him ſay his mattens at midnight now Scoggin beeing well acquainted with this Frier, made bold of his company at all times, ſo comming vp of a ſodaine into the chamber in the 
                  ••
               rning (by chance they both a ſlepe) he ſaw foure naked feete hang out of the bed, whereat he ſeemeth greatly to wonder, and ſodainly put his hand out of the window and mainely cryed, what ho, come ſée a miracle, come ſee a miracle, for Frier Thomas hath foure legges: Whereupon they were ſo aſhamed that they knew not how to excuſe the matter.
         
         
            
            How Scoggin coniured a walking Ghoſt.
            VVHilſt Scoggin remained at Rome, he lodged in the houſe of a widdow that had great ſtore of money, which a certaine young gentleman of the towne perceiued and to the end to get ſome of it from her, in the euenings he came into her houſe & lapped himſelfe in a white ſhéete, counterfetting a ſpirit, thinking that ſhe would run her wayes, and leane her money to his diſpoſing: The woman that was wiſe perceiued the myſterie, and therefore cauſed her gueſt maiſter Scoggin the next day to come and lie ſecretly in the chamber by her, who in the place of a coniuring booke, brought a good cudgell, and withall filling his head with drink to be the hardier: but at laſt about midnight the ſpirit appeared as before, and began with fearefull noiſe pittifully to cry: whereupon the Coniurer, (who had not diſgeſted his liquor) ſodainely ſet vpon him, and ſo baſted him on both ſides with a cudgell ſaying, if thou be the diuell, I am his damme: and he had vtterly ſpoyled him, if he had not the ſooner diſcouered himſelfe.
         
         
            
            How Scoggin put a Country Gentleman out of his Dreame.
            VPon a time there was a Gentleman of the Countrie which greatly loued hunting and tooke therein ſo much delight in the day time, that in the night hee would riſe vp in his ſleepe, and beginne to cry, hollow, and whoop after his hounds, as if he had bene abroad in the day time. This Gentleman on a time came vnto Rome, and lodged in the ſame Inno where Scoggin did: and in the ſame Chamber, but in going to bed, this Gentleman ſaid vnto Scoggin, friend I pray thee be not offended with mee for this one night for I haue an impediment, which is to crie in the night after my hounds for I loue hunting ſo well that euery night I thinke I am at the game, Scoggin hauing heard before time of his humor, ſaid vnto him: Oh Sir (quoth hee it taketh mee after the ſame manner, for I am a Carter, and thinke euery night that I am alwayes whipping of my horſes, and driuing of my Cart, and by no meanes can I leaue it, well ſaid the Gentleman we will therefore beare one with the

other, he goeth to bed, and was no ſooner entred into his firſt ſleepe, but be ſtarted out of his bed, and went crying about the Chamber ſo how, ſo how, ſo how, at this cry Scoggin awaked, and went downe into the ſtable and fetched a Carters whip, and perked, the gentleman too and fro about the chamber, crying haw rée browne bayrd, dun go, what browne I ſay: and withall ſo yerked the Gentleman vp and downe, who awaked with the yearkes of the whip, and in ſtead of crying after his houndes, he changed his tune, and cryed out for helpe, ſaying I am ſlaine, I am ſlaine, but ſtill Scoggin with his whip fetched him too and fro about the chamber: Vntill at the laſt the poore gentleman was faine to get him vnder a table, & there hid himſelfe without ſpeaking a word, which Scoggin perceiued, he ſet downe his whip and went to bed, and began to ſnort like on that had bin in his dead ſléepe. The good wife of the houſe aroſe, lighted a candle, and found the Gentleman hidden vnderneath the boord, in ſuch a little corner as would ſcant ſerue a Cat to goe in, and all his bodie and legges were ſo grieuouſly be painted with laſhes, as if it had beene the picture of Chriſt: the which ſurely was a great miracle,

               
                  〈…〉
               , as before he was wont to do in his ſleepe: whereat his friends and kindred did much maruell, that knew his quality: neuer was one man more bound to another then was the Gentleman to Scoggin, who had healed him of ſuch an infirmitie as that was.
         
         
            How Scoggin asked a Frier a queſtion.
            VPon a time after a Frier had ſaid Maſſe, he inuited Scoggin home with him to dinner, being ſet amongſt their delicates, the Frier moſt highly commended his owne deuotion, affirming that he had the ſame day with the Memento of one make (and at one inſtant) deliuered ninety and nine ſoules out of purgatory: whereupon Scoggin aſked him meerely, why he left an odde one behinde, and made them not an hundred, marry quoth the Frier if the clap of the Church window had not ſo ſodainely ſtarted me, I would haue performed the iuſt number of an hundred.
         
         
            Of the Frier and the Coblers man.
            VVHilſt the frier & Scoggin ſat thus at dinner, there cam a Coblers mā vnto

               
                  〈…〉
                be a meanes to the Pope that hee might bée made a Prieſt: now this Frier firſt to prooue his ſufficiency in latin ſaid vnto him es tu dignus? the poore fellow anſwered, no ſir I thanke you, I will dine with your ſeruants, beléeuing that dignus had bene to dine.
         
         
            How Scoggin counſelled the Frier to forſake ſwearing.
            THE aforeſaide Frier vſed very much to ſweare and for euery ſlender cauſe would take the name of God in vaine, but ſo it chanced that as the Frier walked along the ſtréets of Rome. to be ſore hurt with the ſtroke of a horſe, Scoggin being in his company, and knowing his blaſpheming humour, ſaid vnto him, ſir this will make you leaue your ſwearing: who ſodainely anſwered, now by the body of God I will take héede hereafter how I ſweare.
         
         
            How Scoggin lay all night with a Glouers wife
            
               SCoggin being ſtill a batchler, and a very luſty youngman, he fel in loue with a glouers wife (whoſe huſband was ſomewhat antient &

alwayes when her huſband was at any laire with his ware to ſtay al night Scoggin would be ſure ſtill to lie with her, but it ſo fortuned one night aboue the reſt, as hee was in bed with her, that one of her little Children felt one in the bed with his mother, to whom the little child ſaid, mother I pray you who lies with you now my father is away, why no body quoth ſhe, but God a mighty and thou and I this reſted ſecret for a time, but within a while after his father being at home, and ſitting at his doore playing with the ſaid litle child Scoggin by chance came by, whom the child eſpying, ſaid vnto him, oh father ſee yonder goes God a mighty that lay with my mother all night: thinking he ſaid well becauſe his mother had told him ſo.
         
         
            How Scoggin deceiued a Doctor of Phiſicke.
            
               SCoggin to ſatiſfie the humour of certaine Gentlemen, his familiar acquaintance moſt commonly approued the ſkill of a ſimple Doctor of Phiſicke that dwelt not farre from Rome, and thus it was hee tooke a faire Vrinall, and filled it halfe full of good Wine,

and bore it to this doctor, ſaying it was a ſickemans water, who viewing it and toſſing it vp and downe as though hee had great knowledge: quoth he, the Patient whoſe water it is▪ is full of groſſe humors, and hath néed of purging, and to be let ſome ten ounces of blood: No you Dunce replyed Scoggin, it is good piſſe, and with that drunke it off, and threw the Vrinall at his head.
         
         
            How Scoggin proued the Doctor, a foole by Nature.
            NOt long after Scoggin to make the Doctor amends, gaue him a booke to his Newy fares gift, called, The ſecrets of Nature, the which Maiſter Doctor receiued with great kindneſſe, and to ſhew how kindly hee accepted of it: he preſently before Scoggin began to peruſe it: where amongſt other things he read, that a broad and a long bearded man argued the man to be a foole, for  triall whereof he tooke a candle in one hand, and a glaſſe in the other, viewing whether he was included with it, but holding the Candle ſo neare his beard that it finged it cloſe to his chin: at which the Doctor in a rage threw downe the

glaſſe, and ranne away all aſhamed into the chamber, whereupon Scoggin tooke pen and inke, and in the margent writ, Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            How Scoggin the third time made a foole of M. Doctor.
            NOtwithſtanding for all theſe iniurice done by Scoggin againſt the Doctor, yet aboue all other hee delighted in his company, as thus: the Doctor hauing occaſion to ride from Rome to Venice, requeſted Scoggin to ride with him, who willingly promiſed him: where riding by a wood neere vnto Rome, the Doctor began to be afraid of theeues, who being in bodily feare, by chance he ſaw a farre off a troope of people comming toward him, but he deſired Scoggin to ride before to diſcouer what they were, meane while he did himſelfe behind a buſh, Scoggin comming vnto them, vnderſtood that they conducted a murtherer to execution. He being in a merrie humour, ſtraight ſet ſpurs to his horſe, and galloped backe againe towards M. Doctor beckoned all the way vnto the Doctor as he poſted towards him to be gone and ſhift for himſelfe: which the doctor perceiuing, away he rides towards

               Rome, as though hee had rid vpon life and death: and being alighted at his owne dóore he there attended Scogging comming, who immediatly alighted there alſo, panting and blowing, ſaying vnto him, M. Doctor you are happy that haue ſo wel eſcaped their hands for if he be hanged for killing one man, what would they haue done with you, that haue killed and poyſoned ſo many? the Doctor ſeeing himſelfe ſo flouted, in a furie thruſt Scoggin out of his houſe, and neuer after would abide him.
         
         
            How Scoggin anſwered a Popiſh Preiſt.
            IT was Scoggins chance vpon a time to be in a Church in Rome, whilſt a holy Frier was caſting about his holy water, whereupon there came a prieſt vnto Scoggin and reprooued him becauſe hee did not put off his Cap, when the Frier ſprinckled him with holy water, who anſwered, if it haue power (as you ſay) to paſſe to purgatorie, ſurely it muſt haue eaſier paſſage through my Cap.
         
         
            
            Of a Ieſuite that ſpake againſt Scoggin.
            AFter this Scoggin grew in hate among the Friers, becauſe he many times made Ieffes vpon them, whereupon there was a Ieſuite that would alwayes ſpeake mightily againſt Proteſtants, thinking Scoggin to be one, affirming that he would prooue a Proteſtant worſe then a Diuell, for (ſaid he) if I méete with a Diuell, and bleſſe my ſelfe but with the ſigne of the croſſe, hée will ſtraight flie from me: but if I make the ſigne of the croſſe to a Proteſtant, by God he will flie vpon me, and be ready to ſtrangle me.
         
         
            How Scoggin queſtioned with the aforeſaid Ieſuite.
            
               SCoggin hauing heard of the ſimplicitie of this Ieſuite, came vnto him, and aſked him the reaſon why God gaue vnto the good thiefe paradice, and the cauſe that hee went ſtraight thither without paſſing firſt into the purgatory: marry ſir quoth the Ieſuite, I haue read, that when Chriſt was carryed into Egypt,

(with his mother by Ioſeph) the ſame théeſe would not ſuffer his companions to robbe Chriſt, nor any that were with him: and withal ſaying to Chriſt, remember this good turne I haue done thee, which was then promiſed him and performed, when they met both at execution, this was the ſimplicity of the Ieſuite.
            
         
         
            Of anorher queſtion propounded to this Ieſuit.
            
               SCoggin meaning yet to make this Ieſuit a more Foole, aſked him how Chriſt liued whilſt he was a Boy? whereupon the Ieſuit ſhamed not to ſay, that after Chriſt grew to ſome ſtrength, Ioſeph began to teach him his occupation, and one day amongſt others, hée ſet him to ſaw a peece of timber, but Chriſt not regarding▪ the marke that he ſhould haue ſawed by, cut it too ſhort: whereat Ioſeph was very angry, and would haue beaten him, if he had not haſtily taken vp the one ende and crauing his fathers helpe to hold the other, drew it out of the ſame length that Ioſeph would haue it. The which blaſphemie the Ieſuit iuſtified for a truth.
         
         
            
            How Scoggin proued Muſtard to haue wit.
            
               SCoggin kéeping an Ordinarie in Rome, and ſitting with Gentleman, to make them merrie, would approoue Muſtard (ſtanding before them) to haue wit, how ſo ſayes one? It is like a wittie ſcould: meeting another ſcoulde, knowing that ſcould will ſcould, begins to ſcould firſt: ſo ſayes hée, the Muſtard being lickt vp, and knowing that you will bite it, begins to bite you firſt: Ile try that ſayes a Gull by, and the Muſtard ſo tickled him that his eyes watered: How now ſayes Scoggin, does my leſt ſauor? I ſayes the Gull, and bite too: If you had had better wit ſayes Scoggin you would haue bit firſt: ſo then to conclude with mee, that dumbe vnféeling Muſtard, hath more wit then a talking vnfeeling foole as you are. Some were pleaſed, and ſome were not: But all Scoggins care was taken (for his reſolution was ſuch euer) before he talkt of any ieſt.
         
         
            
            How Scoggin couſned a Frier of twenty duckets.
            
               SCoggin before time hauing borrowed ten duckets of a Frier, and now lacking more money, went againe to the ſaid Frier to borrow ten more, why quoth he, you owe me ten already, how ſhall I be paide that? why thus quoth Scoggin lend me ten more to the ten I haue had already, and I will make you a bond to pay you twenty at the feaſt of S. Peter next cōming, the Frier thinking to haue ſomewhat to ſhew for his money, ſent him the other ten duckets whereupon Scoggin made him a bond the money to be paide vpon the feaſt of S. Peter in the yeare of our Lord 1490. which figure of 4 he turned into 5. very cunningly whilſt the Frier was drawing out his mony: which was done in this maner, 1490. he chāged into 1590 the frier thinking ye bond ſo he rightly written went his way: & at the time appointed came to Scoggin & demanded his money, your money quoth Scoggin, why it is not yet due almoſt theſe 100. yeares▪ therefore looke in your 
                  〈◊〉
                & there you ſhall find it in: the Frier ſeeing the figure of 4 turned into 5. knew himſelfe deciued. & went his 
                  〈◊〉
                with a flea in his eare.
         
         
            
            Of Scoggins wrongfull accuſation.
            VPon a time Scoggin was wrongfully accuſed for getting of a Gentlemans Maide with Childe, and for the ſame brought before a Iuſtice in Rome, which iuſtice ſaid as followeth. It is a maruaile (Scoggin) that you being now a gentleman of good qualitie, and one of good ruputation, would venture thus to get maides with childe, nay rather qd Scoggin were it a maruaile, if a maide had gotten me with childe,
         
         
            Scoggin deceiued by a country wench.
            
               SCoggin as he trauelled abroad, was in a towne where in ye In was a pretty maid, whoſe fauour was placed in a corner of Scoggins affection, and talking with her appointed to meete him at the bottome of a paire of ſtaires: when night and the houre came, and the maide ſubtilly ſent downe her miſtris, who Scoggin catching in his armes art come wench ſates hee, out alas ſayes the miſtris (not knowing who it was) Scoggin
               
hearing it was the miſtris, ſtart a ſide, and the maide came downe with the candle, ſhe eſpyed a glimſe of Scoggin, in the dark, who ſlept into another roome: how now miſtris ſaid the maide, ſomething ſaid ſhee affrighted me, ſome man ſure for I heard him ſpeake: no, no, miſtris ſaid the maid, it was no man, it was a Bull calfe, that I ſhut into a roome till Iohn our pounder came to haue pounded him for a ſtray: had I thought that ſaid ſhee, I would haue hit him ſuch a knock on his forehead, that his hornes ſhould neuer haue graft his coxecombe, and departs vp againe affraid: but how Scoggin tooke this ieſt thinke you.
         
         
            How Scoggin deceiued a Drapers maide.
            
               SScoggin another time lacked money, and being a faire yong man without any haire on his face got him on an ancient Gentlewomans gowne putting a Cuſhion vnder his aporne, and a French-hood vpon his head, and ſo vpon a Sunday in ſeruice time, went to a Drapers houſe, the maiſter and all his houſe being at Church, except a maide ſeruant that dreſſed dinner ſo comming like an olde Gentlewoman to the doore where knocking very

orderly the maide comes and aſked what hée would haue, taking him to be ſome ſubſtantiall Gentlewoman, marry (quoth Scoggin) after I pray you ſtand a gentlewomans friend ſo much as to let her make water in your kitchin, for I am aſhamed to do it in the ſtreet, & am ſo neere beſet that I can goe no further: the honeſt ſimple maide deeming all to be true, let him goe into the kitchin wherein being no ſooner come but hee bound the maide hand and foote, and put a gagge into her mouth, and after tooke what he pleaſed and ſo left the maide there gaping on the ground with a gag in her mouth: at laſt comes the good wife home from the Church, where entring into the kitchin as her manner was, and finding her maide in this pitifull taking was ſo amazed that ſhee ſtood ſenceleſſe till her huſband came home. who likewiſe finding his Maide vpon the ground gaping for breath, vngagd her and aſked her how ſhe came into that extremitie: marry maiſter quoth ſhe, here came the diuell in a French: hood and gagd me and robbed you for I am ſure it was no woman ſhee was ſo ſtrong but ſhe draper, could neuer neither get the theefe nor his goods againe, but contented himſelfe with that loſſe, and euer after left more company at home.
         
         
            
            Of Scoggins ſhort anſwere at dinner while.
            VPon a time there was an olde prieſt and Scoggin dined together in Rome, where there was but litle ſtore of meate, but Scoggin hauing a good ſtomacke, and being a iolly fat man, put off his dublet the better to fill his belly, & began to lay an loade with his teeth as though he had eaten no meate in two or three dayes before: the which being perceiued by the other olde man that ſat at the table, he began to aſke Scoggin many queſtions, thinking thereby to hinder the buſie filling of his belly, but Scoggin becauſe hee would not looſe much time, anſwered the old man very briefely altogether in ſillables: the queſtions and aunſweres were theſe. What Garment doe yee weare? Strange. What wine doe ye drinke? Red. What fleſh doe you eate? Beefe. Now like you this Wine? Good. You drinke none ſuch at home? No. What eate you vpon Fridaies? Egges, and ſuch like: but all this while he loſt not one mouthfull of meate, for his month was ſtill going, and yet anſwered readily to all his queſtions. By this meanes the oldman went halfe hungry away.
         
         
            
            How Scoggin for one day, ſerued in a Prieſts roome.
            
               SCoggin beeing at Rome, and lodged in a Prieſts houſe there, where an old churchman that on a Sonday could not performe his dutie to the pariſh: Whereupon Scoggin taking vpon him the Prieſtes office, and as though he had bene another Curate dwelling hard by, went to the Church and ſaid ſeruice both forenoone and afternoone: but as the order was then, the pariſhioners came before Seruice and confeſſed them to the prieſt, but amongſt the reſt there came to Scoggin a poore Blackſmith to be confeſſed, to whom he ſaid. How ſayeth thou friend, art thou not a fornicator? The poore man ſaid no. Quoth Scoggin againe, art thou not a glutton? Art thou not ſupethious? he ſaid ſtill no, Scoggin perceiuing he ſaid ſtill no, to euery thing began to wonder, aſking againe: Art thou not concupicent? No ſir, ſaid hee, Why what art thou then quoth Scoggin: I am ſaid hee, a poore Blackſmith, for beholde here is my hammer.
            There was alſo another that anſwered in

like manner to this confeſſor, the which is ſome what in better order, it was Sheepeheard, whom Scoggin did aſke friend how ſayeſt thou? Haſt thou kept the commandements of the Church? No, neither, then ſaid Scoggin vnto him what haſt thou then kept? I neuer kept any thing but ſheepe in all my life quoth the ſhepheard.
            Yet there was another who after hee had declared all his faults, was aſked if any thing elſe ſtucke in his conſcience? He anſwered nothing: but that vpon a time hee had ſtolne a Halter. Well (ſaid Scoggin) to ſteale a Halter is no great matter. Yea but (ſaid the man) there was a horſe tyed at the end thereof, I marry (qd Scoggin) that is another manner of matter: there is difference betweene a horſe and a halter, you muſt therefore reſtore backe the horſe, and the next time that hee come againe, I will abſolue you for the halter.
         
         
            How Scoggin and three or foure more deceiued a Tapſter in Rome.
            ON a night Scoggin and three or foure of the Popes ſeruants beeing merrily diſpoſed, conſulted how they might haue good

cheare and pay no money, and euery one inuented away as they thought beſt, at laſt Scoggin ſaid. I haue inuented a cleanely ſhift at the ſigne of the Roſe againſt Saint Peters Church is a new Tayſter, which ere this hath not ſeene any of vs, and he is alſo pourblinde, ſo that if he ſee vs hereafter he cannot know vs. Therefore wee will go thither and make good cheare, and when wée haue a reckoning, wée will contend who ſhall pay all, then will I ſay to auoide the contention, that the Tayſter ſhall bee blinded, and we will runne round about him, and whoſoeuer he catcheth firſt let him pay for all, and ſo wee may ſcape away. Euery man liked Scoggins deuiſe? beſt, ſo in concluſion they came thither and had good cheare, for they ſpared no coaſt ſo that in the end their reckoning grew to ten ſhillings. Then as Scoggin had deuiſed afore, ſo they did. The Tapſter was blinded ſo that they ranne round about him, and firſt Scoggin got out, and then another, ſo that at the laſt they got all away, and left the Tapſter groping in euery place about the houſe for them that ſhould pay the ſhot. The maiſter of the houſe beeing in a chamber next to the place where they were, and hearing the ſtamping

that they made, came to ſee what they did, whom the Tapſter caught in his armes ſaying: ſir you muſt pay the reckoning. Marry ſaid his Maſter ſo I thinke I muſt indeed, for here is no body elſe to pay it. Then the Tapſter and his Maiſter ſought and enquired for them but they could not finde them.
         
         
            The talke which Scoggin had with a pretty woman.
            GEntlewoman ſaid Scoggin, and the reſt as you ſit, I can tell you ſtrange things: now many gallants at ſupper noted one woman, who being little and pretty, to vnſit her pretineſſe had a great wine mouth which ſhee ſeeming to hide would, pinch in her ſpeeches and ſpeake ſmal but was deſirous to heare the newes. Scoggin going from Rome to Venice, tolde that there was a Proclamation made that euery man ſhould haue two wiues, now Ieſus quoth ſhee, is it poſſible? I Gentlewoman, and otherwiſe able too, for contrarily, women muſt haue three Huſbandes, now Iaw
                  •
               us ſaid the Gentlewoman, and with wonder ſhewes the full wideneſſe of her Mouth, at which all the Table ſmiled:

which ſhee perceiuing, would anſwere no more. Now miſtris ſaid Scoggin your mouth is leſſe then euer it was for now it is able to ſay nothing: thou art a cogging knaue ſayes ſhee: Maſſe, and that is ſomething, yet ſaid Scoggin, your mouth shall bee as wide as eare it was for that teſt.
         
         
            Of Scoggin and an Vſurer.
            A Vſurer ſometime there was dwelling at Rome, that euer (by report) made many deſperat debts but what he deliuered out came ſtil with profit back againe: Scoggin hearing hereof, laid a wager with a friend of his, that he would by his witte deceiue him therein, So comming to this rich churie, he demaunded of him how hee ſhould preuent deſperate debts & keepe himſelfe from truſting banckeroutes: This Vſurer kept himſelfe a loofe off, and would not be knowne of the ſecret to him till a concluſion was made, that Scoggin ſhould beſtow a ſupper of this Mony maſter at the tauerne to learne the ſecret. The ſupper was prepared, where Scoggin and the Vſurer ſupped merrily: but during ſupper time, they fell in conference touching the matter, where

the Vſurer tolde Scoggin that if hee dealt as he vſed to doe hée could make no euill debts: and that was, that hee ſhould not take any mans bill, bond, or word, but euer be ſure of a good pawne worth double or treble his money in vſance with a good bill of ſale in open market. The Supper béeing almoſt ended, this olde Vſurer hauing well liquored himſelfe, and olde veſſels muſt needs leake, would needs be gone to make water: nay then (ſayd Scoggin) you meane to leaue mee Not ſo (quoth the Vſurer) if you thinke that heere keepe my gowne, hée went foorth to make water, who hauing no ſooner turned his backe, but Scoggin tooke his gowne, and laide it to pawne in the Barre for the ſhot, and ſo went his way. Thus Fraude was deceiued with Deceite.
         
         
            How Scoggin got away the Abbots Horſe fram him.
            ON a time Scoggin was ſent for to an Abbot in Rome, to paſtime with him, wher he fel ſicke and like to die, whereupon he was shriuen and would haue bene houſed and hée

durſt not for feare of caſting. The Abbot ſaid Crede & manducaſti, that is to ſay, beléeue & thou haſt receiued. When Scoggin recouered, the Abbot lent him his owne horſe to ride home on, Scoggin ſent not home the Abbots horſe, wherefore the Abbot ſent for his horſe, but Scoggin anſwered the meſſenger, and ſaid, when I was ſicke at home with your maiſter, I would haue receiued the holy Sacrament of the Alter, and he bad mee beléeue, and I had receiued the ſacrament of the Alter: ſo in like manner, let him beléeue that hée had receiued his horſe and it is ſufficient, and tell him his horſe he ſhall neuer haue. By this a man may perceiue that a man ſhould not lend his horſe nor his weapon, nor his wife to no man if he loue himſelfe or his owne profit, for by it neuer commeth gaines.
         
         
            How Scoggin was made Prieſt. at Rome.
            
               SCoggin being noted throughout all Rome for a ſhifting companion could not well tell how to liue any longer there, vnleſſe hee

became one of the Church: and conſidering with himſelfe that hee was a maiſter of Arte, and ſufficient enough to performe any office of the Church, whereupon he made ſute to the Pope to be made a Prieſt, the which was done immediatly. Within a while after hee made an Oration before the Pope, and many of his Clergie, and conſidering their Pompe and pride, hée ſayd nothing in the Pulpit, but ſie Saint Peter, and ſie Saint Paul, and when he had many times recited theſe words, ſpitting firſt on the one ſide, then on the other, hée ſodainely departed the Pulpit, leauing his auditors wonderfully amazed, wherefore ſome thought hée was not well in his wild, and other ſome imagined hee was not ſound in religion, ſo as they meant to commit him to priſon: But one Frier amongſt the reſt that partly knew his humour, cauſed him to bée called before the Pope, who commaunded him to ſhew ſome reaſon for that he had done: hée anſwereed that in troth hée was determined to intreate of another matter. But conſidering (ſaid Scoggin) that you poſſeſſe all the pleaſures of the World at will, and that there is no ſtate comparable to yours:

and weighing againe with my ſelfe, in what pouerty, paine and miſery, the Apoſtle liued in: I thought that either they were great fooles to chooſe ſo ſharpe a life to goe to heauen or you, that hauing the keyes of heauen in your hands, were in the high way to hell: this for that time proued a ſufficient anſwere to the Pope, ſo blinded was he with ambition and Idolatry, that hee did not perceiue when he was ieſted at.
         
         
            How Sccoggin ſaued his head from cutting off.
            
               SCoggin vpon a time trauelling a litle from Rome, and lodging in an homely Inne, during which time there was a Gentleman dwelling in the ſame towne, ſomewhat franticke and diſtrauct of his wittes: which madman of a ſudden ruſht into Scoggins bed Chamber, with his ſword drawne and finding him there in bed, would haue ſlaine him, ſaying: villaine were it not valiantly done to ſtrike off thy knaues head at one blow, Scoggin anſwered, tut ſir, thats nothing with worſhip to doe, you can as eaſily ſtrike off two heads at one blow as one, wherefore if you

pleaſe, ile go downe and call vp another, and ſo you may ſtrike off both our heads at once: the mad man beleeued him, and ſo let him ſlip away.
         
         
            How Scoggin ieſted with a Boy in the ſtreet.
            A Wag-halter boy met Scoggin in the ſtreete, and ſaid: Maiſter Scoggin who liues longeſt? Marry, boy, ſaies Scoggin, he that dieth lateſt: and why die men ſo faſt ſaid the Boy? becauſe they want breath ſaid Scoggin: no, rather ſaid the Boy, becauſe their time is come, they die: Then thy time is come ſaid Scoggin, ſee who comes yonder? Who ſaid the Boy? Marry, ſaid Scoggin, Swag the hangman: nay hang me then, if I imploy him at this time, ſayes the Boy: well ſaid Scoggin, then thou wilt be hanged another time by the owne confeſſion, and ſo they departed.
         
         
            
            How Scoggin eſcaped impriſonment.
            
               SCoggin hauing béene dominéering verie late one night with two of his friends, and comming homewards, the watch was ſet, and M. Conſtable aſkt who goes there? tkrée merry men quoth Scoggin: that is not ſufficient, what art thou quoth M. Conſtable? Why ſaith Scoggin one of vs is an eye-maker, and the other a light-maker: What ſaieſt thou knaue? doſt mocke me, the one is an eiemaker, the other a light-maker, which two properties belong vnto God onely. Commit theſe blaſphemers quoth the Conſtable: Nay, I pray you good M. Conſtable bee good in your office, I will approue what I haue ſaid to be true, if thou canſt ſaid the Conſtable, you ſhall paſſe otherwiſe you ſhall all thrée be puniſhed. Why quoth Scoggin, this fellow is an eye-maker, becauſe a ſpectacle maker, and this other a light-maker, becauſe a Chandler that maketh the darkeſt night as light as your lanthorne. The Conſtable ſéeing them ſo pleaſant was well contended, the reſt of the Watchmen laughed, and Scoggin with his companions, went home quietly.
         
         
            
            How Scoggin ſerued an old woman at Rome.
            THere was dwelling ſometime in Rome a widdow woman that was ſo miſerable in houſe-keeping, that no ſeruant would diuell with her any long time: of which woman Scoggin heard tell of, and being deſirous to play the ieſting companion with her, he went vnto her, and hired himſelfe with her to worke for a month: the bargaine being thus agréed vpon betwixt them, vpon a morning betime he came to her houſe to begin his worke: but (quoth be) Dame before I begin, I muſt haue my breakfaſt. Why that thou ſhalt haue for this time (ſaid ſhe) but vſe it not: ſo ſhe ſet him a miſerable breakfaſt vpon the table, which he eate vp euery crum. Now Dame, quoth he, let me haue my dinner to, and I wil haue none at noone▪ the which ſhe likewiſe gaue him, but he eate vp all that in like manner as before: The which being done, he ſaid againe, Dame to ſaue a labour, I pray you let me haue my ſupper too, and then Ile trouble you no more till tomorrow: ſhee thinking to ſaue ſome victuals thereby, gaue him his ſupper alſo,

the which he likewiſe eate vp as before being done, he ariſeth from the table and ſaid: Dame I haue now eaten my breakefaſt, my dinner, and my ſupper: but I pray you tell me one thing: What do folkes vſe to do when they haue ſupt? Marry fellow (quoth ſhee) goe to bed and ſléepe. Euen ſo (quoth Scoggin) will I doe, for I haue now ſupt, and therefore Dame good night. By theſe words ſhe knew well that ſhe was ſlouted, and neuer after would meddle with Scoggin againe.
         
         
            Of Scoggin and a countrey Milke maide.
            
               SCoggin vpon a time béeing in a countrey village, came to Rome in the company of a merrie conceited Milke maide, carrying vpon her head a palie of Milke to the Market, thinking to ſell it: to paſſe the time away, to Maiſter Scoggin, ſhée made her reckoning aforehane in this manner. Firſt (quoth the Maide) I will ſell my Milke for two pence, and then with this two pence, buy eight Egges, which I will ſet a brood vnder a hen, and ſhée will haue eight Chickens: which Chickens being growne vp, I will cramme

them and by that meanes they will bee Capons: theſe Capons being young, will bee woorth twelue peace a peece that is iuſt eight ſhillings, with the which I will buy two pigs, a ſow pig, and a Boare pig, and they growing great, will bring foorth twelue others, the which I will ſell (after I haue kept them a while) for halfe a crowne peece, that is iuſt thirty ſhillings. Then I will buy a Mare that will bring foorth a faire Foale: the which will grow vp and be gentle and faire, that ſhe will play, ſkip, leape and fling, and cry weehes after euery Beaſt that ſhall paſſe by. But now for the ioy this Milke-maide tooke of her ſuppoſed Foale. and in her iollity counterfetting to ſhew her Foales luſtineſſe, her paile of Milke fell downe from her head, and was all ſpilt. Then Scoggin laughing, ſaid, vnto her: There now lies all your Egges, your Chickens, your Capons, your Pigges, your Mare, her Colt and all, vpon the ground, ſo by this meanes, was ſhe depriued of all her purpoſes.
         
         
            
            How Scoggin deceiued an Inneholder at Venice.
            VPon a certaine time, Scoggin & his man trauelled to Venice, and other places of Italy, and making merry there ſo long till all their money was gone, and being a great way to Rome, they knew not what to doe, but as want is the what ſtone of wit, Scoggin gathered his conceits together, and practiſed a tricke to beare him vp to Rome, without money, and this it was: vnto an Inne in Venice they went, and there lay for two or thrée daies of greate charge, although no money hee had to pay for the ſame, the third morning hee had his man goe downe and male content, himſelfe before his Hoaſt and his Hoaſtis and mumbblingly ſaid to himſelfe: Lord, Lord, what a ſcald maiſter ſerue I, this it is to ſerue a Ieſuite or Athiſt, now euen as I am an honeſt man, Ile leaue him in the lurch and ſhift for my ſelfe: héeres adoe about penance and mortification, as though (forſooth) Chriſt had not died enough for all: His man mumbling out thoſe his inſtructions ſo diſſemblingly, that it ſtroke ſuch a ielouſie in the Inkolders heart,

that out of doubt his maiſter was a Ieſuite or Athieſt: whereupon he preſently ſent for the Conſtable, and told him all the aforeſaid matter, and ſo went vp both together, to attache Scoggin in his chamber, who purpoſely had ſhut himſelfe in cloſe, and betaken him to his knées, and to his croſſe to make the matter ſeeme more ſuſpicious: which they eſpying through the key-hole, made no more adoe but in they ruſhed, and arreſted him for a Ieſuit or Athieſt, diſcharged his ſcore, bore his own, and his boyes charges vp to Rome, and there in hope to haue rich rewards, preſented him to the Cardinall, but now marke the ieſt, when the Cardinall ſaw Scoggin, and knew him paſſing well, entertained him moſt courteouſly, & all to be fooled the Inholder and his mate, and ſent them away with a flea in their eare: but when Scoggin ſaw himſelfe diſcharged out of their hands, he ſtood ieſting and pointing at their follie, and ſo taught them by cunning both more wit, and thrift, againſt another time.
         
         
            
            Scoggins deſcription of a pot of Ale.
            VPon a time Scoggin came vnto a great Perſon in Rome, and made ſuch merry paſtime before him, that in recompence thereof he was bidden to demaund any reaſonable requeſt, and he ſhould haue it. Marry my requeſt (quoth Scoggin) ſhall be reaſonable enough, for I came nothing at your handes, but euery day whilſt I liue a pot of Ale, and the appurtenances belonging to the ſame, the which hee had giuen him vnder an aſſurance. Now by this gift (quoth Scoggin) you haue giuen me sixe pence a day whilſt I liue, for the appurtenances are farre more coſtlier then the pot it ſelfe, which I will proue in this manner: Firſt, I muſt euery day haue a penny for a pot of Ale, a penny for a loafe to make a toaſt, a penny for a faggot to toaſt it, a penny for Sinnamon and Ginger, a penny for Nutmegs and Sugar, and a penny for mine Hoſtice to beare me company: without the which, a pot of Ale is like a blew coate without a Badge. For a blew Coate without a Badge, is like an Ale houſe without a ſigne.
         
         
            
            How Scoggin gaue a reckoning Pot.
            
               SCoggin vpon a time dwelt at Rome vpon the Cardinale rents, in which houſe keeping an Alehouſe, there came certaine Schollers and other, to drinke, but being ſet downe one of the Schollers ſaid, bee merrie my good fellowes, for none ſhall ſpend a penny but my ſelfe, at which wordes the whole company thinking that he would pay for all, called in a reckoning of ſome twelu
                  •
                pence, which when they came to pay, there was no more money amongſt them all but the Schollers penny, the which Scoggin hearing them ſitting by the fire, and knowing them to be honeſt mens ſonnes, for that time, tooke the penny for the whole reckoning, and after ſat him downe againe by the fire in the Chaire, the Schollers ſate ſtill looking one vpon another, and at laſt one of them ſaid: What mine Hoaſt, is the reckoning all paide? It is my gueſts (quoth Scoggin) ſith I can get no more. Why then (quoth the Scholler againe) I hope we ſhall haue a reckoning Pot giuen vs? A reckoning Pot my voyes (quoth Scoggin)

and but a penny paide for all, I faith that you ſhall, though I buy it dearely my Lads: ſo ſtarting vp fetcht them a reckoning Pot. But it fell out that at Chriſtmas following when Scoggin came to pay his rent, he was bid to dinner, where for want of table talke, he told the Cardinall of this pleaſant ieſt that hapned amongſt theſe ſchollers: the which ſo highly pleaſed and contented the Cardinall, that hee gaue him a leaſe of the ſame houſe for one and twenty yeares following for iuſt nothing: which afterward was woorth to Scoggin better then an hundred pound.
         
         
            How Scoggin made a Cobler beleeue that he was dead.
            SCoggin being ſtill about Rome, hee grew acquainted with a poore handy-craftsman, a mender of old ſhooes: in wit very ſimple: and as I may terme him a very foole. Scoggin meaning to make ſome ſport with this ſimple fellow, vpon a time came vnto him, and gazed very earneſtly in his face, ſaying: I maruell my friend, how thou art able to walke abroad for I ſee that thou art very ſick, death himſelfe appeares in thy face. After

this, another of Scoggins acquaintance come vnto the Cobler, and in like manner vſeth the ſame wordes, and after him another, all by Scoggins deuiſing: By which meanes, the poore fellow was brought into ſuch a conceit, that he thought himſelfe ſicke in deede, and ſo to bed he went: where after he had layne a while, hee would needes die: being dead in conceite, he was wound in his winding ſheet, and laide on the Beere, as the countrey order is, and on foure mens backes borne towards the Church, but by the way méeting with an vnhappy Boy, who aſked the bearers who was going to bee buried? Who anſwered, poore Iacob the honeſt Cobler. Quoth the Boy againe. What is Iacob the Cobler dead? Nay it is no matter, for he may be wel ſpared, for he was the verieſt knaue in al the towne. With that the Cobler ſtarted vp, and ſaid, Oh thou vnhappy Gallowes boy: if I were aliue as I am dead, I would ſoundly bee labour thée for ſlaundring thus a poore dead man going to be buried. The people hearing the dead man thus ſpeake, thought it a miracle, and ſo bore him home to his houſe againe.
         
         
            
            Of Scoggins moſt ſtrange and monſtrous beaſt.
            ON a time Scoggin béeing in Rome grew very merily diſpoſed, and meaning for to make his acquaintance ſomewhat pleaſant, he want to a Painter and made him to draw the picture of a moſt ſtrange Horſe, with his head ſtanding where his taile ſhould ſtand, and his taile where his head ſhould ſtand, the picture being thus ſtrangely painted, he hang it foorth at a window: by which many ſimple people repaired thither, and gaue him pence a peece to behold this ſtrange monſter: ſo gathering a number of them together in a yard, at laſt he let them all into a ſtable to ſee this aforeſaid monſter, but being entred into the ſtable, they ſaw no other monſter but a horſe with his taile tied vp to the cratch to a bottle of hay, and his head to the groope where▪ the tayle ſhould ſtand. Thus were the ſimple people flouted. and Scoggins acquintance made very merry thereby
         
         
            
            How Scoggin beſtowed vpon his friends excellent good Sammon.
            VPon a time Scoggin bad many of his friends come home to make merry with him, who was to goe to a banquet of all other meates, requeſted at his hands ſome excellent good Sammon, which as then was not to bee had for any money in all Rome, but yet to ſatisfie his friends deſires, he promiſed to ſend for ſome, the which he did: ſo ſitting downe to dinner, in the midſt whereof, came in thrée of his honeſt neighbours and ſate them downe likewiſe at the table: but his friends expected ſtill the Sammon, at laſt demaunded for the ſame. Why (quoth Scoggin) here it is. They ſéeing nothing, aſked where? Marry here (quoth he) pointing to his 3. neighbours: you requeſted excellent good Sammon, here is excellent, here is good, and theres Sammon, for ſo were his three neighbours called. Being thus by this pleaſant ieſt deceiued of their longing, they paſſed away dinner time with great delight and iollity.
         
         
            
            Scoggins opinion of Oyſters.
            CErtaine Noble men and Ladies of the Court, being eating Oyſters, one of them ſeeing Scoggin, called him, and aſked if he loued Oyſters? No, quoth Scoggin, for they be vngodly meate, vncharitable meate, and vnprofitable meate: why quoth the courtier? they are vngodly, becauſe they are eaten without grace, vncharitable becauſe they leaue nought but ſhels, and vnprofitable, becauſe they muſt ſwim in wine. Thou ſaieſt true, quoth one of them, and ſo they all fell on laughing at him.
         
         
            Scoggins reſolution of a queſtion,
            ONe of the company, taking the Gentlemans part, aſked Scoggin, at what time he thought the diuell to be moſt buſied? When the Pope dieth quoth he, why ſaith the courtier? marry (anſwered he) then all the Diuels are troubled and buſied to plague him, for that he hath ſent many a ſoule before him thither, that now exclaime againſt him.
         
         
            
            How Scoggin, by his wit got a ſuite of apparell by a Courtier.
            A Gallant Gentleman lying in the Court, bought himſelfe a ſuite of Satten, the which Scoggin had a great deſire to get, and thinking to purchaſe it by his wit, ſaid vnto the Gentleman, and it pleaſe your worſhip I haue had a great deſire to haue ſuch a ſuite of apparell, and of the ſame faſhion that yours is of: quoth the Gentleman, when I leaue it of, I will giue it thée: ſo the next morning Scoggin gets the ſuite of apparell: the Gentleman miſſing it called his man, wherupon in comes Scoggin with it vpon his backe, which the Gentleman perceiuing, called him knaue, and aſked his reaſon? Why, (quoth Scoggin) you gaue it me when you left it off, ſo yeſternight you put it off: the Gentleman ſeeing himſelfe ouer-reacht, was content againſt his will.
         
         
            
            How Scoggin excuſed a painters fault.
            THus it fell out, that vpon a time when Scoggin was in the preſence of a great Cardinall, there came in a Painter of Rome, with the Images of Saint Peter and S. Paul, the which he had newly painted. The Cardinall himſelfe taking them at his hand, found fault that he had painted them with too high a colour, for their faces (ſaid he) are too red, marry (quoth Scoggin then ſtanding by) in the painters behalfe, this redneſſe commeth of ſhame, for they bluſh to ſee the proude ſtate and traines that you haue, in reſpect of the lowe and poore counternances they carryed: for this his dout he had a great checke of the Cardinall for his labour.
         
         
            How Scoggin deceiued a Butcher in a market towne.
            AS Scoggin rid through a market towne about ten miles from Rome, it was his chaunce to baite at a Butchers houſe being an Inne, which Butcher hauing great ſtore

of meate in his ſhop, he meant to deceiue him of a good ioynt thereof: but not knowing how to obtaine his deſire becauſe of the Butchers continuall preſence, this pretty ſhift he deuiſed. Quoth he to the Butcher, mine Hoaſt they ſay in our country that he is a foole that cannot ſnap with his finger and thumbe as I now do, and therewithal did as Berbars vſe to do with their hands when they waſh a mans face: The Butcher being very loath to be counted a foole, profered to make his fingers ſnap, but through the greatineſſe thereof, hee could not doe it frr his heart: whereupon he preſently ran foorth to waſh off the fat, and in the meane time before his returne Scoggin had ſent away a good ioynt of meate by his Boy, ſtanding at the doore: but when the Butcher returned, hauing made cleane his fingers, he ſaid, Now ſir, I can doe it as well as your ſelfe. I but quoth Scoggin, now it is too late, you ſhould haue done it before. By this ieſt the Butcher perceiued himſelfe made a foole, and ſo ſet him downe all aſhamed.
         
         
            
            How Scoggin deceiued the Butcher another way.
            
               SCoggin hauing receiued ſuch great kindneſſe in the Butchers houſe, that at his returne from Rome he lodged in the ſame Inne againe: But the Butcher himſelfe miſtruſting ſome falſe tricks, would not be out of his ſhop but yet through the wilineſſe of Scoggins wit, hee was deceiued: for as the butchers boy (being directed by maiſter Scoggin) went downe into the Sellar to draw a pot of drinke, where pulling out of the fauſet, he put it in his pocket, and calld to his maiſter for his helpe to ſtop in the drinke who for ſauegard thereof, ranne downe and held his finger in the hole vntill the boy went vp for another tap: and whileſt the poore ſilly witted Bu
                  •
               cher ſtood holding his finger in the taphole, Scoggin like a crafty companion, ran into the ſhop, and ſtole another ioynt of meate and made merry with his friends at the next Inne they came too.
         
         
            
            How Scoggin excommunicated his pariſhioners.
            WIthin a while after this, Scoggin receiued a certaine ſcroule from the Cardinall and a Biſhop, wherein was written the names of ſundry men and women, that hée ſhould excomunicate, the which ſcroule by chaunce hee let falle into a little hole of his pocket, for remedy whereof he helped himſelfe in this order, for with the loſſe of the paper, hée had loſt the remembrance of all the names hée ſhould haue then excommunicated, and therefore thus he ſaid, I excommunicate all thoſe that are within that hole, whereupon remembring himſelfe better of the matter, he except the Cardinall and Biſhop who had therevnto ſet their hands and ſeales, elſe had the Biſhop and Cardinall bin both of them excommunicated.
         
         
            
            How Scoggin ouer-tooke a Prieſt and kept company with him, and how hee and the prieſt prayed for money.
            VPon a time when Scoggin and his man had ridden eight or ten miles on their way, he ouertooke a Prieſt that was riding to Rome to pay his firſt fruites, with whom he kept company withall vntill he be come within twenty mile of Rome, and al that way as they rod, Scoggin made the prieſt very good cheare & would let him pay no mony, ſo that Scoggin had but two ſhillings left, and riding a little on this ſide Rome, Scoggin complained to the Parſon in this ſort: I maruel maſter Parſon (quoth he) how men doe when they want money to get it? For when I want money I know not how to get any, except I ſhould ſteale. No no, ſaid the Prieſt, doe you not know that they that ſerue God well doe not want: and how that God promiſeth, that if you call vpon him in your afflictions, that he will helpe you: You ſay well maiſter Parſon ſaid Scoggin, and roade before, and when he ſaw a faire place hee kneeled downe,

and lifted vp his hands and prayed to God till maiſter Parſon and his man did ouertake him, but nothing hée could get. When they were come, hée roulde them hee prayed, but could get nothing. But (quoth he) I will trie once againe, and then if I get nothing, both you maiſter Parſon and niy man ſhall helpe mee to pray, for I doe not doubt but God will helpe ſemething, when he heareth all our prayers. And then Scoggin did ride afore againe, and when he ſawe his place conuenient, hée alighted from his Horſe and tyed him faſt to a tree, and knéeled downe and prayed as hee had done before: vntill ſuch time as they came to him: Then ſaid the Parſon, how doe you now Maiſter Scoggin. By my troth ſaid hée, I can get nothing, wherefore alight ſirra, quoth hee vnto his man, and tye vppe your Horſe to yonder tree, and then hee went to the Parſon and tooke his Horſe by the bridle, and tould him hee muſt needes helpe him to pray. The Parſon for feare durſt not ſay him nay, but alighted and tooke his Capcaſe from the ſaddle bow, wherein was fiftie pounds, Then Scoggin aſked his man how

much money had in his purſe. He ſaid twentie pence. Be my troth ſaid Scoggin, and I haue but two ſhillings: and how much haue you maiſter Parſon ſaid hee: The Parſon thought that if hee had tolde him all, hee would ſurely haue borrowed a good part of it, and hee ſaid fiue poundes, Well let vs pray heartily ſaid Scoggin, and then they kneeled downe and prayed the ſpace of halfe an houre: and Scoggin ſaid, let vs ſee whether God hath heard our requeſt or no. And then hée looked in his owne purſe, where was but two ſhillings, and then hee looked in his mans purſe where was but twentie pence, Then Scoggin came to the Parſon, and ſaid: now maiſter Parſon let vs ſée what you haue, for I doe not doubt but God hath heard your prayers, and tooke the prieſts capcaſe, and opened it, wherein was a bagge with fiftie pounnds in it, which the Parſon ſhould haue payde for his firſt fruites. Then Scoggin ſpread his Clooke abroad and powred out the money, and when hee had tould it, he ſayd, by Ladie maiſter Parſon God hath heard your prayer: and then he gaue him fiue poundes, and ſaid maiſter Parſon, here is

the fiue pounds that you had before we began to pray and the reſt wee will haue: for I ſee that you are ſo wel acquainted with God that with praying halfe an houre, you can get as much more: and this wil do vs great pleaſure, and it is but a ſmall matter for you to pray halfe an houre. The Parſon deſired Scoggin to let him haue the reſt of the money, for hee ſaid that he did ride to London to pay the firſt fruites. Well ſaid Scoggin then you muſt pray againe for we will haue this, and ſo they rode away and left the Prieſt behinde them, and the Prieſt was faine to ride home againe for more money.
         
         
            How the Pope came to heare Scoggin ſay Seruice.
            
               SCoggin of himſelf being mery conceited would alwaies ſay ſeruice quite contrary to all others, and would rea
                  •
                and ſing them after his owne maner: and aboue all the reſt hee could not abide the order of the Paſſion, as it is commonly ſaid in Churches for when Ieſus ſpake any thing to the Iewes or to Pilate: then would hee ſpeake aloude that euery one might heare and vnderſtand.

And if it were the Iewes or any other that ſpake, then would he reade it ſo ſoftly and with ſuch a low voyce, that none could heare nor vnderſtand: but it ſo hapned, that the Pope vpon a good Friday went through the pariſh where Scoggin dwelled, and being about ten of the clocke in the forenoone, hee minded to heare ſeruice, and ſo came into the Church where Scoggin was in ſaying ſeruice: which wh
                  •
               n hee came to the Paſſion he read on this manner, and when he ſaid, Whom ſeeke ye? he made all the Church to ring againe with his voyce, but when he read Ieſus of Nazareth, he ſpake ſo ſoftly that none could heare him: and in this order went foreward with his ſeruice. The Pope who was very deuout noted wel theſe ceremonies, and was greatly grieued at this order of reading, and wiſhed that he had not come to the Church. But after ſeruice he ſent for Scoggin that he ſhould come and ſpeake with him, who being come, hee ſaid vnto him: I cannot tell Sir where you haue learned to behaue your ſelfe ſo vnreuerently as you haue done this day: for the people to heare your ſeruice, had no deuotion at all, and why ſo ſaid Scoggin, marry quoth the Pope, you haue read the Paſſion to day

like a mad man, for whē Chriſt ſpeaketh, then you reade like the common cryer, and if Pilate or any of the Iewes ſpeake, then you ſpeake ſoftly to your ſelfe that no body can here you: Is it well done thinke you? are you worthy to haue a cure: therefore I will take away your Benefice and make you acknowledge your fault: when Scoggin had long giuen care vnto him, he anſwered: Is this all you haue to ſay to me? now by my ſoule it is true that is commonly ſaid, there are many folke that ſpeake of that wherein they haue no ſkill, And pleaſe your Holineſſe, I thinke I know what belongs to my office ſo well as another, and I would that all the world ſhould know that God is well ſerued in my pariſh according to my degree, as in any place within this hundred miles, I know there bee other Prieſtes reade the paſſion after another manner, the which I can doe, I thanke God, as well as they if I would, but it ſhould appeare that they vnderſtood not what they read, for doth it become the knaue Iewe, to ſpeake ſo low as Ieſus? No, no, I warrant you: be ye ſure that in my pariſh God ſhal be maiſter ſo long as I do liue, and let others do in their pariſh according to their knowledge. When the Pope

heard this proper reply, he ſaid: Now truly Sir prieſt, you are a man of good ſpirit, yet for all this ſhall you not keepe your benefice any longer, whereupon he was diſcharged, and an other put in his place.
         
         
            How Soggin ſerued a country Squire.
            
               SCoggin being thus diſgraſte and turned from his benefice, he attired himſelfe like a country ſeruing man, and went into the country to dwell, where he was hired of a certaine ſquire that tooke great delight to trauell into ſtrange countries to ſee faſhions, the which pleaſed Scoggin wondrous well: ſo it hapned that this ſquire with his man Scoggin reade vpon a time to ſee the Cittie of Venice where the old Gentleman had not long ſoiourned, but in an euening after he had well ſupped, and filled his head with ſtore of good Wine, yet being not thus ſatisfied, his minde longed for ſome further pleaſure, as olde men are apt to ſuch wantonneſſe when their wits are euer charged with wine: wherefore after

his delicate hée had a deſire to taſte a ſmall modicum of laſte mutton, whereupon hee ſent his man foorth for a daintie morſell: So Scoggin going almoſt a whole day vp and downe, and could not finde any fitting to his purpoſe, whereupon he turned backe to his maiſter and told him he could find none that would pleaſe him, why villaine, quoth the old leacher:▪ goe fetch me one or neuer come to me againe: vpon this commaund away goeth Scoggin and to ſatisfie his maiſters minde, went all about the ſtreetes, and at the laſt agrees with an old ruſtie kitchin-ſtuffe, as foule and as blacke as the backe ſide of a chimney, who was verie glad to goe to ſo good a bargaine: So late in the Euening, becauſe his maiſter ſhould not be ſuſpected, he brought her in at a backe-doore ſecretly without a candle, to his maiſters bed, who put off but filthy foule clothes, and went into bed to him, who tooke great pleaſure and delight in her company all the night, till it drew towards the morning: and then ſhee hauing had all the ſport and pleaſure that my old maiſter could doe vnto her, ſhe about day breake prepared herſelfe to bee gone, whereat for his owne credit and honeſtie hee was

likewiſe well content, ſhe was no ſooner readie and out of doores, but vp he gets, and looked out of the window after her, to ſee what a beautifull bedfellow hee had had all night, but when he ſaw ſuch an il-fauoured raine-beaten and withered peece of ſtuffe, vp hee called his man Scoggin, and in a great rage for that offence turnes him out of his ſeruice. Scoggin poore fellow beeing thus maiſterleſſe, home he goeth to his old miſtreſſe, and telleth her how that his maiſter hath turned him out of his ſeruice She being very deſirous to know the cauſe, he ſaith, I faith miſtreſſe for nothing but this, he ſent me to buy him a yong Pullet and I brought him a verie old benne, which hee liked well both in the ſpitting and in the roaſting, but in the morning when hee beheld the feathers that ſhee moue, it ſo broyled in his ſtomacke that hee almoſt became ſicke euen with a conceit, wherevpon, for this offence onely hath hee turned me away. If this be all (quoth his miſtreſſe) take no care, Ile pacifie thy maſter I warrant thee. So Scoggin remained with his miſtreſſe till her huſband came home, who ſaid to him, I much maruell huſband that you will turne

away your man for ſo ſmall a matter but onely for buying you an old Hen inſtead of a yong pullet, now I pray you huſband take him againe, and I will be his warrant he ſhal neuer be the like offence more, the old man perceiued how his man had excuſed the matter to re-obtained his fauour, he tooke him againe into his ſeruice.
            FINIS.
         
      
   