
      
         
            
            
            THE SECOND PART OF PHILOMYTHIE, OR PHILOMYTHOLOGIE.
            
            CONTAINING certaine Tales OF

                  True Libertie.
                  Falſe Friendſhip.
                  Power Vnited.
                  Faction and Ambition.
               
            
            By THOMAS SCOT Gent.
            
            Printed at London, for Francis Conſtable. 1616.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            MONARCHIA.
            Dedicated to all the worthy profeſſors of the Law, who make not priuate-wealth, but the good and peace of the Common-wealth the end of their ſtudies and practiſe.
            
               Though you (perhaps) be Clyentleſſe and few,
               Friendleſſe and poore, yet 'tis to you Iſue
               For kinde acceptance. You alone are they
               Who by example guide vs in our way.
               You looke not on the fee, but on the cauſe,
               And follow truth, as truth doth lead the Lawes.
               The reſt, with vice, and wealths ill-gotten load,
               Paſse on to death, in glories beaten road.
            
            
               
                  TH'inhabitants of the Ile of Wight did boſt,
               No vermin vſ'd to harbour in their coaſt.Cambden de Inſula vectis.  This title is giuen them by our vvorthy L. chiefe Iuſtice of Eng.
               
               For they no hooded Monkes, nor Foxes had,
               Nor Law ⋆ Retriuers who make fooles run mad.
               
                  
With their ſtrife-ſtirring tongues; but liued as free,
               From theſe, as by them others combred be.
            
            
               And though our whole land cannot boaſt ſo farre,
               That we from all ſuch vermin quitted are:
               Yet happy is our Ile, that's hemd about
               With water-walles, to keepe our enemies out;
               Whilſt we (as Adam did) in Eden dwell,
               And ſcarce of famine in an age heare tell.
               Where hils are clad with woods, and vales with corn,
               Whoſe laden eares doe liſten to be ſhorne.
               Where ſhepheards neither Lyon doubt, nor Beare,
               Nor rauening Wolfe which ſheep & ſhepheard teare;
               But each in ſafety dwell, and ſillie ſheepe
               From all but Man, doe one the other keepe.
            
            
               O happy are we if we know our good,
               And if our ſtate be rightly vnderſtood:
               To liue thus free vnder ſo bleſt a King,
               Iuſt Magiſtrates and Cleargy-men, that ſing,
               The ſongs of Syon in the holy tongue
               Conuerting old men, and informing yong.
               No ſpirit-tyrant Pope, ſtate-tyrant Turke,
               
               Can here their bloudy ends and proiects worke;
               Eut each in ſafety may his owne poſſeſſe,
               More free then Kings, becauſe our cares beleſſe.
            
            
               But moſt vnhappy are thoſe neighbour lands,
               Where Peace and Plentie, as two ſtrangers ſtands;
               Where bloudie war, and bloodleſſe famine ride
               Vpon the ruin'd top of thankleſſe Pride:
               Where Law deſtroies, Diuinity deceiues,
               And where the crowne the care of kingdome leaues.
               Where men eate men, as beaſt deuourd by beaſt,
               The ſtrong the weaker kill, the great the leaſt.
               
                  
Where tyrannie in triumph mounted hie,
               Makes truth and innocence in dungeons lie.
            
            
               This tale the difference ſhewes, that we may know
               How much to God for our good king we owe.
               An aged Hart, vpon mount Carmel bred,
               Hauing as Admirall the Nauy led
               From Syria through the Seas, to Cyprus ſhore,
               Where all the Ile with greene is couered o're.
               Hapt by a Parke to trauaile, where he ſpide
               A yonger ſad Hart, ſtanding cloſe beſide
               Th'impriſoning pale, and v
                     •
                  ng all his skill
               To free himſelfe from thence, to larger ill.
               Good brother (quoth the ſtranger) let me know,
               What heauy thoughts they are that vex you ſo.
               Why do you ſadly ſo your ſelfe bemone?
               Why hauing friends within come you alone
               To feed ſad melancholly, and inuent
               To doe a raſh act, which youle ſoone repent?
            
            
               The younger Deere made anſwer, Can ye muſe
               Why I am ſad, and wherefore I doe vſe
               All meanes to free my ſelfe, from being thus
               A ſlaue to him that's foe to all of vs?
               Know brother, I endure more ſorrowes here,
               In one halfe day, then you in one whole yeere.
               For you haue liberty to come and goe,
               Though forreſter and woodman both ſay no.
               But I by cruell man, impriſond keepe,
               Within this woodden walls, where none but ſheepe
               Hares, Conyes, Cowes, and other of my kinne
               Are my aſſociates, ſimple ſoules within.
               I haue no beaſt of worth, of birth, or wit,
               With whom I may conuerſe; but faine to fit
               
                  
My lofty ſpirit to the lowly ſtraine,
               Of baſe companions, ſluggiſh, fearefull, vaine.
               No Wolues or dogs come here, whereby decaies
               The exerciſe of valure and the praiſe.
               The traps for vermin, are ſo thicke beſet,
               That oftentimes they ſome of vs doe get.
               The watchfull keeper, euery night and morne,
               Commands me riſe, and reſt with his ſhrill horne,
               He with his Lymehound rounds the pale about,
               For feare leaſt we be ſtolne or broken out.
               He feeds vs cheerfully, and doth prouide
               Sufficient meat that's fit for euery tide;
               But being fat, he chooſeth which he likes,
               And through our ſides, deaths forked arrow ſtrikes.
               Thus all he doth, is his owne turne to ſerue,
               And for his owne life doth our liues preſerue.
               Then gentle brother helpe to free me hence,
               And my ſwift thanks ſhall yeeld you recompence.
            
            
               Stay brother mad-brain ſtay, quoth Lightfoot thē
               
               If you were out, you'ld wiſh you in agen.
               I was in Syria borne, and euery yeere
               A dangerous voyage make, for what you here
               Enioy with proud contempt. We cannot find
               "Content on earth, without a thankfull mind.
               You ſlight your eaſe and plenty; we, alas!
               With toyle ſeeke that which you with ſcorn let paſſe.
               Our meat is grutchd, we like to robbers watcht,
               So what we feed on, here and there is ſnatcht.
               The pale you call your priſon rather may,
               Be tearmd your Caſtle, Garden, Cloſet, Stay,
               To keepe out others from thoſe ioyes of yours,
               Or to preſerue you from theſe woes of ours.
               
                  
Whilſt we without by Lyons, Leopards, Beares,
               Wolues, Eagles, Serpents, and a thouſand feares,
               Are howrely vext, beſet, beſieged ſo,
               That as our ſhadowes, death doth next vs goe.
               Yet none our deaths reuenge, nor craues account,
               How our neglected blood is lauiſht out.
               For euen that Man (which is your guard) to vs
               Proclaimes himſelfe a foe, moſt dangerous.
               He hunts for our deſtruction cheeres the hound,
               Rides, runs, whoopes, hollowes, and at euery ſound,
               Rings our ſhrill deaths bell with ſo fearefull blaſt,
               As charmes our ioynts to heare, whilſt hounds make haſt
               To finiſh our deſired death, and glut
               With our ſweet fleſh, each vermins maw and gut.
               Thus doe we die abroad, for euery man
               Claimes right in vs, and labors all they can,
               Our weary feet in toyles, nets, ſnares t'incloſe,
               When you haue friends, to guard you from your foes
               If therefore you haue told me truth that there
               You doe no creature but your keeper feare;
               O bring me to this priſon, ſhew me how
               I may obtaine a bleſſed life with you.
               Direct me to a leape, ile ſoone leape in.
               "Tis happineſſe, vnhappy to haue been.
               With that he mounts the pale, adue quoth he,
               Vaine, wide, wild world; who ſerues the law is free.
            
            
               Epimythium.
               There hath been long diſputation to
find out the true freedome. The world
holds opinion that Libertines vvho doe
what they liſt, and luſt whatſoeuer is vnlavvfull

are onely free men. Caine vvas
founder of this brotherhood. He might
doe what he liſt, he was a vagabond exempt
from lawes, he had a marke of priuiledge
ſet vpon him to keep him from
puniſhment here. Our Ieſuits and Kingkillers
being exempt from the temporall
ſword are free of this company. But the
child of God whoſe affections are mortified,
who obeis law for conſcience ſake,
who is a law vnto himſelfe, is the onely
freeman; for to him the Magiſtrate bears
the ſword in vaine. He would be honeſt
without law, and wil be honeſt if the law
ſhould forbid him. Yet vvould he not
reſiſt, but ſubmit himſelfe to power. He
is free of that company whereof S. Paul
profeſſeth himſelfe one when he ſaith, I
I haue learned in al eſtates to be contented. How
much more happy are they who liue vnder
the protection of a good king, and
wholeſome lawes, then theſe are who liuing
here like outlawes goe without contradiction
out of momentany pleaſure &
liberty into eternal ſlauery & puniſhmēt.
            
         
         
            
            The Cony-burrow.
            ¶Dedicated to the louers of
worth, and friends of vertue, who follow
truth with a ſingle heart, and ſpeake it
with a ſingle tongue.
            
               Be innocent, but circumſpect withall,
               The Turtles mate may be the Turtles ſtall.
               Be wiſe yet truſt not wit. The traps we make
               For others, firſt doe our falſe fingers take.
               What we delight to vſe, take pride to weare,
               Takes vs; as Abſalon hangd with his haire.
               Then walke vpright, to neither hand encline,
               There's nought frees innocence, but grace diuine.
            
            
               
                  THe Polcat, Ferret, Lobſtar,
               Weaſel, made
               A ſecret match, the Cony to
inuade:
               Which no way they could compaſſe,
               whilſt he kept
               Himſelfe abroad, when as he fed
or ſlept.
               
                  
At laſt the Polcat to the Cony went,
               With this ſmooth ſpeech. Good couſen my intent
               Hath been long ſince t'acquaint you with our kin,
               And tell ye how our couſenage came in.
               Your Grandame was my carefull foſtermother,
               To your kind ſire, I was a foſterbrother;
               My education, nurture, and my foode,
               I from my youth receiued from your ſweet brood.
               In recompence whereof, my thankfull mind,
               A fitte requitall long deſired to finde.
               The time is come, for I haue lately found,
               A ſecret plot, wherein the cunning hound
               The cloſe diſſembling Tumbler, Lurcher ſwift,
               With Raynard that knowes many a ſubtill ſhift.
               The Eagle and the Goſhauke, haue agreed,
               Their ſtomacke with your dainty fleſh to feed.
               Firſt they intend the hound ſhall hunt ye out,
               And by your footing heate ye once about.
               Then ſhall that hypocrite, the Tumbler trie,
               To cheare you of your life, with his falſe eie.
               But if he faile, the Lurcher with his ſpeed,
               Will ſnatch yee vp (they hope) and doe the deed.
               If not the Eagle, Fox, and Goſhauke, ſweare,
               To eat no meat, till on your lims they teare.
            
            
               The harmleſſe Cony, at this dire report,
               Ready to ſound, beſought in humble ſort
               The wary Polcat him t'inſtruct and teach
               A way, how he might ſcape his foes long reach.
               Faith (quoth the Polcat) you perhaps might hide,
               Your ſelfe among thicke buſhes vneſpide,
               But that the Hounds and Lurcher both are there,
               Whoſe ſents will quickly find ye out, I feare.
               
                  
Againe vpon the rocks, you might remaine,
               But that the Eagle, Fox, and Goſhauke ſaine
               Thei'l watch ye there; ſo that no other way
               Remaines to ſcape with life, but night and day
               To ſcrape and grate with your forefeet, a den,
               Within the earth, where ſafe from beaſts and men.
               And foule, and euery bloody foe you ſhall,
               Your life ſecurely lead in ſpight of all.
            
            
               The ſimple Cony doubting no deceit,
               Thought treaſon had not councell for a bait.
               And therefore thanks his foe, and (glad at heart)
               To dig his owne graue vſeth all his art.
               A ſandy place he ſeeks, and finding one,
               Free from all clay, or flint, or other ſtone,
               He with his forefeet grates, and makes a burrow,
               As deepe, as if he ment to trauaile thorow,
               The body of the earth, and meet the Sunne,
               When it vnto the Antipodes doth run.
               Which hauing finiſht, he prepares a feaſt,
               And there the Polcat is the chiefeſt gueſt.
               The Lobſter, Ferret, Weaſel too muſt goe,
               To ioy him in his houſe, they loue him ſo;
               And their great friend, the ſiluer-ſuited Snake,
               Muſt needs along with them, and merry make.
               He welcomes them, and doth before them ſet,
               What iunckets he with purſe or paines could get.
               The Lyons Court hath not a dainty diſh,
               But he prouides it, euen beyond their wiſh.
               "Yet they that long for blood, till blood be ſhed,
               "Cannot be ſatisfied, though fully fed.
            
            
               Ingratitude! thou monſter of the minde,
               Art thou not only proper to mankind?
               
                  
Is there a beaſt that can forget his friend,
               And for his owne ends, worke his fellowes end?
               Is there a beaſt whoſe luſt prouokes him kill
               The beaſt that did him good, nere wiſht him ill?
               Is there a beaſt who vnder kindneſſe can
               Diſſemble hate? O then thrice happy man!
               Thou art not only he that kilſt thy brother,
               Some beaſts there are that murther one another.
               Some foules, ſome fiſhes, Serpents ſome there are
               Who pray vpon their kind in open war.
               And ſome that vnder friendſhip falſly faind,
               With fellowes murther haue their natures ſtaind.
               Nay there is one who can ſo couer euill,
               That man may iudge him Angell, find him diuell.
               He firſt with ſweetmeats poyſond Adams ſeed,
               Since when of ſweet meats wiſeſt men take heed.
            
            
               So need not theſe bould gueſts, they eat and drink
               And then riſe vp to play; but neuer thinke
               Ought fadgeth right, till they haue brought to paſſe
               The purpoſde plot for which this meeting was.
               Therefore (diſſemblingly) the Polcat gins,
               To licke and catch the Cony, and ſo wins
               Hould vnderneath his throat, which hauing faſt,
               The tragedy begins, the ſport is paſt.
               For all aſſault him then on euery part,
               Some at his ſides, ſome at his head and heart.
               Some at his belly, but the poiſonous Snake,
               Doth at his tayle a deadly iſſue make.
               The helpleſſe Cony ſues, intreats, and ſtriues,
               But he muſt die had he ten thouſand liues.
               Each foe his greedy gorge with blood doth glut
               And with his fweet fleſh cram each hollow gut.
               
                  
"But blood that's ſweet in taſt, is not ſo ſound,
               "To feed vpon, as milke that's eaſier found.
               The Snake with poiſonous touch had venome ſpred.
               Through all the ſwelling vaines, from taile to head.
               And they had ſuckt the blacke infection in;
               A fitting vengeance for their crying ſinne.
               Straight they their ſtomackes find not well at eaſe,
               And ſomething feele, that doth their minds diſpleaſe.
               The Weaſel firſt ſuſpects the Snake, for he
               Can neuer with a Serpent well agree;
               Saies, they are poiſond all by one baſe ſlaue,
               Whoſe company the Ferret needs would haue.
               The Snake replies, he did no more but what
               He was appointed to performe by plot.
               And if they fooliſhly had eat their laſt,
               He could not mend with ſorrow what was paſt.
               They find it true, but find it now too late,
               Each rauing dies, and yeelds conſtraind by fate.
               Yet ere they die, all doe their farewell take,
               By ſhaking teeth together on the Snake.
               Who deadly wounded, crawles but faintly thence,
               Confounded with the guilt of his offence.
               And heeding not his way, by good miſhap,
               Became a priſoner to the warriners trap.
               This feaſt was ended thus, death tooke away,
               And where they did not well we mend it may.
            
            
               
               Epimythium.
               Some are of opinion that wiſedome
conſiſteth in the ability to giue good
counſell. But I think the knowledge how
to take good counſell, and how to diſcerne
the differencs of aduiſe, is the principall
part of wiſedome. That Frog in
AEſope which in a great drought ſpying
water in a deepe pit aduiſed his fellow to
leape downe, that they might be ſatiſfied
and liue there, gaue good counſell and
ſeemed to be a patterne of the firſt wiſedome
ſpoken of. But the other Frog
that refuſed his aduiſe, and diued deeper
then the preſent time, then the bottome
of the pit with this queſtion; But if the
water faile vs there, how ſhall we then
get out or how ſhall we liue there? was
a figure of the ſecond wiſedome, and teacheth
vs that it is harder to take good
counſell then to giue it. Let vs therefore
beware in this point, and learne to looke

a little beyond that good which is firſt
and moſt apparant in euery proiect, The
ſecond and third good is that which we
muſt reſt on: for truth is often moſt remote
and neereſt the bottome, all that
ſwims vppermoſt is the froth and falſe
good and fraud.
            
         
         
            
            
            The Houſe of Fame.
            Dedicated to all the noble attendants
of Royalty in the Campe of
Vertue, who fight for the honor of the Church
and Common-wealth.
            
               Till now of late we feard that lowd report,
               Of Creſſy field, Poicters, and Agincourt,
               
               Fought by our Kings and Princes heretofore,
               Had not been true, or ſhould be tould no more.
               We wondred if thoſe Nobles euer were
               Whom fame for armes and bounty did prefer.
               We doubted all our Countries had forgot,
               The deede of Audely or beleeud it not.
               We thought our Nation was of worth bereft,
               When bowes and arrowes and brown bills were left.
               But ſee, occaſion now hath turnd our eyes,
               To inward wars where greater wonders riſe.
               To ſee affection conquerd, luſt chaſtiſd'e,
               Pride humbled, Murther ſlaine, all vice deſpiſd'e.
               And all old vertues freſhly now reneude,
               By faire examples as the Sun ere vewd.
            
            
               In which braue war of wonders (paſsing far
               
                  
All other conflicts that compounded are
               Of loue and hate) each Lord who lends a hand
               To fight gainſt vice for vertue, doth this land
               More honor then his Anceſtors before
               In conquering France, and ſhall be famd for't more.
               Some for their Prudence who found out and led,
               Others for zeale through whom the enemy fled.
               Others for Art, whoſe skill the ſquadrons placed
               Others for Iuſtice who the enemy chaſed.
               And ſome for Conſtancy, who held it out.
               And ſtill vnwearied, not vn wounded fought.
               But none more fame attaind then mercies ſquire,
               Who begd to giue, all ſauing in deſire.
               He Audely-like taught Courtiers how to craue
               What they might giue away, and giuing ſaue,
               Saue free from feare of forfeiture or loſſe,
               Or the re-begging or the next yeeres croſſe.
               Or enuies eye-ſore, or the Commons hate,
               Or poores complaint, or gre uance of the ſtate.
               To him and to the reſt, this tale is ſent,
               How ſoeuer taken with a good intent.
            
            
               
                  FAme that in Homers time a vagrant was,
               Without a houſe aud home, did after paſſe
               In ſtately ſtructures all the mixed race
               Of Semdeities, and euery place
               Built her a Court, aſſiſted by the Rages
               Of ſundry Poets in ſucceeding ages.
               
                  
For euery one did ſomething ad, to frame
               More ſpace and room for their friends narrow fame.
               Which as they purchaſt, ſtill to her they gaue
               And that's the cauſe, themſelues ſo little haue.
            
            
               This Fame hath now her houſe glazde al with eies,
               The rafts, beames, balkes, nerues, ſinewes, arteries;
               The dores wide open, eares; hangd round about
               With nimble tongues, and couerd ſo without.
               All things are ſeene and heard the wide world ore
               Which touch that place, and fartheſt off the more.
               The Houſe of Fame built vp foure ſtories hie,
               Stands in an open plaine, in which doth lie
               Foure ſiſter twins, True fame, and good the firſt,
               And eldeſt are; falſe and bad fame the worſt.
               And yongeſt payre, yet ſwifteſt are in flight
               And though laſt borne, yet oft come firſt to light.
               Theſe laſt dwell in two darker roomes below,
               Among the thicke Crowdes where all errors grow.
               There keepe they Court, where Scandals, Libels, lies,
               Rumors, Reports, Suſpicions, calumnies,
               Are fauorites and Gouernors of State,
               Whoſe practiſe 'tis true worth to ruinate.
               Falſe fame liues loweſt, and true Fame aboue,
               Bad Fame next falſe, good fame next, true doth moue:
               Yet good fame ſomtime doth with falſe fame ſtay,
               And bad fame ſometime doth with true fame play.
               But falſe and true (oppoſd) will neuer meete,
               Nor bad and good fame, one the other greete.
            
            
               It ſo fell out (as oft ſtrange things befall)
               A gallant Knight, ariued at that faire Hall,
               Attended on with ſuch a noble ſort,
               Of warlike ſquires, as fild this ſpatious Court.
               
                  
Who curiouſly enquiring o
                     •
                   the rout,
               Whoſe Court it was, could no waies find it out.
               For contradictions croſt each other ſo,
               As truth from falſhood he could no waies know.
               Bad fame did call it hers, and ſaid, ſhe was
               A guide to ſuch as vnto glory paſſe.
               Falſe Fame did call it hers; he ſaw they lide,
               For 'boue their heads, two brighter Queens he ſpide.
               True fame ſpake to him then, and let him know,
               That ſhe and good fame did the building owe,
               Being eldeſt borne, to Titan and the Earth,
               Before the Gyants war: when th'others birth
               Long ſince was ſubiect to their parents ſinne,
               And heauens curſe which now they liued in.
               For as thoſe Gyants gainſt the Gods did war,
               So theſe to truth profeſſed enemies are;
               Had by ſtrong hand, and fraud, vſurpd her ſtate,
               And to expreſſe to vertue vtmoſt hate,
               Had bard all paſſage to their houſes hie,
               That mortall men might in obliuion die
               Or haue their memories blaſted, glories kild
               By eating time, with lies and ſlanders fild.
               She wiſht him then if he his good deſired
               To haue repeated, or his ſpirit aſpired
               To worthy honor as old knights had wont,
               (Whoſe ſwords not ruſt, but too much vſe did blunt)
               That he would vſe ſome meanes to ſet them free,
               Whereby his bleſt name might eternizd be.
            
            
               Good Fame then told him, that the only way,
               How he this enterprize accompliſh may,
               Was by the helpe of mercy, prudence, art,
               Iuſtice and zeale, and Conſtancy of heart.
               
                  
All their knowne friends to ſummon vp in armes,
               To force the place, and to diſperſe thoſe ſwarmes
               Of idle vagabonds; who kept below
               And hated good Fame, would not true fame know.
               Then (ſince the ſtayres of fame were broken downe,
               And dores ſtopt vp to glory and renowne)
               She wild him make an engine wherewithall,
               He might her lodging and her ſiſters ſcale.
               And ſo himſelfe in ſpite of perill, raiſe
               Aboue the reach of enuy, or diſpraiſe.
            
            
               The Knight (in ſpirit rauiſht with delight
               To heare their ſpeech, to ſee their goodly ſight)
               Mounts his fierce Courſers backe, with which at hand
               His Squires attend vpon his ſtrict command.
               Wils euery one of them to take a dame,
               Such as the Ladies of the houſe did name,
               Who there attended that they might direct
               This high attempt, with order and reſpect.
               The Squires with willing minds the knight obaide,
               And each behind them tooke a louely maide.
               
                  Prudence directs her Squires to lead the way,
               (Who followes her direction cannot ſtray.)
               At length they come vnto a fruitfull wood,
               Wherein a world of vpright timber ſtood;
               Tall Cedars, Cypres, Pine and royall Okes,
               With country Elmes, and Aſh for plow and yokes.
               The learned Laurell, and the weeping Mirrh,
               The ſmarting Birch, and the ſweet ſmelling Firr
               Grew there in order, and all trees beſide,
               Wherein the thrifty Woodreeue taketh pride.
               The knight ſuruaies all this, yet finds not one
               Fit to be feld; till Prudence lights vpon
               
                  
A proud ſtraight Aſpe, whoſe waueing top did leane
               On a ſlight Poplar, with ſome ſhrubs betweene.
               The curſed Eldar, and the fatall Yewe,
               
               With Witch, and Nightſhade in their ſhadowes grew;
               Whoſe ſaples tops, with mildewes often ſtood,
               And grew ſelf-ſeare, and ouertopt the wood.
               The Rauen & Shreikeowle there did build their neaſts,
               And at their roots did harbour harmefull beaſts.
               Which Prudence ſaw, but mercy would not ſee,
               Till ſhee perceiu'd how euery other ttee
               Droop'd vnderneath the height of theſe alone,
               And could not thriue, or grow till theſe were gone.
               She therefore (ioynd with Conſtancie and Zeale)
               Beſought ſharpe Iuſtice, who doth euenly deale
               Her warie blowes, to fell all theſe with ſpeed;
               Who ſoone conſents, and ſoone performes the deed.
               At euery ſtroke ſhe fetcht, the trees did grone,
               The reſt did eccho laughter to their mone.
               And now they lye along, their branches topt,
               Their barke pild off, their trunks aſunder chopt.
               Then Art with rule and line, theſe vſeleſſe payer
               Frames (engine-like) a ſtraight clowd climing ſtayer
               To mount Fames houſe; this 
                     •
                  uery Squire doth reare
               And brauely on their backs do thither beare.
               But Mercy ſeeing all the other ment
               To burne the Chips, to ſaue them ſhe is bent.
               And, with her Squire, the knight praies, let them lye,
               For he ſhall gaine, and glory get thereby.
               Since chips which cut from Aspe and Poplar bee,
               Do ſoone take roote, ech growes a goodly tree.
               The knight conſents, and fenceth round the ſpring.
               Whoſe forward growth doth hope of profit bring.
               
                  
And now, together to the houſe of Fame
               
               With ſpeede they paſſe, where firſt the falſeſt Dame
               
               Salutes them with a lye, and ſaith ſhee heares
               Her Siſters are together by the eares,
               And haue deſtroyde ech other; this ſhe had
               From her Twin-ſister, who tells rumors bad.!
            
            
               They ſlight her leaſings, and with ſpeed aſſay
               To raiſe the lather, where bold Zeale makes way,
               But falſe Fame and her Siſter, lay about
               To hinder her, with all their raſcall route.
               Slander, foole-hardines, and heartles feare,
               With fooliſh Pittie, and falſe Loue was there,
               Damnde Infidelitie, and ſecret Hate,
               And treaſon too, that cloſe diſſembling mate.
               Who all with open mouth, and open lyes,
               All waies to ſtop this honord worke deuiſe.
               They raile, and fight, intreat, and curſe and ban.
               The Knight proceeds, in ſcorne of what they can.
               And mounts the ladder, with his ſword in hand,
               Which ſoone diſparkles, ſuch as dare withſtand.
               
                  Zeale hales him vp, and Prudence guides him right,
               
                  True Conſtancie encourageth the fight,
               
                  Mercy ſaues all the innocent, who ſwarme
               For companie, not with intent of harme;
               Art orders euery act, the engine ſtaies
               And helpes the Knight ſtep after ſtep, to praiſe
               The luſty ſquires below, with ſword and lance,
               Withſtand bad fame, whilſt Juſtice doth aduance
               Her heauy hatchet, and ſtrikes off the head
               Of both the leaders, and there leaues them dead.
               Which when their troopes diſcouer, they forſake
               Th'vſurped fortreſſe, and themſelues betake
               
                  
To heady flight, into a marſh neere hand,
               Where many whiſpering reeds and Oſiars ſtand.
               There they like out-lawe, doe themſelues incloſe,
               In wilfull baniſhment, with all the foes
               Of this good knight, whoſe valure vndertooke
               This high attempt, that Fame might rightly looke
               On all deſeruers, and that man might finde,
               Like freedome for his tongue, as for his mind.
               That vertue might be crowned by true fame,
               And honeſt meaning liue with honored name.
            
            
               Which promiſe gladly both the ſiſters ſwore,
               In ſolemne forme; and now as heretofore
               The freedome of their tongues they both poſſeſſe;
               And worth is knowne from baſe vnworthineſſe.
               The knight they humbly thanke, and him they crown
               The Soueraigne of glory and renowne.
               Which ſtile, Fames trumpetters the fowre winds blow
               Through th'earths foure quarters, that the world may know
               Th'extent of vertuous actions, how no power
               Can ſtop their paſſage, nor lanke Time deuoure
               Their ſweet remembrance; which ſhall liue as long
               As nature hath an eare, or eye, or tongue.
               To euery Squire then they this fauour giue,
               That after death their Fames ſhall euer liue;
               For ſtill thoſe Ladies, whoſe imploiment they
               So well aduanc't, ſhall duly night and day
               Repeate their labors, and prefer them far
               Beyond Alcides workes, as peace doth war
               Surpaſſe in glory, or thoſe works we doe,
               VVhen others wills, and ours we conquer too.
            
            
               Now'tis proclaimd that if we tell no lies,
               We may with boldneſſe ſpeake and feare no ſpies.
               
                  
That what this age hath done, this age may heare,
               As well repeated now as the next yeere.
               That all our words our ſelues ſhall firſt expound,
               And that no forc't conſtruction ſhall confound
               Our honeſt meaning, but bee't ill or well,
               We may with freedome our opinions tell.
               Since no man dares to doe the thing which he.
               Would not haue all the world both heare and ſee.
               Theſe orders ratified, they fall to ſport,
               And fill with maskes and reuells all the Court.
               The ſeqell refer to Fames relation,
               Whoſe golden trumpe ſounds vs a bleſſed nation.
            
         
         
            
            
            Satellitium.
            Dedicated to all that ſtand Sentinell,
that watch and ward in defence
of this kingdome, eſpecially to the ſtrength
and guard of the State.
            
               Be of one minde; Religion tyes a knot,
               Which none vndoes, by practiſe or by plot.
               But if in that we differ, be our breed
               Within one houſe, or wombe, of all one ſeede,
               "Tis ſeuerd ſoone by hate, reſpect, or gold,
               Which Law can neuer ſoulder, art make hold.
               "Faith only ioynes, what nothing ſunder can.
               "Beaſts loue for benefits, for vertue Man.
            
            
               
                  WHo guarded round about with Parthian
bowes,
               Or Spaniſh pikes; or hedg'd and dikt
with rowes
               Of ſturdie Ianiſaries, or the ſhot
               Of hardy Swizzars, or the valiant
Scot.
               
                  
And after theſe with walles of ſteele and braſſe,
               Hemd in ſo cloſe that ſcarce the ayre may paſſe
               Betwixt the cliffes, is not ſo free from doubt,
               As is that King whom loue doth guard about.
               Whom ſubiects loue doth guard, becauſe that he
               Guards them from all oppreſſion, and makes free
               His noble fauourers to deſert and worth,
               Spreading his radiant vertues frankly forth,
               That both his owne may finde, and neighbors know,
               What glorious fruit doth from religion grow.
               How ſweet an odor Iuſtice ſends to heauen,
               How rare example is to Princes giuen.
               By vertuous deeds, to ſtop the mouthes of thoſe,
               Who vnreform'd are reformations foes.
               Such one ſleepes ſafe within the armes of loue,
               Diuine regard doth all his ſubiects moue
               To due obedience; and with ſacred awe
               Binds conſcience, with a ſtronger bond then lawe.
               Such heauen informes, whilſt hell doth vndermine,
               And ſpite of darkeſt plots with grace diuine
               Doth hedge about, that naked in the armes
               Of enemies he is preſeru'd from harmes.
               They ſleepe ſecurely, feed on holeſome cates,
               Angels their beds make, cookes their delicates
               Giues Antidotes gainſt poyſons, doth defend
               Gainſt damned witches, and their God the fiend,
               No Ieſuits at their elbowes can do hurt,
               Nor troopes of Papiſts that their courts ingirt.
               For God doth them in his bleſt armes incloſe,
               Safe, though their chiefeſt fauourites were foes.
            
            
               O happy then good Kings proceed,Pſal. 45. ride on,
               Grow vp in glory, as you haue begun.
               
                  
Ride on for truths ſake, looke on either band,
               How you are guarded with a heauenly hand
               Of bleſſed ſpirits, who ſhall lead you ſtill
               In holy paths, and guide your ſteps from ill.
               Theſe being with you,Pſal. 91. you ſhall boldly tread
               Vpon the Lyon, and the Dragons head,
               And trample danger vnderneath your feete,
               As men tread ſtones, or dirt within the ſtreet,
               Which only ſpraids them; your heauen-garded ſtate
               Is ſafer far, then that of Mithridate,
               The King of Pontus, vnto whom befell,
               What ſtrange aduenture in this tale I tell.
            
            
               This King perceiuing well there was no band,
               Of duty, loue, or nature,AElianus. could withſtand
               The ſtrong inticement of corrupting gold,
               Or baſer luſt, or humor ouerbold,
               Or fond ambition (which makes empty ſlaues
               Swim bladder borne vpon the floting waues
               Of falſe Opinion, with the arme of pride,
               Of borrowed power, and ignorance beſide)
               But that theſe would peruert the faith they had,
               And cauſe them after farther hopes run mad;
               Did to preuent all this, a guard prouide
               Of faithfull beaſts, whoſe ſtrength had oft been tried.
               A Bull, a Horſe, a Hare, the Captaines were,
               Of this ſtrong guard, whoſe force did nothing feare
               But falſhood, and Ingratitude, and Treaſon,
               From which they were as free, as man from reaſon
               Why knowing more then beaſts, he ſhould not hate
               As they doe, to be treacherous, and ingrate.
            
            
               Theſe three together being put to feed,
               And ſport themſelues till there were farther need
               
                  
Of their knowne faith, together long did dwell
               In peace and loue, till on a time it fell
               That they with reſt and eaſe full fed and fat,
               Had time to play, to dally, and to chat.
               Then did the wanton Hart propound a courſe,
               Betwixt himſelfe and the couragious Horſe.
               The warlike Horſe did dare the horned Bull
               To make one in the race, who ſtraight way full
               Of burning, choller, and aduſted blood,
               Bad cowards run, he for no footman ſtood.
               Twas meet for them that durſt not ſtand it out,
               To vſe their heeles, his heart was too too ſtout.
            
            
               The angry Hart replies, ther's none of you,
               But may to me as to your better bow,
               I ſwifter then the Horſe, my feet can vſe,
               And for my head, the Bull ile not refuſe
               To combat with, my courage I am ſure
               Is like my ſtrength as able to indure,
               And doe, as either of you dare or can,
               And more I am eſteemd by royall man.
               Thoſe Serpents which you run from, I ſeeke forth,
               And teare them with my teeth as nothing worth.
               And as my life to man is ſweet and pleaſing,
               So is my death, each part ſome ſorrow eaſing.
               My hornes all mortall poyſon can expell,
               My marrow makes ſtiffe ioynted miſers well.
               My fat yeelds ſtrength and ſweetneſſe; that fierce lad
               
                  Achilles, neuer otherſpoonemeat had.
               Which made him ſuch a Captaine, euery part
               Is phyſicall and comforteth the heart.
               Yea euen my excrements the dropſie cures,
               My teares, like precious lewels, man allures.
               
                  
To ſeek them vp, whereſ'euer they be ſhed.
               My skin great Captaines weare when I am dead;
               And boaſt that they haue ſuch a coat of proofe,
               Which wounds withſtands, whence venome ſtands aloofe.
               Then why (O baſer creatures) dare you brag
               And match your ſelues with the long liuing Stag?
               My life is long, cauſe I with coſt am wrought,
               But nature ſlights your liues, as good for nought.
            
            
               The creſted Horſe, with fiery eies did ſhow,
               What inward rage did in his hot blood flow
               To heare this bold ſpeech vttered, and with head
               Toſt in the ayre his hardned hoofes doth tread
               The ſc ornd earth with contempt, then thus breaks out;
            
            
               O thou the fearefulleſt of all the rout
               Of hunted beaſts, how haps it that you dare
               With me your maſter and your Lord compare?
               Forget ye my preheminence? the loue
               Man beares me? how one ſpirit ſeems to moue
               Me and my rider? that we ſtart and run,
               Stop, turne, trot, amble, as we were but one?
               Haue you at any time been calld to war,
               Where none but Captaines and great Souldiers are?
               Truſted to heare their Councels? on your backe
               Borne the Commander of that royall packe?
               I haue done this and more, borne him about
               Through worlds of danger, and then bornehim out.
               He truſts me when his legs he dare not truſt,
               And when his hands faile then performe I muſt.
               Nay when he failes himſelfe in euery part,
               I adde another life, another heart.
               In war I thus befriend him, in his need,
               And ſo in peace, I helpe his wants to feed.
               
                  
I till his land that elſe would barren be,
               Beare all his carriage, and am ſildome free
               From ſum imploiment, but muſt neere him ſtand
               As being fit, and apt for his command.
               If he to viſit friends abroad doth fare,
               I muſt along with him, true friends we are.
               If he intends to hunt ſuch beaſts as you,
               For ſport, or hate, or need, he lets me know
               The time, the place, the end, and we agree,
               I ſee the ſport, and hunt as well as he.
               How often haue I ſeene ſome fearefull Hart,
               Perhaps your ſire, at my dread preſence ſtart.
               Fly hence with vtmoſt ſpeed, and neuer ſlacke
               His willing pace, when I vpon my backe
               Bearing my noble maſter haue at length
               O'retane the lubber, hauing loſt bis ſtrength?
               Whilſt I ſtill forming courage, breathing ſprite,
               Haue ſought another conqueſt long ere night;
               And after that a third, vnwearied yet,
               Yet you your ſelfe as Paralell will ſet
               To match and ouermatch my worth, my force;
               As if weake Stags might braue the peerleſſe Horſe.
               For phyſicall receipts ile eaſily yeeld,
               Aliue I profit man, you being kild.
               This makes him ſeeke your death, my liue to ſaue,
               Yet being dead my parts their vertues haue.
               Which I refer to others to relate,
               As ſcorning Hog-like to doe good ſo late.
               This only I conclude, If man ſhould chooſe
               To ſaue but one, hee'd both of you refuſe.
            
            
               The armed Bull ſweld, puft and roard alowd,
               To heare the Hart ſo bold, the Horſe ſo proud.
               
                  
And all the while they ſpake, he toſt about
               With hornes and hoofes the duſt; then bellowed out
               This bolder braue; What ignorance is this,
               That cauſeth both of you, ſo much amiſſe
               To boaſt yourfalſe worths, and neglect the true,
               Which reſts in me, belongs to none of you?
               The Wolfe, the Greyhound, and each queſting cur,
               Makes thee poore trembling Hart keepe ſuch a ſtir,
               To ſhift thy layer, as if thy life were loſt,
               With euery faint blaſt, that the leaues downe toſt.
               And this couragious Horſe, that makes a quoile,
               Of wounds in war, and tilling of the ſoyle,
               With many other vſes fit for man.
               (As they that leaſt can doe, beſt cauill can)
               Let this his anſwer be, the ſpur and bit
               Shewes man truſts nor his courage, nor his wit.
               For if he tyre or faint, his ſpur prouokes,
               And prickes him forward, with continuall ſtrokes.
               And if with headſtrong heat, he madly rides,
               The bridle curbes him, and his folly guides.
               "All voluntary acts the actors praiſe,
               "Not ſuch as others by conſtraint doe raiſe.
               "Out of our natures, whilſt we eaſily are
               "Made inſtruments either of peace, or war.
               Elſe might our horned Heards, the reſcue boaſt
               Of Hannibal,
                  Plutar. in vita Han. and his diſtreſſed hoaſt,
               When he with lights and torches tyde to vs,
               Eſcapt the trap, of lingring Fabius.
               
               But truth is far from ſuch oſtents,Cunctando reſtituit r
                        〈…〉
                     . Enni
                        ••
                     
                   thoſe deeds
               We call our owne, which from our choice proceeds.
               The yoke we beare, and wherewithall we till
               The earth for man, is by conſtraint, not will.
               
                  
What comfort from our fleſh, or from our Cowes,
               By calues, or milke, or Cheeſe or Butter flowes,
               Or phyſicall receipts, as they are more,
               And vſefuller, then what you both before
               Haue mentioned, ſo freely I confeſſe
               Man hath in them the glory more or leſſe.
               His wit and induſtry, in them is ſeene,
               And th' Authors goodneſſe from whom firſt we been,
               War is the good you glory in, which ſprings
               From mans ambitious ignorance, and brings
               Wants, woe, and death, with many ills beſide,
               To ſcourge vs all, through our great maſters pride.
               Then at the beſt, you are but ſlaues to ſuch,
               As feeding you, foode to their like doe grutch.
               And through your force, their owne reuengements take,
               Whilſt you to ſtout men, cowards equall make.
               For what from you they borrow, they muſt grant
               They feare their foes enioy, whilſt they doe want.
               Thus therefore all the nobler nations vſe
               To fight on foot, whilſt coward
                     •
                   rather chooſe
               To ſhare with beaſts in glory, and to get
               Themſelues a name, through your foole hardy heat.
               So you on them, and they on you depend,
               Such ſeruice iudgement neuer did commend.
               And thus in ſportiue war, and warlike ſport,
               You doe your rider from himſelfe tranſport.
               Whilſt you not manlike grow, but beaſtlike he
               Reſembles you, in all theſe ſports we ſee.
               Yea often to miſchance you doe betray
               Your heedleſſe rider, and in midſt of play
               Precipitate his ſoddaine fortune ſo,
               That who hath you afriend, ſhall need no foe;
               
                  
But may himſelfe, a happy man proclaime,
               If by your meanes he ſcapes without a maime.
               But now if either of you, thinke you can,
               Out of your owne worths, proue more fit for man,
               And better able to defend, and guard,
               Him whom we ſerue, from whom we haue reward,
               Then I can with my hornes, and harnaſt hide,
               Proceed to triall, I defie your pride;
               And with bold challenge ſummon you to fight,
               A triple combat, to decide the right.
            
            
               They both with eager appetite accept
               Theſe wiſht conditions, and by this haue ſtept
               Far from each other; all prepard doe ſtand
               At full carere, to ioyne this trebble band.
               The field triangle wiſe they euenly caſt,
               And each with rage expects, that dreadfull blaſt,
               Which warnes them charge. Each roreth out his wrath,
               Nor other need of drums or trumpets hath.
               The Hart doth bray, the bounding Steed doth neight
               The Bull doth bellow, deepe, and lowde and high.
               The earth doth tremble, and the ayre doth ſhun,
               This dreadfull thunder; as when laden gun
               Spits forth its load, in ſcorne to be reſtraind,
               The ayre giues way vnto the bullets chaind,
               As dreading to reſiſt ſo mighty force,
               Thus meete the valiant Bull, the Hart and Horſe.
            
            
               The Hart and Horſe firſt touch tha'ppointed place
               Being more ſwift, and apter for the race.
               And let each other, with much danger feele
               The force of horned head, and armed heele.
               But ere a ſecond bout they can performe,
               In comes the boyſtrous Bull, like winters ſtorme,
               
                  
And ſeuers them with ſuch a violent puſh,
               That they amazde, turne giddy with the ruſh.
               But (nimble both and actiue) they repay
               The ſturdie Bull, with all the ſpeed they may.
               The Hart with his broadhornes, doth make him reele
               But the kinde Horſe, vpholds him with his heele.
               The Bull thanks neither, for the one did pearce
               His hollow flanke, the other much more fearce,
               Did breake a rib, and bruiſe his ſhoulder blade,
               And taught him with leſſe choller to inuade.
               Yet th'ods is ſoone recouer'd with his horne,
               Which hath the belly of the Courſer torne.
               And rent one weaker beame, from branched Hart,
               As trees by thunder riuen, or clouen athwart.
               The ſubtle Hart, then ſhuns thoſe ruder blowes,
               And tho'ds of handiſtrokes too dearely knowes.
               The Horſe taught by his wounds, doth keep aloofe,
               And ſtands vpon defence, with hardned hoofe.
               The Bull aſſaults them both with watchfull eye,
               And ſeeks how he aduantages may ſpie.
               The Horſe and Hart vpon their guard do ſtand,
               In doubt and iealouſie, on either hand.
               The Bull aſſaults the Hart, but he giues way,
               And ſlips his furie with what ſlight he may.
               Yet turnes not head, as fearefull cowards will,
               But wefes aſide, to tyre his foe with skill.
               The Bull then ſtrikes the Horſe a deadly cuff,
               But he requites him with a counterbuff.
               The Hart ſtrikes in betwixt, the Bull turnes rownd,
               The Horſe leaps right vp, doth coruet, and bownd;
               So at one inſtant, fatally they meete;
               The Bull his doath meets from the Horſes feet,
               
                  
The Hart thaduantage takes, the Horſe aloſt
               Strikes his one horne into his belly ſoft,
               Which there hangs faſt; the Horſe doth with his fall.
               Breakes the Harts necke, this is the end of all
               None hath the conqueſt, all of them are ſlaine.
               Their deaths not doubted, long they there remaine,
               Till that the King their Maſter, hauing neede
               Of their attendance, goes his guard to feed,
               For none might tend them elſe, leaſt they acquainted
               With others bribes, by treaſon ſhould be tainted.
            
            
               So enters he the place, and there he ſpies
               What doth affright him, all his comfort lies
               Dead at his feet, then ſadly going neere
               Their carrion corpes, he doth a murmur heare,
               As armed ſouldiers in a City ſound,
               Or fire in th'ayre, or wind within the ground.
               And doubting the ſucceſſe, three ſeuerall ſwarmes
               He ſees prepard for fight, and vp in armes.
               Bees from the Bull, Waſpes from the Horſe do ſtart,
               And Hornets from the melancholly Hart.
            
            
               He motions peace, and hopes to part the fray,
               They ſend three ſouldiers, who ſends him away.
               For each of them doth fix his venomd ſting,
               Within the fleſh of the amazed King.
               He flies with ſpeed from thence, they fight it out;
               The conqueſt all expect, all feare and doubt.
               But what befell I know not; this I know,
               The King cride out aloud. Epimithiū. The euils that grow
               From pride, ambition, and exceſſe of grace,
               "Like thankleſſe curs, flie in their maſters face.
               "Beaſts will be beaſts, doe bounty what it can,
               "Tis caſt away, thats giuen to worthleſſe man.
            
            
               
               O Princes baniſh faction from the Court,
               It ſowres all actions, leauens euery ſport.
               And at the laſt, when it ſhould ſweetly cloſe,
               From one falſe friend riſeth a thouſand foes.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   