
      
         
            
            
               
                  HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
                  royal blazon or coat of arms
               
            
            
               GOD saue the KING.
            A DECLARATION OF HIS M.
Pleasure anent the Religion & praesent Kirk governament.
            
               CHARLES by the grace of GOD, King of great Britanne, France, and Ireland:
Defender of the Faith; &c. To Oure Loveds Messingers, Oure Shirefs in that
part, conjunctlie and severallie specialie constitute; greeting, Forsamekle, As WEE are informed that
now in the beginning of Oure Raigne, Some restles and vnquyet spirites popishlie disposed, haue praesumed
to disperse false bruites & rumors, That WEE intend to make some Innovation concerning the estate
of Religion, or at the least to giue too much toleration and connivance to the popish profession: And
by that and others their seditious and factious proceedings, They doe what in them lyeth to disquyet the
mynds of Oure good Subjects, And to possesse them with some apprehensions and doubtes of the sinceritie
of Oure disposition, towards the true Religion presentlie professed, And by the Law established with
in this Oure Kingdome. And sicklyke that others dis-conforme and Averse persons from the praesent governament
of the Kirk, and contemners of Oure authoritie, by transgressing of the Orders established by Acts of Parliament; haue travelled
to persuade sundrie of Oure good Subjects, That WEE intend to make some alteration of the Kirk governament, and Cannons
thereof happelie established by Oure dearest FATHER of blessed memorie, And that WEE mynd not to vrge any more the observance
of the Acts concluded at Perth and ratefied in Parliament: Howsoewer WEE doe knowe that such foolish rumors deserve not to bee
regairded: Yet least the vnstable mynds of the vulgare sort shuld bee drawne to expect that which WEE never intended, and thereby
bee diverted from their due obedience to GOD and WS. And to the intent that all such false and foolish rumors may bee suppressed
and the forder grouth and progresse thereof praevented. WEE doe hereby Declare, that as Oure laite deare FATHER of famouse and
wortthie memorie, Did sincerlie mainteine the true Religion praesentlie professed in Oure Kingdomes; Which even a litle before his
Death during the tyme of his seiknesse, It was his speciall caire in a Pious maner to make publiklie knowne. So WEE haue resolved
constantlie to professe and mainteine the same, And to propagate and advance the same by Oure Royall Authoritie. And lykewayes
that WEE are so farre from any purpose of Innovating the governament of the Kirk now happelie established, That if the same had
not allreddie beene determined; WEE wold with all Oure cair haue advanced the same, As knowing it to bee the onlie best governament
whereby a Christian Kirk can bee weele reuled in Monarchies and Kingdomes; And most conforme to the best tymes of the Primitive
Kirk. And therefore WEE haue resolved to mainteine that governament and policie of the Kirk alreadie established, and so far
as Oure Lawes doe allow, shall punish any person that darre seeke to disturbe the peace aither of Religion, or praesent Kirk Governamēt
            
               OURE WILL IS heerefore, and WEE charge you straitlie and commands, that incontinent these Oure
Letters seene Yee passe, And in Oure Name and Authoritie, Make publication heereof by oppen Proclamation
at the market Croces of the head Burrowes of this Oure Kingdome and other places needfull, wherethrow
none pretend ignorance of the same. The which to doe WEE commit to you conjunctlie and severallie
Oure full power By these Oure Letters, Delyvering the same by you duelie execute and indorsed againe
to the Bearer.
            
               Given vnder Oure Signet At Edinburgh 
                  the twentie sext day of Julie, And of Reigne
the first yeere. 1625.
               
Ordeined to bee published in Print.
Per Actum D. Secreti Consilii.
         
      
      
         
            EDINBVRGH
            
               ❧Printed by Thomas Finlason his M. printer.
         
      
   