
      
         
            
            
            EXOD. 8. 19.
            
            
               DIGITVS DEI.
            
            
               ESAY. 59. 1.
            
            The Lords Hand is not ſhortned.
            
               2 TIM. 3. 8, 9.
            
            Now as Iannes and Iambres withſtood Moſes, ſo do theſe alſo reſiſt the truth: men of corrupt mindes, reprobate concerning the faith. But they ſhall proceed no farther: for their folly ſhall be manifeſt vnto all men, as theirs alſo was.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            
               MY heart is inditing of a good matter: I Pſ 45. ſpeake of the things which I haue made touching the King; my tongue is the pen of a readie writer.
            God ſhall wound the heart of his enemies, Pſ. 68. and the hayrie ſcalpe of ſuch a one as goeth on ſtill in his treſpaſſes.
            Loe they that are farre from thee ſhall periſh: thou haſt Pſ. 73. deſtroyed all them that goe a whoring from thee.
            But it is good for me to draw neere to God: I haue put my truſt in the Lord God, that I may declare all thy workes.
            Confounded be all they that ſerue grauen Images, that Pſ. 97. boaſt themſelues of Idols.
            It is time for thee Lord to worke, for they haue made Pſ. 126. void thy Law.
            Thou haſt giuen a banner for them that feare thee, that Pſ. 60. it may be diſplayed becauſe of thy truth.
            The righteous ſhall ſee it and reioyce; and all iniquitie Pſ. 107. ſhall ſtop her mouth.
            So that a man ſhall ſay verely there is a reward for the Pſ. 58. righteous; verely he is a God that iudgeth in the earth.
            All men ſhall feare and ſhall declare the worke of God: Pſ. 64. for they ſhall wiſely conſider of his doing.
            The workes of the Lord are great: ſought out of all them Pſ. 111. that haue pleaſure therein.
            Who ſo is wiſe, and will obſerue theſe things, euen they P. 107. ſhall vnderſtand the louing kindneſſe of the Lord.
            Many O Lord my God are thy wonderfull workes which Pſ. 40. thou haſt done, & thy thoughts which are to vs ward, they cannot be reckoned vp in order vnto thee: when I would

declare them, they are more then can be numbred.
            I haue preached righteouſneſſe in the great Congregation: loe I haue not refrained my lips, O Lord thou knoweſt.
            I haue not hid thy righteouſneſſe within my heart, I haue declared thy faithfulneſſe and thy ſaluation:
            I haue not concealed thy louing kindneſſe and thy truth from the great Congregation.
            I will ſpeake of thy teſtimonies alſo before kings and will Pſ. 119. not be aſhamed.
            Helpe me O Lord my God, O ſaue me according to thy Pſ. 109. mercie.
            That they may know that this is thy hand: that thou Lord haſt done it.
            Let them curſe, but bleſſe thou: when they ariſe let them be aſhamed: but let thy Seruant reioice.
            Let my aduerſaries be clothed with ſhame, and let them couer themſelues with their owne confuſion as with a mantle.
            As we haue heard, ſo haue we ſeene in the Citie of the Pſ. 48. Lord of Hoaſts, in the Citie of our God, God will eſtabliſh it for euer.
            The Lord is knowne by the iudgement which he executeth: Pſ. 9. the wicked is ſnared in the worke of his owne hands.
            This ſhall be written for the generation to come, and the Pſ. 102. people which ſhall be created ſhall praiſe the Lord.
         
      
      
         
            
            DIGITVS DEI.
            
               Luke 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
               
                  
                     There were preſent at that time, ſome that told him of the Galileans, whoſe blood Pilate had mingled with their Sacrifices.
                  
                  
                     And leſus anſwering, ſaid vnto them, Suppoſe ye that thoſe Galileans were greater ſinners aboue all the Galileans, becauſe they ſuffered ſuch things?
                  
                  
                     I tell ye, nay; but except ye repent, ye ſhall all likewiſe periſh.
                  
                  
                     Or thoſe eighteene, vpon whom the towre in Siloe fell, and ſlew them, thinke ye that they were greater ſinners aboue al men that dwelt in Hieruſalem?
                  
                  
                     I tell ye, nay; but except ye repent, ye ſhall all likewiſe periſh.
                  
               
            
            
               IN the nine and fortieth Verſe of the former Chapter, our Lord ſaith, that He is come to ſend fire on the earth. And in the one and fiftieth Verſe, denies that he is come to giue Peace on the earth, but rather diuiſion

betwixt Father and Sonne, Mother and daughter, one friend and another.
            This fire is his Word (Is not my Word like a fire, ſaith 
               Ier. 23. 29. 
               the Lord? and like a hammer that breaketh the Rocke in peeces?) the preaching whereof hath battered and shiuered aſunder the Rocke of Rome, and hath occaſioned great diuiſions in the world in euerie age, filling it at this preſent, with warres of all kinds, reall and verball. For this cauſe the Romish Catholikes (a politique people) haue taken order to ſtop the free paſſage thereof, leſt men should burne their fingers with it, &c. Or indeed, leſt thereby their Babylon should be ſet on fire, as, doubtleſſe, Rem. Teſt. Preface. it muſt be ſo conſumed, 2 Theſ. 2. 8.
            
            And ſurely they haue ſeene a faire effect of this their policie; For from this ſilence of the Scripture, proceeds that vniuerſall Peace amongſt them, whereof they ſo much boaſt, and whereupon others ſo reſolutely build. In the beginning and infancie of the world, the Serpent, Ier. 8. 11 12. by Satans procurement, found a meanes to betray our Parents, by teaching them to ſeeke a prohibited and curious knowledge, ſaying, Ye shall not dye, for God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof then your eies shall be opened, 
               Gen. 3. 4, 5. 
               and ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and euill. But now in the dotage of the world, Antichriſt, by Satans inſpiration, hath found a way to betray the Church, by cloſing our eyes againſt commanded and neceſſarie knowledge, ſaying, Ye shall not dye, for God doth know that in the day ye faſt from the Scriptures, ye shall be as Innocents, knowing neither good nor euill. The greateſt part of the world, eſpecially of the Feminine gender, beleeue this newfound Paradox of Antichriſt; and the rather, becauſe it neuer troubles their conſciences, nor ſtraines their wits,

nor takes them off from their Canonicall howres deuoted to Poeticall fictions; which Legendarie ſtuffe is the Diuinitie, whereupon at this day the Faith of the Cloiſter Catechiſt, is principally founded.
            But the word of our Sauiour, though it be the Goſpel of peace, is yet a Fire that inflames, a Sword that deuides. It aimes at another peace then worldlings and fleshlings dreame of; they caſt their eyes vpon peace with men, this teacheth a peace with God; they ſeeke temporall peace, though therein they ſinne againſt God and their conſciences, and doe obſtinately purſue and often obtaine it, though it laſts no longer then vntill the ſtronger hath gotten aduantage by it, for whoſe purpoſe and benefit it was onely concluded; this other aimes to reconcile God and man togither, and to breed peace of conſcience, the earneſt and initiation of an eternall peace hereafter.
            The Apoſtle ſaith, If it be poſsible as much as lyeth in 
               Rom. 12 18. 
               you, haue peace with all men. So farre as is poſſible, Sana conſcientia, with a ſafe conſcience, ſeeke to haue it: but Quod fidaei vestri conuenit. Sed quando de pietate aut de virtute quaeſtio eſt, tunc nulla pax impijs. ſeeke it not by wounding the conſcience, or proclaiming warre with God. For that, though it be poſſible to nature, is impoſſible to grace; thou canſt not reconcile Light and Darkeneſſe, Hell and Heauen, God and Mammon, Chriſt and Antichriſt; nor canſt thou by humane policie bring theſe togither, by cauſing both ſides to abate, and meet in the midſt, through thy wiſedome.
            There is a worldly peace which men vnhappely hunt after, whilſt they neglect the peace of conſcience and ioy in the Holy Ghoſt; which peace and ioy the Saints of God, whoſe hearts are inflamed with that Fire which Chriſt brought into the world, feele euen in the midſt of Iohn 14. 27. tumults, warres, pouertie, perſecution, tortures, fire, death.
            
               
The worlds peace and Gods peace are diuerſe, their fire diuerſe, their ſectators diuerſe, euen as Heauen and Earth is diuerſe or rather oppoſite. We may be farre miſtaken then ſecking for peace, and behold it is warre; peace with men, may proue warre with God. Beware.
            In the fiue and fortieth Verſe our Sauiour proceedes to taxe the folly and hypocriſie of man, who can iudge of times and ſeaſons by ſignes and tokens, but know not the tokens of their owne viſitation, when after their internall Pſ. 74. 10 vocation by Grace, ſtormes of perſecution and triall folfowes; as Sun-shine, and Clouds, and Wind, and Raine, and Froſt, and Snow, haue their ſeuerall turnes. Ier. 8. 7, 8, 9.
            
            Thus we all are wiſe and perfect polititians in State periods and reuolutions of the world: but for diſcerning the incrochments made by Antichriſt, and his aſſotiates, either like Fooles we obſerue them not, or like Hypocrites diſſemble what we ſee, as men wishing well to his ſilent and cloſe inuaſion, to his ſeacret and darke vnderminings. The Lord ſaith by Ieremie, That he is againſt thoſe Prophets 
               Ier. 23. 30. 
               that ſteale away his word euerie one from his neighbour: And doubtleſſe then he is againſt vs, who ſit ſtill in the meane time, and will not ioine with him, and take his part againſt theſe politique Theeues, who ſteale away the Word from vs and our neighbours, ſaying in the meane time that Truth commands vs neither to ſay nor doe any thing to the contrarie, but only to winke and shew our Eſ. 55. 10 11. Pſ. 50. 18 conſent to their Sacriledge, by ſilence, like blind and dumbe dogges; as the Pſalmiſt ſaith, When thou ſaweſt a Thiefe, then thou conſentedſt to him, and haſt beene partaker with Adulterers. And thus being once rob'd of the Scripture, that part of the wiſedome of God which is neceſſarie for vs to know, what wiſedome can be in vs more 
                  
                     •
                  er. 8. 9.
               
then in naturall Fooles, more then in beaſts that perish? Man being thus in honour hath no vnderſtanding, but 
               Pſ. 49. 20. 
               may be compared to the beaſts that perish; The greater man, the greater beaſt.
            In the eight and fiftieth Verſe, our Sauiour giues vs aduice to ſeeke reconcilement with God betimes, whilſt we are in the way, whilſt it is called to day, before we be arreſted and haled violently by death before the Iudge; for then there is no remedie.
            We ſeeke after worldly peace and clap hands with Antichriſt and his confederates, to procure ſpirituall trading in his Kingdome, and temporall trading in theirs; but we neglect God and Chriſt, and make them our aduerſaries; nor haue we any care to be reconciled to them, and to make peace with them, though we know they haue powre to kill both Bodie and Soule alſo. Herein we doe foolishly.
            Whilſt our Sauiour was thus teaching his Diſciples and the multitude, there were preſent certaine perſons who told him of the Galileans, whoſe blood Pilate had mingled with their Sacrifices.
            And this they did perhaps as ſuppoſing the Hiſtorie pertinent for that point of Doctrine which our Sauiour taught; that is, To perſwade vs to make our peace with our aduerſarie betimes in the way; becauſe no man is ſure, either of the time, place, or manner of his death, death comming to man ſo many wayes: and therefore it were good to be reconciled and prepared leſt we be brought before the Iudge ſodainly, by force or accident, whilſt we expect to haue faire warning giuen vs long before, by age, infirmitie, and ſickneſſe.
            Now though there be no Hiſtorie of thoſe times

extant, that tells of the cauſe and manner of this maſſacre punctually; yet there is light enough giuen whereby we may probably coniecture ſome of the principall parts and paſſages thereof, moſt neceſſarie for our purpoſe.
            
               Ioſephus tells of one Iudas the Gaulanite, borne in the 
                  Antiq. Iud. Li. 18. c. 1. Towne of Gamala, whom a little after he calls Iudas of Galilee, that ioyning in confederacie with one Sadoc a Phariſee, became Author of a new Sect, diuerſified from the Phariſees onely in one ſingular point, conſiſting in an obſtinate purſuit of all courſes for recouerie of libertie from the Romane yoke, and freeing themſelues from the Imperiall taxe then impoſed. And it is verie probable, that Iudas and Sadoc vnder the colour of ſacrificing (as the Prophets had wont) aſſembled the people to mooue 
                  
                     •
                   Sam. 10 17. them to purſue this proiect: of which Pilate hearing, being then Gouernour of Iudea for Caeſar, he ſent armed Troopes, and cut them aſunder before they could gather head, euen whilſt they were ſacrificing.
            To make this more cleere, Gamaliel, the great Doctour of the Law, brings in the example of this Iudas in his ſpeech before the Councell, and there mentioneth his cauſe, courſe, and end, briefly, Act. 5. 37.
            This newes being thus tould our Sauiour by ſuch, as it ſeemes thought him vnprouided of examples to ſecond and backe his arguments, and ſuppoſing it ſuited the purpoſe verie well, to perſwade men to reconcilement in the way, leſt they should be ſuddainly cut off, as theſe Galileans were, our Sauiour takes occaſion from hence to inlarge the point, and to inforce it farther, euen vpon the conſciences of ſuch as produced it, ſaying, Suppoſe ye that thoſe Galileans were ſinners aboue all the Galileans, becauſe they ſuffered ſuch things? I tell ye, nay; but except
               
               ye repent, ye shall all likewiſe perish. Thus our Sauiour makes application of this Storie, to all his Auditorie, and cauſeth it to reflect vpon the conſciences of the reporters, as well as vpon all the reſt of his hearers.
            The Galileans were not hereby wholly excuſed a toto (as the Schoolemen ſay) but a tanto, and ſecundum quid, after a ſort; nor was their act of ſacrificing (whereſoeuer, whiſoeuer, or howſoeuer done) iuſtified hereby; but our Sauiour condemnes the rash iudgement of ſuch, as make our ſufferings from men, infallible markes of our ſinnes before God. Wicked men may proſper in euill courſes, good men may fall and ſuffer in holy vndertakings. The Galileans might be ſinners in ſeeking diſorderly to free themſelues from the Romane ſeruitude & Imperiall taxe; and the Emperour, with Pilate his Officer, might be greater ſinners in laying this taxe vpon the people without their conſents (for volenti non fit iniuria) and ſo forcing them to wraſtle for their liberties; yea, and all the other Galileans might be ſinners doubtleſſe, aboue thoſe that ſuffered, whilſt they ſought and deſired the ſame libertie, though they had not hearts to vſe the ſame meanes. So if conſent be a crime, where will is preſent, wanting onely courage to attempt, or powre to accomplish what others aduenture, then the whole Nation were as faultie as theſe few, though theſe did only ſuffer in their perſons, becauſe they did only enter into open action, which by the vulgar is euer cenſured good or badde according to the ſucceſſe; and though before followed, applauded, and effected neuer ſo eagerly, yet it is preſently diſclaimed & condemned as ſoone as it is oppoſed by power, or croſſed and defeated by policie. Thus theſe fondlings could cenſure the Galileans to be Rebles, Traytors, and Sinners aboue others,

and ſo to ſuffer worthely for endeauouring to doe that which all of them deſired to be done: but they could not ſee their owne notorious rebellions and treaſons againſt God, who had beene a gratious King and Ruler ouer them, from whoſe eaſie and equal yoke notwithſtanding, they and their ſtiffe neckt Fathers shranke and withdrew the shoulder.
            The ſinnes againſt man, man cenſures ſeuerely, the ſinnes againſt God we paſſe ouer ſlightly. The iudgement of Caeſar or of his Subſtitute Pontius Pilate, who haue power only to kill the bodie, we tremble at, and count ſo terrible, as it frights vs euen from good duties, or frights all men from acknowledging vs, if we fall into their hands, and be branded as capitall offendors, vnder their tyrannicall cenſures, though it be for performing good duties: but the iudgements of God, who hath power to kill ſoule and bodie, we extenuate, hide, and peruert with our idle Gloſſes, Apologies, and Applycations, though we know they be euer Iuſt, Serious, Obſerueable, Sacred, and neuer inflicted but for notorious euill.
            But how fond and foolish doe men shew themſelues herein? For Caeſar owes more to God, then any man to Caeſar: and yet Caeſar that exacts more for himſelfe then his due, denies or neglects to pay God that which belongs to him; yea, all men are more carefull to pay Caeſar more then they ought, then God what they ought, and for this will robbe God, to inrich Caeſar. Shall they for this be counted wiſe, religious, obedient, faithfull? And Fooles, Factious perſons, Rebels, Traytors for the contrarie? Caeſar can kill thee, Caeſar cannot ſaue thee; die thou muſt when God determines. If Caeſar therefore will neither pay God his due, nor permit thee to doe it, thou maiſt

deny Caeſar whatſoeuer is found to haue Gods expreſſe 
                  Stipendium & Tyranno penditur, praedicatio non niſi bono principi. Caſſ. var. Lib. 9. Ep. 25. Stampe vpon it. I doe not meane the taxe and tribute which he violently exacteth, but prayers for his proſperitie. That hath Caeſars impreſſion, this Gods. Tribute is due to euill Princes, prayers to good. Giue therefore to Caeſar the things that are Caeſars, and vnto God the things that are Gods.
            
            Beſides, if thou offendeſt Pilate, there is no meanes to eſcape, he mingleth thy blood with thy ſacrifice; the Hornes of the Altar are not priuiledged; no place, no perſon, is exempted from the force of his fury; no repentance, no reſtitution can ſerue the turne to redeeme a delinquent from his rage. O Prophane and cruell heart of man! how ſeuere art thou againſt man like thy ſelfe? I ſay, like thy ſelfe, if thou beeſt Gods Image & not Satans; and if thou beeſt Satans Image, then much thy better, like thy Maſter, like thy Maker? Thus if man offend man, there is no mercy: but if man offend God, he may repent and be ſaued. There is indeed no other remedie but repentance; but that remedie is left vs in the greateſt extremitie. Except ye repent ye shall all likewiſe perish. If ye repent, not one of you shall perish.
            
            With Pilate there is no remedy, except you can worke with his Wife vnderhand: With Herod no remedie, except ye can get Herodias Daughter to daunce you into fauour: With Caeſar there is no remedie, except ye can giue for a pardon to Maecenas. It is not ſo with God; He forgiues, though we giue nothing. Repentance only paies all debts. Not the Minion, but the Sonne is the interceſſour. The one ſels at a deere rate the temporall fauours of Caeſar; the other giues freely, the eternall fauours of his Father.
            
               
               Ye shall all likewiſe perish, except ye repent. What all perish by Maſſacre as theſe did? Perhaps not ſo, but by ſome violent, ſodaine, and vnuſuall death, as fell out to the greateſt part of the Iewish Nation about fortie yeeres after, vnder Veſpatian and Titas; Or if not ſo, yet ye shall perish, dying vpon your beds, when others shall not perish, though they dye a violent death. For ſome paſſe by 
               Iob 36. 12. Pſ. 144. 10. 
               the Sword when others perish by it. The end of all examples, is to teach vs repentance; and executions are done for the liuing, that they liue no longer in ſinne, and not for the dead, who cannot be bettered by example or admonition.
            
               To apply this then to our preſent purpoſe.
               The Waldenſes were a People in France, who tooke this their By-name from one Waldus, a wealthy and honeſt Acts and Monuments. Citizen of Lyons. This Waldus chanced, with diuers of his rich neighbours, to be one day making merrie, when in the midſt of their mirth one of their companie fell downe ſodainly dead. This accident amazed all, but wrought more effectually with him, who was more ſenſible and apprehenſiue of Gods hand in the ſodaine and vnexpected ſtroke; inſomuch, as afterward fearing the like death might befall him, he reformed his life, gaue himſelfe to almes, and prayer, and to the frequent reading and meditating of the Scriptures; and withall, exhorted others of his kinsfolke, neighbours, and friends to doe the like. Wherein he ſo farre preuailed, that many ſober Chriſtians adhered to him, and a great reformation followed in that place: at which the Diuell, & his Diſciples, the Libertines of thoſe dayes, repining, information

thereof was giuen to Rome, that Sinagogue of Satan, againſt theſe poore ſoules, and their pietie was accounted Hereſie becauſe they could not finde the Popes Supremacie (a maine and head Article of the Romane Catholique Faith) confirmed in the Scriptures. For this and other ſuch honeſt and holy Hereſies, the King of France was excited by the Papacie to butcher his owne poore ſubiects, with he performed which incredible coſt and crueltie.
               Now I demand (with our Sauiour) Thinke you were theſe Waldenſes ſinners aboue all the people that dwelt in the Citty of Lyons or in the Kingdome of Fraunce, becauſe they ſuffered theſe things? I tell yow, nay; but except we repent we shall all likewiſe perish.
               
               The maſſacre in France is yet fresh bleeding in the memorie of men that liue and ſawe it, when vnder colour of reconcilen, of a marriage betwixt a reformed and deformed Catholicke, the innocent partyes were wonne from their Serpentine wiſedome, and ſo charmed as there remained nothing in them but the ſimplicity, ſincerity, & ſecurity of Doues; wherein aſleepe in peace, they were at mid-night awaked with the shricks and grones of their murthered friends, and all-togither be came sharers in the Crowne of Martyrdome.
               What then shall wee thinke theſe holy Saints, ſinners aboue all that dwelt in the Citty of Paris and Kingdome of Fraunce, or now dwell in the Kingdome of great Brittaine, becauſe they ſuffered ſuch things from Antichriſt and his followers? I tell yow, nay; but except we repent we shall all likewiſe perish.
               
               All theſe died for their ſauing Faith, euen that Faith which was able to ſaue their Soules from the Iuſtice of

God and the violence and iniurie of Sathan, could not ſaue their bodyes from the Tyrannie of their owne Prince, who ought to haue beene their ſafeguard: ſo mercifull is God, ſo mercileſſe is man.
               But ſee the iuſt iudgement of God vpon Shepheards that prone wolues; the King neuer proſpered after, but was often affrighted with the lamentable shrikes of men, women, children intermixt, as if the maſſacre had ſtill ſounded vengeance in his eares: which noiſe not only himſelfe, but diuerſe of his neere attendants did profeſſe to heare often with wonder, horror, and amazement.
               And thus languishing a long tyme he fell at length into a ſtrange and generall bleeding at all the open parts of his body, which could not be ſtaunched till he died: as if Nature by Gods commandement, would not ſtrengthen the vaines, to hold in that guilty blood, which vnnaturally and prodigally had powred out ſo much innocent blood.
               He that will take paines to reade the hiſtorie it ſelfe and to conſider euery circumſtance aright, shall be fully ſatiſfied, in the particulars, and may from thence ſee what foule dealing wee are to expect from Papiſts, let their words and promiſes be as faire, and their treatyes, concluſions, and vowes as ſerious and ſolemne as they pleaſe. There they may obſerue the ſimplicitie of the Admirall, otherwiſe a wiſe man, but wearyed with warre, and beleeuing that reconcilement firme, which he deſired might bee ſo, and knew to be ſo vpon his part, he was wonne or wrought from himſelfe by glorious promiſes, and rockt aſleepe in ſenſeles ſecurity and eaſe (the bane of bold and braue ſpirits) not to be awaked by the thicke and loud alarums of all his friends. There they may obſerue

how the contrary faction of the houſe of Guiſe, ſeemed to be diſgraced, and left the Court for a colour, as if they tooke it ill to be iuſtled out by the Admirall their aduerſarie. There they may obſerue how the Queene Mother tutors her ſonne to diſſemble; and ſtill ſets a head vpon the faction shee hated, thereby to breake them and betray them and religion togither. For religion neuer receiued greated blowes then from falſe heads and falſe hearts ſoulderd on for that end by art and deuilish policie. There they may obſerue and ſee, (and be a ſtonished at it) a young King proteſt and ſweare publiquely, contrarie to his inward purpoſe, and diſſemble ſo artificially, that after the fact, being retired, he demands of his Mother, and of other his flatterors in priuate, If he had not playde his part well. Perhaps he expected a triumph for lying, for periurie, for diſſimulation, and for betraying the too-credulons hearts of his faithfull people, as Nero did for fidling, and fireing of Rome.
               
               There is nothing written but is written for our learning, if examples can make vs to beware and to be wiſe.
               Wee liue intermingled in our Land with the ſubiects of Antichriſt, vnto whom wee are more odious then the Iewes to Caeſar, or Pontius Pilate, or to any of the Romanes: Thoſe only ſought ſubiection of the body, theſe of body and ſoule; Thoſe tooke, theſe watch to take occaſion and opportunitie of ſuch maſſacres amongſt vs, as in other places, with all bloody expreſſion of vnreconcileable hate, they haue found and effected.
               Our Sauiour when he ſent out his Apoſtles to preach, and to plant the Goſpel, told them they should goe as Sheepe among Wolues, and will'd them therefore to be

                  wiſe as Serpents, and innocent as Doues. We are their followers in Faith and in Fortune; and it is no wiſedome in vs to arme the Romish Wolues againſt our ſelues, or yet to ſuffer them to be armed or to arme themſelues with Force, Office, or Authoritie to doe vs a miſchiefe. Eſpecially, ſince we haue the Lawes of the Land inabling vs to diſarme them, in theſe and all other reſpects. And for my part, I beleeue it is no part of inhumanitie or tyrannie to execute the Lawes for the generall ſafeguard againſt the ſeacret and ſeditious conſpiracies intended or imagined againſt vs; But I thinke it Treaſon to the Church and State, and Rebellion againſt God, the King of Kings, to ſit ſtill till theſe arme themſelues, and diſarme vs, the more ſafely and ſpeedily to effect a Maſſacre: which (I am fully perſwaded, and they will ſmart for it who are not ſo perſwaded with me) they will neuer forbeare any longer, then till they can fit and furnish themſelues for it; nor will they abſtaine from it, for any other reſpect of Age, Sexe, Office, or Innocencie, then for the attendance of the firſt, neereſt, and fitteſt occaſion and opportunitie offered to do it ſurely; which rather then they will long be without, and long for when they are fit for it, they will prouoke it by force and all meanes poſſible in their power: yea, they will faine a cauſe rather then want it, to ſerue their turne, as a colour for their crueltie.
               Aſſuredly they will then call our Sacrificing Treaſon, if it can ſerue their turne to breed a quarrell, when they haue vs vnder hatches, and haue fitted themſelues with authoritie and ſtrength to doe vs a diſpleaſure.
               But you will aske what should moue me to thinke ſo, ſince they haue not found vs bloodie towards them?
               I anſwer, though they haue not found vs ſuch, they

haue fain'd vs ſuch in their writings, and what they faine vs to be, we shall ſurely find them to be in their workes. Their Poſteritie beleeue their ſayings, and in Foraine parts they thinke, and will not be perſwaded otherwiſe, but that we haue vſed all cruelties againſt them, and haue caſt them to be worried and torne aſſunder by wild Beaſts.
               Notwithſtanding, whatſoeuer they write of vs at their pleaſure, thereby to exaſperate their partie, to breed a deteſtation of our Liues and Doctrine, and to ſtirre vp compaſſion for the benefit of their perſons (all which are as eaſily effected by lyes as by truth, when preiudice poſſeſſeth the hearer, and both ſides cannot be heard indifferently) yet it is certaine they beleeue not their owne lyes, but in their owne ſoules reſt ſecure that we will do them no violence, how much ſoeuer we know our ſelues to be their Maſters, except we be vrged and prouoked, beyond the patience of men. Yet this aſſurance of our lenitie doth no good to winne and ſoften their affection, but doth rather much hurt, to imbolden their preſumption. They know our tenets, our practiſe, our natures; It is the Romiſh Milke onely which makes all that taſt of thoſe Adulterate Teates to be vnnaturall Wolues, Fratricides, and Parricides. The Powder-Treaſon was tryall enough of this truth, where Digby, Grant, and the Winters, with others not of the worſt natures; and Rookewood, who appeared to be of himſelfe a man of tender and good affections, apprehenſiue of other mens ſufferings, & inwardly touched with naturall hate of the euill entended, yet all theſe were ſo hardned by their ſubtile and ſatanicall Guides, vnder colour of the Romane Catholique good, and the merrit of the worke, as they shut the eyes of Nature againſt Grace, and obſtinatly, and deſperatly reſolued

to purſue the bloodie plot to the vttermoſt, though the innocent ſuffered with ſuch as they iudged nocent, yea-though that blow had giuen an end to the honour of our Nation. Whereas vpon the contrarie part, our clemencie and Chriſtian charitie therein appeared, who fell not vpon them in furie and rage to root them vp, when the occaſion would haue giuen countenance to ſuch a reueng, nor importuned our Superiours to extend the punishment anſwerable to the crime, but wept to conſider the ſcandall of our Countrimen, and thought it enough, that ſome few of the chiefe Malefactors ſuffered a death appointed ordinarily for Traytours, without the exact inuention of any new torture proportionable and ſuitable to the merrit of their cauſe; when I am fully perſwaded, had it beene poſſible, the Diuell could haue made our Religion guiltie of ſuch a villanous attempt, in any place where they had beene Maſters, as we were here, it would haue coſt vs a generall Maſſacre, and all Nations would haue riſen vp againſt vs, and expeld vs their Dominions, as perſons vnworthy to liue in the World, or to breath the common Ayre with bruit Beaſts, much leſſe with Chriſtians. For neuer could Hellish villanie before cauſe the Name of Chriſt be ſo blaſted and blaſphemed as it might be now through the euill occaſion of theſe Antichriſtians. Neuer could that be thought the true Religion, which dig'd ſo deepe for a falſe foundation, and tooke ſo much helpe from Hell to aduance it.
               Notwithſtanding, it may be feared through our remiſneſſe, not ſearching the feſtered ſore to the bottome, or through our too tender pittie (for they will not call it mercie, and Chriſtian charitie, though Rookewood alone had the grace to acknowledge, that as their Act was

without example, ſo his Maieſties mercie in proceeding againſt them, the Actors onely, was without preſident) ſome of this Spirituall generation, may (as Cicero ſaid of Cateline) creepe into the Senate Houſe againe, the place they would haue blowne vp, to fire the Commonwealth by Faction, whom their former traines of groſſer Treaſon could not blow vp. For if the Lord in iuſtice should ſo deale with vs, and permit this to be done, we had no more to ſay for our ſelues, then the Iſralites to the Prophet, 1 Kings 20. 42. Eſpecially when men thus affected for point of Faith (I ſpeake not of their honours) are admitted into this high place of Councell, which by Iuſtice might be that againſt them, as long as they continue of that Religion, as the Sanctuarie was againſt the Moabites, though Conuerts, for ten generations, and againſt the Edomites, and Aegyptians, vnto the third generation, Deut. 23. 3. It is dangerous hauing ſuch blood in the Bodie of the State, though in the extremeſt parts, but to haue it in the heart and boſome, nay, about the head, to heare, and ſee all, and to haue a hand in the higheſt and moſt ſeacret Councell, and in compounding the fundamentall Actes of State, is ſo dangerous in my poore iudgement, as it makes me ſay in this reſpect alſo, If we doe not repent, we are like all likewiſe to periſp.
               
               What all perish with Maſſacres, as the Galileans did? Yes vndoubtedly, except we thinke the young Wolues not ſo cruell and bloodie as their Syres, or that they account vs leſſe Sinners, and leſſe Heretikes, then they thought the Waldenſes, and the Albigenſes, and our innocent neighbours in France, Bohemia, the Palatinate, Haſsia, and other parts of Germanie, and through the Chriſtian World to be, whom they haue ſo ſerued ſucceſſiuely

vpon all aduantages preſented or obtained. Aſſuredly if a Lambe be a Lambe ſtill, a Wolfe will be a Wolfe ſtill, and their Spirituall guides (whom they follow with blind obedience) both traine them vp, and lead them on in blood. You shall not heare of a Miniſter in the Head of the Troopes, preſſing to enter a Worke, or to charge the Enemie with an ambitious and eager forwardneſſe; well may they informe, animate, and rectifie the conſciences and courages of ſuch as goe on, and aſſiſt them by prayers, but they are no open Actors in blood; whereas it is ordinarie, as it appeared at Oſtend, and all other places, for Friars, Prieſts, and Ieſuites armed with holy water, and a red Croſſe on their Shoulders, to leade on the Troopes moſt furiouſly and deſperatly, and to mount the place which they are appointed to enter, before all others, except they be commanded backe by Leaden Bulls, or Iron Arguments. And what they doe publikely, they faile not priuatly much more to inculcate, thereby to breed a deteſtation of our perſons and profeſſion togither, and to beget and cherish an vnreconcileable hate betwixt vs. For they know if Kings, Princes, and People, recouer their wits, and become ſober, the kingdome of Antichriſt muſt downe at an inſtant, and the deeper they haue drunke of her dregges, the more they will hate her, and their owne former drunkenneſſe.
               Our bleſſed Sauiour proceedes farther, in the fourth Verſe, to relate that which befell to eighteene perſons, who were buried vnder the ruins of a Towre, being part of the Wall of Ieruſalem, adioyning to the Fish-poole of Siloah, whereof mention is made in the third Chapter of Nehemiah, the fifteenth Verſe, demanding of his Auditorie, whether or no they thought them greater ſinners

then all other men that dwelt at Ieruſalem, ſubioining his infallible iudgement, ſaying, as before I tell you, nay; but except ye repent, ye ſhall all likewiſe periſh.
               
               The firſt example proceeded from the tyrannie and malicious crueltie of man, vnder the colourable pretence of Iuſtice: but this latter example is of the nature of thoſe, whom Ignorance, and Atheiſme call and account Accidents. An accident in the iudgement of this Dwarfe Ignorance, and this Monſter Atheiſme, is ſuch a thing whereof God takes no Of this minde was that Papiſt who being told by a Reformed Catholike that the falling of Black-Friars Houſe vpon the heads of their Idolatrous Prieſt and people, was a iuſt Iudgement of God: made anſwer, That he proteſted he thought God did not know of it. Which ſpeech of his proceeded out of Ignorance, & then it was pittifull, or out of Atheiſme, and then it was damnable. If God did not know of it, they might after be in Hell alſo without his notice. (from whence there is no redemption.) Their Saints and tutelar Angels therefore were verie negligent in their cures and charges, not to giue information ſooner: And therefore an old wife (one of their companie) being deliuered from the danger, proteſted, she would neuer pray to Saint or Angel more, nor before a Crucifixe or other Image, but only to her Sauiour and Redeemer, who was able alone to heare and helpe of himſelfe. Pſ. 
                     
                        •
                     5. 1, 2. Eſ. 63. 16. notice; a motion which proceeds without the aſſiſtance of the Firſt mouer; an action which is produced by a Secundarie cauſe, without a Primarie; or by a cauſe cauſed, without a cauſe cauſing; neither of all which can be conceiued by any man that conceiues and grants that there is a God, and that that God rules all the affaires of the World by an ouer-maſtering power, and by his wiſedome and prouidence guides and orders all actions and paſſions, euen the death of a Sparrow, the loſſe of a haire from our heads (as our Sauiour ſaith Math. 10. 30. 31.) that is, minutiſsima & maxima, the leaſt and greateſt paſſages, to his glorie.
               
                  
There are others who ſpeake of Accident right and properly, which is onely ſo in regard of vs. So the Philopher ſaith, Caſus eſt inopinatae rej euentus, Chance or accident is the ſodaine euent of a thing vnlooked for. Ariſt. Lib. 2. Phyſ. And therefore the ſame man ſaith in his Metaphyſ. Lib. 1. Imperitia caſum fecit, Want of knowledge hath made Chance. S. Hierome ſaith, in his Commentarie vpon the Prophet Hieremie, Cap 12. Ver. 4. Quicquid in mundo vel bonorum accidit vel malorum, non abſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      prouidentia, & fortuito caſu ſed iudicio Dej. Whatſoeuer good or euill fals out in the world, doth not happen by chance or fortune, but by the prouidence, and iudgement of God. Lament. Ierem. 3. 37. Who is he then that ſaith and it commeth to paſſe, and the Lord commandeth it not? Quia Deus voluit eos contingenter euenire, contingentes cauſas ad eos praeparauit. Th. Acquin. S. 1. Q. 19 Ar. 8.
               In the firſt example then, Man was vſed as an Inſtrument of punishment, in the ſecond ſenſeleſſe Stones. Gods hand of Iuſtice (as our Sauiour ſaith whilſt he threatens the like to all except they repent) was in both, and both fulfilled Gods worke alike; The laſt, namely, the Stones and materialls of the Wall, not knowing what they did; The firſt, namely, Pilate and his Souldiers intending no more then the Stones, the performance of Gods will, or any ſuch thing as the Lord effected, but purſuing blindly their owne plots and politike pretences Act. 3. 17 18. Act. 4. 27 28. of Iuſtice, did ſo effect Gods ſeacret will, for the punishing of a thankleſſe, headſtrong, and rebellious generation, who began to forget what the Lord had formerly done for them in many deliuerances from Aegypt, and the Red Sea, euen as we haue forgot Eightie eight, the Maſſacre

in France, and the Powder-Plot.
               To bring this then to applycation, We ſee what lately hath befalne the Sinogogue of Satan, the Temple of 
                     The dolful Euen-ſong in the Black-Fryars. 
                  Baal, the Image of Dagon, the Sonnes of Antichriſt, the Children of Babylon, who ſought to bring all the Roman Idolatries, and Whorish Superſtitions into the Land: how the Lord ouerwhelmed them, and brought vpon them ſodaine deſtruction, as he had long before threatned in his Word.
               Which Iudgement I relate not as a man that tooke delight in blood, or in the miſerable and lamentable loſſe of my own deare Countrimen, or as one that hated the perſons of any that then dyed, or now ſo beleeue and liue to dye worſe, except they repent: nay rather, I pittie and bemone their loſſe, and that obſtinate blindneſſe which led them into that Pitfall; yea though I cannot abſolutely with the Apoſtle deſire to be wholly cut off for my brethrens Rom. 9. ſake, yet I could wish my body ſo bruſed, euen to the loſſe of this life for the ſaluation of their Soules that ſuruiue. As for thoſe that are dead I iudge them not, I excuſe them not, they ſtood or fell to their owne Maſter, their ſentence is ſealed vp in ſeacret from vs, till the generall Iudgement, when all things shall be opened, nor dare I breake ope the Seale, to paſſe my ſentence with them or againſt them, till that time come when the day 
                  1 Cor. 3. 
                  ſhall declare it. But what I write is for the benefit of the liuing, and to celebrate the Iudgements of God, which none ought to conceale, nor for any reſpect whatſoeuer, to cloke, couer, extenuate, or hide from the eyes of men, ſince that is a notorious Sacriledge, to ſteale the honour of the euerliuing God, for dead Idols and dead men, of

which he is iealous, and for which theft he will hold no man guiltleſſe.
               I would therefore aduiſe in Chriſtian dutie, loue, and charitie, all Magiſtrates ſupreame and ſubordinate, and all people whether intereſted in the cauſe and loſſe or otherwiſe, to giue glorie to God by a free and open publication of this great worke of his Iuſtice; leſt Prince, Prieſt, and People pay for the concealement by ſome ſeuere and ſtrickt Inquiſition. For my owne part, theſe few things that I heare for truthes confirmed, againe and againe by eye witneſſeſſe, I shall reueale to Gods glorie and the Churches edification, togither with ſuch ſimple obſeruations as I am directed to make vpon them for the vſe of all men. For I beleeue this Iudgement is the more remarkeable, being done vpon them who ſtand vpon Miracles, for the confirmation of their falſehoods, and make euerie thing ſuch, that may be wreſted by wit for their aduantage, either touching our diſaſters or their owne felicities. And I hope euen the moſt ſerious on both ſides, who might otherwiſe iudge my obſeruations rash and triuiall, ſadly thinking vpon this point, and withall conſidering and well weighing that this befalls them at ſuch time as they vainely hoped, preſumed, & proudly boaſted of reſtautation, when they might rather expect a Miracle from Antichriſt, as an Omen of good lucke, and would rather haue fained one (had not this croſſe come in their way) then wanted ſuch a meanes to ſeduce the people, and reeſtablish them in the common mans conceit, will not condemne me altogither to be a trifler in my obſeruations, but that ſome or all of them, may profitably paſſe vnder the verdict of their ſeuere cenſures. In aſſurance

whereof, I proceed to propound them, with ſuch exhortations as our neceſſitie and this occaſion giue me life and courage to make, to my Superiours and Equals vpon our ſide and theirs.
               Firſt, Obſerue that the Romane Catholikes (who are cunning in all their courſes) procured this Houſe, and fitted it in all reſpects for their purpoſe; when doubtleſſe they ſuruaid the ſtrength of the building and capacitie of euerie roome. If the Law should take notice of their vnlawfull aſſembly (as that was the leaſt of their feares) then they had the French Ambaſſadours Houſe for a Cloake to which it was adioyning. Or if the People should riſe (as this was one of their aſſayes or tryals before they durſt appeare to play in publike, to proue if all men were growne tame enough to be muzled and hoodwinked, and whether they would ſtart at holy Water, a Maſſe, a Proceſſion, or the like) then the Ambaſſadours Houſe should be their Sanctuarie, againſt the force and rage of the people. And becauſe it might be perillous to the Spaniſh Ambaſſadour to haue the firſt publication at or about his Houſe, who hath beene the firſt and principall moouer to introduce or reſtore Idoll-worship in this Iſland, to the generall diſcontentment of the people, therefore the French Ambaſſadours Houſe muſt be choſen, not for the Papiſts affection, but for ours, as leſſe ſuſpecting that Nation for all our antient enmities, then the Spaniſh for all their new friendship and high alliance hoped for, which they proffred with one hand and ſnatched away with the other, as if they had beene too great for our Royall coniunction, when (I prayſe God) ours was too good for their commixtion.
               Thus the place is ſecured againſt man; but who can

ſecure it againſt God? Not the French or Spaniſh Ambaſſadors, though they haue more powre and priuiledge in England to ſerue their Idols, then the Prince himſelfe could haue in Spaine to ſerue God. For though his Chaplaines were ſent thither to ſatisfie him and vs, yet might they ſay nothing (as we heare) when they came there, to ſatisfie them.
               Secondly, The time is obſerueable; It was their fifth of Nouember, wherein they perished by anticipation, as they would haue dealt with vs before vpon the fifth of our Nouember. Here is the difference, they fell downe, as they would haue blowne vs vp; and did alone feele the furie of that ſodaine confuſion, without ſtirring their Neighbours Houſes, as they would haue blowne vs vp, with the neceſſarie ruine of diuerſe places adioyning. And this they ſuffered from God, when from the King they had in their fond conceites and miſtaken hopes, obtained that, for which they would haue made him & his, vs & ours, ſo miſerably ſuffer without mercie. But we ſee though Pardons, and tollerations paſſe freely at Rome, and in other places for politique reſpects, yet they are not ſure, till they be Sealed and Inrolled in Heauen.
               Thirdly, Obſerue the Play-Houſe ſtands in that place vnshaken, though too often laden with ſin-full multitudes of all ſorts, ſexes, and ſects; becauſe it profeſſeth it ſelfe to be no better then it is, a Play-Houſe; and perhaps ſome Houſes of Corporall Fornication ſtand there alſo, becauſe for cuſtome ſake, that they may haue the more commings in, they deſire to ſeeme what they are, Brothels: But this Houſe which profeſſeth it ſelfe for Chriſt, when it is for Antichriſt, and playes with the Word and Sacraments in a moſt Anticke or Apish fashion, euen

when it pretends to be moſt ſerious; and teacheth men to commit Spirituall Fornication vnder the shew of Sanctitie and Holineſſe; this muſt not ſtand, but the Lord makes it a ſpectacle of his Iudgement; as he made the Beare-Garden long ſince, whilſt they prophaned the Sabbath day (a day at the Creation ordayned for peace and reſt) in that beaſtly ſport of crueltie betwixt the Creatures, proceeding from Gods curſe vpon our Fore-fathers ſinne; which ſight should make Adam, Abell, and Seth, with their pious poſteritie, weepe; as it makes Caine, Lamech, Cham, Nimrod, and Eſau, laugh, with all their Sauage and impious Seed and ſucceſſion. Theſe Houſes therefore muſt not ſtand when they touch vpon the skirt of Religion, to prophane and pollute the holy things of God, whereof man is not ſo carefull a keeper and zealous defender, as of his own right and intereſt. It may perhaps not ſeeme friuolous to ſome that I mention here, what I haue heard for truth, concerning an other Play-Houſe called the Fortune, in which, repeating their Playes vpon a Sabbath day in the afternoone, at night following the Houſe fell on fire and was conſumed to ashes. The Gallorie in the preaching place at White hall, which ſtood from the dayes of King Edward to King Iames, muſt fall then vnder the Spaniſh Ambaſſadours feet, when he was ſent the ſecond time to perfect what he had before but rough drawne. I doe not wonder that it fell then, hauing ſtood ſo long; I rather wonder it fell not before, being oftentimes as heauely laden (except with the ſin of Idolatry) But that Gods prouidence muſt reſerue it to that inſtant, at that I wonder; and me thinkes it told me the Spaniſh footing was not ſo certaine in this Land as he preſumed, but that whilſt his power did tread downe the preaching

places of the Land, he might hap to tumble with them, and by oppoſition giue a happy occaſion to reedifie their ruines more ſtrongly.
               Fourthly, Obſerue no Idols, Crucifixes, Croſſes, Holy-Water, Medals, Beades, or any ſacred Relique or Agnus Dei, whereof doubtleſſe there was great prouiſion laid in, could preſerue or protect from this blow. Let this open the eyes of their ſuperſtitious and bewitched Cuſtomers, and abate the price and eſteeme of ſuch Romiſh and Anti-Chriſtian Reuel. 18 11. 
                  merchandize, teaching wiſe men to diſtinguish betwixt toyes, trash, and reall ſafeguards.
               And here I make bold to demand, What became of thoſe Wafer-cakes which the Prieſt had before turned into gods (for doubtleſſe ſome were there or in the roome vnder (which was the Maſſing place) reſerued for the ſicke) What were all of them brayned with the Timber and Brickbats, and did they perish with the Prieſt and the reſt of the people? O blind men, lift vp your eyes and ſee your owne abſurdities! Should I feare the ruines of Heauen, if he who ſits at the right Hand of God the Father ſtood by me, to ſupport the Roofe from his owne omnipotent and my impotent Head? Reply not ye blind who make others blind with your ſophiſticating tongues, but pray to God for your ſelues, as I doe for you, that he would vouchſafe to giue you grace to acknowledge the truth which you cannot chooſe but ſee. When our Sauiour roſe from the Graue, the Prieſts hired the Souldiers to ſay, His Diſciples came and ſtole away his body 
                  Math. 28 11. 
                  whilſt they ſlept. Had he not riſen alone, I should neuer haue beleeued he could raiſe me; now I can neither doubt his power or will; Saint Thomas his ſeeing and feeling hath reſolued me. Hire you ſome Souldiers (if

Souldiers will be ſuch hirelings, as doubtleſſe you may fit your ſelues with ſome zealous Reformados vpon promiſe of abſolution; or otherwiſe make shift with your owne equiuocating Locuſts, armed at all points for the purpoſe with mentall reſeruations and diſpenſations) to ſay, they ſaw the conſecrated Cakes riſe alone from vnder the ruines, or I shall neuer beleeue your Tranſubſtantiation, nor can you perſwade any to retaine your erronious opinion any longer, or receiue it farther; except ſuch as you with the Cup of Abhominations haue tranſubſtantiated or transformed Spiritually (as Medea and Circes did their Gueſts Corporally) into ſuch Don Quixſhots or Gorgantuahs as would eat vp their God Almightie at a mouthfull, or in their melancholly mood imagine themſelues to be ſuch Monſters as could doe it.
               The Lord complaines againſt his People that they rob'd him of Tythes and Offerings: But you haue rob'd Mal. 3. 8. our Sauiour of Head, Heart, Hands, Feet, of a true Body, of his Humanitie.
               Fifthly, Obſerue how after the Fact, either thoſe that were reſerued or their obſtinate friends, clouded the worke of God, and out of malice caſt the aſpertion vpon man, to their owne diſaduantage; as if God, who would not ſuffer them to blow vs vp in Parliament, would yet fuffer vs to pull their Baalitish Temple ouer their eares in time of their deuotions.
               So in the Powder-Treaſon it was their plot and purpoſe after the ſtrocke, to lay the fault (if Gods mercie had not preuented their malice) vpon the Puritans (as now they haue gotten a tricke for their aduantage, to nickname euen good Proteſtants) & accordingly they had drawne a Proclamation to that effect ready for the Preſſe. Wherein

they charged the Puritans (meaning hereby, all honeſt men that are not like them) with that odious and execrable fact; and with this draught they were found, and taken in the manner, beyond retracting, or shadowing.
               O what honeſt man can be ſafe among theſe Slanderers? The poyſon of Aſpes is vnder their lips. If they entend miſchiefe, the Innocent man muſt ſuffer for it; if they ſuffer from God himſelfe, his Seruants shall be blamed for it.
               But they ſpeake truer then they are aware (as Caiphas prophecied) It is true, it is true, O Antichriſtians, thoſe poore Chriſtians vnpind and ſawed aſunder the beame which vpheld the flore whereon you ſtood, from whence you fell.
               But they did it onely with Hands lifted vp to Heauen, which will vnpin the principals of Babylon alſo, and with Sampſon, plucke the Houſe ouer the Pheliſtines, in the midſt of their mirth, whilſt they are reioycing and triumphing before their Idols.
               Sixthly, Obſerue the ſilence of all men at that time and in that action, prouokes God to ſpeake and to doe. Peter himſelfe had here need of Paule to reproue him to his face, for he was worthy to be blamed; yea, ſome of thoſe that ought to haue honoured their profeſſion with Martyrdome, before they had giuen ſilent way to the encrochments of Antichriſt, shew their readineſſe to hold their peace if they should be requeſted, and ſay it is their Pſ. 39. dutie to doe ſo. Holy Dauid, a man after Gods owne heart, made once a promiſe to doe the like, but for all that when it came to the point, he would not, he could not hold his word againſt God and his Truth, but we ſee his zealous heart was moued to heat, and he ſpake with his

tongue. Silence in Gods cauſe was an iniunction layd vpon Peter and Iohn by the Councell, who anſwered, Act. 4. 19 20. 
                  Whether it be right in the ſight of God, to hearken vnto you more then vnto God iudge ye. For we cannot but ſpeake the things which we haue ſeene and heard. It was Saint Paules caſe, whoſe heart was ſo ſtird when he came to Athens and ſaw that learned Citie deuoted to Idolatry, as he could not hold his peace, though his perſon was thereby in perill. That Hiſtorie betwixt Theodoſius the Emperour and Ambroſe Bishop of Millan, makes more for the vertue of the Emperour, then for the valour of the Bishop. It is no great matter to ſay what the Bishop did, ſince he for ſo doing may be cenſured to be ſatis audax, but what the Emperour did and ſaid of the Bishop, when his anger was ouer, is to the purpoſe. For as Sozomen records. 
                     Soz. l. 5. c. 18. 
                  Theodoſius dixit ſe ſolum Ambroſium dignum Epiſcopi nomine noſſe. Theodoſius ſaid he knew one Ambroſe onely worthy the name of a Bishop. And this was for ſpeaking truth, and diſcharging his conſcience, though herein he plainly condemned an action of the Emperors, and doubtleſſe croſt his preſent deſires.
               Let no man cloake his luke-warmneſſe or perſonall cowardice vnder the pretence of modeſtie, patience, diſcretion, moderation, prudence, or temperance. He that hath a Soule hoping to be ſaued, will ſpeake for his Sauiour. Shall there be ſo many offer themſelues to plead for Baal, becauſe he cannot plead for himſelfe, whilſt few or Iudh. 6. 31. none pleads for Chriſt, who pleads continually for vs all? No, no, Let all men aſſure themſelues if they will not ſpeake becauſe they will not be counted factious, furious, and hot-headed fellowes, but diſcreet, moderate, and prudent perſons, fit for preferment and imployment, that yet

God can raiſe vp Stones to doe that which they should, but will not, or dare not; neither shall they eſcape the Hand of God, but he will find them out, and punish their falshood and faintneſſe in his cauſe.
               Proceed to expreſſe your Chriſtian courages, therefore O Princes, Nobles, Prieſts, People! Behold God goes before you, Who will not follow? Remember what Nehemiah ſaid to that falſe Prophet, that hireling, who ſought to diſcourage him, that his example might diſcourage all the reſt, Should ſuch a man as I am feare? Surely Neh. 6. 11. it doth not become his Place, his Profeſſion. What could a Slaue, a Coward, a Traytour doe more? O let it neuer be recorded of you, to your perpetuall dishonours, as it was of the ignoble Nobles amongſt the Tekoites. Next 
                  Neh. 3. 5 
                  vnto them the Tekoites repaired, but their Nobles put not their necks to the worke of the Lord. And what I ſpeake to Ephraim, I likewiſe ſpeake to Manaſſes. England and Scotland should be vnited in this. They both looke for examples from each other, both should be examples to each other; England as the richer in regard of the world, Scotland as being no leſſe rich in Spirituall treaſure; England as the ſtronger, Scotland as the freer; England as being more engaged for the Royall Preſence, Scotland as being more entereſted in the Royall birth and education; England as being neereſt the danger, Scotland as being too neere to auoid it.
               O all ye Peeres, Prieſts, and People ioyne with your Royall Head, and remember what he hath often ſaid, written, and vowed, and cauſed you to ſay, write, and vow, whilſt he hath proued by his learned Labours that the Pope is Antichriſt. The truth is too ſtrong to be repulced or retorted, ſince Bellarmine, that Romish Goliah, with all

his aſſiſtants, could not wreſt the Staffe and Sling out of his hand with Arguments. Nor is our Dauid growne ſo 2 Sam. 21 faint now with age, that he muſt goe no more to battell, for feare of quenching the Light of Iſrael.
               
               You that haue fought Gods battells with him againſt the red Dragon, the ſeuen headed Beaſt, and her whorish rider, with all their armie, & can tell how brauely he hath borne himſelfe, and what blowes he hath dealt with his tongue and with his pen. It was Saule and not Dauid that fell vpon his owne Sword. If the Pope be not Antichriſt, why hath he written ſo? It is Gods Word and his Ier. 20. 7 Pen that hath deceiued vs. If the Pope be Antichriſt, then to make a Couenant with him, or to trade with him in Spirituall Merchandize, is to make a Couenant with Eſ. 28. 15 Death, Satan, and Hell, againſt God, his Sonne, and his Church.
               To be a Mahumetane is to be an open profeſt enemie, which is in compariſon honourable; but to be an Antichriſtian, is to be a Traytour, For Chriſt in ſhew, againſt him in deed, which is ſuperlatiuely deteſtable. To be a Iudas, though one of Chriſts Apoſtles, is worſe then to be a Pilate, though a condemner of Chriſt. Antichriſt of all the enemies of the Church, is the moſt perillous and moſt pernitious.
               But what need all this? What cauſe haue we to feare the reentrance of Antichriſt? What shall euerie shadow afright vs?
               I anſwer, We doubt not the ſodaine reentrance of Antichriſt, but his ſlye inſinuation, and their wiles who pretend to worke reconcilement, and ſay that humour is too much ſtird vpon both ſides. We would not haue conference with the Serpent, nor caſt an eye vpon the forbidden

Fruit, though neuer ſo beautifull. Is it not a little 
                  Gen. 19. 20. 
                  one? made way for a great offence. We are will'd to come out of Myſticall Babylon, as out of Spirituall Sodome, not to looke behind vs as if we long'd to turne Apol. 18 4. & 11. 8. backe, nor to touch any vncleane thing, but to flee the garment polluted with the flesh. This puritie becomes Virgines and Angels, who will not mixe with Spirituall Fornicators. Such Soule chaſt Spirits shall onely ſee the face of the Bridegroome in glorie. We feare to looke of a Moabitish woman, leſt she proue a ſnare and a ſtumbling Num. 25 blocke to the Princes and People; or to take a fauor from Antichriſt, leſt it proue to our Church and State as Achans wedge to the Hoaſt of Iſrael. 
                  Iudg. 7.
               
               What hope of reconcilement is there, where the erring ſide holds it to be a fundamentall veritie, that they cannot erre. To abate, is to denie their grounds, they know it, they haue ſet downe their reſt vpon it, and this alone forceth them to maintaine shameleſſe errours with an obſtinate and womanish will, hauing nothing to defend their nakedneſſe, but theſe arguments that they are old, and belong to an infallible Chaire. For if they should confeſſe in one, all Babylon were ouerthrowne.
               The experience of Charles the Fifth, and Ferdinand his ſucceſſour, mightie Emperours, armed with all aduantages which man can thinke vpon, to procure reformation and reconcilement, and ſtudiouſly and conſtantly employing their power and policie to that end, with great zeale and affection to the cauſe, and faire probabilities to effect it, may notwithſtanding in their booteleſſe endeauours reſolue the World how vaine a worke it is to vndertake or attempt ſuch an enterprize which God hath reſerued to himſelfe to accomplish. It is an eaſie worke

to draw vs to them by corruption, but it is too hard a worke for man to draw them to vs by reformation, which is a kind of regeneration. The paſſages of the Councell of Trent may inſtruct vs ſufficiently what to hope of their reformation, except we long to be deluded; and for vs to come on vpon their ſide, and take vpon vs the leaſt marke of the Beaſt which we haue caſt off, therby to buy our peace, and to endeare our entertainment, is to wound our owne Conſciences, and to ſinne with a high Hand againſt the Light of Knowledge. And hauing thus ſwallowed one abomination (which God forbid) a reprobate ſenſe will make roome for all, and men, by the iuſt Iudgement of God giuen ouer, will begin to beleeue thoſe lyes in good earneſt, which at firſt they heard and repeated in ieaſt.
               Leaue that great worke therefore, to the Reconciler of Heauen and Earth, to the Moderatour and Mediatour betwixt God and Man, who will conſume the Man of Sin 2 Theſ. 2 (by degrees, not altogether) with the Breath or Spirit of his Mouth (by the powrefull preaching of the Word, and effectuall working of the Spirit) and will abolish and deſtroy him with the brightneſſe of his comming; till when we shall haue Antichriſt, though impotent, old, and in a conſumption. Thus let vs guard our owne, for it is probable God will no more vſe the temporall power or policie of Princes in the totall and finall ſupplantation and eradication of Antichriſt, then he did vſe them in the firſt planting of the Goſpell of Chriſt. They are to be nurſing Fathers and nurſing Mothers, not generating and naturall Parents to the Church, that Chriſt may be all in all.
               
               Conſider this well ye moderate minded men, and shew vs a way how we may be ſuch politique Chriſtians, as to

pleaſe God and the Diuel, Chriſt and Antichriſt togither; 1 Kin. 18 21. Or let vs leaue haulting, and declare our ſelues plainly for Chriſt by open action as well as profeſſion.
               Therefore leauing that which is improbable, and perhaps, impoſſible, Let vs follow after charitie, and purſue 1 Cor. 14 1. that which is both poſſible and probable, that is, The vniting of the Reformed Churches within themſelues. And to this end conſider what things they are that keepe vs deuided. Whether they be points of Doctrine, or points of Diſcipline. Whether matters ſubſtantiall and fundamentall, or ceremonious and circumſtantiall. Whether of neceſſitie and vnalterable veritie, or of indifferencie and variable conueniencie.
               If of the firſt ſort, then conſider whether they may be reconciled by clearing or remouing ſome termes diuerſly vſed and vnderſtood, or by ſilencing ſome peremptorie expreſſions and abſolute definitions, ſetting a modeſt bound to the inquiſition of curioſitie and ſingularitie in matters vnſearchable.
               Whether we may be accorded in the generall heads, and the branches and conſequences left free for the exerciſe of euerie mans ſeuerall gifts, ſo they depart not from common vnitie, and giue not publique ſcandall by obſtinate oppoſition.
               Whether this or ſome other way may be found of reconcilement.
               If the queſtions be of the ſecond ſort, then whether the formes & diuerſities of gouernment may be left free to euery Nation and Church, without the breach of brotherly loue and charitie, and of the vnion and communion of Saints.
               Whether, although we iudge it fit to hold thoſe formes

amongſt our ſelues in Great Brittaine, and to continue them, being ſetled, without alteration, yea, to perſwade them what we can vpon others for vniformities ſake; If it be charitable to ſuffer other Chriſtian Churches without (holding the ſame faith with vs) to be embroyled and expoſed to ruine, thereby to ſettle them amongſt ſuch as hold them not to be indifferent. And whether vpon the other ſide it be charitie in them who are at libertie, to condemne vs and all other Churches of Antichriſtianiſme, who vſe thoſe formes and eſteeme them indifferent.
               Whether it can be imagined that we will in France by Treaties, Articles, and Arguments, or in the Vnited Prouinces by reall aſſiſtance, or in the Palatinate by chargeable Armies, deale ſo ſeriouſly and effectually for the vpholding and replanting of Religion, as long as theſe differences remaine vndetermined, vnſetled, vnreconciled, as the Papiſts doe for the planting of their Superſtition, or, as we would doe if in all reſpects we were perfectly one.
               And whether the Religion in France the Vnited Prouinces, and the Palatinate, be not the ſame in ſubſtance with that in Great Brittaine, which we should not doe well therefore to diſcountenance and abandon for the outward forme ſake.
               Theſe points in the humilitie of my Soule, and as in the preſence of God the Searcher of the Heart, and the Iudge of all men, and all actions, I preſent with all feare and reuerence to the eye and conſideration of my Superiours, not with any purpoſe to contend or ſaucely to cenſure the contrarie reſolutions of ſuch as God hath placed ouer me in authoritie, or to giue them the leaſt offence

or diſtaſt by propounding theſe things publikely, or as a man that thought my ſelfe able to direct in theſe bottomleſſe Depths, or to ſaile in theſe Seas by my ſelfe and my owne skill without Compaſſe, where no Land can be ſeene; but hoping hereby to giue occaſion, to men of place and abilitie, to ſtudie the point, and to purſue it to purpoſe to a finall reſolution and determination. And if theſe poore vnworthy papers of mine shall euer haue the happineſſe to kiſſe his Maieſties hands, or the hand of any that may whiſper a plaine truth into his Iuditious eare, then I humbly deſire he may know (and from my Soule, and the ſinceritie and ſimplicitie of my Heart, I ſpeake it) that nothing could haue moued me to write what I haue done (leſt thereby I should offend his Maieſtie, whoſe wiſedome hath beene pleaſed to run a contrarie courſe) but onely that I feared to offend God by concealing this truth from the eares of his Maieſtie, and the reſt of his loyall Officers and louing Subiects, which I am fully perſwaded God put in my Heart to the end I should vtter it. And to incourage me and prouoke me the more to this worke, the infirmitie of this Seaſon and of my body with it, are continuall meſſengers telling me I muſt make haſt, for I am not likely to ſtay long here, but I muſt appeare before his Tribunall, where Kings and Beggers Pr. 12. 2. ſtand vpon euen termes, and where men shall anſwer, as well for the concealing of truth, as for the venting of falſhood. The Peſtilence alſo walkes about the Street, and enters euerie mans dore at night or noone-day without knocking; This alſo makes me the bolder, as men that are in the heat of warre, dare do more then vpon cold blood. But my hope is in the vnſpeakeable mercie of God, that he will perſwade the Heart of his Maieſtie, and all others

that shall reade this Treatiſe, that whatſoeuer is herein vtrered, proceeds from an vpright and good intention, thereby to helpe to vnite the reformed Churches in one, and to remoue or qualifie ſuch differences as hold them deuided, to the great aduantage of the enemie: Wherein if I haue tatled to little purpoſe, or perhaps a little too much, it is becauſe I am able to doe nothing but tattle; but were I able to doe more, I would doe it, that our deuiſions might not be told in Gath, nor our nakedneſſe published in the Streets of Askelon, to the reioycing of the publike enemie.
               For I know how much it concernes the Reformed Churches that they should be vnited in one (if it be poſſible) that the humours of men might be mittigated, and made in loue with Peace, which is ſo much in their mouthes.
               And I know how much it concernes the proſperitie of our Church and State, and the peace and proſperitie of all Reformed Churches, that England and Scotland should firſt be perfectly vnited.
               I know what aduantage euen in opinion, much more in action, the enemie takes from our deuiſion; and I feare euen ſome of thoſe who pretend to be Chyturgions to cloſe the wounds, do make them wider vpon purpoſe by preſſing the Flesh too hard. Force neuer did good, eſpecially with fierie natures, but mollifying Oyles of interchange and abatement, may by kind conference cloſe and conſolidate all differences.
               And vpon the other ſide I know how much thoſe Spirits haue diſaduantaged the cauſe, that haue made their breath bellowes only to blow vp contention by oppoſing Superiour powers with violence, and dipping their pens

in Gall and Vineger, haue exaſperated the humour without any other profit to the cauſe then prouoking of farther proſecution, where patience, ſubmiſſion, and expectance might haue qualified and allaid the heat.
               In which regard I could wish that men howſoeuer forward and zealous that way, would be warie how they ſtirre vp coles of contention by writing againſt Iuda, as if they writ againſt Aegypt, leſt they kindle a fire to the great hurt of the Reformed Churches, which may waſte that ſtrength and Spirit within, that, employd abroad, would waſte and conſume the foundation of Babylon. I ſpecially I wish this courſe were taken at this time, when his Maieſtie hath beene gratiouſly pleaſed to condeſcend to our weakneſſe, and to ſecure our feares and iealouſies, by open proteſtation, that his whole intention is to procure and effect the good of the Reformed Churches and Religion, in all his deſignes; that he will neuer entertaine Treatie to the contrarie; and to reſolue vs of this (a thing that he need not) hath made a fearefull imprecation againſt himſelfe and his poſteritie, in caſe he do otherwiſe. It is no more then reaſon that we beleeue what we heare him ſay and ſweare, and shew ſo much good manners at leaſt, as to meet him halfe way vpon our knees, when he wooes and inuites vs to come; attending a while with ſilence and patience his Maieſties leaſure and pleaſure, for the timely fulfilling and perfecting of theſe promiſes; which as it is my reſolution to doe out of dutie, ſo I wish it were the reſolution of all others; eſpecially conſidering if euer we may haue hope in outward meanes for effecting amitie and vnitie amongſt the Reformed Churches (a thing ſo much deſired by all that know how to deſire that which is good) we may expect it in his Maieſties

peaceable Reigne, who is made by God an able inſtrument to this end, being acquainted with all the controuerſies that trouble the Church, and exerciſed in all the differences both concerning fundamentall and circumſtantiall points, and armed with power, art, and argument beyond all other princes, to accomplish this worke, which would make him more famous, being finished and compounded by his meanes, then if he had conquered the whole world.
               And now to conclude by returning to the Romane Catholiques, I deſire them that they would not ſlightly paſſe by that Iudgement of God executed vpon their Brethren in the Black-Fryars, but that they would lay it to heart, and confeſſe ingeniouſly it was neither Chance nor Accident that did it, but the Hand of Gods power, which is in all actions, yea, in the ouerthrow of that houſe wherin the children of Iuſt Iob feaſted. Shall there be euill in a 
                  Amo. 3. 6 
                  Citie, and the Lord hath not done it? Who is he that ſaith and it commeth to paſſe, & the Lord commandeth it not? Confeſſe then your wiſedomes had charmed many wiſe and ſenſible men, but you could not charme ſenſeleſſe Stones. Man may be mocked and deluded, God cannot. Submit your ſelues therefore to him, Kiſſe the Sonne leſt 
                  Pſ. 2. 12 
                  he be angry, and ſo ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little.
               
               Acknowledge your Pope to be Antichriſt, that Man 
                  2 Theſ. 2 
                  of ſinne, that Sonne of perdition, that ſits in the Temple of God as God (that is diſpenſing, pardoning, abſoluing, binding the conſcience, making new Articles of Faith, which none but God can doe) exalting himſelfe alſo aboue all that is called God, and worshiped, that is, aboue Kings, Princes, and Gouernours, Ciuill and Eccleſiaſticall, aboue

Saints and Angels, whom he appoints to be worshiped, and canonizeth or condemneth at pleaſure.
               All thoſe that write, and deſpute, and labour the point ſo eagerly about perſonall and viſible ſucceſſion, thereby to retaine you ſtill in their ſuperſtitious bonds, doe but labour to proue the Pope to be Antichriſt. For prouing a viſible Temple of God at Rome, they proue a viſible Antichriſt to be there. The Field was well knowne to be Math. 13 the Houſeholders, wherein he firſt ſowed Wheat, & the enuious man after ſowed Tares. If it had belonged to the enuious man, why should the Houſeholder or his Seruants complaine? Might not he ſowe what Graine he would in his owne Field? But it was not his Field, it belonged to the Houſeholder, and therefore his intruſion, to intermingle Seed for the ſpoyling of the whole crop, was an effect of Enuie.
               The Doctrine of Chriſt and Antichriſt is mingled in your Church, as the Tares and Wheat both in one Field; doe but diſtinguish that which is of God, and that which is of man, and the controuerſie is cleared.
               We confeſſe you haue ſauing Truth amongſt you, but it is mingled with all-condemning falshood, as Apotheocaries mixe poyſon and preſeruatiues. And therefore the riſing of Antichriſtianiſme in the Church, is called, A Myſterie of Iniquitie, for the ſubtile and cloſe creeping in of Errour, and winding about the Root of Truth, ſo that they ſeemed all one, and of one age. This Myſterie began to worke euen in the Apoſtles time, and good men perhaps, out of good entention, were made Seedſ-men againſt their wills, whilſt one inuented one thing, another man another; one added this Ceremonie thereby to intice the people, another that to win the Heathens from a

groſſer Idolatry to a leſſe, as they thought; and thus doubtleſſe if Errour be examined it shall be found to be verie old, and much of it fathered vpon none of the worſt men; nay, much of it will be found to be ſo ancient, as the time when it was brought in, and the perſon who introduced it, will hardly be found; yet if this be compared with the pure Wheat of the Word, which God by his Sonne, and the Miniſterie of his Seruants the Apoſtles of Chriſt, hath ſowne in the Church, it will eaſily be found to be Tares and trash of humane inuention. Doe but caſt Mar. 5. 15. out the Diuell therefore, whoſe name is Legion or Multitude, and the man is ours which is amongſt you, and will ſit quietly at Ieſus Feet.
               Acknowledge alſo your Rome, as it is the Seat and Sea of Antichriſt, and the Head Citie of your Church, to be Babylon; and as in the ruines of Shilo, Ieruſalem was Ier. 7. 12 taught to ſee her future miſerie, ſo in this shadow, behold what the Lord will doe (though perhaps myſtically, as Rome is myſticall Babylon) to the Sinagogue of Satan, which you now ſtile the Romane Catholique Church, when it shall be fulfilled which the Spirit of God proclaimes, Apocal. 18. 2. Babylon the great is falne, is falne, &c. Not that I beleeue the Citie it ſelfe shall be ruined and burnt, the Houſes and Temples puld downe, and your Pope no more named; but that I thinke the Truth shall be reuealed to ſuch as now ſit in darkeneſſe and in the shadow of death, and then Kingdomes, and Countreys, and Churches, will one after another reforme themſelues, and forſake the Doctrine of Diuels, that abſurd Superſtition and Idolatry, which you now zealouſly, out of a ſcornefull Ignorace, exerciſe, thinking you doe therein God good ſeruice. This ſeemes to be Hieroms
                  
opinion vpon theſe words, 2 Theſ 2. 8. Quem Dominus 
                  
                     D. Hieron. Com. in Mich, C. 5. 
                  interficier Spirituoris. Haec interfectio non abolitionem ſignificat (
                     •
                  aith he) This interf
                     ••
                  tion doth no ſignifie a totall abolition, but a ceſſation of euill life which they led before. Et deſtruet illuſtratione aduentus ſui. And shall deſtroy with the brightneſſe of his comming. Nun quam autem deſtrueret, ſi interfectio, abolitionem ſonaret, cum iam eſſe ceſſaſſet.
               
               But let vs returne to conſider the words vſed by the Angell, Apocal. 18. 2. Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of Diuels, and the hould of euerie foule Spirit, and a cage of euerie vncleane and hatefull Bird; For all Nations haue drunke of the Wine of the wrath of her Fornication. (Marke the note of vniuerſalitie, whereof the Church of Rome ſo much glories, All Nations; Marke alſo the Metaphor vſed to expreſſe beguiling Errour, Drunke; The moſt wiſe and learned man, may be ouertaken and miſtaken in drinke.) And the Kings of the Earth haue committed Fornication with her. (Marke the Metaphor, doting Luſt will doe much.) And the Merchants of the Earth, are waxed rich through the aboundance of her delicacies. (Marke the Metaphor, for couetouſneſſe and commoditie will preuaile verie farre, and make euen good men looke through their fingers; but for bad men they will eaſily be perſwaded to proue ſuch Merchants as Iudas was, and to ſell their Maſter Chriſt for pleaſure and profit.) Here is the ſtrength of Wine, of Women, and of Wealth, or of the King, ioyned 1 Eſd. 3. 10, 11, 12 againſt the ſtrength of Truth, yet at length, Magna eſt veritas & preualet; Truth is ſtrongeſt, and beares away the victorie. Yet Truth muſt ſtruggle for the victorie, her oppoſites are ſtrong enough to ſtriue, and will not be

conquered till we haue fought vnder her Banner, and reſiſted vnto blood. 
                  Heb. 12. 4.
               
               Now after you haue heard and conſidered this aduiſedly, then attend to that which followes immediately after at the fourth Verſe. And I heard another voyce from Heauen, ſaying, Come out of her my People (God hath a People, God hath a number of Elect names, God hath a Church in Babylon.) that ye be not partakers of her ſinnes, and that ye receiue not of her plagues; For her ſinnes haue reached vnto Heauen, and God hath remembred her iniquities. Reward her euen as ſhe rewarded you, and double vnto her double according to her workes: In the Cup that ſhe hath filled, fill to her double. How much ſhe hath glorified her ſelfe and liued deliciouſly (Marke; what she hath aſſumed, challenged, and arrogated to her ſelfe.) ſo much torment and ſorrow giue her: for ſhe ſaith in her heart, I ſit a Queene, and am no Widow, and ſhall ſee 
                  Eſ. 47. 8. 
                  no ſorrow. (Doth any Church boaſt ſo but the Romish?) Therefore ſhall her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning and famine, and ſhe ſhall be vtterly burnt with fire, for ſtrong is the Lord God, who iudgeth her. Stronger then all the Kings that would defend her. And doe not ſay, or hear others ſaying, that ſuch as perished were greater or leſſe ſinners then the reſt of the Romish Idolators that ſuruiue (ſince we iudge not their perſons, but opinions and actions) For except ye repent, ye ſhall all likewiſe perish.
               
               The Lord open your eyes that you may diſcouer Antichriſt in the midſt of his masking, and open your eares that you may heare Chriſt in the midſt of the Candleſticks, and turne your hearts from following

the vanitie and Idolatry of thoſe ſuperſtitious Fathers of your Flesh, that you may beleeue the Veritie of God the Father of your Soules, and ſo poſſeſſe an eternall habitation with him in Glorie and Immortalitie.
               Amen.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   