
      
         
            
            
            APHORISMES OF STATE: OR Certaine ſecret ARTICLES for the reedifying of the ROMISH CHVRCH agreed vpon, and approued in Councell, by the Colledge of Cardinalls in Rome, ſhewed and deliuered vnto Pope Gregory the 15. a little before his death. Whereunto is annexed a cenſure vpon the chiefe points of that which the Cardinalls had concluded.
            
            By THO. SCOTT.
            Very needfull and profitable for all thoſe, who are deſirous to vnderſtand the euent of the reſtitution of the PALATINATE: And of the ſtate of the Prince-Electors, of Saxon and Brandenburgh, in the behalfe of the Clergie in Rome. Fit for the Brittiſh Nation, eſpecially to take notice of, that they may euidently ſee, the iſſue of all our Treaties, Ambaſſages, and Promiſes, with other hopes depending: wherein we haue beene long held in ſuſpence, and are ſtill like to be, to our vnrecouerable loſſe.
            
            Faithfully Tranſlated according to the Latine, and Netherlandiſh Dutch, into Engliſh.
            Printed at Vtrech. 1624.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            New vnheard of, and ſtrange Articles.
            
               The firſt Article.
               WHereas Maximilian the Duke of Bauaria, for the eſtabliſhing the ſtate of his Prince-Electorſhip, hath ſought vnto the authority of the Apoſtolicall ſeat, thereby hath the Apoſtolicall Church obtained oportunity, to recouer their loſt obedience in the denied Eccleſiaſticall iuriſdiction.
            
            
               
                  The 2. Article.
               
               SInce the Pope of Rome by meanes of the preſent Duke of Bauaria, as being the moſt obedient ſonne of the Church, may obtaine againe the Rights, which for theſe two hundred yeares and more, haue beene loſt in the conſtituting of certaine things, and orders in the Empire belonging to the Church, it will bee a very ſmall labour, to plucke the poſſeſſions of the Church goods, which depends vpon the Eccleſiaſticall rights, out of the hands of the Hereticks.
            
            
               
                  The 3. Article.
               
               WHereas the Duke of Bauaria, according to the eſpeciall Oath, made vnto the Church, hath an earneſt deſire, to reſtore againe the Eccleſiaſticall State, as it was before the time of Pope Gregory the eleuenth, The Hereticks (who are the temporall Arme of the Empire) ſhall be bound to reſtore againe thoſe goods which they haue poſſeſſed ſince the paſſa wiſh tranſ-action.
            
            
               
                  The 4. Article.
               
               SInce that it properly appertaiueth to the Church to diſcerne and take notice of the ſtate and order of the Empire, therefore

thoſe Hereticks which denie this antiquity, and the rights of the Church in the ſtate and order of the Empire, which now by the Duke of Bauaria ſhall be reeſtabliſhed in time to come, are not to be tollerated.
            
            
               
                  The 5. Article.
               
               SInce that Pope Leo the third, had that power in reſpect of the hereſie, to cut off, and ſeperate the Eaſterne authority from the Weſterne; and to plucke that from the Grecians: wherefore ſhall not the Pope now haue the ſame power, to take the Prince Electorſhip from the Palſgraue, as being an Arch-hereticke, and tranſport the ſame vnto the Duke of Bauaria, the moſt obedient ſonne of the Church.
            
            
               
                  The 6. Article.
               
               SInce that the divulſion of the Eaſterne Empire, from the Weſterne, which was performed by the moſt bleſſed Pope, Leo the third, hath continued ſo firme and ſacred euen to this very time: that although the Weſterne Empire hath often times beene voyd of a poſſeſſor, was neuer as yet vnited vnto the Eaſterne Empire, nor the lawes of the one in the Prouinces of the other were euer of force: wherefore then ſhall not the divulſion of the Prince Electors dignities of the Palſgraue that arch-hereticke, be maintained vpon the moſt Catholique Duke of Bauaria, in the like ſanctity of perpetuity and ſtability, by the Pope and the Holy league.
            
            
               
                  The 7. Article.
               
               SInce that the tranſport of the Empire from the Grecians vnto the French, performed with ſuch a free arme, and ſuch an actiue power by Pope Leo. The Grecian Emperours themſelues, although they were the ſtrongeſt, durſt neuer oppugne the ſame, nay haue many times & often very ſignificantly commended and firmely kept the ſame, in like manner the ability not the oppoſition of the arch Heretick, the Saxon who is yet remaining, may not hinder, much leſſe make oppoſition to the tranſport of the Prince Electors dignity, vnto the moſt Catholique Duke of Bauavia: in regard that he as being an Heretique, and not knowing the

ſanctity, nor the antiquity of the rights originall of the Empire, and ignorant of the lawes and priuiledges thereof, may not enioy that right.
            
            
               
                  The 8. Article.
               
               WHen as Fredericke the firſt, according to the will and pleaſure of Pope Alexander the third, was detruded from the Emperiall ſeate, then Emanuell Comnennus preſented both men and money vnto the Pope againſt Fredericke, to the end the Grecian Church might bee vnited to the Latines: by which vndoubtedly he confeſſeth, that to eſtabliſh and fortifie the Popes cutting off, and tranſport, and the vniting of one Kingdome with another, was forbidden, all men whatſoeuer, ſaue onely the Pope, who had firſt ſeperated them; ſo in like manner theſe things like as they alſo be, ſo is it true that the Pope with the Holy league, are bound to employ all their power againſt the Arch-Hereticke the Saxon, and all thoſe Rebels that depend vpon him: that the Sanctity of the Apoſtolicall ſtoole, and the Antiquity of the Romiſh Empire in the tranſport of the Prince Electors dignity, might be preſerued and maintained.
            
            
               
                  The 9. Article.
               
               AFter Pope Leo haue other Popes alſo, onely by the authority of their Chaire, very often tranſported the ſayde Weſterne Empire from one Nation to another; wherefore then may not the Pope by the ſame authority of the Chaire of Rome, plucke the Prince Electors dignities out of the hands of the Heretickes, and tranſport the ſame to the Catholique Princes, to the end that the ſacred Eſſence of the Romiſh Empire, by the extirpation of Hereticks be againe eſtabliſhed.
            
            
               
                  The 10. Article.
               
               VVHereas in all right, Pope Boniface the eight, vnto whom the ſupreame authority in the Church belonged,

would not admit that Albert the firſt of that name, Emperour of the Romans, by right of inheritance might come to the Empire, like as he had ſought both for himſelfe and for his poſterity and ſucceſſours, but onely by election: In like manner may the Pope, the Emperour, and the holy league, without violating the Apoſtolicall ſeate, which alwayes to be kept ſacred in her antiquity, muſt be defended, not to ſuffer the Saxon and the Brandenburgher, that they ſhould ſeeke to draw the authority of the Antiquity in the tranſport of the Electorſhip from the Chaire of Rome, to bring the ſame to the Colledge of the Prince Electors.
            
            
               
                  The 11. Article.
               
               
                  PHilip King of the Francks, ſent Ambaſſadours to Abignon vnto Pope Clemens the fifth: That they very humbly ſhould entreate him, that hee would reſtore the Empire againe to the French, vnder whom before it had bin. Then did the Pope ſend Ambaſſadors vnto the Prince Electors, by whom hee commanded them, that they ſhould chuſe Henry of Lutzenburgh Emperour: And that if they did the contrary, that they ſhould incurre greate danger, and ſhould forfait the Empire, and the right of their Election vnto others for euer; whereupon they preſently aſſembled, and elected Henry Emperour. From all this very plainely appeareth, that the French aſſuredly knew, that it was in the Popes power to eſtabliſh the Emperiall command in their Kingdome, and to tranſport from the Germanes the Empire and the right of the Election: and therefore may the Pope according to the plenitude of his power, no longer vſe conniuence, when as theſe Arch-Hereticks, the Saxon and the Brandenburgher, would throw downe into hell, the antiquity and order of the Empire.
            
            
               
                  The 12. Article.
               
               IT is in the Popes hands, as in all Hiſtories appeareth to renew the Emperour in their Empire, to tranſport the authority of one Nation vnto another, and vtterly to aboliſh the right of Election: how wickedly and vngodly then doth the Saxon, in labouring to plucke the ſayd power from the Chaire of Rome, and to vnite the ſame vnto the Colledge of the Prince Electors? By this

meanes the Pope of Rome and the Emperour may expect, that from this permiſſion the reſt of the Arch-Hereticks, the Saxon and the Brandenburgher, may change the Eſſence of the holy Church, and of the Empire, into an abhominable and curſed monſter.
            
            
               
                  The 13. Article.
               
               SInce that Wenceſlaus by reaſon of his follies, by the Prince-Electors, was depoſed from the Emperiall ſeat, and contrarily Robert Palſgraue of the Rhine, by the commaund and authority of Pope Boniface the 9. aſcended to that high dignity. In like manner alſo is the Palſgraue that Arch-hereticke, becauſe he had committed high treaſon, and had diſturbed the Common-peace of the Emperour and the Empire, detruded from his Prince-Electorſhip: And contrarily for the recouering of the Antiquity, the Emperour with the ſacred and true Prince-Electors, as ſonne obedient to the Church, and diligent in maintaining Antiquity by Commiſſion from the Pope, hath promoted Maximilian Duke of Bauaria in all right vnto that high degree of Prince-Electorſhip.
            
            
               
                  The 14. Article.
               
               SO that by the Authority of the Apoſtelicall ſeate, the power of Electing an Emperour, and a Prince Elector: is drawne into the number of ſeauen Princes: yet whereas according to the Conceſſion of Gregory the 5. it appertained vnto all the Princes of Germany: alſo by the ſame plenitude of power, it is lawfull for the Pope to cut off the Dignity of the Prince-electorſhippe, from the Palſgraue and his heires, and to tranſport the ſame vnto the Duke of Bauaria.
               
            
            
               
                  The 15. Article.
               
               THe plenitude of the power of the Apoſtolicall ſeate, is prooued by the publique documents, as is the Election of Rudolph of Habſburgh, Adolph, Henry the 7: Charles the 4. Wenceſlaus, and Rupertus, who had no other ſtability, but from the grant and conſent of Nicholas the third, Boniface the 8. Clemens the 5. Clemens the 6. Gregory the 11. and Boniface the 9. which publique documents are kept with the Writings of the Apoſtolicall ſeate.
            
            
               
               
                  The 16. Article.
               
               TO the end that the Antiquity of the Empire may the better bee manifeſted, that the Pope and the Church hath onely the power to take notice, diſcerne, and to diſpoſe of the affaires of the Empire: Therefore the Emperour is Crowned with the Crowne by the Pope, who therein hath the higheſt authority, and this worke effected, then is he eſtabliſht in the Emperiall ſeate: Therefore all Doctors doe agree herein, that hee that is Crowned by the Pope, hath the power onely to beare the title of Emperour and Auguſtus: To ſigne with the ſigne of the golden Bull, and to take vpon him the adminiſtration of the Empire: and when the Prince is not crowned by the Pope, he is rightly forbidden to vſe the ſame.
            
            
               
                  The 17. Article.
               
               AT what time a great contention was riſen betweene Charles the balde King of the Francks, and his brother Lodowicke in the behalfe of the Empire. Then preſently Charles poſted vnto Rome, and ſo with gifts and entreaties obtained the Crowne: And therefore Carelus Calvin. according to the forme of Antiquity, the Pope onely hath the power to take notice of matters of the Empire: and therefore the Germane Hereticks doe very ill in ſaying, That the ſame belongeth to the Colledge of the Prince Electors.
            
            
               
                  The 18. Article.
               
               SInce that Fredericke the firſt, by the Biſhop of Bamberghen, required the Crowne of the Empire from Pope Adrian the 4. (where the words vnder-written are vſed and placed to expreſſe the ſame ſence) from whence very plainely appeareth, that hee that receiueth not the Crowne out of the Popes hand, is in very deede no Emperour. Therefore moſt holy Father, fulfill without any longer delay, that which Maximilion the Duke of Bauaria wanteth in the plenitude of the Dignity of his Prince-Electorſhip, that the ſame may be accompliſhed by your Holineſſes liberality, to the end the Empire may bee reduced and brought into its olde faſhion againe.
            
            
               
               
                  The 19. Article.
               
               SInce that in the diſpoſing and ordering of the affaires of the Empire, the Popes reſpect onely extendeth ſo farre, that it now and then hath beene vexed, ſuppreſt, nay hath beene wholy and totally circumuented and defrauded; like as many Hiſtories doe teſtifie, what hath paſſed betweene Pope Gregory the 7. and the Emperour Henry the 4. betweene Pope Alexander, and the Emperour Fredericke: the firſt, between Pope Innocent the third, and the Emperour Ottaman the fourth, betweene Pope Innocent the fourth, and the Emperour Fredericke betweene Pope Iohn the 21. and the Emperour Lodowick the 4. betweene Pope Boniface the 9. and the Emperour Wenceſlaus. By the ſame reſpect hath the Pope that vndoubted right to take notice of the affaires of the Emperour, and to diſcerne thereof, and not the Colledge of the prince Electors.
            
            
               
                  The 20. Article.
               
               SInce that the power of the Electing the Emperour, was not purchaſed for money by the prince Electors, nor obtained by force of Armes, nor enioyed by right of Inheritance, nor befalne vnto them by the hands of the Emperors, but is deſcended from the authority of the Apoſtolicall ſeat: Therefore it is not lawfull for the Germane Arch-hereticks, now at this preſent to beleeue any otherwiſe, thereby to moleſt the Antiquity and Sanctity of the Empire.
            
            
               
                  The 21. Article.
               
               WHen as for a long time the cuſtome of Electing the Emperour had beene in vſe, according to the conſtitution of Pope Gregory the 5. by the Interceſsion of all the Chiefeſt and princes of Germany, and that many troubles and deuiſions aroſe by the great diuerſity of voyces in their Election; The Empire is at laſt become to nought; So that the Chiefes and Princes with one accord (according to the decree and approbation of the apoſtolicall ſeat) were agreed, that all the power which was graunted vnto them, all of pope Gregory the 5. ſhould deſcend vnto

ſixe Princes onely; viz. to three ſpirituall and three temporall, vnto whom afterwards the ſeauenth was adioyned, and ſolemnly concluded, that of theſe alone, without admitting any other thereunto (from henceforth the Emperour ſhould be choſen) although they were of the like faculty, power, and authority.
            
            
               
                  The 22. Article.
               
               LIke as in former time the Election was performed by vertue of the graunt of Pope Gregory the fift. The ſame ſhall now at this preſent (by the ſame power proceeding from the good pleaſure of the Popes tranſport) be effected by the ſeauen. And like as in olde time, the Popes commanded all the Chiefes and Princes of Germany, that they ſhould chuſe an Emperour, euen ſo at this time when neede requireth, it ſhall be lawfull for the Pope to commaund the ſeauen Prince Electors, who doe repreſent the Aſſembly of all the princes there. And like as the ſeauen Prince Electors doe enioy a like power that authority of right, which in olde time the Princes of Germany enioyed: in like manner the Pope doe enioy wholly that authority which they had in the time of that Aſſembly, in regard that through proceſſe of yeares, or length of time, the vigour of the Church deminiſheth not, nor the rights of the Apoſtolicall ſeat doe wax decrepit: How great then is the ignorance of thoſe Doctors and Councellours of the Germane Arch-heretickes, which neither know the antiquity nor the Rights: But according to their malicious conceit, are not aſhamed to peruert the Antiquity and Sanctity of the Empire into nouelty, and to bring order into confuſion.
            
            
               
                  The 23. Article.
               
               SInce then it hath beene very amply proued, and ſhewed to his Holineſſe, that the power as well of the new as of the olde Prince Electors to Elect Emperours, hath beene obtained by no other meanes, but from the moſt high Apoſtolicall ſeat, which may be approued by the Writings of the moſt famous Authors, as Iacob Winphilingis, Krantzius, Naucleri, Carion, Auentine, Cuſpinianus, and other Tranſmontanian Writings, omiting the Italian Doctors, becauſe that they in this point of controuerſie, might peraduenture come in ſuſpition to be corrupted, and by that

meanes might be reiected, of the Germane Heretickes. Therefore it is, The reſt that ſhould follow, muſt be taken from the former. &c.
            
            
               
                  The 24. Article.
               
               SInce the ſeauen Prince Electors, by the publick proofes of writings, ſubſcribed with their owne hands and Seales, doe not deny that the faculty of Electing Emperours, is deſcended vnto them from the Apoſtolicall ſeat, & if the ignorant Councellours of Saxon and Brandenburgh, will not beleeue the ſame, the Writings themſelues ſhall be produced and laid open before them, which doe approue the ſame, dated in the yeare 1279. when Nicholas the third was Pope and Rudolphus. Hubſpurgenſis was Emperour, which are whole and good, in parchment, remaining with the Secretarie of the Caſtle of Saint Angelo: where the ſeauen Prince Electors moſt of them vſe theſe wordes. The mother Church of Rome in times paſt, as with a naturall loue embracing Germany, hath as with a preſent of temporall dignities honoured the ſame, with that which is aboue all names, onely as temporally vpon the earth, planting Princes therein, as godly Trees, and watring the ſame with a ſingular grace, and hath giuen vnto them that growth of worldly power; that they being ſupported by the authority of the ſame Church, as a choyſe and famous plant, may cauſe to ſpring or grow vp by their Election, him who hath the reynes of the Romane Empire in his hand. Therefore it is, Here lacketh ſomthing which is to be conceiued out of that which goeth before. &c. 
               
            
            
               
                  The 25. Article.
               
               THe ſeauen Prince Electors muſt confeſſe to haue this power from the Apoſtolicall ſeat, like as ſufficiently is proued in the former Article. And contrarily no man can take away the ſame; without the authority and conſent of the ſame Apoſtolicall ſeat. If it be taken from any, as being robd therof, it muſt not be eſteemed as lawfully done, and that dignitie which after that manner is ſo taken from one, and tranſported to another without the Popes conſent and authority hath no vigour, in regard the ſame is taken and giuen by them, whom in all right it is forbidden. Therefore if it be beſtowed vpon any man after this manner, in proceſſe of time, taking the right title, he ſhall not keepe the ſame.
            
            
               
               
                  The 26 Article.
               
               SInce that the tranſport of the dignities of the Prince-Electorſhip vnto this preſent line of Saxon, is not eſtabliſht by the moſt holy Apoſtolicall ſeate; Therefore the Pope and the Emperour for the dealing of the tranſport of the Electorſhip vnto the Duke of Bauaria, ſhall not once be moued, but his exception againſt the Tranſport, ſhall not be eſteemed for no exception: for that which is lawfully done, and ſimply is not done, is all one.
            
            
               
                  The 27. Article.
               
               SInce that the tranſport of the dignities of the Prince-Electorſhip, is paſſed vnto Maximilian Duke of Bauaria, and is confirmed by the moſt holy Father, Therefore it is no longer in the Emperour, nor in the King of Spaines power, to place that Arch-Heritick the Palſgraue, or his heires in that dignity and dominion, out of which their Father is caſt, nor to place him againe in the Electorſhip, in regard that theſe Controuerſies doe belong to the moſt holy Apoſtolicall ſeat, and neither to the Emperour, nor the King of Spaine.
               
            
            
               
                  The 28. Article.
               
               SInce that the Pope hoth confirmed the tranſport of the Electorſhip: ſo is that demand (which the King of England, the King of Denmarke, the Saxon, and the Brandenburgher, of the reſtitution of the Palſgraue into his dignities and Electorſhip) which they ſeeke of the Emperor very vnreaſonable: for the requiring thereof is nothing elſe, but the detruding of the Apoſtolicall ſeat (from the right of her Maieſtie, and to attribute vnto the Emperour the fundamentall originall, contrary to the antiquity and Sanctity of the Church and Empire: And therefore the holy Father ſhall be warie, that from ſuch like conniuence there ariſeth not a greater diſcommodity to the farther ruine of the Church.
            
            
               
                  The 29. Article.
               
               TO the end then that the Eſſence of the Church may be preſerued in her Antiquity and Sanctity: The moſt illuſtrious

Prelates, the Cardinalls, with one conſent and accord haue ſworne, that the Holy Father hauing permitted the confirmation, on Maximilian the Duke of Bavaria: may not reuoke the ſame without preiudice of the moſt holy Apoſtolicall ſeat, and are bound by the lawes of God, ſimply to maintaine the aforeſaid Duke of Bauaria with one common hand, with conioyned power of the whole Church, and with force of Armes, in the dignities of the Prince-Electorſhip.
            
         
         
            Here followeth the Cenſure, or Conſideration vpon the aforeſaid Articles.
            HEre are preſented vnto vs 29. Articles, from the Prelates of the Romiſh Church, whoſe Elegancie is not much to be commended, and doe tend to the preiudice of Germany: for the better examination whereof, we will courſe through all the members or particulars, and to the end that no man may be bewitched therewith, we will adminiſter vnto the ſimple an Antidote againſt this poyſon.
            The beginning ſhall be of the three firſt Articles, wherein the Clergy of Rome doe imagine vnto themſelues a moſt excellent growth as well of the Iuriſdiction, as of the Temporall goods.
            To ſpeake in order of both theſe: I ſay the Pope for as much as he is Pope, hath no Iuriſdiction at all, but for as much as he is enriched by the liberality of Princes, he hath alſo his owne lands, and

hath a certaine Iuriſdiction, which is well to be vnderſtoode in his owne lands: But in the Empire where he hath no place amongſt the Princes of the Empire: no Iuriſdiction may be allowed him, without deminiſhing of the Emperiall Maieſtie: Let no man ſuffer himſelfe once to be moued for that which hath bin ſo long ſaid, that the Pope of Rome is in the place of Chriſt here vpon earth. Chriſt himſelfe denied that his Kingdome was of this world. The Diſciple is not mightier then his Maſter, nor the ſeruant greater then his Lord.
            What is more euident and plaine, then that which Chriſt himſelfe ſaith. Let the Kings of the Nations beare rule, but with you it muſt not be ſo: neither is that firmer that they hope for the victory, from the triumph, and other proofes, wherewith they haue alwayes defended their cauſe, that Chriſt ſaid, All power is giuen me in heauen and in earth: Maldonatus refuteth this with theſe words. Chriſt ſpeaketh not here of all power, but of that which he gaue to the Apoſtles: that is of the power to obtaine and gather together his ſpirituall Kingdome, for which buſineſſe hee ſent out the Apoſtles; like as temporall Princes are carefull of their temporall goods, ſo are they alſo of their Iuriſdictions. Here auaileth that which the olde Father Bernard wrote to Pope Eugenius, in his firſt booke of Obſeruations, Your power is ouer offences or ſinnes, and not ouer poſſeſſions. Theſe baſe and earthly things haue their Iudges, Kings and Princes of the earth; wherefore doeſt thou enter vpon other mens iuriſdictions? Wherefore doeſt thou thruſt thy Sickle or Sythe into another mans Harueſt? Moreouer, he ſaith in his eleuenth booke, Dominion was forbiden the Apoſtles, dareſt thou then vſe it (A Lord) the Apoſtleſhip, or an Apoſtolicall perſon dominion, verily both theſe are forbiden you, if you will enioy both theſe at once. Therefore asketh Hoſtienſis, what ſhall we ſay of that which concerneth the Pope in worldly or temporall affaires? whereunto he maketh anſwere, with his Lord Innocentius, that vnto him, viz. the Pope, it concerned nothing at all. The ſame alſo may de read by Iohn Parienſis, in the tenth Chapter of the power of Kings and Popes. This is long agoe tolde vnto them,

but they giue it no audience, from hence ariſeth the Engliſh complaint by Mathew Paris, where hee treateth of Henry the third. That it is ſufficiently knowne and found, that the wrath of God is falne vpon the Romiſh Church, becauſe their Magiſtrate and Regent, doe not diligently apply themſelues for the denotion of the people, nor for the gaining of ſoules; but to purchaſe Reuenues, and to ſcrape money together.
            
            Other Nations vſed very grieuouſly to complaine thereof, and that with good reaſon, eſpecially Germany, whoſe Princes long agoe ſeeking remedy hereof, were not very acceptable, who could neuer ſatisfie the Romiſh Clergie, with riches and dignities: from this vnſatiable gulfe, alſo ariſeth that they in the third Article, deſire to cut off the conditions for their aduantage, which for the common peace ſake, were receiued aboue ſeauenty yeares ſince at Paſſow. But it is not in the Popes power, not in the Clergie, to breake that which was concluded by a generall Councell of the States, where the Authority of Charles entertained.
            Heere followeth the Cenſure vppon the ſecond part, which extendeth it ſelfe farre larger then the firſt, in regard that it not onely ſheweth the Cardinaliſh Prince, but that which lyeth next vnder. This afore-ſaid part containeth 20. Articles, in which they with the like proofes doe proceede, as yet ſeemeth: yet their obiect indeede is ſomething elſe, more then in the former. In which it ſeemeth to be ſufficient to Michael Lonigus: That if the Duke of Bauaria could but be perſwaded, that hee would ſeeke for the conſent of the Pope, in thoſe dignities where he was honoured. In ſuch manner the chiefeſt Cardinals doe take the reynes of good reaſon too too long into their hands; Nay, as Phacton vpon the Waggon of their Auarice, to the great danger of the world, and more eſpecially of Germany, doe ride out of the common rout of the Popes: like as if it were a matter of no moment, to pronounce ſuch an horrible ſentence of the Tranſport of the Electorſhip

of the Palſgraue, and the occaſion thereof: whereof we will not now diſpute, and ſo they fall aboord the Prince-Electors of Saxon and Brandenburgh in the behalfe of the Rights of the Election: what is it elſe but with the like thunderbolt to daſh the heads of the ſacred Empire? they ſay they are Heretickes: It is now no time to enquire after hereſie, but rather ſoundly to diſpute, whether that a Biſhop like as hee hath right to excommunicate a man for hereſie; Whether therefore hee hath the power alſo to rob and ſpoile a man of his dignities and meanes? verily therein is great difference: Chriſt commaunded that the excommunicated ſhould be counted as an Heathen or Publican: but in no place willeth hee that men ſhould rob the Heathens or Publicans of their Authority, or ſhould ſpoile them of their goods. Chriſt himſelfe paid Tole vnto the publicanes, and by his example, hath ſhewed vs the way what we ſhould doe. The Apoſtles liued vnder Heatheniſh Emperours, and were obedient to their lawes: in like manner alſo were all their Succeſſors: nay the Apoſtles being obedient, vſed to pray to God for them: There ſaith Tertullian in his Analogie, in the thirtieth Chapter, wee inuoke the eternall God for the proſperity of the Emperour, praying that he may haue a long life, a peacefull gouernment, an eſtabliſht habitation, ſtrong Armies, faithfull Councellours, and a peacefull world: When Iulian left Chriſtianity, and betooke himſelfe to Heatheniſme, did the Chriſtians then detrude him forth of his Empire? When they heare of this, then will they contend with later examples, ſaying, Wherefore then may not the Pope, by the ſame right for hereſie, tranſport the dignity of the Prince-Electorſhip vnto another, ſince that Pope Leo the third, for the ſame occaſion tranſported Empire from the Grecians vpon the Francks? This is that Achilles which ſo boaſts in the Colledge of the Cardinalls, but yet he is not ſtrong enough to take in our Citie of Elium. They abuſe themſelues exceedingly with this example; firſt from the Act of the Pope, they conclude the iuſtneſſe of the Act, if we may ſo driue our Arguments, there is no Act of any

man, but it may be found fault withall: they erre alſo herein, that they affirme that to be done, which was neuer done.
            We know it all of vs, that the Empire was tranſported, but withall that it was done by the councell of Rome, as alſo all Italy conſented thereunto, either priuatly or publikely. Of the weſterne people I will paſſe ouer in ſilence; They ſay againe that we haue many Writers, which make repetition of that which Leo did; who denieth that: but they commend Leo, as being one of the chiefeſt citizens, and ſo had the greateſt reſpect of any man in the Citty: they commend him alſo as being Biſhop of Rome, who with his hands was to ſet vp the crowne, as being a ſign or repreſentation of the Empire; Therefore theſe writers were in no hereſie, becauſe they meant that either Leo did the ſame alone, or elſe principally could haue done it. Many other who are no leſſe in number, nor in reſpect then theſe, doe relate vnto vs the cleane contrary: they ſay expreſly, that the ſame was done and performed according to the decree & will, as is aforeſaid of the Councell of Rome. 
               
                  Sigebertusſaith in the yeare 801: The Romans now, who long agoe had withdrawne their affections from the Conſtantinopolitan Emperour, as then finding very good opportunitie, becauſe that a woman, when the Emperour Conſtantine was depriued of his ſight, gouerned them by his Son: then proclaimed they with one accord the Emperour Charles for their Emperour, they crowned him by the hand of Pope Leo, they ſtiled him Emperour and Auguſtus. A popiſh writer Theodoricus de Niem, who afterwards was Biſhop of Verden, ſaith, about the very time of the Coronation the people of Rome made a Law according to the old cuſtome, but it was very troubleſome to recollect all things that happened ſo often: therefore the ſentence, right and power of the Empire, was left vnto the Emperour as we finde it written: then the people of Rome tranſported all this vnto Charles, &

gaue vnto him all their right and powor.
            
            
               Blondus alſo in his firſt book, decad 2: and Aneas Siluius, or Pius 2. in Blondus his ſhort relation: alſo Iacobus Wymphelingies, in his ſhort relation of the people of Rome, in the xi. Chapter, doe affirme that the Coronation by Leo, was performed and done with the knowledge, and at the entreatie of the people of Rome. Theſe are the wordes of Onuphrius Panuimus in faſtis: Leo by the conſent of the people of Rome, and at the entreatie of the clergie of Rome, proclameth Charles Emperour. So that from theſe and others who affirme that it was done by the Councell, and the people of Rome; muſt thoſe writers be interpreted, that they doe not confirme, nor yet deny the ſame?
            How much more is it to beleeue that which is confirmed by witneſſes, which is denied by none: then not to beleeue thoſe which doe confirme the ſame, becauſe that all of them do not affirme, although there be no body that doe deny the ſame: for after this manner writeth Michell Coccimmus very well, in his booke of the tranſport of the Empire, we muſt beleeue that the ſame tranſport was performed, and had his power or operation from the conſent and authoritie of the Romans, and other people of Italy.
                That which Innocentius the 3. wrote vnto Bartold Duke of Zaringe, doth not contradict the ſame: That the apoſtolicall ſeate of Rome, tranſported the Roman Empire vnto the perſon of the famous Charles from the Grecians vnto the Germanes, for in this wee conſent: That the Apoſtolicall ſeate vpon no other meaning did tranſport the Empire, but that they who did tranſport the Empire, did conſent thereunto, or elſe made declaration that they ſhould tranſport the ſame. But ſuch a tranſport hath had its power from the vniforme conſent of the people.
            Hence may very plainely appeare in what maner the tranſport which Leo performed was done, and by this meanes that is very eaſily ouerthrowne, which they ſay:

That the Empire was tranſported for Hereſie: the occaſion of the tranſport is here formerly related out of Sigibertus: the true cauſe thereof was, becauſe the Emperours of the Eaſt did neglect, or were careleſſe of the Weſterne Empire and authoritie: and ſo (as is aforeſaid) did let it paſſe; this we can confirme and approue with very firme teſtimony; Lupoldus ſaith in his fourth booke of the rights of the authoritie of the Empire, in this maner. The Grecian Emperour in the time of Carolas Magnus, nay before his time alſo, viz. when his Father Pepin, and his Grandfather Carolus Martellus liued, gouerned onely with the name of the Weſterne Empire: ſo that neither the Romiſh Church, nor the other Chriſtian Congregations, nor thoſe of the Longobardes, who were contrary to all law ſuppreſt, could either by the Eaſterne Emperour, nor by their authoritie obtaine any right in the Weſterne Empire: ſo that the aforeſaid Emperours made no account nor reckoning of the Weſterne Empire, but held it looſely as a derelict, onely commanding therewith the name, as appeareth in diuers Chronicles; Of the ſame opinion is Iohannes Pariſienſis, in his 16. Chapter, writing of the Kingly and papall power. It was not done by the Pope onely, but that it was the peoples deſire, who may ſubiect themſelues to whom they will, without preiudice to any other: and therefore that was done for a neceſſary reaſon, for to defend them againſt the Heathens and infidels, becauſe they could not be defended by any other: which right they might doe: for the people make the King, and the Army the Emperour.
               Aneas Syluius in his booke of the riſing, and authoritie of the Roman Empire, ſaith in the 9. Chap.  At the laſt when the Grecians were careleſſe of Rome, and leauing the ſame to be made a pray, and to be ranſacked one while by the Barbarians, and alſo by others: the people of Rome, who with their blood had got ſuch great riches, who by their valour had erected the Monarchie of the

world, ſaluted by the name of Emperour, Carolus Magnus then King of the Francks, being a German borne, who deliuered the Citie and the Holy place from the inuaſion of enemies: firſt greeting him with this title, Patricius: and afterwards Auguſtus:
                the Popes good will and pleaſure hereunto concurring. Alſo ſaith Nauelerus in his 27. generat, in the yeare 800, vpon the day of the Birth of our Lord, good deliberation proceeding: Leo the Pope of Rome, conſidering that the Conſtantinopolitan Emperours did very careleſſely defend that name, and held the Weſterne Empire as loſt: he declared, with the conſent of the people of Rome, Charles Emperour of the Romans, and crowned him with the Crowne; when the commonaltie of the Romans three times cried out aloude, Carolo Auguſto, &c.
               
            
            
               Paulus Aemilius in his Hiſtorie of the Francks, ſaith thus: The Maieſtie of the Emperours was now at this time, and before very ſlight; and there after he ſaith: the principalleſt of the Romans being of another courage and audacitie, gaue their voyces, that the ſeate of the Empire being (as it were voyde) and poſſeſſed of none: as if it had beene Gods will, and had beene ſo ordained: ſhould be inueſted with the King of the Francks, becauſe that he by his ſeruice which he had done for the Church, had well deſerued the ſame: and that they were obligde and bound to him, &c.
            
            
               Michaell Coccimus ſpeaketh yet more plaine concerning the tranſport of the Empire, ſaying: When the Romans, and almoſt all the people of Italy by proceſſe of time, and the Inuaſion of many Nations and pillagings, as being ſubiect to the Gothes, Vice-Gothes, Humes, and Longbardes, and being not able with their owne forces to defend themſelues, and the Grecians taking no care at all of them for the performance therof: nay that which is more, they themſelues heaping euill vpon euill, and vſing all diligence to ſuppreſſe and ſpoile them, vſing to great auariciouſneſſe and deſire of

authoritie ouer them; they marking the exceſsiue couetouſneſſe of the Grecians, and alſo their careleſneſſe: obſeruing alſo the worthineſſe, capacitie, and equitie of the Germanes: they tranſported the Empire from the Grecians vnto the Germanes, and recommended the ſame to Carolus Magnus; This tranſport of the Empire being effected by the Romans, and other people of Italy, and that with the common conſent and authoritie of them all, out of all doubt had full power, and hath remained firme.
            
            Hence appeareth plaine enough, that they are either fooles, or elſe are much deceiued, which thinke that the Empire was tranſported to the Francks for hereſie.
            This alſo is worthy conſideration, that although the Eaſterne Empire was tranſported by Pope Leo to the Weſterne, that the Pope hath now the ſame right to remoue the Empire according to his will. In olde time it was otherwiſe then it is now. Let vs grant that the Pope of Rome had ſome right, as the beſt qualified citizen of the citie; nay that the City (which neuer yet was done) had tranſported all her power vnto him, what doth that concerne theſe our preſent times, ſince that the Pope hath driuen the Emperour out of the dominion of the Citie. After what manner (ſay I) hereafter ſhall either Rome it ſelfe, or the Pope of Rome pretend any right in the electing of an Emperour, ſince they doe not acknowledge the Emperour for their Lord; yea ſince it is acknowledged that the prince Electors are to be ordained by the conſent and voices of the States, and this is by the approbation of Gregory the 5; hath not the Pope loſt his right when he conſented hereunto? ſo that hereby that authoritie which the Pope aſcribeth to himſelfe is quite ouerthrowne. What a number of proofes might be produced againſt this power of the Pope? yea alſo the teſtimonie of principall perſonages, who by reaſon of their learning, are exceeding famous.
            Here followeth the third part, which falleth very grieuouſly

both with tooth and naile vpon the bodies of all thoſe that diſlike the ſentence of the Pope, and that conſiſteth in the three laſt Articles.
            And firſt that is touched which concerneth the election, that is, the right of voice is taken from the Prince Elector the Duke of Saxon; vnder this pretext, becauſe forſooth the Pope of Rome hath not confirmed that dignitie wherwith that family for theſe many yeares hath been inveſted, nor is it confirmed by the Pope: as if that illuſtrious Family had not been ſo wiſe, as neuer to haue required the ſame of the Pope. It is but too well knowne vnto them, that they whom the Hope glorieth to haue honoured with the name of Empire or Authoritie, that hee taketh away from them the maieſtie of authoritie: ſo that his inveſting may well be called diſrobing, and his crowning a dethroning or depoſing. For I pray you, of what conſequence is the confirmation of the Pope vnto thoſe whom he driues into a bodily feare, if he had no temporall power? It is ſuch as Origen long ago vnderſtood to be; which he taught, as appeareth by his writings vpon Mathew, on his twelfth Homily: Among you which are mine, theſe things ſhall not be; to the end that thoſe which haue any power in the Church, doe not ſeeme to domineere ouer their brethren, nor to vſe any authoritie. For like as a neceſsitie is impoſed vpon temporall matters, and not left to the will; and ſpirituall matters in will, and not in neceſsity: ſo ſhall the dominion of ſpirituall Princes be confirmed in loue, and not in bodily feare. If therefore the power of the prince Electors be from the Pope, becauſe that the Emperiall power is from him, as our adverſaries affirme: how can they proue that the dignitie of the prince Elector muſt proceed from the Pope, if it be not needfull that the Emperour be confirmed by the Pope? There is a text that ſaith, The Army maketh an Emperour. The Gloſſe ſaith thereby, He is a right Emperour before he be confirmed by the Pope. This they of Baſil
               
vnderſtood very well; who after the death of Lodowicke, where the Lord of Bambergher chiefe Preſident made this anſwer: That Emperour which the prince Electors ſhall ordaine for vs, him will we accept of, although he haue no reſpect vnto the Pope. This appeareth in ſupplemento Vrſpergenſi. Nay that which is more; the Pope himſelfe confeſſeth, that not the Empire it ſelfe, but the Emperiall title reſted onely in him. Pope Adrian the fourth, in his Epiſtle to the Archbiſhop of Ments, Tryer and Cullen, ſaith: The name of the Emperour is from the Pope, but the Empire and Authoritie cometh from the prince Electors. Hence then is confuted that which is ſaid in the 27. Article, ſince that the Pope hath confirmed the Duke of Bavaria in the dignitie of prince Elector, that then not onely the King of Spaine (who is there mentioned) but alſo the Emperour is bereaued of the power to reſtore againe vnto the Palſgraue his hereditary poſſeſsions and the dignitie of the prince electorſhip. For if the Pope hath no power in the affaires of the Empire, then ſhall the Emperour by his doings not loſe his right, much leſſe any other Prince, if he before the Popes deed had any right of ſuffrage.
            I am forced to ſtop my eares by the reaſon of that extreame proud and ambitious affront which is ſet downe in the 28 Article: That although the two moſt puiſſant Kings of Great Brittaine and Denmarke, or the two illuſtrous prince Electors of Saxon and Brandenburgh ſhould require of the Emperour that the Palſgraue of the Rhine might be reſtored againe vnto his hereditary poſſeſsions and dignitie of prince Elector, that they then robbed the Seate of Rome of the right of its maieſtie, and did attribute the power of the prince Electors dignitie vnto the Emperour. The Pope of Rome doth very falſly attribute that Maieſty vnto himſelfe, which appertaineth to the Emperour, and to the Princes of the Empire and the States. Very falſly is the Pope of Rome called here, the Fountaine and Sourſe of the prince Electors

dignities, becauſe that power is ſprung out of the Councell of the Germaine Princes. Like as Naucleius ſaith, Generat. 34. The writer Theodoricus Niemus vſeth theſe words: The Princes of Germanie haue ordained it ſo. The very ſame alſo do other writers affirme. Neither do I deny that it was with the approbatiō of Pope Gregory the 5. Therefore the temporall dignitie is not chiefely from the Pope, for not the Pope, but the princes of the Empire doe repreſent the whole body and people of the Empire, in whom immediatly, as in the ſubiect the temporall power conſiſteth.
            
               Nicholas Cuſanus in his third booke of the catholicke concordance, in the 4. Chap. In my iudgement iudgeth very well thereof, writing in this maner, ſaith: The prince Electors, who elected in the place of others, were (in the time of Pope Gregory the 5, being a Germaine) ordained of the naturall kindred of Otho and therefore it is not tollerable that the prince Electors ſhould haue their power of electing from the Pope of Rome; (ſo that now, vnleſſe he conſented theſe ſhould not haue it: or if he would, that he would take it from them.) I aske, who hath giuen the people of Rome power to elect an Emperour, but the Law of God and nature; for by way of a voluntary ſubiection, and conſent in predecedencie, all ſorts of gouernments are well and holy inſtituted: and afterwards there he ſetteth downe yet ſomething elſe; the prince Electors that were conſtituted by the generall vniformitie of voices, of all Germaines and others belonging to the Empire: in the time of Henry the 2. had their fundamentall power from the generall conſent of voices of all, who by the law of nature might chuſe themſelues an Emperour, not from the Pope of Rome himſelfe, in whoſe power it is not to giue to euery prouince a King or an Emperour when it pleaſeth him, and when it doth not pleaſe him.
            
            Laſtly, the Articles were ſealed vp with this Oath.

That the Pope himſelfe, without preiudice to his ſeate, may not reuoke the Electorſhip from the Duke of Bauaria, ſince that he hath confirmed him in that dignitie; nay, that all the Prelates of the Romiſh Church, are bound with force of Armes to maintaine the Duke of Bauaria: and yet more, that all thoſe that are of the Romiſh Church, are bound to bring all their force together to maintaine the ſame. So that the Romiſh Clergie diſdaining the prerogatiue of Kings and Princes, doth very boldly determine and decide theſe controuerſies which ariſe in the Empire, and threatneth to force them by warre who are not content with the Popes ſentence; How ilſauourly theſe things doe ſute and agree with Pope and Clergie of Rome, is ſhewed vnto vs in that famous place of Peter Damianus, who liued in the yeare 1060, his words in his Letter vnto the Biſhop Firminus are theſe.
            
               Like as the Sonne of God himſelfe did ouercome all the obſtacles of this raging world, not by any proofe of vengeance, but by conſtant patience, and inuinceable Maieſtie: ſo ſitteth it beſt that we rather ſuffer, and patiently endure the worlds raging with humilitie: then either by taking Armes in hand, or requiting wounds with wounds: eſpeciall ſince that betweene the Empire and the Prieſt-hood, the offices are ſeuerall; The King ſhall vſe the temporall Armes, the Prieſt ſhall put on a ſpirituall ſword, which is the word of God; Paul ſaith of the princes of this world, that he beareth not the ſword in vaine, being a Miniſter of God, and his reuenger in wrath, vpon him that doth euill. King Azarias, becauſe he tooke vpon him the Prieſts office, was ſtricken with Leproſie: ſo that Prieſts which ſhall take vp Armes, (which is the worke of the Laitie) what deſerueth he? If now any man would obiect, that Pope Leo oftentimes thruſt himſelfe into warres, and yet for all that was a iuſt Pope: I tell you mine opinion. Peter neuer obtained the Apoſtle-ſhip becauſe he forſooke

his Maſter; Nor Dauid the gift of propheſing, becauſe he defiled anothers mans bed. Here is not to be conſidered of good and euill things according to the deſert of the poſſeſſors, but they are to be iudged according to their owne qualities. Doe we reade any where that Pope Gregory, who endured ſo many roberies and pillages of the Longebeards, either did or wrot the like; Doe we reade any where, that any of the holy and worthy Popes did euer take vp Armes to make a warre: no neuer in no place; grant then that the Lawes of the ciuill Magiſtrate may narrowly fift, pry, and determine any certaine queſtion which ariſeth in the Church: or elſe determine and iudge of that which concernes not the Iudgement ſeate of the ciuill Magiſtrate, by an Edict of the Councell, or an aſſembly of Diuines: to the end that either by the iudgement of the Magiſtrate, or the Iudicate of the Pope, there ariſe no warre which might be accounted to our ſhame.
            
            The Clergie men of Rome are altogether of another oppinion, practiſing and endeauouring almoſt nothing elſe but warre, not onely with their Armes, but alſo threatening others, and whilſt they are doing this, they are not aſhamed to affirme, that they are bound thereunto by the Lawes of God; Let them obſerue what Chriſt commanded the Apoſtle Peter, to put vp the ſword into the ſheath. Where hath euer God commanded the Clergie, that they ſhould intermeddle in matters of temporall dignities, or ſhould vndertake warres: much leſſe that they ſhould blow the Trumpet, or beate Allarmes as they do now. (haue I the deſire of Dominion their God) Obſerue diligently I pray you, that bloody Oath intended by all the Prelates, to the end the faſhion of the ancient and holy Church might be maintained intire, like as if the faſhion of their Church now were, as it was wont to be in former times; Let vs reade that which Tertullian, Ambroſe, Auguſtine, and other Writers, who ſubiect the Clergie vnder the power of the Temporall; Pope Gregorius
               
               Magnus, writeth himſelfe vnto the Emperour Mauritius theſe words: I the vnworthy ſeruant of your pietie: and a little after he ſaith yet farther, To this end authoritie is giuen to me from heauen aboue all men, that belong to my Lords the Emperours for pietie cauſe; When as the ſaid Mauritius, would haue that Pope Gregory ſhould publiſh a law which he had made: and this Pope adiudging the ſame to be vnreaſonable, and oppoſing the liberty of the Church: he therefore did not blaſpheme againſt the Empire, but was obedient vnto the command of the Emperour his Maſter, not diſſembling to ſpeak his minde and opinion of the Emperours Law: theſe are the Popes owne wordes: I being ſubiect to authoritie, haue ſent theſe Lawes into ſeuerall quarters of the world, and becauſe they are not agreeable to almightie God, I haue communicated the ſame vnto the Illuſtrouſe Lords, by amiſsiue of my owne oppinion, ſo that I haue fully diſcharged my dutie on both ſides: ſhewing as I am bound obedience to the Emperour: and not concealing my opinion in that which concerneth God.
            
            Here ought we to obſerue, how cunningly and craftily the Colledge of Cardinalls obſerue and aime at the example of the ancient holy Church, chiefly in the time of Pope Gregory the 7: vnder which this lurketh, that this Pope Gregory was the very firſt who durſt aſcribe & take vnto himſelfe the right of the Empire; At what time (I pray you) liued this Pope? about the yeare 1100. is the antiquitie whereof they boaſt; I may affirme with Tertullian, that this is noueltie; what holineſſe was there in thoſe dayes, when all maner of fractious, cuſſennings, frauds, deceites, and villanies had their full ſwinge: and to write much thereof would be to dangerous, and be no honour to Chriſtendome; Like as the Writer of thoſe times affirmeth in the dayes of the Emperor Henry the 4. It is very well knowne vnto all men, what Cardinall Benno hath written and tranſlated of that Pope:

(although Cardinall Bellarmine iudgeth that the ſame was wrtten by a Lutheran;) In like manner, it is alſo but to well knowne by other Writers, who haue painted out in liuely colours this Pope Gregory euen to the life. A certaine man named Orthamus Gracious, very much adicted to the Romiſh Church, was the firſt publiſher thereof in a booke, wherein are contained very many remarkeable obſeruations: out of the actions of this Pope Gregory, the Colledge of Cardinals, in the 19. Articles do conclude the Popes authoritie, and not out of theſe actiones onely, but alſo of other Popes who haue delt moſt tirannically with the Empire. One could alſo hit the Cardinalls in the teeth, with that which Cardinall Bellarmine in his ſecond Booke of the Popes of Rome ſaith, in the 29. Chap. vpon the 4. Argument, viz. That the Chriſtian Emperours haue oftentimes beene Iudges of the Popes: whereunto very ſubtilly he inferreth or anſwereth; That theſe things haue beene done, but how well they haue done the ſame, and by what right, that they themſelues ſhall anſwer.
            
            It is indeed much to be wondred at, that the Clergie men are grown to that paſſe, that they ſo ſtoutly attempt that which all the world hath in abomination, and with ſuch polluted hands to lay hold vpon the moſt famous ſtate of the Empire. We obſerue alſo how ſhameleſſe the Colledge of Cardinalls are, willing that we (from the euill liues and wicked actions of deceaſed Popes) ſhould conclude how great the authoritie of the Pope is: at leaſt they neede not to be ſo contumelious, and arrogant againſt thoſe Emperours, which in former times the Popes haue acknowledged to be themſelues ſeruants of the Emperours; The Pope alſo ought to haue in conſideration that he by meanes of the Empire hath obtained ſo great riches, and now by the greatneſſe of his power, and all maner of ſenſuallities, blindeth the eyes of many temporall princes.
            How blind are the men of this age, when the Sunne

ſhineth ſo bright, how little do they know or think what will fall out in the end; he hath got ſo great treaſures from thoſe of the Empire, to the end that he wanting nothing, might giue the better luſter vnto his religion: now abuſeth he theſe gifts, by driuing the Empire into a great feare. He is enriched with earthly countries, to the end he ſhould enrich vs with the heauenly, and now they ſerue him to take away our earthly; He is enriched, to the end that by his religious care, we might liue in greater ſecuritie in the Empire: now he careth not for that, although there be trouble raiſed in the Empire, ſo he may liue brauely and laciuiouſly; This is the reward of peruerted liberalty: ſo that for many ages it hath been very truely ſaid: Religion brought forth riches, and the Daughter hath deuoured the Mother.
            
            You props and pillers of the Empire, (moſt Illuſtrious Emperour, Princes Electors, Princes, and States) tollerate no longer this triumph and pride of the Romiſh Clergie: you ſee how boldly they violate the lawes of the Empire, they limite your eſtabliſhed law, and preferre vnto you that which they do but thinke and inuent: leauing vnto you the bare name of the empire, but haue drawne the maieſtie thereof long agoe to themſelues.
            What will this worke in the end, if you be content any longer with patience to behold or looke vpon the ſame, neuer thinke that they will omit to increaſe theirs, and decreaſe yours; You haue heard how they threaten you, and what they intend as enemies to proſecute: and you know that the abominable deeds which the Popes haue performed againſt the Emperours, doe ſerue them now for very faire examples.
            Since then it is not yet to late, take councell prouidently, that the Romiſh Cardinalls in the end may be glad to leaue their affronts, and their proud courage may quaile, vndertake firme and ſubſtantiall courſes, that their diſſolute and inſolent deſire of dominion may be reſtrained and bridled: then ſhall the Maieſtie of the empire be

preſerued: whereunto Almighty God giue you his bleſsing in all your conſultations. from whom you haue receiued the poſſeſsion and gouernment of the Empire.
            FINIS:
            
         
      
   