
      
         
            
            
            A SECOND PART OF SPANISH PRACTISES. OR, A RELATION OF MORE Particular wicked plots, and cruell, in humane, perfidious, and vnnaturall practiſes of the Spaniards.
            WITH, More Excellent reaſons of greater conſequence, deliuered to the Kings Maieſty to diſſolue the two treaties both of the Match and the Pallatinate, and enter into Warre with the Spaniards.
            WHEREVNTO IS ADIOYNED A WORTHY ORAtion Appropriated, vnto the moſt Mighty and Illuſtrious Princes of Chriſtendome, wherein the right and lawfulneſſe of the Netherlandiſh warre againſt Phillip King of Spayne is approued and demonſtrated.
            
               PRO. 20.28.
               Mercy and truth preſerue the King, and his Throne is vpholden by mercie.
            
            PRINTED. M.DC.XXIV.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            MORE EXCELLENT REASONS OF GREATER CONSEQVENCE, DELIVERED TO THE Kings Maieſty, to diſſolue the two Treaties, both of the Match, and the Pallatinate, and enter into Warre with the Spaniard.
            
            
               FIRST it is to be obſerved, that the State of Spaine, not content with thoſe ordinary prouiſions for the exerciſe of the Romane Religion, by the Infanta, and her family, (which other Princes in like caſe would haue demaunded, and which his Maieſty with great reaſon, might at the beginning of the Treaty haue conceived they would haue beene contented with: Haue with great vehemency (upon advantage of having the Princes Perſon in their poſſeſſion) preſſed a generall conniuence for all his Maieſties ſubiects of the Romane Religion; to the great diſhonor of Almighty God, in the ſincerity of his ſeruice in this Realme, and to the great derogation of the Lawes of this Kingdome. And laſtly, to the great diſcouragement, and griefe of all his Maieſties well affected ſubiects, from whoſe generall diſcontent they expect (as well appeareth) a conſequence of no ſmall miſchiefe.
            
               Secondly it is obſerued, that during the continuance of this treatie, and by reaſon of the ſame Popiſh faction, haue exceedingly increaſed in this Realme, both in multitude and boldneſſe.
            And whereas they haue beene divided heretofore amongſt themſelues into the part of the Ieſuites depending vpon Spaine, and the ſecular Prieſts otherwiſe, They are generally now ſtrongly vnited together depending no leſſe vpon Spaine for temporall reſpects, then vpon Rome for ſpirituall.
            And conſidering the houſe of Auſtria hath beene alwayes a capitall enemy to our Religion to increaſe their owne greatneſſe, by extirpiting the proteſtant party in all places where they can prevaile. It cannot but be of moſt dangerous conſequence, to the ſafety of the King, and the Realme vnleſſe remedy be prouided with ſpeede, for the abating of that party here at home, which cannot be during the time that theſe Treattſe are on foote.
            Thirdly, it is obſerued, that by aduantage of theſe Treaties, and thereby keeping of his Maieſty in hope of a generall peace, they haue contrarily vnder the pretence of aſſiſting the Emperour, oppreſſed the Proteſtants party in moſt parts of Chriſtendome, being the ancient Alies and confederates of this Crowne, to the endangering not onely of the whole State of the reformed Religion, but alſo of the Common ſafety of all the profeſſors of the ſame.
            Fourthly, during the time of theſe Treaties of loue with his Maieſty, they haue with all kind of hoſtility, ſet vpon his Maieſties ſonne in Law, the husband of his onely and moſt Royall Daughter, inuadeing his Townes and Territories in all places, and infine diſ-inherited him with all that Royall Off-ſpring of all his ancient Patrimoniall Honors and Poſſeſſions, to the great diſhonor of his Maieſty, and extreame griefe of all his well affected Subiects. And now alſo at the laſt, when they ſhould come to make good the hope of reſtitution, they haue layd new grounds for endleſſe delayes, and turned pretended difficulties into apparant impoſſibilities, not forbearing alſo now to annexe as a Condition to the weake hope of their vncertaine and imperfect reſolutions. That the eldeſt ſonne of the Count Pallatine, ſhould be brought vp in the Emperours Court: ſo reſtleſſe are their deſires to worke the ouerthrow of Religion by all poſſible devices.
            
               Laſtly, it is apparant how manifoldly from time to time, they haue deluded and abuſed his Maieſty with their Treaties, how ſmall reſpect they haue ſhewed to the Prince his Greatneſſe and worth, what endignities they haue offered againe and againe, to his highneſſe, by importuning him vpon all aduantages to forſake his Religion, contrary to the cuſtome of all Princes, and contrary to the ancient Lawes of Honor, and Hoſpitality, who ought to haue beene vſed there withall Princely freedome, and preſſed to nothing vnto which he was indiſpoſed, conſidering with what confidence (being ſo great a Prince) he had put himſelfe within their power, although it pleaſed God to guide and fortefie ſo his Princely heart, that he conſtantly withſtood all their attempts, and ſtratagems, to his owne immortall honor, and to the vnſpeakeable comfort of the good people of his Fathers Kingdome; Wherevnto may be added their infinite aduantagiouſneſſe, and endleſſe delayes in their Treaties. And finally what diſhonor they haue obtruded vpon our Nation and Religion in inviting ſtill to new Treaties, and turning al to the aduantage of their owne particuler ends, being true to nothing but their owne grounded Maximes, with which neither the Match nor the reſtitution of the Pallatinate can poſſibly conſiſt, but vppon ſuch termes as threaten to our State, an incurable miſchiefe.
         
         
            
            AN ORATION OR SPEECH OF THE RIGHT AND LAWFVLNES of the Netherlandiſh Warres againſt Phillip King of Spaine: Vnto the moſt Mighty and Illuſtrious Princes of Chriſtendome.
            
               Illuſtrious Princes of Chriſtendome:
            
            
               GReat and Mighty are the Kingdoms in your poſſeſſion, which extend far and wide, throughout all the world: but much more great, and farre more excellent are the vertues and knowledge, by which you hold, preſerue and governe the ſame righteouſly, even to the vttermoſt extent of felicity.
            In the meane time let me now intreat you, ô moſt peaceful Princes, that you will heare me with a friendly and well-affected minde, the ſequell hereof, and fundamentally will underſtand wherefore the Spaniards doe moſt falſely accuſe vs; That this peace was violated and broken by vs: which accuſation I hold to be very grievous.
            Among other Conditions, Lawes, and Contracts of this peace, this was one of the chiefeſt and weightieſt: That Don Iohn ſhould not admit any Spaniard or ſtranger, nor any of them; by whoſe counſell and adviſe it was evidently knowne, that the Provinces were brought into that extreme ſpoyle, into the Councell: And contrarily,

hee called, and ſent for them to him, kept them in his Court, and in his moſt ſecret chambers; That Baptiſta Taxis, a moſt notable Spie, and enemy of our common affaires, who a little before had beene Secretary vnto Duke d' Alva, who was not onely adioyned to his priuy Counſell, but alſo was made and ſet ouer them. Beſides him one Octauius Gonzago an Italian, as alſo hee tooke vnto him one Eſcouedo, a crafty Spaniſh Fox, vnto whom hee adioyned certaine Netherlanders. But what Netherlanders I pray you? Thoſe who partly had beene the ſtirrers vp and fauourers of ſo many miſeries; who were both hated of their natiue Countrey, and of all good men; viz. Barlemont, Megan, Hierge, Flojon, Hautepenny, Aſſonuille, and other plagues of their Countrey, who hauing ordained the Law of Lentulus, Cataline and Caſſius, eſtabliſhed the ſame with their counſels & deeds, viz. That all thoſe that by preſeruing the Common-wealth would be preſerued, ſhould be declared for enemies.
            
            By this counſell and aduice, the Spaniards preſently, euen at the beginning of this peace, ſhould haue ſurprized the Towne of Gent, if the good and profitable counſell, and alſo the valiant deeds of the States, had not hindred the ſame; For don Iohn himſelfe could not refraine nor keep in his hatred and enmity any longer, which he bore to the Netherlanders, but had quickly forgot that ſacred oath, which he had ſworne, vpon the Euangeliſts, before the Biſhop of Shertogenboſeh, and the Popes Nuncius, or ſpirituall Embaſſadour.
            He had promiſed and ſworn; that hee would deale with all the ſouldiers in the Netherlands, who were 15000, about their Arrearages, to the end, that they thereupon might bee diſcharged, like as in the agreement of the peace had beene concluded. And contrarily thereunto, he promiſed the Souldiers, in the Kings behalfe, anew, to haue greater meanes, honours, offices and rewards: and held a moſt miſchieuous counſel with Fronſberghen and Focker, Collonels of the German ſouldiers; part of whoſe wicked counſell hee effected, and the reſt being hindred by the States he could not effect.
            But yet to the end, that you may ſee and know the ground of this Buſineſſe, I will in few words declare vnto you how the matter fell out: For vnder theſe two conditions or couenants, viz. in maintaining of the Romiſh Religion; and in yeelding lawfull obedience to the King, did the whole Treatie of the peace conſiſt.
            
               And when the States which had ſworne hereunto with an high Oath, then were they preſently admitted, that thoſe affaires concerning the Land, which preſently in the beginning of the treatie of peace were begunne, but could not be concluded vpon, that they ſhould be diſpatched and concluded in the next aſſembly of the States.
            But yet Don Iohn, whoſe affection burned with a luſt and longing deſire, by ſome ſecret and concealed practice to breake the peace, and to begin the warre againe, caſting all theſe conditions and promiſes at his heeles, made a way for thoſe complaints which Phillip, and all the former Governours had vſed as a cloake to cover all their intended w
                  •
               cked imgainations againſt the Rei-publicke, viz. That the Hollanders and Sealanders neglected and deſpiſed the Romiſh Religion; and by that meanes the commandement of the King was neglected.
            Vpon this Anvile did they hammer night and day? they aſſayled the States, and were exceeding troubleſome vnto them, counſelling them that they altogether ſhould beginne the warres, againſt Holland, Sealand, and the Prince of Orange, who was the moſt eminent Champion againſt the vniuſt government of the Spaniards, who indeede had beene exceeding beneficiall to the whole Common-wealth.
            In this counſell Don Iohn had his eye vpon theſe two obiects, which ſhould be exceeding profitable and ſerviceable to further his intent; that by their Ciuill warres, the ſubſtance and treaſure of the land might be exhauſted, and they being weakned and bruyſed by their owne Warre, that then he, with the more eaſe and conveniency might ſuppreſſe them together.
            Whereas he ſtill perſiſting with theſe deſires and intreaties, being as it were daſht againſt a Rocke by a Tempeſt: The States anſwered him; that it were better and more profitable for the Common-wealth, That concerning all thoſe matters whereof Don Iohn made his complaints, to haue them by a friendly compoſition decided, and vnited, in the aſſembly of the States; and if they could haue imprinted or perſwaded him to haue beleeued the ſame, we had never fallen into the miſeries of a Ciuill Warre.
            For what is more repugnant to the common good, and to all humane Lawes and Iuſtice; then to try by warre, thoſe controverſies,

which may be decyded by Right and Reaſon. Arch
                     •
                  damus (though no Chriſtian King, but of a ſtately, honourable any provident Nation) ſayd; That it was vnlawfull to take Armes againſt thoſe, who were willing to haue the matter tryed by Law. When and iniury had beene offered to the Romanes themſelues; they did not preſently begin with wars: but did firſt ſend Clarigatum, that is, they cauſed thoſe things that were ſtollen or taken away, to be more apparently and manifeſtly demanded againe.
            But how profitable, good, and wel-ordred is the cumſtome of the Common-wealth of the Venetians, which I lately ſaw and obſerved; where they will not ſuffer that the principall Nobles themſelues of that flouriſhing Common-wealth, ſhould contend, chide, or maintaine enmity among themſelues, for, or about other mens ſmall and petty affaires. But they bring the ſame into their Senate, or Councell, and there they deſire, pray, and admoniſh them, that they will remember, and be mindfull, that they are all of them Saint Markes children (which name they haue given their Rei-publicke) and that they are brethren, and Burgeſes of ſuch a free and happy government, and that it was not beſeeming for them, for any particular buſineſſe, to cheriſh and foſter any private diſſention or hatred, which might thereafter prooue to be more generall, to the perill and danger of that Rei-publicke.
            Which cuſtome aboue all other affaires ought to be vſed in the affaires concerning the Land, and ought to be eſteemed of in all wel-ordered Common-wealths. If this were ſo, we ſhould not ſee one City ſo againſt another (oftentimes in one Province or Rei-publicke) or one Noble-man ſo againſt another of the contrary party, to threaten warre, murther, deſtruction, burning and blaking, nor violence to aſſault each other.
            But now to returne to our former purpoſe, in reſpect that there are two ſorts of Warres: the one with words by way of Iuſtice; the other with violence. The firſt being proper to men, the ſecond to vnreaſonable beaſts. And that wee muſt neceſſarily avoyde violence, vnleſſe the courſe of Iuſtice be denyed vs. Therefore we muſt beleeue that the States farre rather would haue decyded thoſe controverſies, by their good and wholeſome counſels, by reaſon and conference; then to make them greater by Warre and ſpilling the

blood of the Citizens. Contrarily Don Iohn complaineth of the States very publiquely: Hee reprooues and vpbraids them all for Rebels, and then deales with the High-dutch Souldiers no longer by ſecret dealing in the affaires very prejudiciall to the Common-wealth (with whom very cunningly hee had long time dealt with all) but then began he very publickly to deale with them; ſo that the whole diſcovery of that buſineſſe, by divers intercepted letters, was fully come to the knowledge of the States. And many things they dayly ſaw with their eyes, as firſt when he removed his Court and family, with his Councell-companions to Bergen in Henegow (being a very ſtrong Towne, and very fit for his conjurations and complottings) and commanded that the ſame ſhould bee provided with a ſtrong Garriſon.
            Moreover, when as he ſurprized the Caſtle of Antwerpe by Treacherie, and did ſurprize thoſe well provided and fortified Townes of Namen and Charlemont, and put a ſtrong guard into them of his owne ſouldiers, thinking thereafter by treachery to haue taken in the Towne of Bruſſels, So that already the principall and chiefe Cities and Townes, by the great number of his Forts and Citadels, where beleagred and oppreſſed; and then he wholly beganne to ſet vp himſelfe againſt the Rei-publick; and alſo many other things were then done by his adviſe and motion: whereas hee according to his oath, ought to haue adviſed, that all the ſouldiers ſhould haue layd downe their Armes, and preſently to haue departed out of the Country.
            All which things appearing manifeſtly to the eyes of the States, who adjudged that the ſame tented to the ſubverſion of the Common-wealth; they thought that they were bound continually to keepe a good counſel-watch; neither did they turne their eyes aſide from the Rei-publick, from that time that he ſought to haue all the governement alone, vnto whom they in all officiouſneſſe (not being mooved by any diſtemperature of minde) ſent as Embaſſadours vnto him, Marolaus and Bruſus, charging them that they ſhould preſent and ſhew, their full performance, innocency, and integrity, and ſhould free them from all ſuſpition and evill conceit, (the which they moſt certainly knew, that he miſchievouſly had diſſembled,) that the faith that was given at Gent ſhould be renued: They ſhould alſo promiſe, that the States ſhould make diligent enquirie, and execute

ſeuere puniſhment vppon thoſe Treacherous murtherers and conſpirators, who (as he ſayd) layd waite for his life, and had conſpired againſt him; (making a ſhewe and diſſembling, as if to prevent the ſame, hee went to Namen:) They would augment his Guard more then thoſe he had already, to the number of three hundred compleat armed men, who ſhould bee all of them Netherlanders, the which before that time was never offered to any Governour or Ruler. And yet with all theſe ſupplications and intreaties they effected nothing; for there was neither modeſty nor reaſon to be found in Don Iohn. Nay, hee could not bridle nor keepe in his owne evill arrogancy and audacious paſſion; but declared the ſame to Marollaus at the ſame time of his Embaſſage, boaſting himſelfe, that hee now did wholly aſſure himſelfe, and that hee doubted not, but that hee had brought vnder the ſubjection of his will and command, the Citie of Antwerpe, that hee had no lacke neither of money nor men; that hee now had all things in a readineſſe, for the furniſhing of a Warre; and that hee with his ſword, would purchaſe vnto himſelfe a greater authority, power, command and government; then the States had promiſed and granted him in the pacification of Gent; and that it was his will, that theſe Embaſſadours ſhould report all theſe things vnto the States, for he would not conceale any thing from them that hee knew to appertaine to this his intent and will. This matter is undoubtedly ſure and certaine, and ſufficiently knowne before this, ſo that heere it is not needefull to produce witneſſes. And although it be a very miſerable thing, not to be able to deny, and very ſhamefull to be confeſt; yet I thinke verily that the Spaniards themſelues (although they be leſſe ſhameleſſe then a man would beleeue they are) cannot deny this at any time. Don Iohn had written vnto Tre-longe, and to his other companions and fellow-workers of his ſecret trickes and conſpiracies, That hee had given as a Cymbrian ſpoyle the wealth of the Citizens of Antwerpe, for a prey vnto his Souldiers. The ſouldiers ranged already through the City, as mortall enemies, and forced the Citizens to giue them whatſoever they liſted: Many of the principall citizens began to flye out of the City, and as it were baniſhed: by which meanes the traffique and trading of the Marchants by ſhipping, beganne to ceaſe.

And although there were great and manifeſt tokens of their malignant enmity; yet neuertheles the States did beare al this very moderatly and modeſtly, and indeed would haue born yet much more, if that mortall and pittifull proiect which Don Iohn intended, had not beene diſcouered and made manifeſt as the day; euen as if a man at the firſt ſight ſeemed to perceiue ſome liveleſſe and inſenſible creature, and afterwards by more certain and ſure ſignes and tokens, beginneth to think of what quality that was whereof hee doubted: euen ſo the States did alſo very eaſily vnderſtand, by all thoſe things which they had ſeene, that this prince did cheriſh in his mind and counſels, an hatred tending to the ruine of the common-wealth: but of what qualitie that he was, and how farre he would extend himſelfe ouer the reipublick, that they moſt euidently diſcerned and diſtinguiſhed thereafter, both out of his owne, and by letters from others. For there were many letters intercepted in Gaſconie, viz. Two of Don Iohns, written by himſelfe vnto the King, and other from him written to Anthonie Perez the chiefe of the Kings Covncell; Moreover fiue letters from Eſcouedo to the King, out of which the States might aſſuredly vnderſtand, that there were fed and bred monſters, and ſtrang impoſtures; that privat conſpiracies were there practiſed; that there was great diſſention mingled among the Cities and the Nobilitie of the Netherlands; and by what meanes the ſame was effected; and how fit and ſerviceable it was that tyrany and the Inqviſition, according to that firme reſolution of the Spaniards, ſhould bee brought in & eſtabliſhed; and to that end ſoldiers, armes, and all warlicke preparation very earneſtly was required for the King.
            Conſider and vnderſtand, illuſtrious Princes, the ſecret and privie conſpiracies of this man: Heare the words which this man vſeth in his letters written to the King, which (as I ſaid before) were intercepted. In regard that this bodie (ſaith he) is ſo vnhealthful, that it cannot be cured any otherwiſe, but by cutting off of the vnſound members, you muſt now carefully obſerue this occaſion which is preſented. And Eſcouedo adds thereunto the reſt very amply, as a good interpreter of his meaning, who might very well write that which Don Iohn himſelfe would not giue to vnderſtand. This Eſcouedo was the right minion and ſeruant of Audacitie and Treacherie, whom I thinke by reaſon of his nature and manners, was named Eſcouedo, becauſe that hee knew

by his deceit to bring the miſerable Netherlanders into his net. He wrot that vnto the King which Don Iohn would haue him to write, viz. That it poſſibly could not be, that the Netherlanders ſhould be brought vnder the pure and perfect obedience and will of the King, vnleſſe that firſt they were tamed and conſtrained thereunto with fire and ſword. That therfore both men and armes were very needfull, and that the ſame muſt be effected by warre. By the which as a good architecture of the Spaniſh tyranny, he gaue them to vnderſtand, that the crueltie and rigour which Alua and Requiſenius had abuſed, muſt not continually be put in practiſe, but that the Netherlanders muſt bee enſnared by a greater deceit and hypocriſie. Like as in Nauigation, it is a point of knowledge to ſee before hand the ſtorme, that although men cannot attaine the hauen, yet (if altering the courſe) you may attaine thereinto, then it is a fooliſh deed to keepe that courſe which before was taken with great perill and danger, rather then that you altering the ſame, might attaine to the wiſh for haven. For ſo was his opinion, that the firſt raging and madneſſe of the Spaniards muſt bee ſomewhat mollified, and now muſt go to worke with diſſembled faith and promiſes. That Don Iohn who had an incredible moderation, and an indifferent minde betwixt Ambition and Crueltie, might very fortunately effect the ſame. Hee aduiſed by his owne and his maſters counſell, that England ſhould be firſt ſurpriſed and conquered by warre, and then it would be eaſie to ſvrprize the Netherlandiſh prouinces.
            In thoſe letters which Don Iohn ſent vnto Anthony Perez his ſpeciall friend; He gaue him to vnderſtand that he was of ſuch a nature and condition, that he could not liue ſtill in idleneſſe, nor could away with the lawes of peace; and that his mind and conſcience could not indure that he ſhould wholly ſubmit himſelfe to the priuiledges and lawes of the Netherlanders, but that he farre rather by force of Armes would obtaine and effect for the King, a whole abſolute, and vnlimited government over the Netherlands.
            And if now you do not ſufficiently ſee and perceiue, that Don Iohn firſt broak the pacification of Gent, where the ſame by ſo many and cleare proofes doth appeare. Then remember (by the Eternall God) remember, I ſay, what reaſons he vſed to the Embaſſadours of our States at Marche and Famines, when he ſayd, that he would keepe

the contracts and conditions of peace ſo long, vntill that covenant which was begun, ſhould repent him, that is, vntill hee by his ſweet entiſings, and hypocriticall lenitie, hauing rockt the States aſleepe, at the laſt might deſtroy them; and with them ſuppreſſe the whole Reipublick. For after the death of Iohn, Philip ſhewed very manifeſtly that that ſame in very deed ſhould haue befallen vs, like as he at Mechlen by the Lord of Selles certified and gaue them to vnderſtand, that he would breake the lawes of the peace, and that hee no longer would be bound to keepe them. But I pray you for what occaſion? was it for neglecting the Romiſh Religion? Aſſuredly it had neuer beene more vſed nor reuerenced with the like deuotion, care and diligence, nor neuer was the zeale of our people ſo greatly affected thereunto as then. The Biſhops of the Churches were then receiued; the Schooles and Colleges were partly inſtituted, partly renewed and augmented. Finally, there was not any thing omitted that ſerued for the maintaining of the cuſtomes and ceremonies of the Romiſh Church. So that our Netherland might well haue compared, matched and ſtrouen with Italy and with Rome the chiefe ſeate and Metropolitane of that Religion. The which the Popes Nuncius, (or ſpirituall Embaſſadour) who in his behalfe was ſent vnto vs, ſhal not deny the ſame. For hee writing himſelfe vnto the Pope concerning this, ſaith, that he did much admire, and was therefore exceeding ioyfull, that thoſe preſcriptions and duties (or ſeruices) of the Romiſh Church, were exceeding well maintained by the Netherlanders in great devotion and pietie.
            How and after what manner the affections, wils, and devotions of all our States, and of all the Netherlanders were affected to the king, I need not to make repetition; neither is it needfvll to proove, that they delighted or loved any thing ſo mvch as to fvlfill the kings commands, and to ſhew obedience therevnto. The Trophaes, Pyramedes and Pageants which were made and prepared ſo ſvmptvous and coſtly to the honor, and at the entrance of Iohn, can teſtifie this. How did all the Nobles with ſvch exceeding ioy, wiſhing him good luck, receiue him? How did all the people with great mirth and reioycings receive him? What bankets and ſumptuous feaſts at the lands charge, were then with mvch delight made for ioy thereof, that this peace was made and concluded? And what great triumphs

all the Netherlanders made and demonſtrated vpon all their Theaters when this peace was made, is yet teſtified by all the inhabiting ſtrangers, who were thereat exceedingly droven to admiration, yea were euen aſtoniſhed.
            It was no otherwiſe then, but as if the Netherlanders had then found the beginning and principles of a wel-governed Common-wealth in the perſon of this their Chiefe, or Gouernour. Yea, thou thy ſelfe Iohn, if thou wilt but enter into thine owne heart and conſcience, ſhalt not be able to deny the ſame, That the Netherlanders did fully keep and obſerue all the contracts and conditions of the peace, which they were bound to keep; and neuer denied obedience vnto the commandement of the king, if they were not more vile then the commandements of Manlius, if they did not to too much oppugne the lawes and priviledges.
            But to the end that I may produce one inſtance which farre exceeds all mens admiration; and which ſhall perfect this our diſputation: you muſt for a certainty acknowledge, that the ſtates had vndertaken with force of Armes to haue forced the Hollanders and Zealanders to haue done thoſe things which you moſt deſired, which was the induction, and as it were the ground-worke of your accuſations and complaints, if in caſe they by right, reaſon, and conference, could not be brought thereunto; which things you altogether ſcorned and rejected, and to the end that this one pretext, this onely pretence might remaine for matter for your falſe accuſations; And that this might be a juſt occaſion for your conjurations: yet this occaſion was not ſufficient thereunto, neither could it be ſufficient enough, in regard the ſame is manifeſtly knowne vnto all men, not onely to Netherlanders, but alſo to all ſtrangers, who either ſaw the whole buſineſſe as it was carried, or elſe haue heard the ſame reported: That the Hollanders and Zealanders haue alwayes entertained, received, and accompliſhed the precepts and commandements of the King, no otherwiſe then if they had been the Oracles or commandements of God: That they neuer were careleſſe nor negligent in their offices or duties which by the law of Nature they were owing to their Prince. Yet this I will freely confeſſe, (which I will attribute and conſecrate to their immortall and moſt high commendations) that the Hollanders and Zealanders were the firſt counſellors, and ſhewed the way firſt to the other Provinces, to free and to maintaine

the common liberty. For I will at the laſt, O you moſt provident men, you moſt mighty States of Holland and Zealand, convert and turn my ſpeech and oration from thoſe wicked and horrible dealings of that diſhonorable man; to your vertues, valours, and abilities. Should I ſo ſleightly paſſe by the worthineſſe and valiant deeds, and manly courage, whereof every mans mouth is full: and for which euery one ſo highly commendeth, loveth, and honoreth you for.
            You haue evermore with a valiant, conſtant and perſevering courage, reſiſted and rejected that moſt intolerable and moſt cruell ſeruitude and thraldome of the Inquiſition, or Faith-preſſe. And if they now ſay, that the authoritie, reſpect and commandement of the King conſiſted therein; and that you in reſpect thereof, would not giue way, nor be obedient vnto the ſame; wherein indeed conſiſteth your glory, and whereof you may juſtly boaſt; Yet you confeſſe, to your great commendation, that you haue given theſe occaſions vnto the accuſations of Don Iohn: That you, being free from all faults, yet in this you are and will be faulty. And herein you may boaſt, That you with an eſpeciall providence and wiſedome, haue carefully watched and kept your ſelues, ſo that at no time, neither by any of theſe, nor any other Spaniſh trecheries, periuries, tricks, or traps, you haue been couſoned, debaucht, nor inſnared: that you were the firſt which were inflamed with a ſingular conſtancie and courage, to deliuer the Reipublicke from the grievous yoake of tyranny and cruell government. That you with the toarch of your libertie, haue been a light to enlighten all the other Provinces. And that you had farre rather, by theſe long-during warres, be ſpent, die, and indure all kinds of miſery and adverſitie: then to forſake your cuſtomes, lawes and priviledges. I beſeech the Lord God, by whoſe only conduct, grace and aſſiſtance, you haue atchived ſuch admirable things, that you may proſperouſly continue & perſeuere therin from henceforth perpetually. Now will I turne me againe vnto that from which I haue digreſſed, and recommend vnto your judgment and arbittrement, Oh Chriſtian Princes, all what I haue ſpoken of the deeds of Don Iohn. Take notice, iudge, and ſpeake what you thinke thereof. Conſidering that of all the States parts, there is nothing omitted, which by the law and contract they had promiſed to doe: and contrarily for Don Iohns part, of the ten parts of the agreement or compoſition, which wholly he ought to haue performed, he hath not

diſcharged any one point thereof well nor honeſtly as hee ought. And hereby you may ſee, with what juſtice and equity we vndertook this buſineſſe, and how we (having vndertaken the ſame) haue dealt and proceeded therein.
            For when the States perceiued, that all their hope and truſt for the caſhiering of thoſe great numbers of the Germane ſouldiers was fruſtrate, and that they were laid in the cities, townes, and mouthes of the frontier garriſons, and that they kept Namen & Charlemont, being Cities and Caſtles that were very well provided; to the end that Don Iohn that way, might receiue and bring into the Netherlands that great army which hee had deſired of the King in his letters; and moreover they perceiving that the hate and enuy of all the ſouldiers was turned vpon them, and that they with an exceeding greedy deſire longed for the pilaging of the greateſt Cities, And that they attended onely but for the leaſt ſigne and token of their Prince, to have falne rauenouſly and furiouſly, as raging beaſts, and to haue ceized vpon the liues, goods, and meanes of the Netherlanders. That Don Iohn himſelfe, and other naughty people daily threatned the ruine and ſubverſion of our natiue Countrey. That they by the demoſtrations, hand-writings, mouthes and letters of their confederates, were themſelues conuinced. That they all had agreed to ſet the cities and towns on fire, and to haue ſlaine all the Nobles and chiefe of the Citizens, to haue deſtroyed the Netherlands, and to have rooted out the Reipublick. Who is he then that would not be awaked and ſtirred vp for the defence and preſeruation of the common good? Who is he that with good counſell would not prevent the trecheries of Iohn: Who would be ſo vnprovident, and ſuch a coward, that would not defend and maintaine his owne life, with weapons and warre? Aſſuredly reaſon hath taught the learned; neceſſitie the Barbarians; cuſtome the heathens; and nature it ſelfe the vnreaſonable beaſts, to repell violence with violence, euen to their vttermoſt ability.
            You your ſelues, Oh great and gracious Princes, which poſſeſſe kingdomes freely and in proſperitie; may eaſily know and vnderſtand this; and know alſo that even ſo it muſt be done. But what do I ſay, that you muſt know it? All the Spaniards our enemies do know it, and will freely confeſſe the ſame. For they demonſtrate it in their deeds, that the ſame hath been juſt, and is ſo yet. For conſidering

that Henricus Caſtellanus (being a baſtard) and the great Grand-father of King Phillip, did expell Peter his lawfull brother and right heire, out of the kingdome, becauſe he ſeemed to vſe tyrannicall dealing: and becauſe he ſeemed to dominiere contrary to the lawes and cuſtomes of his kingdome; And, that King Phillip vpon the ſame conditions that he inherited Spaine, did inherit the Netherlands, (viz. that he ſhould maintaine and religiouſly obſerue the lawes and cuſtomes.) Wherefore then may not we, as the Spaniards did reject Peter, even as wel reject Phillip (who oppreſſeth his ſubjects with an vnjuſt and vnlawfull government) and expel him with our armes for euer out of our Provinces.
            But I feare, O Princes, that I haue too much abuſed your patience, and that my oration ſeemeth to haue run ſuch a courſe, that I neede not adde any thing more thereunto. Yet I intreat your leaue, that you be pleaſed to ſuffer me, though very briefly to continue in that which Phillip ſought to effect after the government of Iohn, by the deceit of an hypocriticall and diſſembled peace; to the end that you may clearely ſee and perceiue, wherfore that we, ſo long as the world ſtands, may neuer make any peace with Phillip, but now and for euer without ceaſing, are bound to Warre againſt him. The very name of peace (I confeſſe) is exceeding ſweete, a peace that is good and ſound: But betweene peace and that bondage which is cloaked, covered, and falſly folded vp in a concealed peace, is indeede a very great difference. Peace is a ſtill and quiet liberty: but that bondage, or all manner of feare thereof, is the extreame of all euils and miſchieues. Such was the peace, (if a man may call that peace) which induced, or rather ſeduced the Netherlanders even vnto Collen.
            
            When at the States by their Embaſſadours and letters vnto you and your predeceſſors, Oh all you Princes of Chriſtendome, had againe intreated; that you by your authorities, reſpect, and exhortations, ſhould ratifie, eſtabliſh, confirme, and looke vnto that peace which Phillip after a new couſening manner ſhould make, that the ſame ſhould not be deceitfull: Like as he certainely and moſt maliciouſly by his deceit ouer-threw the fame. For the Spaniards then made no delay, but preſently brought in new diſſentions into Artois and Henego
                     •
                  e, cauſing them to fall away from the other Provinces, over the which they euen vnto this preſent haue dominiered. Afterwards by force of Armes, violently they ſurpriſed Maſtricht,
               
and moreouer and aboue they, partly by violence, and partly by great promiſes, haue ſovght to get into their power many other cities and prouinces.
            And finally is that Vliſſes-like-wit Alexander Farneſius Duke of Parma, brought out of Italie, who like vnto a moſt craftie and cunning bird-catcher, with the ſong of his lenitie, and promiſes of great rewards, inſnared and captiuated all the Cities and Townes of Brabant and Flaunders.
            Of this Prince I could ſay very much, which I am conſtrained to omit: Yet this one matter I cannot paſſe by in ſilence; That, although in the time of his gouernment hee effected many things very great and eminent for Philip, yet could hee not eſcape of being ſuſpected, as if hee would haue vndermined the King in the gouernment, becauſe that through his gentleneſſe, linitie and amitie; he had drawne vnto him the affections of all the Netherlanders, and that hee alſo ſeemed perſpicuouſly to haue looked into, and alſo to beare a hatred to the wickedneſſe and fraudulent treacheries and deceites of the Spaniards. Therefore Philip gaue him fungos, or Toads-bread to eate, which Agrippina had ſo commended to the Emperour, to the end that by the power and operation thereof, he might be admitted, counted and receiued into the number of the gods.
            But I pray you, what was that at laſt for a peace, which as a Comet or bright ſhining ſtarre, ſhined vnto vs out of the firmament of the Spaniſh trecheries vnto which the Duke of Parma counſelled vs, at what time the Arch-enemy ſtood, as it were, ouer our heads, and that the incredible great Spaniſh Fleet filled and couered the great Ocean or main Sea? A Fleet which was ſo terrible to behold, that I can hardly iudge, whether the Fleet that Xerxus had, which couered the Sea called Mare Ponticum had a greater number of Shippes, more Souldiers, or greater warlike preparation. With this Fleet Phillip had thought totally to haue ſuppreſſed vs: who were at that time raviſhed, as it were, with that pleaſant and delightfull ſound of peace. Yet when this Fleet, by the onely power of the Almighty God, was wonderfully deſtroyed and brought to naught; then preſently by the Emperours Embaſſadours hee offered theſe Prouinces a new Treatie of Peace, to the end, that he thereby might tranſport all his Army and power of

warre out of the Netherlands into France. The treacheries which many yeeres before he had plotted againſt that kingdome, beganne then to haue a wonderfull good progreſſion: For his naturall kinſman Henry being made away by paracide, (or his murthering of a kinſman,) and the ſtate of all that kingdome, being vtterly confuſed with Ciuill warre; then the matter, and the preſent occaſion required, that he with Armes and a mighty Hoaſt ſhould proſecute his deſigne, in that flouriſhing and famous great Kingdome of France, which Kingdome hee by violence hauing taken in and conquered, he might thereafter, without any trouble at all, haue ſubiugated thoſe Netherlandiſh Prouinces, and all the other Kingdomes of Chriſtendom.
            What? Is it yet lawfull for me, or may I yet ſpeake any more of Arrereges, or reſidue of the dangers of this Reipublicke? Yes, it is lawfull for me, and it ſhall be lawful for me alwayes to ſtand for the dignity of my natiue Countrey, and to confeſſe the truth. Like as all good Orators, or eloquent ſpeakers, doe euer keepe ſome of their moſt forcible and ponderous Arguments to the laſt. And like as experienced Generals vſe to place their beſt ſouldiers in the laſt rankes; euen ſo Phillip in theſe latter yeares preſented a peace vnto theſe Netherlands, which ſhould be adorned and confirmed with notable fidelity; the whole foundation and chiefe ground worke thereof, lay and conſiſted in the vertues, mercy, endeuors, diligence, and in the loue of the Arch-duke Erneſtus his ſiſters ſonne; who, after the Duke of Parma, was placed in the gouernment of theſe Prouinces: He promiſed theſe Prouinces a peace; not ſuch a peace as ſhould be limited with any grieuous or heauie conditions and contracts, like as the former was; but ſuch a peace as they themſelues would wiſh or deſire. In the meane time Phillip ſent his great and huge Armies into France, and his ſecret murtherers into Holland, to haue murthered the Illuſtrious Prince Mauritts, Earle of Naſſow, a famous and notable imitator of the vertues and valour of his father, and a ſingular defender of our Liberty; and by ſuch an odious and treacherous villainy, to haue made him away; like as they, but a little before, by a moſt cruell and trecherous hand, had murthered his moſt worthy and valiant father, the Prince of Orange.
            
            And finally Phillip concluded many more miſchieuous, and more wicked purpoſes againſt theſe Prouinces, then euer before he could

haue bethought himſelfe of. I doe not ſpeake any thing vnaduiſedly, ô Princes, but that which thouſands beſides me of good reputation, can teſtifie in faith and verity, and that which Phillips owne letters doe make good.
            What then? Meaneth the king of Spaine, that our States by any propoſitions of peace, can bee diuerted from their enterpriſes and deſignments? Doth he not yet know and vnderſtand, that all our affections are ſo abdurate and hardned, that we will far rather yeeld and giue place to Armes and Warre, then to any kind of new inuented peace-treacheries, after what manner ſoeuer the ſame might be propounded? Or, thinketh he peraduenture, that the affections of our States euery day, lie open to his deſire and appetite? What? Is he yet ignorant, that the counſels of all our people, with a generall conſent and vniformity of voices, are long agoe vnited and knit faſt together in this point; and that they will farre rather honourably in warre and Armes liue and die, for their Lawes, and for their natiue Country; then from henceforth ſhamefully to ſinke or quaile, vnder his treacheries and deceits? What, doe I ſay ſinke or quaile? Nay, to come into the extreameſt euills of Tyrannie; to bee bound with vntolerable and inhamane bonds of ſlauerie, and to bee reckoned and accounted among thoſe ſlaues that are bought and ſould. We haue prepared, made ready and ſharpened, a perpetuall and an euerlaſting warre and Armes againſt him: we neither haue, nor may caſt our eyes vpon any other peace, then vpon ſuch a peace as is grounded, confirmed, and may bee maintained with force and Armes.
            But in regard that a little before I beganne to ſpeak of France, and to proue that our warre partly was joyned with that ſame; therfore I will proceede to adde ſome other matters hereunto, by the which you may evidently ſee and perceiue, how many treacheries, traps and deceits that Phillip hath laid for them.
            He hath a long time ſince, as you know, O Princes, laboured and endeuored to aſſaile France, with all the violence and force of his warre; to the end that he by the occaſion of the Civill diſſentions in France, might effect ſo much by his wars and charges: that if he could not ſwallow and devoure the whole Kingdome; yet that at the leaſt he might get a great part thereof. For he had made his full reckoning and accovnt before hand, by preparing of that cruell

Fleet, that both France and England had been a prey vnto their enemies: Wheras thoſe good Princes, notwithſtanding had nothing at all endamaged him, neither was he by any juiuſtice provoked to that warre; vnleſſe peradventure it be, that he thought this occaſion ſufficient; that the Pope, at the will and deſire of Phillip had excommunicated thoſe two flouriſhing Kingdoms, for their exerciſing and miniſtery of the Reformed Religion; who for the extirpation and eradication of that Religion; Phillip as a Cato Maior, with the puiſſance of the Romiſh Cenſores (or correction maſters) vſeth to haue regard vnto all the Kings and people of the earth, and therefore to correct and puniſh them, which is indeede a matter known vnto you all; for which no man can ſufficiently wonder at the ſhamefulneſſe thereof, and might now neither be paſſed by nor omitted. And that Phillip in theſe warres of France dealt moſt earneſtly, and with the greateſt diligence and alacrity, with the Duke of Feres, and other Spaniards of the League, whom he as companions, had aſſiſted in that warre, to haue eſtranged the Right and Title of the Crowne of France, not onely from the ſucceſſion or deſcent of the Kings blood and kinred, but euen from all Frenchmen, and to haue drawne the ſame to Spaine.
            
            Theſe things are ſo certaine, O Princes, that there is no man which doubteth of the truth hereof. But to what end do I bring theſe into your Remembrances; What is this to maintaine the purpoſe I haue in hand; For this end it ſerueth; thereby to proue how exceeding great the ambition is of this moſt cruell Tyrant; and to the end you may perceiue and ſee how greatly, not onely we, but euen all of you together, muſt keep good watch and looke vnto it. For like as the nature of the Vine, is to extend the branches, as the armes thereof farre and wide, and therewith embraceth and layeth hold vpon euery thing that is neer it, if it be not lopt and pruned; Euen ſo ſhall Phillip, if you doe not all at once make reſiſtance, at the laſt deſtroy and devoure all Chriſtendom, with moſt cruell and bloody warre.
            Moreover, he by his Btibery, and ſecret conſpiracy had lately effected ſo much in Scotland, that ſome of the chiefe of that Kingdome, ſhould haue received and taken in twenty thouſand Spaniards, if they had not been puniſhed (after the matter was knowne and revealed) according as their treaſon deſerued. I need not to thinke

with my ſelfe, that I can ſufficiently expreſſe with words, what treaſons, what perills, what daungers, he, ſo oftentimes hath attempted againſt the Queene and Kingdome of England. Can ambition and violence proceed yet any further? Yes truely, For the like treacheries practiſed hee a little before againſt the Principallity of Collen, the Dukedomes of Gelders, Gulich, Cleane; the County of Berghe, and that ancient Emperiall Towne of Aken: All which is moſt manifeſtly and apparantly knowne by good Teſtimony, and by his owne letters. And who knoweth in what lurking hole and corner of hipocriſie and diſſimulation, he hideth and ſheltreth his moſt mortall hate againſt the moſt mighty Princes of Italy; whom (as ſoone as the wind of the firſt oportunity ſhall blow (very ſuddenly, ſhall be turned into coales and aſhes, by his vnquenchable and fearefull great flames of Warre.
            Doe ye not yet ſee and perceiue enough, ô Princes, what treacheries and deceits that Philip prepareth, for your moſt happy Kingdomes and Prouinces, which are your Patrimonies? Conſidering there is no man ſo blind nor ſenſeleſſe, who ſeeth not, and vnderſtandeth not that the ambition of Phillip neuer reſteth, but dayly draweth him from land to land, and raiſeth a new warre out of war; So that he by warres, ſinne, miſchiefe, and meere villanous deceits and treacheries, vnder the pretence of a ſeeming-peace, ſeeketh to deject and detrude euery one of you from the ſeate of your Gouernment. For this his deſire is vnſatiable and immoderate, and cannot be included nor ſhut vp, neither in Heauen nor in Earth. If that all Phillips Kingdomes which he uſeth commonly in that long traine or taile of his moſt proud Titles and Termes of Honour were put or layd into one of the Seales of Critolaes ballance, and in his other ſeale his Ambition or greedie deſire of Honour; All the Kingdomes would ſcarcely weigh the quantity of one graine, in compariſon of his Ambition.
            
               Alexander the Great looked about for more worlds, when he had conquered the whole world; but Phillip would, if he could, with the Gyants aſſault the heauens. And therefore, O Princes, and you moſt peacefull Princes, I intreate you, and I would admoniſh you, that you judge no more of the occaſion and lawfulneſſe of our warre; but in your judgements and opinions to hold it for good: and I exhort you moſt earneſtly againe and againe, that you by all

meanes, both in your vnderſtandings, and with all your powers, will take heed of the treacheries, robberies, and miſchievous practiſes of Phillips deceit.
            In former times, whenas the Athenians, partly with warre, and partly with deceits and treacheries, ſought to get unto themſelues certaine neere adjacent places, as the Cities of Syracuſa, Lacaedemon, Meſſena and Catina: they by their immoderate Ambition, and deſire of others Rights, drewe ſuch an hatred upon their owne heads, that Darius the moſt mighty King of Perſia, with the whole country of Grecia, voluntarily undertooke and proſecuted warre againſt them, unto which euery man ranne and haſted, as to quench a publicke flame. But you, O moſt Illuſtrious Princes, ought long ago to haue expelled Phillip, (with your conjoyned forces from you, and from your proſperous States) that ſeeketh continually your liues and Kingdomes, by moſt unjuſt warre, and by moſt wicked enterpriſes.
            And it concernes, and is fitting, not onely for you, who for a long time ſince, haue beene provoked, ſpurred, and ſtirred up thereunto, by the many injuries and ambition of Phillip, but euen you altogether, who ſee and perceiue, that he incroacheth with violence upon the limmits of your neighbours; and with an eaſie and ſlow pace creepeth and incroacheth towards your Countries. It ſtandeth you upon in time to looke unto it; to the end, that your neighbouring Countries, being conquered and brought under his ſlauery and bondage, Tyranny, when you leſt thinke upon it, do not incroach upon you.
            When as Phillip of Macedon, the Father of Alexander the Great, after the Battell with the Tribaldes, had entertained a long diſſembling warre with the Athenians, the Thebeans aſſembled themſelues for this occaſion; fearing, leſt when the Athenians had bene conquered, the fire of their neighbouring-warre might haue flowne unto them. And a little before, there being a confederacy made betwixt two of the mightieſt Cities; who, before had bene at extreme enmity with each other, terrified thereby, and by their Embaſſadors, all the Country of Grecia: eſteeming it ſo, that a common enemy ought and muſt be repelled with common force; ſo that if the firſt invaſion of Phillip of Macedon, had had good ſucceſſe; he would not haue held up, nor reſted untill he had conquered and ſubjugated the

whole country of Grecia. The Romanes in former time, perceauing that the power of the Carthaginians increaſed and grew great, they had an eſpecial care that the Carthagenians ſhould not grow ſo great as to ouer-maſter them: And for that end they ſent their ſouldiers to relieue the Mamertines from the beleagring, and to relieue Spain from ſeruitude of the Africans.
            
            Although that the Venetians are not very lightly incited to warre, but when the matter of neceſſity conſtrayneth them: Yet they neuer tefuſed to ſend their warlike power for the ſuccour of others that were under them, when they perceaued that their neighbours contended with each other, with an vnreaſonable and an immoderate violent ambitione.
            Theſe, and the like even to an innumirable examples (or foredeedes) doe teach you, how carefully you muſt take heede of that moſt peſtilent evill, of the Spaniſh ambition; and do ſhew; or proue, that it is a righteous and juſt cauſe, that even all you with one conſent with us, proſecute a warre againſt that Tyrant.
            For our States do know, that the occaſion of their warre againſt Phillip, is not onely exceeding juſt and righteous, and ever was: but alſo, that they at no time, now nor never, may ceaſe their warre, that they may make no peace with Phillip, but alwayes muſt mainetaine warre againſt that Tyrant. For we are taught by our friends, how we muſt take heed of our enemies: For if Phillip do gape and long ſo earneſtly, and with ſuch diligence for your Kingdomes; like as you ſee he daily doth; how then ſhall we ſpeed? For aſſuredly he wil never lay aſide Armes before that he hath ſubjugated all the Netherlands under him, becauſe it is a Countrey ſo fit for his purpoſe; who, out of them may attempt many enterpriſes upon your Kingdomes, and dayly may beginne to raiſe new warres againſt you, and draw out of them Souldiers, Armes, and all manner of warlike proviſion againſt your adjacent Countries. And therefore he would farre rather caſt the greateſt part of Chriſtendome for a prey to the Turke; then to ceaſe theſe warres.
            At the laſt Parliament in Germany, he would not conſent to furniſh the Emperor with any ſoldiers, nor aſſiſtance againſt the Turke; and the reaſon was, becauſe he might the better vexe Chriſtendome with warre.
            Doe yee yet doubt of this, O yee Princes, which you your ſelues

haue ſeene, that Phillip in the beginning of our ciuill commotions, had far rather looſe two Kingdoms, Tunis and Goulet, which the Turkes, under their General Sinam Baſcha then recouered from him, then that hee would for a while ceaſe his warres with us; or would remoue his Souldiers out of theſe Prouinces, againſt the moſt deadly and mortal enemy of all Chriſtendome.
            And you know how many Souldiers, how much Armes, and what charges Phillip hath been at, and waſted, to maintain this war againſt us. So that if you would but reckon up the ſame, you ſhall find that he might haue bought and purchaſed two Netherlands with that mony: although notwithſtanding they be very great, rich, and exceeding copious. So that there is no doubte of this, but Phillip would far rather endure the greateſt loſſe that might betide him then that he would leaue Bellgium with out bellum, or the Low-countries without long encountrings of warre, with out ſtrife, without ſouldiers, that they might liue in peace and quietneſſe, freely and wholy according to their Lawes and priuiledges. For by this war, and with the conqueſt of our Prouinces, he wil lay and eſtabliſh the ſtrongeſt foundation and ſureſt ground-worke of his Monarchy, Sole-dominion, Tyrannie, and cruel Gouernment. For when he ſaw and perceaued that theſe Countries were ſo ſingularly fitting for his cruel treacheries and deſgnments, and that our Lawes and Liberties contraryly did wholy oppoſe the ſame: therfore ſought he firſt of all with warre, with force and violence, to plucke vp, teare in ſunder, and with violence, to oppreſſe the ſame, to the end, that his ſubiects of other Kingdoms, which at this preſent he hath ſubiugated, or elſe might ſubiugate hereafter; from this our concording, and generall defence of our Lawes and Liberty, might take no example or inſtance, with the greater courage and alacrity, to ſtand for, and maintaine their liberty.
            What do you then iudge, ô you moſt peaceful Princes? or what is your concluſion that our States ought to doe, who chiefly ſeek for the common good of their natiue Countrey? Verily it cannot be with them, as it is vnder the Gouernment of a cruel Tirant, and as it uſually is in ill-gouerned Reipublicks: they are not vſed to be lead, and to ſubmit themſelues at any time, with cap and knee, as flatterers doe? to the wills, deſires, and luſts of their ſuperiour Lords, nor to be dealt with all as hired ſlaues? conſidering that

they neuer would admit nor ſuffer, that their Lawes, Liberties, nor their Reipublick, ſhould bow or ſubmit vnder the yoake of vniuſt and vnlawfull Government: But haue as good fathers of their natiue-Countrey; as good fighters for their freedome, and Defendors of their Lawes, (like as it muſt be in a Reipublick which is moderately and ciuilly gouerned by their Prince) directed their deſignes, wils, and gouernment of their ſuperiour Lord; according to their Lawes, and the preſeruation of their Liberty.
            Do you think that the Spaniards ſhall ſpoyle and cruell vexe and torment our Reipublick; and that we with ſhame will leaue and quit the ſame? Shall we neglect our deare countrey and liberty? Muſt we deſpiſe the lawes of our predeceſſors? And ſhall they peruert & turn topſie-turvie our ciuill orders and policy into tyranny? And ſhall we with wringing hands look vpon the coarſe, and behold the exequies or funerall of our patria and natiue countrey? Shal they rend & teare in peeces the body of our common-wealth, and like moſt ravenous beaſts deuoure the ſame? And ſhall we like ſlaues, with praying and intreating, hardly preſerue our own liues, goods, and meanes? Or do ye not far rather laud & extol with the higheſt commendation of honour, this will and affection of our States, for their manumiſing and preſeruing of their deare and natiue countrey? Incite and exhort you them to proceed as they are beſt able, and to the vttermoſt of their powers, for the preſervation and manumiſing of their owne liues and liberty? Come not theſe things daily into your remembrances, when you think of the Netherlandiſh warre, or diſcourſe thereof, which I haue now demonſtrated, and with ſure and infallible and vncontrollable reaſons proued vnto you, viz. that our States, & all the Netherlanders, being drenched and ſoaked in miſery, and oppreſſed with the cruelty of the Spaniards; and being expeld out of their natiue countrey, of meere neceſſity were conſtrained to take Arms againſt Philip. And that now all the other treacheries, infidelities & iniuries which the Spaniards during the time of theſe wars haue done vnto the Netherlanders, being ſo great, ſo inhumane, and ſo incredible, that they themſelues (ſo to ſpeak) do earneſtly exhort, do require & command, that the States with a conſtant courage, ſhould keepe and maintaine their armes, and neither now, nor neuer, to lay them out of their hands; but to ſhew vnto the other ſubiects of Phillip (thoſe of Sicilia,

Calabria, Lombardy, Arragon, Caſtile, India, & Portugal) yea euen vnto your ſelues, O Illuſtrious Princes, I ſay to ſhew, and with valiant deeds to proue, that not onely we, but all of you together, yea and all men vpon the face of the earth, far rather ought to dye, then to behold or looke vpon the face of that tyrant.
            Do ye yet think, or can you imagine with your ſelues, that Phillip, with the limits of our countrey, hath limited in his tyranny? Do yee not yet ſee and perceiue, that the high aſcending and mortall flames of the Spaniſh tyranny, devoureth and ſwalloweth vp the treſholds, doores, and turrets of your kingdomes? Ariſe, and at the laſt awake out of this your ſleepe and careleſneſſe; come hither with ſpeede, and in all haſte flye hereinto, for to quench theſe vniuerſall fireflames. Wherefore do yee ſeeke vnto vs againſt our wils, by your counſels, authorities, and reſpects, to induce vs to make peace with Phillip; whereas it had been more fitting, that you your ſelues long agoe, with warre and force of armes ſhould haue expelled Philip, and with an eſpeciall force and power to haue ſuppreſt him?
            And to the end I may ſpeake vnto you all one after another, you moſt mighty Princes of Germany, be ſencible, that Philip in your Dutchland doth not hunt after a cruell and vniuſt government; but (ſo to ſpeake) doth poſſeſſe the ſame already. For he hauing once conquered theſe Netherlandiſh prouinces; when you will not bow and ſubmit to his gouernment: he will haue all the hauens of the ſea, and the mouthes of all the Germane riuers at his owne will, and in his owne power: thereby afterwards to impoſe ſuch grieuous toles and taxations, vpon your nauigation and trading, or elſe wholly will hinder the ſame, euen as it ſhall pleaſe himſelfe. And this is that for which, and in behalfe whereof, one or two of the prouinces doe appeare in your aſſemblies and conſultations: you heare him publickly ſpeak his minde, and you eſteeme and preferre his tyrannicall advice and counſell, before your owne proſperity and tranquility. You haue him, the Biſhop of Friſinghen and Hildeſhem preferred before; and you haue ſeene them made Princes and Prince-Electors of the Empire; The Biſhop of Collen, Liege, and Magdeborgh: and you haue ſeene that the moſt ambitious Duke of Bavaria hath laid ſnares for you all.
            And to the end that I may turne my ſpeech vnto you, O you illuſtrious & mighty powerful Princes of Poland, hath not Philip brought

a great number of that generation of mankind, (I ſay Ieſuites) into your Countrey, by whoſe religion and policy they haue brought almoſt the whole world into an vp-rore, to the end that he by their meanes, with Sun-ſhine-like deceits, might propound vnto you what his will and counſell is.
            To you alſo, moſt peaceful Princes of Italy, I haue already ſayd, and ſay againe, that the ſword of the Spaniſh tyranny hangeth by a very ſmall threed ouer your heads, already naked and drawne out of the ſcabberd.
            And for you, O moſt illuſtrious Senators (or Priuy Councellors) of Venice, you your ſelues haue ſeen and beheld the tyranny of Phillip in your owne State and gouernment, when he ſent money to arme the Turke againſt you; and diuerted the power and force of the Turk from his owne dominions vpon Cypris; although that hee by thee quity and right of the covenant, had been exceedingly oblieged and beholding vnto you.
            Therefore O Princes of Christendome, yet euen now, at the longlaſt, be carefull of your owne eſtates and affaires, of your owne liues and proſperitie; marke and conſider it well, that Phillip is enemy and tyrant to you all, and ſuffer him to liue no longer in the world: but reſiſt and impeach his ambition to reigne, and that his peſtilent and mortall government proceed no further. And like as ſome certaine members are cut off when they begin to be without life and blood, and are hurtfull to all the other parts of the body; euen ſo muſt you alſo eſteeme, that this inhumane cruelty in humane ſhape, muſt (ſo to ſpeak) be ſeparated and cut from the common body of men. Verily the deed of the Perſians is much to be commended, and ought to be wel thought upon of you all; who when Cometes and Oropaſtes two of their Magicians (or wiſe men) by the like tyrannie and murther of Smerdis, King of Perſia, poſſeſſed the Kingdom: they were ſlaine by the valour of ſeuen of the ableſt Princes of Perſia, all of them running with a ſingular affection, diligence, and burning zeale to kill and to deſtroy thoſe tyrants with their ſwords, one of the Magitians claſped about the neck of one of the Princes whoſe name was Gebrias, which made his companions to linger the more, becauſe they would not kill him in ſteed of the Magician (for this was done in a dark place) who commanded the Magician to thruſt his ſword through his body. Yet in the end the Magician was ſlaine, and this

valiant Gebrias (who had rather to haue died, then that the tyrant ſhould haue eſcaped with life) was ſaved, and had his life preſerved, Such an hate did theſe men beare to tyrants.
            The Grecians informer times attributed divine honour to thoſe men who had ſlaine a tyrant, And doe you thinke that the Netherlanders ſhall do euill, or more vniuſt, that they oppoſe and reſiſt Philip that jnhumane tyrant.
            The Romanes expelled their King Taquinus Superbus, becauſe that he, did but in ſome ſort weaken the ſtate of their common-wealth; and ſhall we ſuffer or indure Phillip in our common-wealth, who not onely with fire and ſword would deſtroy and turn-vp-ſide-downe all the Netherlands, but euen the whole world? No, by no meanes. Our States without doubt, will proceede and prepare the way for you to break off, and to expel this tyrant. They wil perſeuere to diuert, driue away, and to foyle him ſo farre and wide from ſuppreſſing and killing of our proſperity, that once, not onely they and theirs, but alſo euen the other provinces of the Netherlands, may bere-eſtabliſhed in their former liberty, and may lead them out of the ſtraights of the Spaniſh tyranny, and repoſſeſſe them in the poſſeſſion of their predeceſſors. That finally, they being re-eſtabliſhed, and better ordered, and vnited and bound with the Prouinces of the whole Netherlands; they may ſtop the incurſion and invaſion of this cruell tyrant, and altogether with one accord may expell him from their proſperity, and from their common liberty. Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            AN ADIOYNDER OF SVNDRY OTHER PARTICVLAR WICKED PLOTS AND Cruell, Inhumane, Perfidious; yea, Vnnaturall practiſes of the Spaniards.
            
               
                  To the well-affected indifferent READER.
            
            
               GEntle Reader, there being ſo much ſpoken, as thou maiſt perceiue, by the fore-going firſt Part of the Spaniſh practiſes, touching the cruell, inhumane, trecherous, perfidious; yea, vnnaturall practiſes of the Spaniards, in moſt parts of the World, which may ſufficiently delineate him in his deſerued colours, that whoſoeuer beholds him may mourne to ſee this Hazael ſo to tyrannize ouer the innocent, and that the Lord ſhould permit, and the earth beare ſuch an vnheard of monſter; yet notwithſtanding, much more might be added in ſundry other particulars, as the Dutch Chronicles mention, and other Writers haue well ſet out: amongſt which, although I my ſelfe be a ſtranger by Nation to them; yet ſince the time of my abode here, hauing attained ſome vnderſtanding in the Language, I haue thought fit to adde ſome further particulars, which in my reading I haue obſerued, and could adde many more; but my purpoſe being onely to annex a few things, I will not enlarge, leſt I adde another Treatiſe. But before I come to what I intend, I haue thought fit hauing ſome ouerſight in the publiſhing of this Treatiſe aforegoing, to note by the way,
                  The Dutch word Gheſante ſignifieth indifferently Embaſſadour or Meſſenger.
                the ill tranſlating of one word, in the 21 folio, it is touching the Princeſſe of Parma, the Tranſlator termes her a crafty Queane, wheras the word beares no ſuch ſence in the Dutch, but ſignifies one that hath a ſharp wit to deceiue, as is ſaid of the ſerpent that beguiled Eue. Beſide, that that is tranſlated Embaſſadour, ſpeaking of ſuch as were ſent

from the States to the King, I conceiue to be more fittingly rendred Meſſenger.
            
            Firſt, thou art to vnderſtand, gentle Reader, that the King of Spaine was louingly receiued here in the 17 Prouinces, and a ſolemne oath was taken on both parts; the King for his part ſwore to maintaine all their Lawes and Priuiledges, and they to him all due homage and allgeance: Hee preſently demanded of them a ſumme of money, whereupon the States did aſſemble, and collected for him 40. millions of Florines, of Brabants money, to be paid in nine yeares, and paid it into his Exchequer; and although it was more then they had paid before to his predeceſſours, yet vpon this he did take great diſpleaſure againſt them; and, as they write, he for this did hate them to death.
            But he pretended this to be the cauſe of his wroth, becauſe he ſaw that there were ſome among them, that did defie the Pope and all his Religion: but that could not be, for the Citie of Aelſt was as ſuperſtitious in that Religion as Rome it ſelfe; for they did perſecute the Reformed Religion euen vnto death: and yet for all that both they, and 170 faire Villages that belonged vnto them, were by them plundered and ſpoyled of all their goods, and many of them wounded and tormented for to confeſſe where their money was, and many were killed. Thus much by the way.
            My ſcope and chiefe intent, is to ſhew the firſt and iuſt cauſe of the warres in the Netherlands; whereby the diligent Reader (not partially affected) may clearely vnderſtand, that the Netherlanders did not rebelliouſly take vp Armes againſt a lawfull Prince, (as ſome ignorantly thinke and ſpeake) but iuſtly and religiouſly defend themſelues againſt a perfidious Tyrant who ſought their ruine, by all poſſible meanes he could, and the ſubuerſion of the whole State. A long while they patiently vnder-went his cruell oppreſſions, and intollerable vexations, as the Hiſtories clearely manifeſt; till there was no hope, but either they muſt become ſlaues in ſoule and body, worſe then that of Iſrael in Egypt, they and theirs for euer, or elſe be butchered by mercileſſe executioners of a cruell Tyrant.
                  The Inquiſi
                     
                        •••
                      was there 4. yeares before.
                This Tyrant hauing a purpoſe to innouate all things, to root out the ancient inhabitants, and to fruſtrate all the Lawes, Cuſtomes and Priuiledges which himſelfe had ſworne to maintaine, knew not how better to effect his euill ends, then by raiſing a bloudy Inquiſition to ſet ouer them for their gouernment;

which ſaid Inquiſition (raiſed in Spaine) concluded and pronounced certaine Articles, the tenth of February 1568, which were confirmed by the King, the 26. following. Now becauſe it may appeare I doe them no wrong in this charge, I will lay downe the Articles themſelues verbatim.
            The moſt ſacred Office of Inquiſition ſo often attempted in the Netherlands by his Maieſtie, and hindered vntill this time, ſhall be inſtituted and aduanced in this manner, which is moſt expedient.
            1 They muſt perſwade the Emperour, being gone aſtray, and wickedly confederated with heretikes, that hee reſigne his Kingdomes vnto his Sonne, with the whole adminiſtration of the Neitherlands.
            2 That the Emperour with his two ſiſters, hauing giuen ouer all affaires, leauing the Netherlands, ſhall retire into Spaine vnto Vs, being aſſured that they ſhall neuer returne more to doe any harme.
            3 Theſe being diſpatcht, we muſt alſo draw the king to vs, and keepe him for euer that he part not, and not ſuffer any Flemmings to haue acceſſe or conference with him.
            4 That the King write vnto, and command the Clergie of the Netherlands that with the Inquiſition they ſhould accept of 15 new Biſhops, the which ſhould be free from all ſecular iuriſdiction, yea in caſes of treaſon.
            5 The ſubiects of the Netherlands through their malice and waywardneſſe, will reuolt and moue ſeditions and tumults, pleaſing to all but to our companie.
            6 The Princes and Noblemen, heads and authours of thoſe factions, with the ſubiects, muſt be taken away, and the others reduced vnto reaſon.
            7 They ſhall hire at our charge theeues and ſpoilers of Churches and Images, whoſe offences ſhall be by all the world imputed to Rebels, by ſome ſubtill meanes, and ſo we ſhall vanquiſh them.
            8 That all Comerce, Negotiation, Liberties and Priuiledges, ſhall be rooted out, and that all be reduced to extreame pouertie, whereby the realme ſhall be permanent for Vs.
            9 No man of all thoſe Countries (except he be of our faction) ſhall be held worthy to liue; and finally all to be rooted out: and all Goods, Poſſeſſions, Arts, and Trades, and all Orders to bee

taken away, vntill there may bee a new Realme, and a new people.
            10 In this action the wiſe and valiant Duke Alva ſhal be imployed in perſon; whereas any other, were he of the bloud Royall, or a Prince, ſhall be of no eſteeme: ſo as being ſuſpect, yea in the ſmalleſt matters, they muſt be diſpatcht.
            11 No Contracts, Rights, Promiſes, Donations, Oathes, Priuiledges, and ſolemne Aſſertions of the Netherlands, ſhall be of any force for the Inhabitants, as being guilty of high treaſon.
            12 But aboue al we muſt haue an eſpeciall care that in theſe matters of ſo great weight and moment, wee proceed not violently, but by meanes, by degrees, and that diſcreetly, to the end the Princes, Nobilitie, and inferiour ſubiects may mutinie amongſt themſelues, ſo that one may perſecute, yea execute the other vntill at laſt the hangman be executed himſelfe. For in all Chriſtendome is there not a Nation more fooliſh and indiſcreet, and whoſe levitie and inconſtancy may ſooner be deceiued then theſe Netherlanders and God puniſheth them accordingly.
            There were other Articles found in Preſident Vergaes chamber at Antwerpe, and there Printed; and thoſe are more cruell then theſe.
            By theſe articles and vnlimited power of theſe lawleſſe Inquiſitors, no man had any aſſurance of life or goods for a day, but were in danger continually to be called into queſtion, either for the law of their God, or for ſome work of mercie, which either religion, morall equitie, or the bond of nature called for: or elſe if they had colour for none of theſe, they would impoſe ſuch vnreaſonable taxations, which if the Cormorants had not their gorges crambed full, they would make prey of all, whether by right or wrong it mattered not. But my purpoſe being to auoid prolixitie, and to paſſe by impertinencies and needleſſe repetitions, I will come to that I intended. In the yeare 1565, a match was concluded for the Prince of Parma, and the nuptials were ſolemnized at Bruxels, whither all the Nobilitie and Gentry of the Countrey were inuited, and accordinglyt, here met of them about foure hundred, who like faithfull Moſes being grieued to ſee the daily oppreſſion of their brethren by the hard task-maſters of the Inquiſition, who not onely robbed them of

their goods, but alſo by inhumane crueltie, and vnnaturall butchery, depriued them of their liues, who daily led them as ſheepe vnto the ſlaughter: The conſideration hereof they ioyntly layd to heart, and hereupon (being met vpon this occaſion) they reſolued to preſent a petition to the Princeſſe of Parma, which they did the fifth of April next following. The Earle of Breedrod deliuering the petition, humbly requeſted a fauourable anſwer. Three dayes after they receiued this anſwer, viz. they ſhould ſend two of their Noblemen to the king, by whom ſhe would write in their behalfe. The Lord of Barlaymont being preſent, after their departure ſaid (like a flattering Courtier) they were a company of Raſcals and Beggars.
            It was concluded that the Marqueſſe of Bargen, and the Lord of Mountigny ſhould goe into Spaine, who humbly preſented their ſuit to the King, but could get no anſwer in 16 Moneths after.
            The 26 of Auguſt anno 1566, the Princeſſe of Parma ſent for the Gentrie, telling them ſhe had receiued letters from the King, containing promiſe that all ſhould be well, and that the Inquiſition ſhould ceaſe. And for the Proclamations they ſhould not be of force, but his Maieſtie would take ſuch order as they and the State ſhould well like of. The Princeſſe alſo gaue them toleration for their Religion, on condition, they ſhould not deface, nor breake downe the ornaments of the Churches: for, there had beene before this time vilde and lewde perſons that frequented the meetings of the Reformed; theſe went into the Papiſts Churches, ſtole their ſiluer and what was worth carrying away, and brake down their Images: but the Reformed ſuſpected that this was done by the appointment of the Princeſſe; neither was their ſuſpition without good ground, for it is to be ſeene in the Kings letters, Art. 7. that ſhe had order to hire this raskall company to doe this villany,
                  Emanuel de Miter ſaith, that in Flanders they tooke 50. of them at one time, and hanged 2
                     •
                  , and whipped the reſt.
                which fact was imputed to the Proteſtants, to the end that they might not only be odious there, but alſo ſeeme guilty, euen in the iudgement of other Nations; howbeit the offenders were puniſhed with impriſonment, yea, with death, euen by the Reformed themſelues, who iointly confeſſed the action vnlawfull, and were ſo farre from hauing occaſion of offence in this nature, that Papiſt Burgers themſelues offered good ſecuritie that no ſuch thing ſhould be attempted by them. Who then can make any doubt that they were free from giuing any hand in thoſe outrages laid to them, the very oppoſites in Religion

being Iudges, who as appeares were willing to undertake for them; now as their faithfulneſſe brought ſo good effect for their perſons, ſo did the Lord worke that the truth of Religion found many friends likewiſe, the Lord wondrouſly proſpering the courſe of Reformation, in ſo much that in ſhort ſpace they had in Flanders 60 Aſſemblies, ſome Churches themſelues builded, but were by Duke d' Alva ſoone caſt downe, who erected gallowſes of them, and hanged them vpon them.
            The Princeſſe of Parma alſo began to entertaine ſouldiers with pretence to apprehend the Church-robbers, but intended indeed to take away the ancient Liberties and Priuiledges of the Netherlanders, wherefore ſending certaine companies to Valencyn, the inhabitants denied them entertainment, who for that were proclaimed Rebels the 14 of December, ſoone after they were beſieged, ſacked, and many of them put to death.
            But before they of Valencyn denied entertainment to the ſouldiers,
                  Let pretended it for religion, but his aime was to get their lands and goods.
                the Nobility had receiued letters out of Spaine, from the Marqueſſe of Bargen, ſhewing, that the King was exceedingly incenſed againſt the Netherlanders, that he had in the preſence of many vowed to be fully reuenged of them, though it were with the hazard of all his Countries; that hee would make them an example to all the world, and would inuite the Pope and Emperour to aſſiſt him in this quarrell. Vpon the receit of the letters the Nobility aſſembled at Dortmond to conſult what were beſt to be done, but concluded not any thing, ſome iudging it ſafeſt to ioyne, and make head to reſiſt his tyrannicall furie, other ſeeking rather to eſcape by flight.
            Now was the Inquiſition againe brought in contrary to the Lawes and Liberties of the Country, which the King was ſworne to maintaine, for execution whereof there were appointed 12. Inquiſitors, commaunding them to receiue the Councell of Trent, theſe were called, The bloudy Councell, and ſo they were indeede, which Rome well knew, refuſing it, anno 1559. when as they fell vpon the Inquiſitors houſe, ſet it on fire, wounded the chiefe of them, brake open the priſon, and ſet at liberty the captiues, and would haue burned a Cloyſter that belonged vnto them, had they not beene by faire meanes diſſwaded by two Lords in the Citie, viz. Marc▪ Antonio Colunus, Iuli
                     •
                   Caeſar.
            
            
               Likewiſe Venice, Naples and Millaine, though they be Papiſts, would not ſuffer it; the Marchants of Lisbon who are as ſuperſtitious in the Romiſh Religion as any in the world, yet they did offer the King two millions and a halfe, that they might not haue it in their parts.
            Yet the cruelty of this Inquiſition did here encreaſe, and many ſouldiers came into the Countrey, that ſome of the Countrey forſooke their houſes, and reſorted towards Freezland, and ſome did ſtay at home, and went to meete Duke Alva, and welcomed him into the Countrey, and ſhewed him all the kindneſſe they could,
                  As the Grais of Egmond, & the Grais of Horn, & many of the Gentry at Bruſſels, 1568. but hee very ſhortly tooke off moſt of their heads, ſo that hee did ſo terrifie the inhabitants, that there fled out of the Countries more then an hundred thouſand houſholders, beſides many that were taken in flying, were taken and hanged, and all theſe had their goods confiſcated to the King.
            The Prince of Orange, and the Earle of Bredrod, and fine Earles, eight Lords, and fifty Gentlemen, and they had ſome fine thouſand of Souldiers being in Freeſland, but were moſt ouerthrowne by the Duke of Alua his forces; ſo that they were driuen to Embden land, and there prepared themſelues to the ſea.
            Now the Duke of Alua did commaund all the inhabitants to pay the hundreth peny of all their goods, and of all that was bought and ſold▪ the which ſome of the States did yeeld vnto: And then hee commaunded them to pay the twentith peny: and then hee commaunded the tenth peny of all things that were bought and ſold, ſo often as they ſhould be ſold. Some of the States did make their humble petition to the Duke, and to the Princes, ſhewing them that it would driue all trading out of the land. The Duke of Alua told them that hee would haue it, though it did ruinate all the land; but if hee ſaw them to doe their beſt to pay it, hee would deale fauourably with them.
                  All the priſons were filled, in ſo much as they were forced to prepare more, and filled them alſo.
                But hee ſaid that it was againſt the Kings honour if they ſhould not pay it, ſeeing it was his pleaſure to require it. And now did the Inquiſition impriſon and execute many of the richer ſort, as well Papiſts as of the reformed Church: and if they were rich, there was no eſcaping for them. And whoſoeuer was found to haue any hand in way of ſuit and petition to haue the tenth

peny to be remitted, they were adiudged to haue committed high treaſon againſt God and the King; and all theſe muſt forfeit life and goods to the king, and not any of their children to enioy one peny worth of the ſame: but (poore Orphanes) they muſt begge their bread. And ſome that had beene buried certaine months, they cauſed them to be digged vp, and hanged on the gallowes, and ſome to be burned, becauſe they had not the ſacrament, and confeſſed before their death; but it was becauſe he would confiſcate their goods to the king: yea when theſe inſatiable gold-thirſty and bloud-thirſty wretches wanted colour to couer their iniuſtice and cruelty, they had their officious imps (falſe-witneſſes) ſuborned by Jeſabel, to get Naboths vineyard; witneſſe Marti
                     •
                   Hutton, who was one of the Inquiſitors Clarkes, and (being committed to Priſon) did acknowledge that hee had made many falſe teſtimonies againſt ſundry rich perſons, ſome whereof were of the reformed Church. Here might fitly be brought in the hundred Marchants of Granado, who were of the Romane Religion, and were neuer other; what pretence had hee to cauſe them to bee murthered all in one night, and then preſently to command all their goods to be brought to his treaſurie of Exchequer, whoſe eſtate was worth more then 28 hundred thouſand pounds ſterling? Now as this tyrant was a deuourer and deſtroyer of the liues of men, ſo did hee preſume to vſurpe further, not only vpon ciuill ordinances, but vpon the things of God; ſo that thoſe that were married in the reformed Church, he forced to be married againe: and if they were rich, hee tooke them from their husbands, and gaue them to his ſouldiers to make prize of them. Thoſe that were baptized in the reformed Church, he compelled to be baptized againe, contrary to Gods word, and to the decree of the ancient counſels, ſo that intolerable were the burthens this cruell Pharoh layd, ſo exceſſiue was his cruelty, that he filled all places with blood, bloud touching bloud, as the Prophet ſpeakes. For in ſmall townes hee executed 50, and in great townes 200, and 300 or 400. And in places as men trauelled from one towne to another, they might ſee many that his ſouldiers had hung up in trees to death, and ſome were worth 80 thouſand guldens, and ſome leſſe: yea, this tyrant did confiſcate ſo much lands and goods, as by his account ſent into Spain, did amount yearly to 8 tun of mony ſterling, beſides the many thouſands that he & his ſouldiers had.

All the money that he did exact out of this land in 6. yeares, did amount to more then 50. millions of gold. And if any were knowne to haue any thing that did belong to any that were put to death, and had not brought it to the knowledge of the Inquiſition, they did looſe both life and goods: yea the 16. of February 1566. hee gaue ſentence in his Court at Madrill, that they were all traytors againſt God and himſelfe. At Vtrecht he beheaded a widow that was 84. yeares old, becauſe ſhee had before lodged a Preacher one night, whoſe liuing was worth foure thouſand guldens yearely. And at Maſtricht a father for lodging his ſon that he had not ſeene in a long time, that was fled for religion, was put to death. And at that place there was one put to death for giuing a widow a peck of corn for an almes, whoſe husband this bloudy Court had put to death. And many women were put to death, becauſe they receiued their husbands in the night that were fled for religion; yea, they haue killed women great with child, and ripped vp their bellies, and taken out the child and killed it: and ſome they haue fleyed aliue, and couered drummes heads with their skies, and ſome they haue tyed to a poſt, and made a ſmall fire round about them, and ſo roſted them to death.
            At Naerden they receiued the Spaniards friendly into the towne,
                  The like cruelty they did at Ondwater.
                who promiſed them both their liues and goods; and as ſoone as they came in, they commanded them to come to the State-houſe without their Armes, the which they did, and the Spaniards gaue fire vpon them, and murthered them all: and then they ran about in the towne, and rauiſhed the women, and after killed them and fired the towne. The yong children that lay in the cradle, they quartered them, and tooke them vpon their pikes, and ſo went vp and downe the towne, reioycing in their cruelty.
            Such ſauage cruelty is ſcarcely to be found in any Hiſtory, what Chriſtian heart can heare it, and not be affected with deepe ſorrow, yet behold ſome monſters herein haue been found, that haue beene ſo farre from humanity herein, (for hee that hath humanity in him will commiſerate others calamities) that they haue applauded it, as if he had in all theſe outrages done God good ſeruice. Amongſt the reſt, I ſhall content my ſelfe at preſent, but to name the holy Father the Pope, and one of his chiefe ſonnes in this buſineſſe. The Pope ſends his Legate to commend theſe ſo rare exployts, and cals this cruell Duke Alua his beloued ſonne, ſends him a coſtly

ſword, the hilts whereof were of Gold, and a hat wrought with gold, and be-ſet with rich and coſtly ſtones, thanking him for his good ſeruice in maintaining the Romiſh Religion, and ſubuerting of heretikes. Howbeit that his chiefe ſon I mentioned (exceeding this man of ſin, in the ſin of cruelty, as if he would verifie himſelfe to be ten-fold more the child of Satan, then his father the Pope) thinkes not ſo well of it, his name is Vergas, the Preſident of this bloudy Inquiſition; for going ſhortly after into Spaine, he told the King, that he and Duke d' Alua, did marre all in the Netherlands, by ſhewing ſo much mercy to thoſe people.
            Concerning this Duke d' Alua, of whoſe outrage and cruelty ſo many haue felt, and perfidious dealing which many haue found by lamentable experience, whereby may eaſily appeare of what ſtamp his exceſſiue mercies are, euen ſuch as the Wiſeman ſpeakes of Pro. 12.10, the tender-mercies of the wicked are cruell. In which he prids himſelfe,
                  Theſe words he ſpake at a banquet, as he ſate at the Table, reioycing he had done the King ſo good ſeruice.
                boaſting he had ſlaughtered eighteen thouſand and ſixe hundred, in form of iuſtice, in ſix yeares times, and ten times ſo many he and his Souldiers murthered otherwaies. And many more would he doubtleſſe haue murthered, had not the Lord reſtrayned and limited him, for his deſire herein was as hell, that cannot be ſatisfied: Witneſſe the purpoſe of his proceeding againſt the Magiſtrates of Bruxels, becauſe they did not collect the tenth peny ſo as he deſired. He ſware that he would haue it, and before he would let it fall or remit it, the Sunne and Moone ſhould leaue their ſhining: ſo he went to Bruſſels, and commanded the executioner to prepare ladders and ropes to hang vp that night in their doores 70 of the citizens,
                  Anno 573 1 April. 1. I haue inſtanced but 4 or 5 towns, but there were ſcarce any town eſcaped their cruell pillaging, except they had bribed their Commanders with exceeding large 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                and gaue them his warrant in writing what they ſhould be: But God in his prouidence preuented this his cruell purpoſe, in that there came newes that the Graue of Mark had taken in the Brill, ſo the tyrant did not goe forward with his bloudy enterpriſes.
            Thus hauing giuen you a taſte of ſome of thoſe many things I haue obſerued concerning the intolerable oppreſſion, and worſe then ſauage cruelty of the Spaniards, exerciſed vpon the people, which they endured and laboured vnder the ſpace of ſixteene yeares; I wil now leaue theſe cruell tyrants to the Lord for iudgement, and addreſs my ſelfe to ſpeak ſomewhat further concerning this Earle of Mark, who had thoſe Gentlemen with him that fled. Before this hee had laine with his ſhipping in England, but the King of Spaine ſending

his Embaſſadour to our Queen (who was then in peace with him) to deſire her that ſhe would not ſuffer his ſubiects to haue their harbour in her land, and that ſhe would not giue them or ſuffer them to haue any reliefe whereby they ſhould make head againſt him: and hereupon the Queene ſent and commanded them out of her harbour; and ſhe commanded that they ſhould not be ſuffered to haue any prouiſion in her coaſts, ſo that now they had no other meanes but onely God, who did in his mercie prouide for them better then they expected. For they were purpoſed to haue gone for the Taſſel, and to haue taken ſome towne about that part; but when they came neere that part, they had the wind contrary that they could not come there, ſo they went for the Malſe, and came with their ſhips before the Brill, and there they went preſently and tooke it; yet the Duke of Alua had his forces in the towne, neere ſo many as they were, whom they preſently killed and chaſed out of the towne, and out of the Iland. The Prince of Orange being in France, and hearing what had happened, he ſent them ſouldiers with as much ſpeede as could be out of France. And within one moneth after Duke Alua ſent certaine companies to Vliſhing to keepe that place ſtrong for himſelfe, and many of the Commanders were come into the towne: So the Magiſtrates commanded the citizens to come preſently vpon the Statehouſe, ſo they told them they muſt lodge the Spaniards in their houſes, and they knowing how they had vſed the Citizens in all places where they came, they told the magiſtrates they would not haue the Spaniards in their towne. The Magiſtrates asked them which of them it was that did refuſe to receiue them. They ſaid, All of them. So the Magiſtrates ſeeing them ſo earneſt againſt the Spaniards, they ioyntly tooke their Armes, and killed and tooke priſoners all them that were 
                  •
               n the town,
                  Hee had appointed thoſe to be executed becauſe they were they were the chiefe that ſtood againſt the payment of the tenth peny.
                & with their Ordnance they ſhot at his ſhips where the Spaniards were, and they made away. And of thoſe that were taken, there were the names of about 80 that they had in writing from Duke Alua that dwelt in the Iland, that they ſhould put to death. So thoſe of the Bril ſent their ſouldiers with ſpeed to help thē. And ſhortly the Prince of Orange came with forces and defended them; and ſome other townes, ſeeing the crueltie of the Spaniards, forſooke the Spaniard, and ioyned with them, and took the Prince of Orange to be their Protector, yet the States notwithſtanding did remaine in obedience to the King ſome ſeuen yeares after.
            
               Againe, it is further worthy to be noted, that theſe Prouinces did three times ſend to the King their Noblemen, but could obtaine no mercy, and many more times they went to the Princeſſe of Parma, and made their humble petition for redreſſe of their oppreſſion, but could not obtaine any fauour, then they made friends to the renowned Queene of England, and to the Princes of Germany, and to the Emperour, who did earneſtly entreat by their Embaſſadours for them. The King of Spaine anſwered their Embaſſadours with theſe words; he bad them tell their Maſters, That they ſhould meddle with their owne ſubiects, and not with his, for he knew well enough how to rule his ſubiects without their counſell. Now when our Queenes Maieſtie found his vnreaſonableneſſe and cruelty, then and not before, ſhe aſſiſted them with Armes.
                  Ann. 1575.
            
            His owne ſonne Prince Charles did intreat for them, that it would pleaſe him to let them haue their Lawes and Priuiledges, and that they might not be ſo oppreſſed;
                  Marplam in his Chronicle an. 1567. and withall hee told his father that thoſe Countries did belong to him, and that they were giuen him at his Baptiſme, for the which his father ſent him to priſon, and he neuer came out againe. If the Lord would not haue forgot what Amalek did long after, for ſmiting the weakeſt & hindmoſt of his people, how may we in equity forget the infinite murthers, and ſpoiles, this cruell Tyrant hath executed where-euer hee hath preuailed? And who can forget in ſpeciall that bloudy attempt againſt our ſelues, in the yeare 1588.
            If I ſhould trace this Tyrant from place to place, I ſhould runne in infinitum, hauing made the name of Chriſtianity hatefull, by his cruelty, amongſt the Heathens that know not God further then the light of nature: for it is confeſſed by the Spaniards themſelues, that ſome of the chiefe of the Jndians,
               
                  They were exhorted by a Popiſh Prieſt to minde, that after this life, there was one place for ioy, and an other of torment.
                who were to be burne to death, being told of heauen and hell, they asked whether the Spaniards went when they died? It was anſwered to heauen, Oh then ſaid they, we will neuer come there, for we will neuer come where the Spaniards are. But not to run ſo far, I wil reſt content to keep me within the bounds I chiefly intended concerning theſe Countries. When the Citizens of Leyden were in great extremity, by reaſon of a long ſiege, the Spaniards proffering conditions of peace, if ſo be they would yeeld vp the Citie and themſelues to them, they returned anſwer; Not while they had a right hand to hold the ſword, or a left to eate; but if they ſhould

be driuen to fall into their hands, they would rather burne the Citie and drown themſelues, then to ſubmit to them, of whoſe perfidiouſneſſe they had had ſo lamentable experience: and when ſome of the Citizens preſſed a yeelding, in reſpect of the extremitie of famine, a Burgermaſter, called Peter Adrianſon ſaid; Louing friends, I confeſſe the famine is great, and that ſome doe die for want of food: yet rather let vs agree to eate vp one another, as it ſhall fall by lot, begin with me firſt, and deuide me amongſt you.
            
            At Antwerpe, the Spaniards by the appointment of their Gouernour did come into the Citie in battell order, and marched vp and down their ſtreets, and ſhot into their houſes, and made a tumultuous noiſe, as if they had beene ſo many deuils, for one day and two nights, and tooke the keyes from the Magiſtrates,
                  They did this as wel to the Spiritualty▪ as to the 
                        ••
                     
                     poralty no ſort e
                        •
                     cepted.
                and ſet watch at the Ports; whereby they put the Citizens in ſo great feare, that many women with childe fell in trauell, and ſome dyed with feare: and they went by 12 or 20, into the beſt houſes, and commanded them to prepare them the beſt cheere, as boyled and roſt, and other dainty diſhes, as they liſt to call for; and beſides beere,
                  They did offer them two parts in money and the third 
                        ••
                     cloth, but they cryed all for money.
                they would haue at leaſt two ſorts of wine. And all the chiefeſt Citizens houſes had at leaſt tenne of theſe gueſts. And they all cryed out for money, and ſaid that they would haue 15 moneths pay, before they went out of the Citie, of them; and the Magiſtrates told them that they would procure them in cloth, and apparell, and money the ſumme; but they all cryed out for mony, and that mony they would haue before they went away; ſo at the laſt, the Magiſtrates got the mony, which did amount to 400 thouſand Guldens. And the charge they were at,
                  I doe make but a ſhort relation of ſome of the cruelties they did againſt this Citie yet there ſtands in the Chron
                        •
                     cle, one quier of paper of their further cruelty▪
                  
                which theſe companions did coſt the Citizens, was 600 pound ſterling the day, and thus they were oppreſſed with them 28 daies, in which time they had made them all rich ſuites, ſome of ſattin and veluet, and ſome of cloth of gold: and one of them had a cuſhion of veluet, with theſe words in letters of gold. I am the Dutchmans Bride-well Maſter. And thus they got r
                  •
               d of them for the preſent. And about two yeares after they came againe, and then they vſed the Citizens much more cruelly, for theſe deuils did bring ſtraw, and ſet on fire, and put it into the houſes, whereby they ſet nine rich ſtreets on fire, and burnt them with many rich and coſtly goods, and rifled the Citizens of all their rich and coſtly iewels, and ſiluer-workes, with their money, and three dayes did they torment

the inhabitants for money:
                  
                     That they are now and haue been this 30. yeares more 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ▪ I eaſily yeeld it. But why? not that they haue changed their former nature, for they ſtill hold the former principles of the Councell of Trent, but being more ſubtill, and finding their Kingdome is more weakened, they dare not ſo preſume as formerly.
                  
                  
                     In the yeare 1580. the States proclaimed King Phill
                           •
                        p to haue l
                           •
                        ſt his right, by reaſon he violated his oath. A Spaniards kindneſſe to his friends.
                  
                and in this time there was murdered of the Citizens aboue foure thouſand. The money they tooke at that time, is reckoned for more then 40 tun of gold, beſide the Iewels and the loſſe they had by fire, was as much as the reſt. And thus was the beſt Citie of Marchants in Europe ruinated.
            At Riſell there was a Spaniard would force a rich woman to haue the vſe of her body, and the woman cried out for helpe, and her huſband came, and two of his neighbours to helpe his wife, and they thruſt the Spaniard away, and hee ranne into the ſtreet and cried Spaynea, Spaynea, and there came many Spaniſh Souldiers about him, and they ruſhed into the houſe, and tooke the man and his neighbours, and carried them before the Magiſtrates on the Towne-houſe where they were aſſembled, and there before them he complained of them to be rebels, and ſtirrers vp of vp-ro
                  •
               es, and told the Magiſtrates that if they did not preſently put them to death, they would burne their Towne, and execute them themſelues, whereupon they durſt doe no otherwiſe, but hanged two, and whipped the other.
            Diuers things being manifeſted of the Spaniards cruelty, I wil adde one inſtance of their trechery, and that of a famous perſon to his neereſt familiars; yea, when he pretended ſweeteſt familiarity & friendſhip. Pope Alexander the 6. a Spaniard by birth, inuited diuers Nobles & Cardinals to a banket, with a purpoſe to poyſon them all. The meeteſt inſtrument he made choyſe of to effect this, was a Spaniard, one Caeſar Burgia, his ſworn ſeruant. The Pope ſhewed himſelf wonderfull pleaſant to auoyd ſuſpition, and drank a carouſe to them all; willing that his truſty ſeruant to fill from ſuch a bottel he knew well: which hee did very effectually to the Pope himſelfe as well as to the reſt. After the company was departed, the Pope perceiuing by an alteration in himſelfe, what was done, and that he muſt die now alſo, ſaid to Burgio, This is a right Spaniſh trick. It is written of them that they are ſo expert in theſe exploits, that if Iudas himſelfe were aliue, he might goe to them to Schoole.
            
               J doe b
                     •
                  ſeech the Lord to ſhew mercy to my natiue Country, that they may neuer come vnder the gouernment of the Spaniards, and giue them hearts to repent of their tranſgreſſions, and that they may ſincerely embrace the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt, to their endleſſe comfort. Amen.
            
            
               Yours to command in all ſeruices, for the aduancement of the truth of Ieſus Chriſt. S. O.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               O Thou moſt high God, which guideſt and gouerneſt the heauen, the ſea, the earth, warre and peace: Thou which giueſt lawes and commandements to Kings, Princes, and to all people vpon the earth: Thou that appointeſt and giueſt conqueſts, triumphs, and trophies, the ſignes of victory: Thou which doeſt hinder and diuert ouerthrowes, dangers, and all vniuſt dealing: Anſe, O thou great God, and oppoſe thy ſelfe againſt the enemy of all iuſtice and peace; againſt the enemy of thy praiſe and honour. We beſeech thee, that with thy prouidence and wiſedome thou wilt order our endeuours, and relieue thy people, that thy moſt holy name may be adored and honoured with all perfect piety and true religion. Amen.
            FINIS.
         
      
   