
      
         
            
            
            THE
BELGICK
SOVLDIER:
VVARRE VVAS
A BLESSING.
            2. CHRON. 33. 7.
            Be ſtrong and couragious: feare not, neither be afraid
for the King of Aſhur, neither for all
the multitude that is with him: for there be
mo with vs, then is with him.
            Printed 1624.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE
BELGICK SOVLDIER:
VVarre was a Bleſſing.
            WHen Athanatius oppoſed the multitude
of Arrian Biſhops, it ſeemed ſo
dangerous to the eſtabliſhed gouernment
of the Empire, that his caſtigation was threatned
by expulſion or feare; Yea Liberius that tooke
his part, was checked by the Emperours owne letters
for affecting the opinion of that wicked man; But
when againe his faire demeanour and religious conſtancy
drew away the veile of ſuperſtition, ignorance,
and hereſie: whereby the Emperours eyes were opened
to reioyce in the ſunny ſplendor of truth; Conſtantine
admitted him within his embraces: and all
thoſe adherents of Arrius were confounded by their
owne wilfulnes.
            Thus hath it fared with all innouations; yea,
Chriſt himſelfe was ſubiect to traducing, for aboliſhing
thoſe ceremonies on which the Iewes were beſotted,
for propheſing againſt that Temple, about
which the Prieſts were ſo puſſled, and for preaching

the doctrine of ſaluation, againſt which the people
were ſo enraged; and yet in the end, they that were
not credulous of his doctrine and miracles when he
was aliue, beleeued a few Fiſher-mens reports after
he was dead.
            Thus muſt I needs incurre the diſpleaſure of time
ſeruers, the ſcoffs and diriſion of Papiſts, and the repining
of Hiſpanoliſed Engliſh, when I goe about to
proue, that warre hath beene better then peace, and
the Common-wealth and religion of England, haue
had their fame and propagation by oppoſing Antichriſt,
and in plaine termes, muſt recouer her ecclipſed
proſperitie reputing Spaine our oppoſite. Concerning
whom, let me remember what is reported of
Caeſar, who hearing of the death of a Roman Souldier
that had liued merrily and ſecurely, yet dyed
greatly in debt and mens dangers: he deſired to buy
his bed and pillow, deeming ſome rare vertue to be
therein, whereon a man could ſleepe ſo ſoundly that
liued in ſo manifeſt trouble. So though I deſire no
pillow nor bed from vnder the King of Spaine: yet
with Caeſar I proteſt, there is ſome wonder of nature
belongs to him, that can ſleepe at all, hauing ſo many
encombrances to wraſtle with, and intricate ſedgy
weedes of diſturbances to winde out of.
            For euer ſince Phillip the ſeconds marriage with
England, and that the ambitious humor in being an
Emperours ſonne, ſwelled beyond the degrees of
compariſon with other Princes: how hath Spaine
beſtird himſelfe to the affrighting of Europe, and moued
of purpoſe out of his owne faire and ſerend element,
to looke on his neighbours with retrograde

aſpects in contrarious orbes: ſo that other Kings may
demaund, what hath Spaine to do in moſt of the Prouinces
of Europe: which at this inſtant toucheth
France and England ſo neere, that they had need deale
with him; as Henry the 8 did of famous memory.
            At firſt by reaſon of conſanguinity (yet perſonall
mariages doe not rule Princes affaires,) he ioyned
with the Emperour againſt France, and by his anxiliary
forces Charles the 5 not onely expulſed the French
out of Italy, but at laſt ſacked Rome, and tooke the
Pope and his Cardinalls priſoners; as he had done
the French King at the battell of Pauy; but as he was
running away with theſe aduantages, King Henry
looked about him, and entertained a kinde of ielouſie
againſt his greatneſſe, as ſuſpecting what an ambitious
conquerour might effect: whereupon by degrees
he retracted, ſuppoſing it high time to rebate his
inſolency, and lay as it were a cooling card vpon his
forwardneſſe. So not onely the French King was releiued,
but Pope Clement ranſomed.
            If it be thus, and that there is a kinde of polliticall
neceſſitie among Princes to watch the affaires of one
another; I hope it is now time to looke vpon Spaines
intruſions, and not onely prouide for our ſelues, but
releeue our neighbours, leaſt we haue more dangerous
neighbours, then we either deſire, or ſhall be
able to preuent. But if we be ſenſible of preſent loſſes,
wrongs, diſgraces, affronts, and intollerable indignities,
let vs rouſe vp our ſelues, and redeeme
our loſt time with quick and ſeaſonable remedies: and
if peace haue abuſed vs, let warre a Gods name repaire
our credits, and reſtore our decay. There is

no poiſon againſt nature, but may be countermanded
by an antidote; Yea, it is an axiome in Philoſophy,
that preuenting Phiſicke is better then curing; and
the law of preſeruation is incident to all creatures.
            But heere me thinkes, ſome couetuous wretch,
churliſh Farmer, ſcurrulous Lawyer, or temporiſing
paraſite may interiect theſe doubts. 1. Whether we
haue ſufficient occaſion or no, to fall out with Spaine.
2. How ſhall a warre be maintained. 3. Where
the ſeate of this warre ſhall be. 4. Who ſhall be
called to our aſſiſtance. 5. And laſt of all, Whether
the Countrey be willing and able to ſuch a deſignement.
To all which I anſwer directly, the State, or
Councell of warre muſt deſide theſe things. For as
it is in Martiall affaires, let the Generall be neuer ſo
wiſe, and the Commanders neuer ſo valiant: yet
when proiects of conſequence are propoſed, a
Martiall Court is called, and an orderly debating the
matter concludeth for the beſt. So I referre this buſines
to the directer of princes hearts, and the inſtrumentall
cauſe of a countries proſperity, & wiſe councellors.
And I pray all true hearted Engliſhmen, let
this my diſcourſe diſcouer my good intents; as for
other difficulties, I referre them to good ſucceſſe. But
becauſe mony is the ſinews of the war, and that hereat
is our ſtop and repining, I anſwer the objector.
Why ſhould we be more vnfortunate now, then we
haue beene? the warre hath brought vs in treaſure:
and why ſhould we now diſpaire, or terrefie one another
with ſuſpition, or diſhartning queſtions. When
the Scripture tells vs, that if Dauid will be ruled by
Ioab, and come to the taking of Rabbah, the Kings

Crowne ſhall be ſet on his head, which weighed a
tallent of gold, full of precious ſtones: beſides the
ſpoile of the Citty, which was in exceeding great aboundance.
As for the deceites of peace, and thoſe
bewitching flatteries of pollitick inſinnuation; let
it be the Spaniard, or whom it will, we muſt not truſt
either a reconciled enemy, or a diſſembling friend.
            But to come to the purpoſe, and ſome illuſtration
in the defence of warre; He that pleaded for peace,
Tully himſelfe I meane, and cryed out in an inſulting
brauery: that the armed caſſocks muſt giue way to
the Senators gownes, yet ſaies plainely: that warrs
may be vndertaken either for the propulſing of iniuries,
or procuring of peace, not ſo much to giue way
to reuenge, as to keepe other princes in a good opinion,
that we know what is wrong, and when it is time
to redreſſe iniuries. I could ſay, that warre ſometimes
may be vndertaken for enlarging Dominions. As
Salomon made all his neighbour Prouinces tributary
vnto him, and ſo he ruled from Euphrates to Sidon,
and the Mediterranean Sea. I could alledge that all
the famouſſeſt Common-wealths in the world, haue
augmented their territories by the actiue imployment
of Heroick ſpirits, and receiued a fulneſſe of
wealth and renowne from the raging Sea of
turbulency and warre. I could produce examples
of Scripture, to proue directly that Daniels Monarchies
ſucceeded one another by the preuailing of
mighty armies, and the ſtronger euer ſhouldred aſide
the weaker. I could adde, that the corruptions
of peace in all ages, haue like ſtanding pooles increaſed
durt and ſlime; that is, pleaſures and impieties:

which haue growne to that outragiouſneſſe, that men
haue forgot their firſt benefactor, and with a luciferion
rebellion continually defied God in his Maieſty,
liuing as if we ſhould neuer die, and dying as if
there were no after account to be made; And yet
we dote on peace. And I am afraid, will rather lep
on ſhore to be deſtroyed by the incantations of the
daughters of Achelous, then tie our ſelues to the maſt
of Vliſſes ſhip, to be ſecured from the temptation.
            But I purpoſe no ſuch diſcourſes, onely a ſmall
encheridion, to proue that warre was a bleſſing, and
hath beene allowed from heauen: and that a corrupted
peace hath increaſed ſinnes, and ſin brought
Gods vengeance vpon ſuch tainted Kingdomes.
There was a warre in Rebeccas wombe betweene her
children: and Iacobs bleſſings proceeded from wraſtling
with God. There was a warre in deliuering the
Church out of bondage, or elſe Iſrael had beene ſtill
moyling in the brick-kills of Egipt, but at laſt Canaan
was ſubiected, and Gods people made glorious for
euer. It was a warre that charactered Salomon the
Prince of peace: or elſe why are Dauids worthies, and
their actions ſet downe by name. It was a warre that
finiſhed Octauius troubles, and ſurnamed him Auguſtus.
And in many places you ſhall reade, that
God did fight from heauen againſt his peoples enemies;
What ſhall warre come from heauen, and
ſhall we be afraid of it on earth: God forbid. Conſidering
that in the times of peace, when the warres
had ſet the people of Iſrael downe in the chaire of
tranquillity, euen then forgat they both God and
themſelues, ſtretching out their limbs on beds of

iuory, carowſing in goblets of gold, and killing the fat
lambs of the flocke: but no man remembred the
affliction of Ioſeph; may I not well then conclude,
that warre was a bleſſing. And thus much for warre
before Chriſt.
            Now you ſhall ſee what warre and peace haue both
done, ſince Chriſtianity tooke a fairer progreſſe, and
God had determined that his Church ſhould floriſh
through the diſſention of the Nations; For although
by the firſt perſecutions it had a feareful diſhartning,
and by the augmentation the pompous Papacy, a
more fearefull ſuppreſſion and martirdome: yet ſuch
was the will of God. That as Siria, Edom, Moab, Egipt,
and the Iland Gentiles, one were their owne enemies,
and Gods inſtruments to deſtroy one another. So in
the beginning of Chriſtianity, the barbarous nations
that poſſeſſed Europe, although they made themſelues
fortunate by the warres: yet in the end they
conſumed themſelues; and from their ruines the
Popes of Rome became great, and from their greatneſſe,
through the ſwelling proſperity of peace, the
true Church of God by little and little diſpelled the
clouds of their contempt, and deiected: and ſo at
laſt obtained that faire ſunſhine, which is now ſo tranſlatent.
            Some 300 yeere after Chriſt, or there about, you
ſhall reade that in Goteland, and thoſe northen regions
now called Finmarck, Norway and Sweden, the peace
had ſo multiplied the people, and thoſe remote
healthfull Countries affoorded them ſo long liues,
that they could not liue one by another: ſo that the
aged, impotent, and beggers ſwarmed in euery place;

at which time one Stenio was the principall Monarch,
who called a councell to redreſſe theſe inconueniences,
and they concluded to take them all that were
ſo vnprofitable to the Common-wealth, and tying
them backe to backe, throw them into the ſea. But
when the Queene whoſe name was Iuditha, heard of
ſo cruell and vnmercifull a doome, ſhe could not
containe her ſelfe, but at the Kings returne kneeled
before him, deſiring to haue it reuerſed: for ſhe
had found a better way of preuention and effect of
cha
                  •
               itie: which was to ſhip the people, and let them
try their fortune in other places: which was both
nobly apprehended, and effectually practiſed; and
ſo in proceſſe of time they poſſeſſed thoſe Countries
which you now call Seruia, Bulgaria, Moldunia, Pedolia:
and at laſt became famous Nations of Gotes and
Lombards, infeſting Italy and Spaine, and diſpoſſeſſing
the Emperours, who had called them into their ſuccours;
thus the warres made them famous, till by the
warres of Chriſtian Emperours they were diſpelled
and extirped againe. Afterward the Othoman family,
comming out of that Countrey you once called
Scithia, augmented their reputation by the warres
of Aſia. So did Tamberlaine conquer Perſia, and
claimed renowne to his Actions by famous battell.
So did the Turks come into Europe. And all the
beggerly Nations of the world became rich and potent
by rayſing of warre, and were diminiſhed and
conſumed to nothing by the corruption of peace, and
bewitching of pleaſure.
            Thus receiued the Papacy the fulneſſe of her
progreſſion by the warres of the Countries,

eſpecially after the German Eagle had affoorded her
ſome feathers of her wings: then tooke ſhe a flight
beyond reach, and at laſt ſtradles ouer Rome, making
Rome haue roome of precidency before other Kingdomes.
So that I may well ſay, the barren ſoile of
their potency was watred and manured with the
blood of Souldiers, as the Prouinces of Europe gathered
together the ſcattered bodies of Pelops, and
made a more perfect body then the firſt. Thus
did the Popes floriſh by forreigne warres, and
ſetting Emperours on worke to deſtroy one another.
            But now what became of their owne peace
and eſtabliſhed greatneſſe? they fell to pride,
gurmundize, and riot, they ſupplanted one another,
they proued incendiaries to Chriſtendome,
they intertained newmantict ſpells, with diueliſh
and exoptick Artes: they practiſed murther, whoredome
and inceſts, they depoſed one another, they
attempted the humiliation of Emperours, and
made a ſport at the inauguration of Kings and
Princes, as if it lay in their power with a Prophets
hand, to tumble aſide their faſteſt Diadems. In
a word, they grew proud with peace and plenty,
and as warre had cauſed their greatneſſe, they
cauſed their ſinnes to be more great through the
corruption of proſperity: ſo that from mortified
Preachers and Miniſters of Gods word,
they grow Statiſts, and diueliſh Pollititians:
then from Schollers, they proued proficients in
Villanie; rayſing Quarrells againſt Princes,

and exciting Princes one againſt another; So that I
may well ſay according to their owne computation,
that warre was a bleſſing. And if the Nations had
maintained their priſtinate quietneſſe and idolatry,
they had neuer floriſhed in ſuch outward brauery,
and viſibility as they now boaſt of. And thus you
ſee how the warres haue beene beneficiall to the Papacy.
            Now it remaines to proue, how the true Church
of God hath receiued her beſt floriſhes by warres;
It is but ſuperfluous to repeate what other men haue
written in the defence of our Church, prouing directly,
that from the Primitiue Church to this houre,
God euer had a remnant of people: and in moſt
Countries there were ſuch as profeſſed the truth in
deſpight of fire. But I referre you to the Hiſtory of
the Church, and other learned tractate compoſed by
religious men.
            I come to the dayes of wickliffe, after whom followed
the Bohemian warres: whith were the firſt apparant
warres for the Goſpell that I reade of. For the
great Ziſea proued a conqueror; and although Iohn
Huſs, and Hierome of Prague ſacrificed themſelues, and
were expoſed to the fire for Chriſts ſake; which
might haue deterred men from taking their parts,
and profeſſing the truth: yet did the Goſpell increaſe
ouer Europe, and the warres taught thouſands of people
a ſong of conſtancy: and a burning zeale made
their hands fight for the liberty of their conſciences.
            But when Luther came to act his part, the warres
of Germany made way to the peace of the Proteſtants;

And as you reade of many, that hearing Platos diſcourſe
of the immortallity of the ſoule, longed for the
ſame, and wiſhed, yea, procured to die. So whole
multitudes expoſed themſelues to torture for Chriſts
ſake: and as the warres and perſecutions augmented
their puniſhments, they augmented their ioy for being
ſo perſecuted, and tooke a pleaſure in the diſpleaſure
of princes againſt them for Gods ſake. France
became a rare preſident, and very quickly the Proteſtants
multiplied ſo faſt: that with the Iewes they
forgat the ceremonies of the Saboth, and applied the
Law of preſervation, whereby nature taught them to
take vp Armes in their owne defences; then ſtood
Geneua on their guard: then Denmarke, Norway, Sweden,
England, Scotland, and diuers Ilands and Townes
from being ſlaues to the conclaue of Cardinalls, ſent
defiance to Rome, and breake the yoakes of their
captiuity: from impoueriſhing their Countrie, enriching
their owne treaſures, to the augmentation of
the dignity of Common-wealths: from proſtituting
their wiues and daughters to the libidinous luſts of
Prieſts clenſed themſelues with the water of chaſtety,
and tooke a pleaſure in vndefiled beds: from the terror
of the Cardinalls, and thundring of excommunication,
they went with peace and contrition of foule
to Gods alter, obtaining ſo remiſſion of ſinnes, and
aſſurance of ſaluation. So that I may well ſay, the
hand that ſtretched to pul the Prophet by the throat,
is whithered and dried vp: yea, except the Prophet
pray to God, Iereboham ſhall not recover, not be able
to lift it vp againe. If it be thus, was not warre a
bleſſing? and hath not Religion beene propagated

by that meanes.
            But becauſe you looke for more moderne particulars,
let vs come neerer home, and obſerue how Religion
hath proſpered, and the Nations bin enriched
by the warres and contentions with Spaine, Auſtria,
and the Papacy, 1. in Germany, 2. France, 3. the Low
Countries, 4. and England it ſelfe: and how peace, or
if you will diſſembling contracts of peace, haue abuſed
vs at all times.
            Concerning Germany and the Empire; when Carolus
quintus perceiued the ſunny ſplendor of Proteſtantiſme
to be more and more radiant, for all he
had interpoſed divers clouds and miſty vapours, and
became ſuſpitious of ſundry Princes greatneſſe, after
the Duke of Saxonies protecting of Luther, as obſeruing
that the warres would not onely make them factious,
which appeared by the impriſonment of the
Lantſgraue of Heſse, but teach them a way both of defence
and oppoſition; he tooke another courſe to
corroborate his owne greatneſſe, and extenuate the
ſtrength of Religion, and this was by making a
peace, and withdrawing himſelfe from the troubleſomneſſe
of State: wherein, as it often happeneth
with cowardly polliticians, who by ſeeking
to hide their feare, diſcouer more the ſame. So
played this Emperour, after many famous exploits
and flatteries of fortune, he made the Germaines beleeue
he was ſo indulgent ouer the Common-wealth,
that he would affright or trouble them no further,
but leaue them in peace and libertie of
conſcience: when yet they knew he departed in a
rage, as diſappointed in his pretences, that he could

not incorporate the Empire to his Family. Vnderſtand
then, that in his latter times he had ſome
checks, and his peace ſhewed not ſo beautifull a face
as his warres. So that he plainely ſaw, that if other
blocks and hindrances were not caſt into the ſmoother
walks, to hinder Religion from her handſome
progreſſe, and debarre the Proteſtant Princes from
vniting, the Maieſty of Auſtria would be diminiſhed,
and their potencie fruſtrated; yea his owne renowne
obſcured with malignitie of time, and cloudy threatnings
of a fatall end; which though it came not
to ſuch a miſery as Pompeys loſing his head: yet
might proue as bitter a receit as Scipios confining himſelfe to a countrey grange, who had in his life obtained
the ſurname of Africanus, and in his actions the
renowne of a remarkable vertue. All which came to
paſſe in the harueſt of this Emperours huſbandry. So
that now you ſhall haue ſome particulars concerning
his diſcontents and obſeruations, which he himſelfe
propoſed for the eſtabliſhing the houſe of Auſtria in
the Empire.
            Touching his diſcontents; Firſt, Though he kept
correſpondency with the Duke of Saxons humors,
yet he much repined at his audaciouſneſſe, that durſt
maintaine a Frier againſt the Pope and himſelfe, as by
Luthers comming to Wormes was apparant. Secondly,
It amazed him to ſee a greater neglect of the princes
toward
                  •
                him (for all the uniting of Spaine, Burgundy,
and Auſtria) then was before, and that the
declaring himſelfe an eneny to the Proteſtants, declared
them the firme friends of the Goſpell of Ieſus
Chriſt. Thirdly, Hee thought there was no

proceedings in the high projects of Germany. For
queſtionleſſe King Henry of England would take the
Proteſtants parts, and prouide that the Empire
ſhould be ſtill Electiue. Fourthly, That when the
Princes had denied the Diadem, and inveſture to
Phillip his ſonne, as diſcovering that he went about
to make it hereditary, and ſo kept all Europe in awe by
his treaſure and dominions, he ſtomacked their repugnancy,
and would peraduenture haue threatned,
if his power hād kept correſpondency with his willingneſſe
to reuenge. Fiftly. That when the Pope
and the conclaue of Cardinalls would by no meanes
conſent, to haue him ſit in ſuch a chaire of greatneſſe,
as Spaine, the Indies, the Empire, and the Low Countries;
he wreaked his rage from Rome; and Burbon in
his behalfe ſacked the Citty, impriſoned the Prelates,
and ſet the Pope at a ranſome; whereupon followed
the excommunication both of himſelfe and Phillip his
ſonne, and the election of his yong brother Ferdinand
Emperour; all which augmented his diſcontents.
Sixtly, That hauing heard of the loſſe of his Nauy
at Algier, he ſuſpected a change of fortune, and grew
ſo diſquieted and melancholy, that comming to
Millaine, he forgat the ſtate of an Emperour, and
they forgat the duty of obſeruation; For when the
people perceiued that he was careleſſe to ſatisfie their
expectation, they were as careleſſe to gratifie or glorifie
him as a Magnificent prince; for in the Citty
they left him all alone in his blacke Spaniſh cape
cloake, and would not attend him downe to his
Galſies. Laſt of all, Comming into Spaine, he
found the Clergie humorous againſt him for his

ranſomming Pope Clement, and other contumaces againſt
the Church: whereupon perceiuiug his peace
to thriue worſe then his warres, he left all his honors
to his ſonne and brother, and retired himſelfe to the
Monaſtrey of Saint Laurance, or Eſcuriall: where
within three yeares he finiſhed his life: and yet he
liued to ſay, that warre was to him a bleſſing, farre
beyond his peace.
            2. Touching thoſe fruits of pollicy, it is well
knowne. Firſt, That he not onely proiected himſelfe,
but inſtructed his ſonne Phillip to make the Empire
hereditary to the houſe of Auſtria, and all Europe
to depend vpon Spaines Monarchy; as by the ſubſequent
actions of King Phillip was apparant. Secondly,
That Ferdinando Emperour, be eſpecially carefull
to firme and contract vnto himſelfe by one meanes
or other (eſpecially conſanguinity) the King of
Poland, Saxony, and Bauaria: as within ſhort time
after came to paſſe. Thirdly, That of all other
things a peace be ratefied with the Gran Signeur,
and correſpondency kept betweene them. Fourthly,
That a iealous eye be had ouer Prague, Preſburg, and
Glatz. For Prague was the abſolute commander of
Bohemia: and the Prouinces durſt not ſtart, if the other
Citties were Gariſond with Spaniards. Fiftly,
That the Ieſuites be countenanced in their deſignes;
For although the Pope and conclaue of Cardinalls
might repine at their intruſion, and intermedling
with matters of State: yet by their meanes, and
ſanctified religious deuotion, ſuch buſineſſes might
be effected, as ſhould euer tend to the augmentation
of Spaines greatneſſe. Sixtly, That an Imperiall

faction be ever nouriſhed in Luſatia, Sileſia,
and Morauia: eſpecially that the Catholick Biſhops
be maintained in the ſuppreſſion of the Proteſtants:
who elſe will follow the former Bohemians, in taking
vp Armes againſt their Princes; and therefore the
ſafeſt way were, to diſarme them by one meanes or
other. Seuenthly, That the Gouernour of Millaine
in his due time labour to get a footing in Swittzerland,
by building ſome fort or fortreſſe to ſecure the
paſſages: that ſo the Armies in Italy might march in
peace, or without preiudice ouer the Alpes into Germany.
Laſt of all, That the Grizons eſcape not without
viſitation, although it coſt pentions, reward, and
flattery; and if the protectors, which muſt be either
Imperiall or French, name it an intruſion: meanes
muſt be wrought, that neither of both haue leiſure
to preuent it.
            Thus ended this great Proiector his dayes; but
then began his Family: their Phaetons floriſh of
mightineſſe, which queſtionleſſe had runne ouer the
bancks of Europe like an inundation, had not that miror
of mankinde, (I meane Queene Elizabeth) with
the States of Holland, kept King Phillip and his ſonne
play 50. yeares at leaſt; whereby they were hindred
from either ſending forces into Germany; or growing
to faſt, like broade ſpredding burrs, which are not
onely noyſome in themſelues, but ſpoile the ſweeter
graſſe which neighbours them. Notwithſtanding
Ferdinando, Rodulphus, and Mathias, proceed in the
affaires of the Empire, with the former cautions, and
outward lenatiue courſes, laying aſide all forcible
Armes, and imperious ouerruling the Princes: whereby

by in leſſe then forty yeares many things are effected,
tending to combuſtion of gouernment, and ouerthrow
of true religion: which may be contracted to
theſe heads, and ſerue to proue, that Warre was a
bleſsing: and peace a meere enemy to their proceedings.
            Firſt, Certaine marriages augment the inceſts of
Spaine, and reconcile Poland and Saxony to the houſe
of Auſtria. Secondly, Vnder the colour of ſecuring
the confines of Hungary and Poland, againſt the incurſions
of the Turke, Spaniſh Gariſons are admitted
into Rab, Camora, Presburge, Camiſia, Glatz, Vienna,
and Prague it ſelfe. Thirdly, The free Citties of
Germany put vp a 100 grieuances againſt the Papiſts,
and neuer deſiſted, vntill they had obtained their
owne manuſtions, to haue the excerciſe of religion.
Fourthly, The Proteſtants increaſing both in Prague
and Vienna, a certaine tricke of the Popes is diſcouered
by admiſſion of the Ieſuites and Prieſts into Poland,
Hungary, and Germany: whereby Saxony was
poyſoned with the infections of Popery: as diuers
other Prouinces. Laſt of all, The Inquiſitors and
Catholike Biſhops grew ſo preſumptuous of their
papall authoritie, and potent adherents, that they
began to tyrannizr ouer the Proteſtants. And
when Mathias had ouercome the iealouſie betweene
his Brother and himſelfe, whereby he was
inueſted King of Hungary in Rodulphus life time,
and within a while after abſolute Emperour;
they fell from threatnings to bloudy executions, not
ſparing the liues of men, women and children; nor
deſiſting from opening the graues of the reuerend

defunct, and burning their bones; yea the variety
of tortures, and exaſperating diſpleaſures was ſo forcible:
that all ſortes exclamed on their coſſening
peace and proſperitie: confeſſing, warre was rather
a bleſſing unto them.
            Shall I follow now with Bohemias ſtory their diſtaſtings
of Mathias government, the repinings at the inauguration
of his couſin Ferdinand, now Emperour;
their reſolution to reduct the government to electiue
Suffrages, their apprehenſion of the Palſgraves worthineſſe,
their preſumption of Englands coadjutemēt,
and at laſt their raiſing of ſeverall forces vnder the
government of the Protectors of Prague: in all which,
Warre was a bleſsing indeed, and the diſſimuled peace
of the Provinces with the confederate Princes tripped
downe (as it were) the ſtanding or rather ſtaggering
glorie of Bohemias proceedings. For while Englands
embacies and ſlender preparations made Vienna
ſmile at the protraction, Bauaria enters the Palatinate
on the Eaſt, Leopoldus of Elſac Saueren on the
South, and Spinola with Gonzales de Cordua on the
North: yea before the reuolt and taking of Prague,
the myſtery of warre was not ſearched, and the hope
of peace ouerclouded King Fredercks good parts with
parcemonie and neglect of execution of diſcipline,
whereby the Citie of Prague grew factious, and the
inhabitants ſuſpected themſelues, yea were angrie
with their former iudgements, that had elected a
man, who ſtaggered in his opinion betweene peace
and warre, and committed a great ſolleciſme in State,
as leauing his country vnfurniſhed, and Heidelberg in
a manner vnfortified; when yet there was nothing

but warre, either to ſupport him ſtanding ſtill, or further
him aduancing forward. But there is no reuiuing
of fearfull accidents, and vnſauory contingents
to deiected Princes. Yet come to Mansfields coming
into the Palatinate, and Prince Fredericks returne with
Brunſwicks heroike and noble oppoſition: all the
while the armies lay watching one another, there
was hope of recouery, and the enemy ſeemed ſo farre
from inſulting, that he feared their incurſions into
his owne countrey of Bauaria. Yea Vienna knew not
what to ſay to the dangers threatning her triumphs:
and although the ſouldiers played the fiery meteors
on euery ſide with miſchiefe and terror, with afflicting
the townes, with exacting diſburſements, and other
inconueniences of a cruell miſery, yet did
the warre keep Bauaria, Tilley, Leopoldus, and the Catholike
Biſhops in awe, and might haue procured a
bleſſing to the much humbled Prince Palatine, if the
Fox had not brought the Lion into a trance, or if
you will, a labourinth. For no ſooner were the armies
recalled, and the Princes remoued, but Bauaria for
himſelfe, and Tilley for Bauaria ranne in fury to
extinguiſh his brand of light, and put out the
glory of the Palatine. So that I may well conclude,
Warre was a bleſsing; and the diſſemblings of
peace haue with Iacobs ſubtiltie preuented Eſau from
Iſacks benediction, who once thought it meete that
the firſt borne ſhould haue the preheminence of being
fortunate. And thus for Germany.
            
            Shall we ſtep into France, and that with eaſie paces,
to take the better ſuruey of thoſe times and actions.
Beleeue it then, the crueltie of perſecution and variety

of turmoiles haue dragged Religion by the haire, and
brought her out as forlorne and contemptible before
the people, of purpoſe to ſtone her, as if Suſanna
had committed folly in Iſrael: but thoſe eyes that burned
with reuenge, vpon her approued innocencie
were turned to compaſſion; thoſe hearts which murmured
at her hypocriſie, were leniated with a more
iuſtifiable triable; and thoſe hands which had ſtones
ready to daſh out her braines, returned them vpon
her accuſers, and made them repent the warres, and
curſe Spaine, whoſe trechery and ambition onely
weakned France by inteſtine combuſtions, that France
might not weaken Spaine by publicke hoſtilitie.
            I will not deale with the French inventory, nor
make the long ſhadowes of ſtory make you beleeue,
there is ſome ill lucke behinde you: but that
you may ſee how many worthy men have taken
vp perſpectives, to ſhew the true harted French man
a far off, upon ſurmiſes of Spaines coadjutement, or
augmentation of his owne territories. For the Spaniards
would ſerve him, as they once did the Duke
of Calabria againſt Charles the fift, to forſake him in
his extremitie. And when Francis the firſt ſent an
army to recover Nauarre, and Fonteraby upon Spaniſh
inſtigation, in the tumultuous times of divers inſurrections
in Arragon and Caſtile, the troubles were
ſoone appeaſed, and the French driven out of the
Land.
            But let vs come to the tripping Pheries of all
times, whereby Princes are ſeduced to flattery
and priuate reſpect; How hath Spaine delt with
all Kings and their Minions, ever ſince the Duke

of Guiſes tyrannous Maſſacree at Vaſti, and that
unfortunate marriage of Navarre, and the cunning
baites of the King of Spaines Penſioners in
the Court of France: which I am afraid are ſtill ſo
venemous to all Nations, that they will corrupt the
ſoundeſt hearts, let there be never ſo great pollicy or
conveniency at their admiſſion. What ſay you to
the houſe of Loraine, the Cardinall, and Dukes of
Guiſe? What thinke you of the Duke De Maine, and
the Holy League? Shall I name Heſpernon, and the
advancing of his Family? Shall I recount the fearefull
ſtory of Birone? The life and death of the Marquis
De Ancre. The falls of Luiſnes and Cadinet his Brother;
With divers other, whoſe lives made France afraid:
and actions were ſo many tortures to the hearts
of ſollid Chriſtians, and loyall Proteſtants. Were
not all theſe the inſtruments of Spaines, to keep France
buſied at home: though fortune geered at the temerarious
proceedings of the Princes againſt their owne
ſubjects, and divert the ſeverall Kings from looking
toward Navarre, Millane, Naples, the ſuccoring of
the Switzers, Grizons, and thoſe territories: yea if
you will, the patronizing of the Palatinate it ſelfe:
which was once under the covert of the French confedracy.
Thus hath the cannon battered their owne
townes, and the mis-led Kings unſheathed their
owne ſwords of vengeance, to ſheath them in the
bowells of naturall and loyall ſubjects; wherein yet
they have prevailed no further, then to increaſe an internall
hate and jealouſie againſt Rome, Spaine, the Inquiſition,
Ieſuites, Prieſts, and all the rablement of
Locuſts, who like vermine in a ſtanding ſtincking

water, infect the aire with fulſome and ill vapours.
            If you reade the life of Henry the fourth, you
ſhall ſee how famous were his actions, and remarkeable
his renowne all the while the warres
laſted, inſomuch that the attribute of greatneſſe
was made a Trophe of his everlaſting fame:
and yet ſtood like an impregnable rocke, againſt
which the waues did ruſh impetuouſly, but to
the breaking of themſelues in peeces; but when
peace was contracted, his honour was diſtracted,
his Countrey defiled, his Townes vitiated, his faith
violated, his Preachers ſhed teares, and Molines wept
over him for temporizing: his great officer Biron
fell into the ſnare of perfidiouſneſſe, the Proteſtants
hung their heads for his luke-warmeneſſe, the Papiſts
gnaſhed their teeth for his pollices, the newters feared
him, the Atheiſts abhored him, his Wife diſſembled,
and an Italian vpſtart contrived his deſtruction:
as for his Sonne and his unlimited youthfulneſſe,
that muſt needs caſt a chain over the necks of Rochell,
Monpelier, Montalbon, Niſmes, Chartres, and other
Proteſtants Provinces and townes; what did thoſe
attemps beget but the faire birth of increaſe of religion,
and firme oppoſition againſt unprincely cruelty,
and unnaturall enforcement? and he went away
affrighted at his owne handiworke, and curſing the
motives and ſetters on of his preſumption: which abated
his malice, and taught him to know there was
a God aboue princes, which could make the warre as
a bleſſing to propagate trve Religion, and augment
the glory of the Church. So that I may well ſay,
that peace to France proved like the Aſpes of Ethiopea,
               
who doe not ſting at all, but by licking and
tickling breake their bladders of poyſon, which from
itches grow to ranckle the fleſh, til at laſt it exaeſtuates
and by burning heates proves incurable. Why then
ſhould we be afraid of warre; or for any cauſe temporize
with Gods enemies, and a dangerous Nation:
for whoſe ſake we have ſuffered the Palatinate to be
loſt, and ſeene a Noble Prince dejected, as if we were
glad, that by ſuch courſes there ſhould no enuy be
raiſed for his thriving in greatneſſe, or going to faſt
in his race of Soveraignitie and powerfull Majeſty.
But I dare ſay that the Angel did curſſe Meros for not
aſſiſting of Iſrael.
            Concerning the Low Countries, I cannot compare
them better, then to Camomile, which the
more it is troden, the more it ſpringeth. For
whether warre hath been a bleſſing unto them, iudge
your ſelues, conſidering they haue augmented their
fame and renown abroad, and increaſed their wealth
and territories at home. Abroad, the Weſt Indies
haue been frequented with their Navies; and the
ſtormes at ſeas are not ſo formidable to the mariners,
as their approches to the Spaniard; inſomuch that his
plate Fleets are many times detained in harbour from
their ordinary courſes, to the diſappointing of his
Garriſons in Europe, which hath cauſed many mutinies
and innouations amongſt the ſouldiers. The Eaſt
Indies haue been viſited by them, and ſo viſited, that
they haue planted Colonies in the Ilands in deſpight
of oppoſition; they haue dared the Portingals, and
ouertopped the Engliſh; their ſhips exceed in number,
and their Merchants in induſtrie and huſbandry:

their labours haue made way vnto continual thriuing;
and the ſeuerall Kings of the nations haue reputed
them greater then the Engliſh. The Philippines and
Molunes haue been ſearched by them, and neither
Iland nor harbour but reioyced at their trade and traffique.
The South ſeas with the ſtreights of Magellane
haue been adventured on, and their voyages ſet the
pens of learned Chronologers on worke. Both the
Guincies and the coaſts of Afrik are explored by them;
and if there be no more in the ſatisfaction of expectation,
then knowledge, experience, and augmentation
of wealth: they attained to all by their nauall encounters
and adventures. The Leuant is ſtored with
their ſhippes, and the Streights of Gibraſter are not ſo
ſtraight, but in their defiances with Spaine they ruſhed
them open to giue them paſſage: ſo that both Turkey
and Italy have admitted their factories, and opened
the lapps of their plenty, to bid them take the bleſſings
by ſhippes full. If you ſtep into France, you
ſhall finde, they not onely ſtepped thether, but viſited
every towne of importance, yeelding an honeſt
account of their traueles. What thinke you of the
fiſhing in Newland, of Whales in Greeneland, of the
commodities of Iſland, Freezland, of the Herings of
Scotland, Ireland, and England, of the coaſts of America,
and all thoſe Nations which are acceſſable, yeelding
either pleaſure or profit, they haue euery where
ſuckt the hony with the Bee, and extended their
trauaile with the Ant, ſo that the ſummers labour
hath fed and cloathed them in winter, and the winter
it ſelfe never had ſuch fearefull blaſts, but the winde
either breathed good vpon them, or draue them to

ſeeke it in all the corners of the earth. If you are not
afraid of the Eaſterne violence and mountanous ice
of Ruſsia, you ſhall finde that they are not afraid of
winters ſnow, nor ſummers contagion: but viſit
Norway, Sweden, Goteland, the ſound of Denmarke,
the Haus Townes, Pruſsia, Poland, Muſcouia, and all
maritime coaſtes; Inſomuch, that like the honeſt explorators
of the land of Canaan, they not onely returne
with cluſters of grapes, but continue undaunted.
So that I may well ſay, warre hath beene a bleſſing
unto them, and the God of all bleſſings hath
multiplied Iſrael euen vnder their grieuances.
            But now if they kindly let you within their doores,
you will be amazed at the furniture of their houſes:
I meane the ſucceſſe of their affaires, and the noble
proceedings of the warres, which hath made them
famous in the ſucceſſe, and left their honeſt defences
exemplary to all poſterity. They haue expulſed the
Spaniard out of Zealand, & Holland, and as it were exprobrated
great Princes for not being content to inſult
ouer the obedienc of their ſubjects, but they muſt
tyranize their ſoules, either by Inquiſition or change
of religion; is it any other then the working of ſlumbring
patience, which being abuſed turneth to fury &
diſobedience; They haue not onely preſerued their
virgin prouinces from the rauiſhings of Burgundy, but
reuenged the vſurpation, which challenged their captiuitie
by hereditary birthright: yea, beſides their
owne ordinary walkes to viſit Vtreck, Gelderland, and
many fortified Townes, they haue made larger ſteps
vpon their enemies Countries, and by maine force
ſhouldred open the Caſtillian gates, and throwne

the Portcullis on the ground which boaſted of Auſtrias
faſting, and the Popes Benediction; ſo they
entred Hamlers, and ſtill keepe Sluice and the adiacent
places to depend vpon their garriſons; they poſſeſſe
Breda; diuers Bergens the fort of Lillo: and aboue
20 forts and fortreſſes in Brabant. What haue they
done in Cleue, Munſter, Weſtphalia, the Land of Luke,
and thoſe places of Freezland, wherein the Spaniards
are now politicke intruders?
            For what Papiſt or Hiſpanolized temporiſer, can
yeeld an accou
                  •
               t of any thriuing action, or preuailing
ſucceſſe againſt them theſe 50 yeares; yet the
Pope curſeth and excommunicateth, the Emperor
threats, the Archdutches proſcribes them, Spaine
aſſembles armies, the Ieſuites coniure, the Prieſts impoſture:
and all the practiſes which pollicies, mightineſſe,
treaſure, or friends haue hatched and brought
forth, was but to amaze them with ſome monſtrous
birth of treaſon, and perfidious reuenge; yea, thoſe
ſtrange hindrances of diuers reuolts and couert ſupplantations,
haue proued their owne ſhame.
            Thus by the corruption of Spaniſh rewards, haue
diuers Engliſh themſelues proued traitors to Holland,
and onely abuſed their honors and loyalty by ſuch inconſtancy:
which yet ended with Spaines ſcornes,
and their Countries eternall hate and baniſhment.
Yet for all this haue the Low Countries thriued by
ſuch exaſperating difficulties, and the following warrs
haue beene a bleſſing vnto them: inſomuch that the
Spaniard hath not onely admired theirs, and Englands
happy eſtate: but blaſphemed heauen, to
ſuppoſe we had a pulling hooke to bring proſperity

vnto vs.
            In the time of Don Lewis Requeſcens, Commander
and Captaine Generall for the King of Spaine, by the
exciting of diuers Prieſts, certaine Engliſh reuolted:
which added life to the Spaniſh affaires. After this
Aegremont, Ratelife, Grey, and ſome others, Gentlemen
of Noble Families in England, went from the
Low Countries, and fell into the ſeruice of Spaine, as
if they had fallen into a deuouring graue. At the
ſiege of Audenard, 600 Engliſh vnder Norris, Barney,
Corniſh, and Gipſon, proued traytors to the States,
and violated their firſt alleageance, to be afterward abuſed
by them which ſet them on worke. Aloſt was
betrayed to the King of Spaine by a whole Regiment
of Engliſh, ouer whom Pigot commanded, who
with the aſſociation of Dalton, Tailor, Vincent, Smith,
and We
                     •
                  ſh, thought to pull away the ſtones of the high
built walles of the Low Countries bulwarks. In my
Lord of Leiceſters time, Deu
                     ••
                  ter and Zutphen were
deliuered to Stanley and Yorke in the Queenes name,
who in the diuels name redeliuered them to Spaine.
Grane was betrayed by Hermet the Gouernour. Venlo
ſold by the Burghers, before the enemy approached.
Newis loſt by treachery. Berck beſieged, and ſo abandoned.
And many other places and perſons left the
ſeruice of the States, to ſtate themſelues in the King
of Spaines intertainment. Yea by perfidious practiſes
another Regiment vnder Sir William Stanley, whoſe
Captaines were Scurlock, Peter Winn, Hart, Guin, Salſbury,
Eaton, Reignolds, and Hariſon, forſooke their
firſt faith, and flattered themſelues with the hope of
great treaſu
                  •
               es of Spaines Indies. I could alſo name

the failing and falling away from Englands loue, and
the Low Countrey embraces of the Earle of Weſtmerland,
Lord Paget, Charles Paget, Sir Francis Englefield,
Hugh Owen, Dakers, Tempeſt, Norton, Harman, Markenfield,
Tremaine, Stradling, Carew, Allen, Southwell,
Fleming, Bulmer, with diuers others, whoſe reuoults
might haue been great diſcouragments to the States.
But for all this, they proued like the women of Iſrael,
ſtrong and quicke in their trauell, and doe what Pharoah
could, they multiplied exceedingly: and God
built the Midwiues houſes for being honeſt to his
people.
            I haue not I proteſt cited theſe particulars by way
of renouation of diſpleaſure, and diſtaſting betweene
the Dutch and vs: but meerely to ſhow the error of
inconſtancy, and the vanity of diſpairing men, who
by ouerpriſing Spaines potency, diſtruſted the Low
Countries weakneſſe, or dazeled with a miſt caſt before
their eyes, or led on by wicked angells, miſtooke
ſhadowes for ſubſtances, and thought to repaire
their decayed eſtates, by repairing to a Prince, whoſe
petty officers laughed them to ſcorne, and in their
greateſt extremities ſaw them die in the ſtreets without
compaſſion: as for religion, it was a poore ſhift,
and idle motiue to forſake the pure ſtreames and
cleane waters, by the reaſon of the coldneſſe and
aſperous quickneſſe, to fall into the pudled durt of
Atheiſme, ſuperſtition, and corruption; what is this
but with Swines to wallow in the mire, and lie basking
in filthy puddles, and beſmeering tromperies.
But was it thus with Souldiers in thoſe dayes, and
men of fiery ſpirits? I pray God it be not ſo ſtill with

with effaeminate Courtiers, and temporizing officers,
who to maintaine their owne greatneſſe and glory,
wiſh Nehemiah to flie from his enemies, when they
intended onely his ſhame and diſgrace, and proiected
their owne ſupportation by taking part with Sandolet
and To
                     •
                  iah: by flattering and extolling the great
King: by preſuming on penſions, honour, and glorification
from the idolatrous Monarcks of Perſia.
            
            But to proceede, ſhall I recount the ſeuerall tragedies
of Antwerpe. Firſt, Vnder the Regency of Lady
Marget, Dutches of Parma. Next, At the comming
downe of the Duke of Alua, whoſe tyranous pride
might haue ſtartled and amazed a greater State, then
the Gouernment of the States. Thirdly, Afuerca
Villacos by the Spaniſh Souldiers for want of pay vnder
Don Lewis de Requeſcens. Fourthly, Another
mutiny vpon the death of Don Lewis during the authority
of the Kings Councell. Fiftly, The inuaſion
of the French, and the valiant reſiſtance of the
inhabitants. Laſt of all, The tedious ſiege of Alexander
Ferneſe Prince of Parma, with the yeelding of
the Towne by reaſon of famine, and wretched extremity
which they endured. Shall I conclude with other
petty treaſons, and practiſes of murthers vpon
the perſons of William of Naſſaw, Prince of Orenge.
The innouations and rebellions of Leiden, Vtrech,
and other Townes. The murthers of Counts Egmond
and Horne; and at laſt the Prince of Orenge himſelfe;
the ſundry conſpiracies againſt Mauritius, and his
Brother Graue Henry; the Armenian ſect; the pollicies
of Barneuelt, and the proiects of his faction, with
his Children, to be reuenged for their Fathers death;

the ſtill ſupplying of the Archdutches Armey with
diſcontented Engliſh and Iriſh, vnder pretence of
aſſi
                  •
               ting friends: hope of extraordinary ſalu
                  •
               y, affecting
the Catholicke religion, diffidence of our
Countries abillity, ſuppoſſition of Spaines greatneſſe:
with other by cauſes: in all which, and through all
which common reaſon and enforcements of pol
                  •
               icy,
would affright the naturall man; and make the Low
Countries ſtand amazed at there enemies threatnings,
and proſpering in the peace of their neighbour kings;
yea we in England that behold the menaces and mightineſſe
of Auſtrian Family, to mount like the billowes
of the ocean, and with a kinde of inundation, to keep
ſo many Countries vnder water: may tremble againe
to thinke how ſlender a Nation ſhould beare a head
againſt the impetuous aſſaults of the warres.
            Yet for all this, experience goes beyond precept,
and examples ouercome poſitions. For if we may
apply a ſentence of diuinity to worldly affaires; as
there is no comming to heauen with dry eyes, or with
out the endurance of afflicton in this world. So hath
the glory of the States beene raiſed out of difficultie;
and as wee ſee a radiant ſunne diſpell miſty vapours,
and foggy exhalations. So hath the warres wiped away
all thoſe impediments of the Low Countries:
and their conſtancy in religion, made religion to
floriſh.
            So that if the Mines of gold by the ſearches and
induſtry of men, affood their ore, and plenty through
the vnbowelling of the earth, and making w
                  •
               rres
(as it were) vnder ground; The Low Countries haue
raiſed their fame, and amaſſed their treaſure by oppoſition

poſition to Spaine, and warre with Auſtria, telling him
to his face with the viſion: there is no kicking againſt
the pricke; and that goes about to graſpe too much,
will at laſt reſerue nothing.
            So that I may well ſay it, and I thinke none can deny
it, that warre was, and is a bleſſing to the Low
Countries.
            
            In the remarkeable greatneſſe, and admirable
raigne of Queene Elizabeth: may I not ſay, that
Warre was a bleſsing, when all Nations were bleſſed by
her; The rebellions of Sweden appeaſed; The Proteſtants
of Germany releiued; The pride of Poland abated;
The paſſages of Switzerland defended; The
holy league in France counter-checked; Henry the
4 aſſiſted; The Low Countries in a maner made high
w
                  •
               th honer; The Spaniſh Armado diſſipated; The
intruſions and rebellions of Ireland annihilated; The
rages of many treaſons confounded: and the practiſes
of 23 murthers vpon her perſon fruſtrated; As if the
Angell of the Lord ſhould ſtay Abrahams ſword from
killing of Iſack. Yea a very Italian writes of her: that
ſhe grew to ſuch greatneſſe, and was ſo garded about
with the loue and obſeruation of her ſubiects, that
all the world admired, and exalted her.
            Obſerue the noble Voyages and explorations of
her time, by Ienkinſon, Borog, Forbiſher, Haukins, Drake,
Fenner, Grenuilde, Candiſh, Michelborn, Raleigh, and
diuers others: the braue actions and exploits of our
Nation, the ſollid and pious renowne of her gouernment:
did we not ſearch all the harbors of the world,
and made Engliſh Merchants and Aduentures deſerue
a character of renowne? did not our inferior

ſhips ſcorne the Spaniſh gallies and galeons, yea,
thruſt open the Streights to paſſe into the Arche?
did not we viſit India without the tricke of factory, or
exportation of money? did we not ſearch the South
ſeas, and paſſed the S
                  •
               ieghts of Magellane? did not
Michelborne and others b
                  •
               ing Spice out of India without
paying for it; Candiſh Silkes without bleeding
for it; Drake Bullion without digging for it? did not
our Engliſh ſurprize the Towne of Santus, and Saint
Sebaſtian in Brazile? did not Raleigh begin a plantation
iu Guiana, and made his very name odious to the
Spaniard? did not our Merchants imploy many
braue ſea men, who returned with great booty, and
prizes of all ſorts? did not Eſſex knock at the gates
of Lisbone, in the behalfe of Don Anthonio King of
Portugall? did not a ſlender Nauy and vnprouided,
ouercome that inuincible Fleete of Spaine? was not
Ireland reduced, when it lay ſicke of a conſumption
by Montioies fortitude, fortune, and patience? was
not Cales made our owne, and Ciuill it ſelfe affrighted
with our approches? was not Spaine and all Spaniſh
actions like vnfethered ſhafts, which could not flie to
any purpoſe. And though in the Iland Voyage,
Fortune ſeemed to giue Vertue the check; yet it was
a braue attempt, worthy of memory and Illuſtration.
Remember the batteries of Roane, and the beſieging
of Paris; the many exploits and Marches of our
Souldiers, the admiration of our Kingdome, and vnmatchable
glory of our Queene; all which proceeded
from the warres, and the Heroick ſpirit of a woman.
Whoſe vertue proued like an Vberant ſpring,
the more plentifull and ſweeter by agitation and extracting.

Yea, her Countries was made famous,
and illuſtruous to forreigne Nations, by the endurances
of her Gentlemen and Souldiers.
            I haue not breath enough to tell the reſt, but for
theſe and the reſt I will be bold to ſay, we were beholding
to the warres and ſuch Martiall ſpirits: who
tooke example from ancient Patriots, to be indulgent
ouer their Countries renowne and enriching: and yet
witha
                  •
               l was ioyned the glory of God, the Princes honour,
the Kingdomes proſperity, and their owne increaſes
of nob eneſſe, and generoſity.
            But what hath the peace done? it hath made vs
drunke with eaſe and careleſneſſe, forget our God, be
vncharitable to our neighbours, neglect our calling,
ſleepe in ſecurity, accuſtome our ſelues to fooliſh exerciſes,
and by ſtudying euery man for his priuate,
the whole kingdome is confounded with pouerty
and wretchedneſſe; inſomuch, that the complaints
fly about like flies; and pollicy is aſhamed of her own
fallacies: for you ſee it hath inuented a trick by factory,
and drawne diuers worthy men into the net of
couetuouſneſſe, to aduenture the Indies: when I muſt
ſay it, the very exhauſting of our treaſure will be the
diſcomfort of our ſoules, I inſiſt not vpon the remoteneſſe
of the place, loſſe of ſhipps, decay of men, abuſe
of time, vnwholeſomneſſe of women, danger of ſhipwracks,
and the want of our account in our owne
channells, things ſubiect to fearefull conſtruction,
and ſenſible to examination: but ſay plainly, that
the bringing in of a million of commodities, is not,
or cannot be ſo beneficiall, as the expo
                  •
               tation of
30000 l. ſterling a yeare (beſides the conuen
                  •
               ency

at many greater ſummes) is preiudiciall to the Common-wealth:
a great diſparity I confeſſe, but experience
goes beyond apprehenſion. For it is well
knowne, that Henry 8. from one of the richeſt and
mightieſt Kings, became the diſcontenteſt and
meerly indigent to the turmoile of the ſubiect, by
reaſon of the ranſome of Pope Clement, ſo fooliſhly
and trecherouſly ſent out of England. And in former
dayes was not the wealth of this Land almoſt in
the hands of the Romaniſts, and how poore were
our people by reaſon of Peter pence paid vnto Rome.
Looke into the ſtory of Salomon, you ſhall reade of
great ſtore of gold brought into the Land, but neuer
any ſent out, or permitted to be tranſported: onely
commoditie for commoditie, or neceſſaries for their
gold and ſiluer in ſuch Countries as wanted them.
As for their obiections, or coſſenning their owne
hearts, that ſay, England hath no gold growing, and
therefore we may ſpare a little of a great deale which
is brought in; I anſwer, that becauſe England was
ſometimes barbarous, full of boggs, woods, and a
wilderneſſe for beaſts: therefore it matters not to
haue braue Citties, a reduction to ciuillity, and an
extraordinary beauty of Magnificenſe and glory: we
ſhould be no worſe then we were before; I hope
ſuch arguing is weake, poore, and full of moroſity:
ſeeing all the Maieſtie of Europe receiues exornation
from the various commodities of other Count
                  •
               ies,
whom it hath pleaſed God to deny the vſe of his
creatures, that they might ſerue ſuch as ſerue him in
holineſſe and righteouſneſſe. And then ſhall Iſack
ſow in the Land of Ab
                     •
                  melech, and receiue a hundreth

for one. But to our peace againe.
            Now ſince our peace, what hath that done to vs,
or we done to ourſelues? hath it not proued our
ſickneſſe, and wrought vpon our corrupt bodies like
a feuer, not onely obnoxions in it ſelfe, but bringing
on apace other diſeaſes. And haue not we taken a
libertie to ſinne, becauſe no puniſhment followed
ſuddenly. But hearken how the vengeance of God
comes vpon vs: the cry goes, the countrey is weighed,
and found lighter by 14 Millions in 15 yeares; we
are haunted with Beggers, vndone in our Trades,
peſtred in the priſons, the Common-wealth ouerrunne
with pouerty, the people cry out of miſery,
and feare and terrors make vs all amazed, inſomuch
that in many Countrey Townes, ſuch idle, laſie, diſcontented
vagabonds abound, that the inhabitants
are affraid of ſpoiles and rapes, euen in the face of
Iuſtice: that is, though there be officers to threaten
them, ſo that if it were not for forreigne plantations,
and compulſiue ſending ſome people away, we might
deuoure one another. But marke withall, to what
inconueniences we are driuen in our cheefeſt Citties,
there are ſo many of all Trades, who confound one
another by vnderworke and indirect abuſes, that the
welthy are made poore, and the poore in a maner labour
for nothing: beſides, young men are growne
ſo proude and ſauering of liberty, that they muſt be
houſe-keepers the firſt hower, and conſume themſelues
with comparatiue expences to their ſuperiors:
filling their houſes with children, and the Commonwealth
with bancke-routs; ſo that there is no preuenting
of theſe miſchiefes but warre, warre muſt

cure this ſore, which if we looke to in time, we may
finde remedie with eaſe: either by disburthening the
Common wealth of vnneceſſary people, or enriching
the Common-wealth with ſurpriſalls vnlookt for.
            Let vs then reſolutely aſſiſt the Dutch, they and
we are all one, good neighbours and friends: and
ſo no doubt France will come in: and then a three
fold cable will be very ſtrong; otherwiſe, who would
not condemne his negligence that ſtandeth ſtill, while
his neighbours houſe is on a blaſe. But if we now
take opportunity by her faire foretop, and ioyne
heart and hand, wealth and courage, prayers, and
preuentions againſt the practiſes of Spaine, whoſe
very looke diſcouers the pride of his heart: we ſhall
finde his treaties are trecheries, his ſpeeches deceit,
his deuiſes ſcornes, his heart hollow, his dealings
double, and his whole courſe of his proceedings,
make but ſo many diſcourſes of abuſes and deceit; In
a word, they are the great diſſemblers of the world;
but let vs not diſſemble with our ſelues, eſpecially
take heed, and prepare againſt them.
            Let vs then take a veiw of our Countries, eſpecial-Ireland
and the Ilands, fortifie our Harbours repaire
our Caſtles, double our Gariſons, Muſter our Souldies,
viſit our Nauy, ſtore our armories, countenance
the Merchants, ſtrengthen our paſſages, diſarme our
Papiſts, change their dwellings, diſſolue their meetings,
breake the knot of their factions, watch their
wayes, and diſcouer the villany of their darke lanternes:
ſo ſhal their inſulting pride and trecherous
hearts be kept vnder, and a
                  •
               l the reſt be ſure and ſafe
againe from home diſturbances. But yet this is nothing,

except you baniſh the Prieſts, hang vp the Ieſuites,
impriſon the falſe hearted, and preuent the
diſcontented Hiſpanolized faction; ſo ſhall we be
ſure of them from annoying of vs, that would elſe
make vs ſure from defending our ſelues.
            Let vs with the Belgick Souldier alwayes be in a readineſſe,
keepe good watch and ward, ſtand vpon our
guards, and looke to our charge, the King, the Prince,
the State, the Church, the Common-wealth is our
charge: yea, our Neighbours are our charge, whoſe
Countries haue beene lately ouerrun, their Villages
deſtroyed, their houſes burnt, their Cattle pilledged,
their Wiues deflowered, their Daughters rauiſhed,
their Infants brained, their Children ſtarued, and
their Husbands taken priſoners; and thus while
they haue (I meane their enemies and ou
                  •
               s the Spaniards)
beene treating a peace and contract with vs,
they haue eſtabliſhed a warre againſt them: and ſo
by degrees will at laſt ſet vpon vs, if we prepare not
to ſet vpon them.
            Looke ouer ſtories, and peruſe them with iudgement,
and you ſhall find that Spaine hath ouer reached
all Nations with treaties, becauſe he found himſelfe
to weake to deale with actiue imployment; ſo
that his greatneſſe hath beene the well ſpring and
head of all miſchiefe, the foundation and ground of
Europes troubles, and the meere author and proiector
of Religions ruine; I will goe no further then 88,
while we were treating of a peace, the Armado
comes vpon vs; while France lookes for a pacification
of troubles, the Ieſuites inuite the King to a bloudy
warre.
            
               
While we are ſending to the Emperor for a reſtitution
of the Palatinate, Bauaria enters, and is not onely
Lord of the Countrey, but made the Electorate.
In 23 he treats of a match in ſigne of loue, but prepares
powder and match as effect of his mallice. In
a word, we muſt looke about vs to ouermatch this
match, and ſo no doubt euery true Engliſh heart will
affoord his helping hand, heart, purſe, prayers, and
all he hath to ouerthrow the boaſting pride of this
running enemy, and teach him a new leſſon for his
great ambition, and forward preſumption.
            As for me an old Belgick Souldier, I will pray from
my heart, with ſorrow in my ſoule, and ſadneſſe
from my conſcience, with a liuely ſpirit, and paſſionate
affection that my King, Prince, and natiue
Country: that a
                  •
               l may ioyntly conforme themſelues
to the faſhioning a worke, which may tell the
Princes of Europe: how patiences abuſed, turnes to
fury; and the King of Great Brittaine is not a ſubiect
for Spaniſh ſcornes and indignities. Me thinkes I
heare his Maieſtie ſay, you haue my good will: the
Prince crys out, take my true heart with you: the
Councell warrant their iudicious conſent, the Clergy
aſſure their vnfained prayers, the Nobillity and
Gentry propoſe their reuinues, the Countryman expoſe
his body, the Cittizen proffer his wealth, the
Merchant yeeld his warres, the Drum ready to beate,
the Trumpet ready to ſound, the Horſe furniſhed:
and all ſorts are ready with their beſt endeuours, except
Hiſpanolized Papiſts, and temporizing couetuous
wretches.
            What then doe we ſtay for? but prouide our t
                  〈…〉
               sure,

prepare our armes, reconcile our hearts, and
pray to God, that we may be ſtrong enough with
Abraham againſt the fiue Kings, to recouer his Brother
Lots ſubſtance. And ſo may we gaine and regaine
what hath beene loſt: and by an honeſt and iuſtifiable
warre repaire all our ruines and damages, ouerworking
and ouerweying vs by a diſſembling peace.
            To conclude, the Belgick Souldier once againe intreates
the reuerent Biſhops and Clergy to prepare
their prayers, the Senate of wiſe men their councell,
the Nobles and Gentry their courages, the true
Courtiers their loyalty, the commonalty their armes
and prouiſion, the Merchants their Shipping, the
Cittizens their meanes, and the very Vſurers their
money; That euery one may be ready with the Machabes
to defend the Sanctuary of the Lord; And
with true Engliſh hearts, not onely fight in the defence
of their Countrey, but when God commands,
not to ſpare, to goe on and prepare, and let euery
one prepare himſelfe; For the Belgick Souldier is
prepared, and made ready to goe to the battell. And
the God of heauen prepare your hearts, wayes, words,
deeds, and dealings, to be vigilant and carefull to
prouide for vs: and we with gods helpe, will be carefull
to fight for you. And ſo the God of heauen
Fight for vs all.
            
               A Prayer.
               O Lord, glorious God, and euerlaſting Father, we
intreate thee mercifully to looke downe vpon vs,
and hearken to our complaint and deſires, and
grant we beſeech thee our requeſt; O gracious Father

thou knoweſt our ſinnes, and our iniquities are not hid
from thee, they lie open to thy iudgements: yet we know
that thy mercies are the cure of our miſeries, and when we
flie to thee, thou draweſt neere to vs; we beſeech thee
now to be fauorable, and ſpare vs for all our ſinnes paſt,
and be ready to deliuer vs from ſinnes to come; looke down
in mercy vpon vs, and as thou haſt beene our euerlaſting
defence, ſo now defend vs from the rage of our Enemies.
Go in and out O Lord before our Armies, before our Generall,
and grant we may he thy Souldiers, to fight vnder
thy banner: ſtirre vp our hearts and ſtrength againſt the
enemy; defend thy afflicted flocke; Remember we beſeech
thee the burden of miſery layd vpon the Church at
this time in Germany, and in thy due time reſtore it to
his former glory: ſettle our hearts and affections to regaine
and recouer that which hath beene loſt by their treacheries:
and now we ſee their double dealing, grant we
may no longer truſt to them which haue no truth, they imagine
miſchiefe in their heart, and are ſet on fire to doe ill;
but break thou the knot of their malice, lay open their plots,
diſcouer their deuiſes, weaken their Armies, and ouerthrow
their inuentions, confound their councells, and conſume
their numbers. O Lord thou haſt in times paſt made the
Starres to fight in order, the Sunne to ſtand ſtill, the Seas
to deuoure, the Winds to ouerthrow thy enemies; ſo now
O Lord prepare theſe thy creatures to aſsiſt and helpe vs,
that all the world may know it is thou that fighteſt our battailes.
Finally, O Lord bleſſe we beſeech thee vs, and
euery one of vs, in what we ſhall take in hand for defence
of thy Church. Bleſſe we intreate our King, our Prince,
our State, our Clergey, our Commonalty, and giue thy bleſſing
vnto vs all. And laſt of all, bleſſe we beſeech thee all

that worthy and excellent Companies of the Artillery,
and Military exerciſes in London, and alſo in this Land:
bleſſe O Lord we intreat their new inuentions of warre,
and mike their practiſes expert, make them skilfull and
full of knowledge, that all the world may know that thou
conducteſt our Armies. Grant this deare Father, and
all other good things vnto vs, now and for euermore.
Amen.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   