
      
         
            
            CERTAINE REASONS AND ARGVMENTS OF POLICIE, Why the King of ENGLAND ſhould hereafter give over all further Treatie, and enter into warre with the Spaniard.
            
            Printed M.DC.XXIV.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            CERTAIN REASONS AND ARGVMENTS OF POLICIE, WHY THE KING OF England ſhould hereafter give over all further Treatie, and enter into warre with the Spaniard.
            
            
               For the firſt, which is, Leaving off all treaty.
               
               BEcauſe the Engliſh in all Treaties taken in hand with the Spaniard and the houſe of Auſtria, and continued ſo many yeares with ſuch labour and charges, hath not only bin vnfortunate, but alſo ſcornfully abuſed by the Spaniard, who is exceedingly diſagreeing from the honeſt mind and meaning of the Engliſh. For ſo many yeares while things ſtood ſtronger on the ſide of the Engliſh, nothing hath been effected by treatie: and who can preſume that any thing will be effected now, when things are brought into far worſe caſe?
               The King by ſeuen diuers Treaties and Ambaſſages hath effected iuſt nothing in this cauſe, which concernes the peace of Germany
                  
and the whole eſtate of his Sonne in law. 1. In the yeare 1619. by the Earle of Carleil. 2. by Sir H. VVotton at 
                     Ʋienna, 1620. 3. by Sir E. Conway and Sir R. VVeſton in the ſame yeare. 4. by the Lord Digby, 1621. 5. by Sir R. VVeſton in the ſame 6. by the Lord Chicheſter Baron of Belfaſt. 7. by the Prince in Spaine, 1623. Beſides, how many Curriers haue been ſent? how many letters written? and what adoe ha
                     •
                  h been made by ordinary Ambaſſadours and Miniſters?
               2. The honor of the King and kingdome requires, that this tye of Treaties which they haue been entangled in all this while, ſhould now be broken off. For if they ſhould continue that courſe which hath brought no benefit to either themſelues or to others, or to the common cauſe, who can excuſe them? Beſides, they ſhould expoſe themſelues to cō
                  tempt and ſcorne, by ſtumbling ſo often vnpardonably at the ſame ſtone; with their friends and ſubiects they ſhould bring themſelues into ſuſpition and hate, by continuing a thing ſo dangerous; & to ſtrangers they ſhold not onely increaſe the ill opinion which the

world hath conceiued of their ſecure cariage, but alſo they ſhould giue all men good cauſe to forſake them hereafter, if they ſhould chance to haue need of them
               3. By Treaties the Engliſh haue not onely got and gained nothing; but farther, all the buſineſſes of themſelues and their friends haue euer gone backward to the worſe: the Spaniards going forward alwaies with a high looke and a brazen face, and wiſely making vſe of the faire forewind of fortune, turning their countenance to the Engliſh, and their mind to their owne aduantage.
               4. The meaning and ſ
                     •
                  ope of the Spaniard is directly oppoſite to that of the Engliſh. For his endeuour is by Treaties to circumuent, to gaine time, to vndoe his enemies by delayes, to aduance his owne profit and dominion, to deſpiſe peace as perni
                     •
                  ious to him, and his great power to nouriſh warre, eſpecially in Germanie, where by the diſſention of the Princes diuerſity of Religion, & aſſiſtance of his friends, he may be ſure not only to loſe nothing, but to gaine, & to fiſh ſafely in troubled waters. But the intention of the Engliſh
                  
is honeſt, viz. to giue peace to Europe, and to euery one his owne: neither doth he intend to get benefit to himſelfe, & rule ouer others. And how can theſe contradictories be reconciled by Treaties?
               5. The very adverſe part doth ill interpret and take theſe treaties of the King, as if thereby he intended nothing elſe but to gain time, and to waite for the reuolution of fortune, or the occaſion of change, with a minde altogether eſtranged from any peaceable compoſition, and onely pretending an intention of treating; as the Archbiſhop of Mentz doth in expreſſe words write of the King to the Elector of Saxon. 7. Octob. 1623. The letters may be ſeene.
            
            
               
                  Reaſons for the ſecond: Of vndertaking warre with Spaine.
               The faith promiſed mutually to one another, which they haue violated, the breaking of the couenants confirmed by ſolemne ſtipulation, the iniuries offered, the deeds and Inſtruments of the couenants falſified, and

ſuch like as theſe which follow: all or any one of theſe are eſteemed of all Nations iuſt cauſe of entring into warre.
               Now then muſt we declare how faith hath been violated, and the ſolemne conditions of the League haue been broken by them. The laſt yeare a ſurceaſe of Armes for 15 moneths was propounded of the Spaniard, accepted of the Engliſh, and vpon certaine Articles vpon both parts agreed vpon, was ſet downe in inſtruments, ſigned and ſealed. But the Spaniard and their Complices, both at the very time in which they ſealed the Articles, and alſo afterward, did many wayes violate and pervert them, both by leauing out what was agreed vpon, & inſerting vvhat vvas not couenanted at all. That Inſtrument of truce vvas exhibited and communicated in the Empire in the moneth of March, many weeks before it was either concluded or ſigned in England. In the meeting at Iutterbock, to the end that the warlike preparations of the Princes of Germanie might be hindered, and in Hungarie to Gabor that he ſhould not ſtirre, it was exhibited long before it was concluded, as if it had bin

fully concluded and ſealed. And marke their cunning and falſe practiſe, by this exhibition of it, and a falſe perſwaſion which they added to it, that all things ſhould ſhortly be accommodated, were the Princes of the Empire ſo moued and perſwaded, that they compelled the Duke of Brunſwick to lay downe armes, and to depart out of the bounds of Germanie, denying him all prouiſion and paſſage. But the Inſtruments of the Truce were not ſubſcribed by the Engliſh, but in the 21 of April old ſtile, or the firſt of May new ſtile, and after in the moneth of Auguſt ratified by the Elector Palatine. Moreouer in thoſe inſtruments and deeds giuen abroad there to Germanie by the other partie, theſe words in the third Article (Declaring them enemies of the Empire and of our Allies) were left out, as words that might giue iuſt cauſe of offence to the Princes of the Empire, when they ſhould ſee ſuch a hard declaration extorted and wrung out of the Engliſh. But in the inſtruments ſigned in England, thoſe words were expreſly ſet downe, notwithſtanding the exception made againſt them by the Kings Sonne in law.

2. In the laſt Article in their deeds, it was left out, That the King of England ſhould ſend his Deputies for the intereſt of his Son in law, when yet in that conſiſted the very hinge and controuerſie of the buſineſſe, and the foundation of the mind and will of the King of England, as it is expreſſed in the Engliſh inſtruments.
               There is alſo a falſhood to be noted in the ſubſcription of the day. In the Engliſh is expreſſed the 21 of April, Engliſh ſtile; in theirs the firſt of May. Moe things may be brought to ſhew, that there was either falſhood or elſe double deeds.
               Furthermore, it was alſo expreſly prouided by way of caution, That all things ſhould abide in the Palatinate in the place and ſtate as they then were during the truce: that all acts of hoſtilitie ſhould ceaſe: that neither Allies nor friends ſhould be offended, but that both parts ſhould enioy the peace of the League. But Spaniards and their Complices did & doe ſtill in the time of the truce exerciſe all kinds of hoſtilitie, by confiſcating of their goods who haue withdrawne themſelues from the ruine of their countrey, by aboliſhing religiō, by diſmembring & transferring vnto others

the better parts of the Palatinate, as was done with the Lordſhip called the Bergſtras, with the Dioceſſes of Bleyenſteine and Nevenhane, & others; by impoſing continuall ſeruitudes, and by often extorting new contributions frō the oppreſſed; by drawing out the bloud and ſoule of the afflicted, and by waſting and wearing out all the poore ſubiects with their inſolent tyrannie. The very Spaniards alone haue in that part which they hold in the Palatinate impoſed an exaction of aboue thirty thouſand Dollars a moneth ouer and aboue the ordinary impoſitions. Verdugo in his propoſition when he impoſed this exaction, was not afraid to affirm, that it was done with the knowledge and ſufferance of the King of England, & that he did to moue the people. This extorſion hath now continued diuers moneths, and is yet ſtill exerciſed, Laſtly the Spaniards and their complices did neuer for all the truce lay downe armes in the Empire, but went on with victorious warre againſt the friends of the King of England and his Sonne in law: yea we yet ſee them to proceed on ſtill ſcorning & breaking this league of the truce, making it a net to catch their enemies in.
               
                  2. The Spaniard hath by force and armes poſſeſt himſelfe of the Patrimony of the innocent infants the grand children of the King of England, hath caſt his Daughter and Son in law out of all their eſtates and dominions, and doth detaine the Palatinate againſt the hope he hath giuen and promiſe which hee hath ſo oft made of reſtoring it: he hath beſieged the Citie of Frankendale the Dowrie of his Daughter, & invaded it in hoſtile maner; neither would he vouchſafe to raiſe the ſiege at the moſt earneſt entreaty of the King of England
                  ▪ he compelled the forces of the king of England and his Generall ſent thither, to depart out of the Palatinate, ſcoffing and deriding the protection of England, by which hee had falſly perſwaded him that the Palatinate ſhould be ſafe.
               3. Forſomuch as the Spaniard doth oppreſſe the Allies and friends ioyned in conferation and bloud with the King, doth caſt them out of their dominions, & doth purſue them with hoſtility euen againſt his faith giuen; there is no other courſe left to help them but by armes: treaties in this caſe will proue vnprofitable.
               
                  4. The ſafety of the King and kingdome requires warre. For it behoues vs then to look to our ſelues, when our next neighbours houſes are on fire. Princes loſe both power and ſtrength when their Allies do periſh. The encreaſe of a potent neighbor whoſe friendſhip is vnſafe, as it cannot be without iuſt ſuſpitiō, ſo is it alſo dangerous and hurtful. The liberty of Germany now ready to periſh, is to be relieued; and the conſeruation of it doth greatly concerne both the Engliſh and all the Princes of Europe. Germanie is the heart of Europe, for ſo Nature ſeems to haue placed it; the Palatinate is the motion in the heart, according to the lawes. If Germaine as the heart be poſſeſt by the Spaniard, who ſtriues to get the dominion ouer all Europe, the reſt of the Princes ſhall not long draw or enioy any vitall life or ſpirits. The heart therefore muſt be ſuccored, if you would haue the reſt of the members or the body to be ſafe. But by theſe weake remedies of treaties you ſhal do no good: ſtronger things are to be applyed, the diſeaſe ſtill encreaſing.
               5. Neceſſitie requires warre. Great preparations for warre are made by the Spaniard
                  
here neare at hand; his mind and intentions are well enough knowne. A potent Prince makes no reckoning of friends when he finds opportunity to oppreſſe them. The Engliſh are now brought into that extremity by their owne foreſaid counſels, that vnleſſe they do preuent by war, they wil ſhortly be preuented. The Spaniard knows ful wel, that he may not truſt them any longer, and that it is the part of an vnwiſe man to ſtay for the firſt blow, which is commonly the Criſis of the future war, by which we may take a ſcantling of the euent of it, which is vſually ouercome by preuention and diuerſiō, according to the ſaying of that prudent King. Politicians ſay, that he which conſults of breaking and making war, hath already broken; and that he is not well adviſed or wary enough, who neglects to preuent his enemy. The Spaniard who is naturally diſtruſtful, doth without queſtion conſtrue & take this conſultation & alteratiō of minds in England for a breach and a war, and experience will ſhortly ſhew it, if prudence take not place: but if he ſee the Engliſh men remiſſe, he wil ſay that they want not ſtrēgth but corage, and that it is baſe feare that keeps them back.
               
                  6. The King of England in the yeare 1621. the 12 of Nouemb. ſet downe the conditions of peace, & what he would haue to be obſerued and kept by his Son in law, and ſent them to the Emperor for his finall declaration; and did thē withal proteſt of the effuſion of bloud that would follow, & of the warre which he ſhould be compelled vnto if the Emperour wold not ſubſcribe vnto thoſe cōditions. But the Emperour and the Spaniard haue not only deluded the conditions, but went boldly on with war againſt the innocent infants & the Kings bloud. And is he not now bound in honor to recouer what he preſcribed by war which he threatned and denounced, that the conditions were not performed.
               7. Suſpenſion of arms was promiſed at Vienna to the Lord Digby, who brought the Emperors lettets with him to Bruxels concerning that buſineſſe: yet by colluſion was the contrary giuen in charge to the Infanta, and ſent thither either before or at the ſame inſtant inſomuch that that ſuſpēſion was changed into a moſt cruell war; which was executed with the more immanity, becauſe the King of England hath vndertaken the protection of the

                  Palatinate, and was pleaſed to ſtrengthen and defend it with his own garriſons. And 1 when the Lord Digby had in the Kings name long and exceedingly ſolicited, but in vaine, the raiſing of the ſiege at Franckendale; this anſwer was giuen him, That it was againſt the honor of the Spaniards to leaue a citie which they had once beſieged without the expreſſe commandment of the King of Spain. 2. In the very time of the treaty at Bruxels, was Hendelberg taken and ſpoiled. 3. If he could not then obtain by treaties and entreaties, a thing vncertaine and ſubiect to chance, & which was not in their hands, but only in hope, wil reſtitution of thoſe things which they are poſſeſt of, be now procured by thoſe former means? The Spaniards as they will doe nothing for loue, ſo will they alſo refuſe nothing when they are compelled by feare and force; as one of themſelues hath confeſſed.
               8. The Proſcription which is the head of the euils which haue followed, by which the Kings ſon in law was declared infamous, & al his grandchildren pronounced fallen from al right of ſucceſſiō, was moſt earneſtly ſolicited by the Archduke Albert, and was conſulted of

in the Spaniſh Ambaſſadours houſe. And is there not then iuſt cauſe that the Father ſhould by warre vindicate the honour of his Son?
               9. The reſtitution of the Palatinate cannot be procured by treaty: for this courſe hath bin often tried and vſed, euen by the Prince himſelfe, but euer in vain. Therefore there is now no other meane to be vſed, ſaue the way of warre.
               10. The honour of the King and kingdom requires, that now theſe wrongs be fought to be righted by warre, the laſt arrow in neceſſities quiuer, and the onely meane now left of preſeruing reputation. He doth but draw on new iniuries, who neglects to reuenge the old, eſpecially ſo intollerable as haue been offered to the Engliſh. But if now, after they haue raiſed ſo good opinion & hope of themſelues in the world, they ſhould grow faint, and fall backe into their former lethargie, they ſhould loſe all faith and reputation. I ceaſe to ſhew how magnanimious Princes are more bound in honour to recouer the eſtates of their friends which they haue taken into their protection, then their owne goods.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   