
      
         
            
            
            THE
HIGH-WAIES
OF GOD AND
THE KING.
            WHEREIN ALL MEN OVGHT
to vvalke in holineſſe here, to
happineſse hereafter.
            Deliuered in tvvo Sermons preached
at Thetford in NORFOLKE,
Anno 1620.
            By THOMAS SCOT Batchelor in Diuinity.
            Qui ambulat in via vna& Regia, non laborat.
Hier. Com. in Eſa. cap. 57.
            
            Printed at London. 1623.
         
         
            
            TO THE READER.
            THat which I preached once with approbation of the
godly hearers, I publish now for the vſe of all beholders:
No other reaſon perſwading me to it, then the
neceſsitie of the Times, which begin to bee like thoſe, wherein
S. Auguſtine would haue all men write. Farewell, and the
Lord make it, as I intend it, a bleſsing to thee for Inſtruction,
Admonition, Reformation. Amen.
            
            
               Tho. Scot.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE HIGH-WAYES
Of God and the King.
            
               Proverb. 14. 12.
               
                  ❧ There is a way which ſeemeth right vnto a Man:
But the end thereof are the wayes of death.
            
            
               THE Philoſopher Pythagoras,
(whoſe Ipſe dixit, was warrant and reaſon
enough to ſatisfie, or ſilence at leaſt, his
whole Schoole) conſidering the birth of
all Mankind to be after one manner, and
their deathes a like certaine, expreſt his conceit by the
Greeke letter Y; shewing thereby, that all haue alike
common entrance into the world; the King and the beggar;
the foole and the Philoſopher; and that only the difference
betwixt Man and Man was, in the different vſe of
themſelues, and the choyce of their wayes heere, vvhere
there was a way of wiſedome and vertue, and a way of
ignorance and vice propounded to all; and as Men
walkt in the one or in the other, ſo was their liues, and
the iſſue of their liues (their deathes) either miſerable
or happy.
            Our bleſſed Sauiour (the true Pythagoras) the wiſdome
of his Father (whoſe Ipſe dixit muſt ſilence the moſt curious,
and ſatisfie the moſt contentious) hath ſayd, Mat.
               
7. that there are two wayes; A strait gate, and narrow
way which leades to life, and a wide gate, and broad way,
which leades to deſtruction. And euery Man that is
borne of a woman walkes in one of theſe wayes, and to
one of theſe ends. Ioſuah 23. 14. Now as life is the moſt
ſweet and deſireable eſtate, and Death of all things the
moſt hatefull and terrible to Nature; So the meanes to
attaine life and auoyd death, should be carefully ſought
by euery vviſe Chriſtian.
               Pro. 19. 19 
               For he that regardeth not his way
(ſaith Salomon) shall die.
            
            This then concerneth euery man to looke to; and is
a Doctrine fitting all perſons, all places, all times. For if
the way of life bee ſo hard to finde that few attaine it,
and that thoſe who ſuppoſe themſelues to be in it may
bee out of the way, vvee cannot bee too wary and ſedulous
in this inquiſition, nor need wee feare the loſſe of
our time in ſeeking, but rather the loſſe of our ſoules
for lacke of ſeeking.
            This Text containes one of thoſe wiſe obſeruations
which Salomon aſſiſted by the Spirit of God made, out of
his extraordinary experience in the paſſages of this
world: and thought ſo needfull to bee vnderſtood of
all, as he repeates it againe verbatim in the 16. Chap
25. verſe, and in diuerſe other places in a diuerſe manner
of words to the ſame purpoſe.
            Wee obſerue heerein two principall parts:Diuiſion.
            
            1. An erroneous opinion of Priuacie, in theſe words;
There is a way which ſeemes right to a Man.
            
            2. An infallible iudgement of verity, in theſe words;
But the end thereof are the Yſſues of Death.
            
            In the firſt part we note.
            1. The ſubiect or matter propounded; There is a way.
            
            2. The quality or condition of that way; It ſeemes
right.
            
            
               
3. The Iudge of that quality: A mans ſelfe; The ſpirit
of priuacy.
            In the other part, the publike Iudgement, we obſerue,
1. The end or purpoſe and ſcope thereof, compared
with or oppoſed to the beginning or pretence.
            2. The certaine ill quality oppoſed to the ſeeming
good quality; It did but ſeeme good or right, but it is,
certainly it is the way of death.
            
            3. The Iudge of this Quality, Salomon, the Publique
Magistrate, directed by the Spirit of God, oppoſed to
the erring partiall ſpirit of a Mans ſelfe, of priuacie, to
whome the way ſeemes good.
            So the vvay ſeemes right, but it is wrong; It ſeemes
the right way to life, but it is the ready way to death; It
ſeemes good in Mans eyes, but it is not ſo in Gods eyes▪
               Multa videntur, quae non ſunt.
            
            
               
                  1. The Subiect. There is a way.
                  
                     A way literally and properly is thus defined by ſome;
viae vna pars eſt Locus;Com. in Ariſt. Metaphyſ. lib. 8. & alia eſt diſpoſitio in loco, per quem
initio est poſsibilis, in ea ad finem intentum. By others Thus;
Eſt via Locus per quem babere iter imnibus licet.
via est tranſitus à lòco in locum.
                  The Latins call it via (as Varro thinketh) either ab
eundo, quaſi ia▪
                      the Impartiue to Eo; Or elſe a vehendo, quaſt
primum veba, & tum deinde via.
                  
                  The Greekes call a way 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , which ſome likewiſe deriue
from 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , quaſi 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , proficiſcor, or iter facio.
                  
                  But none expreſſeth it ſo aptly and fully as the Originall,
which is Derech, whoſe radix is Darech, calcauit or
conculcauit, from the ordinary trampling and beating of
the way with the feet of many paſſengers. And thus it
is vſed properly for a way or place of iournying and trauaile,

but metaphorically tranſlated pro more, ratione, ſeu
vitae inſtitutione, ſeu conſuetudine.
                  
                  Now in this place it is vſed in a borrowed ſenſe, and
yet holds proportion or ſimilitude with the thing that
lends it.
                  And thus it muſt heere be vnderſtood of the wayes
of God, or the wayes of Man. The way of God is conſidered
after a two-fold manner.
                  1. His counſell or ſecret will which is called a vvay,
Rom. 11. 33. O the depth of the riches, &c.
                  
                  2. His reuealed will in his Word, of which the Pſalmiſt
ſpeakes, Pſal. 18. 3. The way of the Lord is an vndefiled
way.
                  
                  This laſt is likewiſe two-fold. 1. Either via legis & mandatorum.
2. Or via gratiae, promiſsionis & Euangelij. The firſt
of theſe wee walke in vvhen vve performe obediently
that vvhich is commanded; the ſecond, when we beleeue
faithfully that vvhich is promiſed. So the firſt reſpects obedience,
life, action, vvorkes; the other, knowledge,
faith, hope, and the affection of loue, which performeth
all the Law by being accepted in Chriſt.
                  But of theſe vvayes as the firſt of all heere ſpoken of,
vvhich is that of Gods Counſell, is too deepe for any
of vs; yea or for Salomon himſelfe to vvade in, (though
the shalloweſt fooles vvilbe buſieſt in it) ſo the other,
his reuealed will, is the rule of our vvayes, and neither of
them heere intended by Salomon; becauſe they are both
good and ſeeme ſo;Vrim or light of knowledge Thumim, prefection or holineſſe Exod 28. 30 but this ſeemes good, yet it is not ſo.
                  Then this is ſpoken of the vvayes of Man; and they
are likewiſe twofold.
                  Either the vvay of knowledge and vnderſtanding:
                  
                  Or, the vvay of Practiſe or Action.
                  
                  
                     
The way of knowledge,1. Vrim. is that Faith or Religion
which a man beleeues to be the truth ſo farre as he vnderſtands,
and by vvhich he hopes to attaine l
                        •
                     fe and
happines hereafter.Act. 24. 14. And in this ſenſe it is taken, Act. 14.
16. 19. 9. And ſo it ſounds, as if Salomon had ſayd; There is
a Religion which a man ſuppoſeth to be the truth, and the right
way to Heauen, but it is falſe and erroneous, and the next way
to Hell.
                  
                  The way of Practiſe or Action is our conuerſation,2. Thummim
manners, and fashion of liuing and dealing betwixt man
and man, in vice or in vertue, Iuſtice or injurie, equity
or iniquity: and ſo it is taken, Mat. 21. 32. And then
the ſenſe is, as if Salomon had ſayd, There is a courſe of life
which a man thinkes very upright and iuſt, and ſo iudgeth himſelfe
a holy Man whilſt he liues heere in it, but it is a moſt deceitfull
trade of life, bringing a man to death, dishonor, and deſtruction.
                  
                  But for our more cleere vnderſtanding and diſcerning
of this point, we will ſpeake firſt of the way of Religion,
being the Speculatiue part, whoſe obiect is truth and falſhood:
And then of Practiſe, being the actiue part, whoſe
object is good and bad.
                  
                  And this the rather, becauſe knowledge or the Theory
better ſuites and anſweres the way, then action or
the practique: and action more properly correſponds
to our paſſage, trauaile, and walking in that way. So
for doctrine wee will only ſpeake of the truth or falſehood
of Religion, and vvill reſerue the practique part, our
life, our manners, and converſation, for the vſe and application
of thoſe points of doctrine, which from hence
shall naturally and properly flow. And thus much for

ſubiect, that we may know, what it is that Salomon vailes
vnder this shadow, The way.
                  
               
               
                  2. The Quality.
                  
                     Which ſeemes right] This is the Quality of the Way,
which whilſt Salomon thus deſcribes, he affoords vs from
hence a foure-fold diuiſion, according to that common
Proverbe, The Italian ſeemes wiſe, and is wiſe; the Spaniard
ſeemes wiſe, and is a foole; the French ſeemes a
foole, and is wiſe; and the English ſeemes a foole, and is
a foole: So here, There is a way which ſeemes right and is
wrong▪
                      and to that is oppoſed, A way which ſeemes wrong
and is right: and there is A way which ſeemes wrong, and is
wrong; and to that is oppoſed, A way which ſeemes right
and is right.
                  
                  Now theſe ſeeme foure diuerſe wayes,Terminus a quo. Terminus ad quem. but indeed are
but two: as two croſſe or ouerthwart wayes ſeeme to
him that ſtands in the midſt to bee foure, yet haue but
two beginnings and two ends: ſo here the difference is
not ſo manifold in the ſubiect, but in the Iudges, to
vvhoſe ſight theſe vvayes appeare after a diuerſe manner,
according to the truth or error of their apprehenſions.
For that the right way ſeemes vvrong, or the
vvrong vvay ſeemes right, proceedes à deceptione viſus,
from error of judgement. For we ſee an euill vvay may
to one man ſeeme right and yet be wrong; and the ſame
vvay to another may both ſeeme wrong, and be wrong:
and a good way may to an euill ſight ſeeme wrong,
                     1. Sam. 12. 23. 
                     and yet bee
right; and the ſame way to a good ſight may both ſeeme right,
and be right. Now vvhilſt I ſpeake of a good way, and
a bad vvay, I intend a true Religion and a falſe Religion:
for as a vvay may be faire, (which vvee call a good
vvay) and yet be indirect: ſo a Religion may be glorious

to the eye, and furnished with faire pretences, & yet
be falſe. And as a vvay may be foule, (vvhich wee call
a bad vvay) and yet carry vs directly to the place whither
we tend, ſo a Religion may bee naked, poore,
plaine in shew, perſecuted, afflicted, ſcorned, contemned
of the greateſt part of the vvorld, of the mighty, noble,
learned, politicke, and yet be the true Religion, and
the true direct vvay to happineſſe hereafter, the leſſe
happineſſe it hath here.
                  Having then Religion for our ſubiect, if we looke vpon
it, vve shall finde three Religions in the vvorld, eſpecially
juſtling for the truth of this way: The Turkes, the
Iewes, the Chriſtians: nor need any man to vvonder at
this, that I should mention Turkes and Iewes vvith
Chriſtians: for the Iewes Religion, yea the Turkes ſuperſtition
ſeemes in their eyes to them, as true and as
right, as ours doth to vs; and vve haue nothing but the
Scriptures to diſtinguish them and vs aſunder: I meane,
the conſent of Scripture, Lawe and Prophets, Olde and
New, Spirit and Letter: for ſome paſſages and obſcure
places, they pretend (though vnjuſtly) to be for them.
But becauſe vve know (vvhatſoeuer they boaſt) that
their Religions are wayes vvhich both ſeeme vvrong to
all good or indifferent judgements, as they are wrong in
Gods judgement: and becauſe our hope is to haue no
hearers here but Chriſtians, vvee vvill leaue them to
themſelues, & ſpeake of the diuerſitie of wayes amongſt
vs, vvhich appeare principally to bee foure, euery one clayming
truth, and holding their Rel
                        •
                     gion to bee Orthodoxe,
and ſo the onely right vvay to heauen.
                  1. The firſt of theſe, are the Grecians, or the Eaſt
Church.
                  
                     
2. The ſecond, the Abiſsins, or South Church vnder
Presbiter Iohn.
                  
                  3. The Weſt Church, or Church of Rome vnder
the Pope▪
                     
                  
                  4. The fourth, is the Reformed Church vnder diuers
Princes: vvhich for diſtinction ſake, and perhaps
ſituation, (hauing reſpect to ſome of theſe) vvee may
call the North Church.
                  Now if any man expect I should ſub-divide the Reformed
Religion, becauſe there are ſome differences amongſt
vs, and ſuch as in ſome times, and with ſome
hot-headed perſons, breed great combuſtions in the
Church, I shal not need, neither truly ought I to do it;
becauſe all of vs (except the Heretiques who are generally
cut off from the body of Chriſt by vs all, or thoſe Schiſmatickes
who ſeparate and cut themſelues off, as perſons
that haue no way, that haue no tract of Antiquity, or
any footeſtep to follow directly in the Scripture) agree
in the way it ſelfe, though perhaps ſome of vs may vary
either in the manner of walking in that way, or in ſome
ceremony and circumſtance of deuotion or diſcipline,
which is as the hedge, and ditch, and fence of this way,
and no eſſentiall part of the way it felfe, but rather for
the order, eaſe, and conveniencie of the Traueller.
                  And thus thoſe whom our aduerſaries miſcall Lutherans,
Proteſtants, Puritans, walke as Iacobs ſonnes did out
of Egypt to fetch their good old father thither, to whom
their brother Ioſeph knowing their ſtubborne, croſſe,
proude, and peruerſe natures, gaue them this admonition
aforehand, See that you fall not out by the way. Geneſ.
45. 24. In via out per viam, non pro via, or propter viam:
ſuch are our hot alterations, not for the way, but in the way.
                  
                  
                     
And thus ſuch as the Papiſt cals Lutherans and Puritans,
walke the one vpon the one hand, and the other vpon
the other, the Proteſtant in the midſt, shunning both
the Extreames.Via Regia temperata eſt: nec plus in ſe habens nec minus. Hier: in Eſai. cap. 57 Wherein whilſt the other walke with
moſt violent and obſtinate auerſeneſſe, they thinke
themſelues only ſafe, and become ſeuere and ſupercillious
cenſurers of vs and all men who in the leaſt circumſtance
diſlike their Criticiſmes, or in the leaſt ceremony
vary from their rigide rules. But for the way it ſelfe, all of
vs agree in one, & with vs the whole Catholike Church,
both Grecians, and Abiſsins, as the learned know; and as it
were eaſie to demonſtrate to the vnderſtanding of the
ſimpleſt, if time would permit ſo long a diſcourſe, in defect
whereof I referre them ouer to a booke called Catholique
Traditions, collected by a Frenchman, written in
English, and dedicated to our late Prince Henry of bleſſed
Memory. The only materiall difference vndecided,
hangs betwixt vs and the Church of Rome, they holding
themſelues to be only in the way as perſons that
cannot poſſibly erre from it, and all others to be out of
the way, that in all points walke not ſtep by ſtep, and
hand in hand with them. Like a man, who vvould perſwade
all England there were no other way to London, but
through his ground, that ſo he might exact a generall
toll of the Paſſengers for his priuat benefite.
                  Now whilſt I ſay, wee vvith all the Catholique Church
agree about the way, and our only difference is vvith
Rome: I neither intend to affirme, that either our agreement
with all is ſo intite, nor our variance from thoſe
of Rome ſo diſtant, as ſome of ours and ſome of theirs
would beare the world in hand.
                  Only whilſt ſome Churches ioyne with vs in the Articles

of our faith, and in all the fundamentall points of
Religion (abſolutely neceſſarie to ſaluation) we dare not
judge them for erring in ſome matters of leſſer moment.
For what haue wee to doe to iudge another
mans ſeruant? he ſtands or fals to his owne Maſter.
Yet whilſt I ſay, vvee vvill not iudge, I shew there is
cauſe and feare of iudgement, which they may auoyd,
vvho vviſely leauing ambiguous and vnneceſſarie queſtions,
reſt and build vpon that which is generally and
vndoubtedly agreed vpon. Theſe & ſuch like I forbeare
to iudge, becauſe I heare Chriſt ſay, Iudge not, lest you be
iudged. Mat. 7. 1. And I know well it is the preſumptuous
pride of Antichriſt, and an infallible note of that man
of ſinne who ſits in the ſeate of God, and exalts himſelfe
aboue all that is called God,2. Theſ. 2. to preſſe with Lucifer into
Chriſts Office, and to iudge the quicke and dead before
his comming, condemning all for Heretiques vvho
vvalke not in his vvay. I know it is the only deſperate
error, not to ſee and acknowledge our error; but to proceede
erring with a preſumptuous opinion that we cannot
erre. Theſe brands therefore I leaue to him, vvho
only by theſe (if there were no other) might be knowne
to be out of the right vvay. And yet in the eyes of theſe
men (led by flesh and blood, and the outward apparance)
how vvell doth their vvay ſeeme, how indirect
and crooked ſeemes ours? Let vs a little behold them
comparatiuely.
                  
                      Doth it not ſeeme right to a man (who hath but naturall
reaſon, flesh and blood to direct him) to follow
that faith vvhich his forefathers profeſſed time out of
minde? And doth it not ſeeme ill to adhere to a faith
vvhich they ſay had no being till about theſe hundred

yeeres, and vvas neuer heard of before Luther?
                  
                  Doth it not ſeeme right (vvhilſt wee fancie God like 
our ſelues, or ſomething better, like a good old King
troubled vvith many imployments) that wee should goe
to Saints, and Angels, and other ſpirituall fauorites to
intercede for vs and prefer our petitions? And doth it not
ſeeme ill, that vvee (vilde ſinners) dare preſſe euen to the
Throne of grace it ſelfe, and refuſe to vſe any other
meanes to obtaine our ſuites then the name, ayde, and
mediation of the Prince himſelfe Chriſt Ieſus?
                  Doth it not ſeeme right, vvhilſt vvee keepe the pictures 
of our earthly Parents and friends, that wee should
vvith greater reuerence and care preferre the pictures of
God the Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghoſt, the Parent of
our ſoules, of the Virgin Mary, and other Saints our celeſtiall
friends? And doth it not ſeeme ill, that vve
should not only neglect theſe, but alſo caſt them out of
our Churches and houſes, breake and burne them; And
the more pretious account vvee haue of the perſons
dignity, by ſo much the more to hold the picture perillous?
                  Doth it not ſeeme right to fleſh and blood, that man 
should ſatisfie for his owne ſinnes by ſuffering penance,
affiction, chaſtiſements, faſtings and the like? that man
should merit his owne ſaluation by vowes, pilgrimages
workes of charity, chaſtity, voluntary pouerty, obedience,
and other free-will offerings of ſuperrogation?
And if heere there were any thing vnpaide, is it not according
to reaſon, that after this life it should be taken
out in Purgatory before wee goe to heauen? And ſeemes
it not as ill to deny flesh and blood theſe ſenſible ſatiſfactions,
& to teach, that all proceedes out of Gods mercy;

that wee muſt doe good, but not truſt to it; that man
cannot ſatisfie, much leſſe merit; that the chaſtiſements
wee ſuffer, or the beſt actions wee doe, are not worthy
of heauen, either ex condigno, or ex congruo; and that as
there is no third way heere, but a right way or a wrong
way, ſo there is after this life no third place, but men
preſently paſſe either into eternall ioy, or eternall
paine.
                  
                      Doth it not ſeeme right, that ſince Chriſt is God, and
God is Omnipotent, able to doe whatſoeuer he ſaith,
that therefore when he ſaith, This is my body, that wee
should then beleeue, the bread in the Sacrament to be
tranſubſtantiated into his body, and the wine into his
blood? And doth it not ſeeme ill, that wee who graunt
this power of his, should vnderſtand theſe words ſpiritually,
ſacramentally, figuratiuely, and miſtically?
                  All theſe things, and many more like theſe, appeare
thus to the naturall Man. But apparance and ſeeming
are no infallible notes of veritie, as we shall manifeſt,
when wee come to ſpeake of the Oppoſition, or the publique
Iudgement of verity, and now will partly shew, comming
by order to treate of the Iudge of theſe controuerſies,
vvho is heere ſaid to bee man, guided by his
owne imagination, and the giddy ſpirit of Priuacie.
                  
               
               
                  3. The Iudge, A Mans ſelfe.
                  
                     To a Man] Man iudgeth of things either by his Senſe,
or by his Reaſon (for I ſpeake of the naturall man, that
is, of Nature corrupted, not as God made man righteous,
but as man hath corrupted his owne wayes.) By his
Senſe if he iudgeth, he finds himſelfe often deceiued; for
a ſtraight ſticke put into the water, ſeemes crooked in
his eyes, an eccho beguiles his eares; his feeling, taſting,

ſmelling, all of them are ſubiect to deception. And for
his Reaſon, the beſt it can doe, is to diſcourſe probably
of the leaſt common accident of a Plea or a Flie; and
then whatſoeuer he brings, may be controuerted ſo by
another ſeeming reaſon, that the Iudge who should
from this baſe, ground his determinations, had need do
it with caution, and leaue roome to retract and reuerſe
his ſentence. Much more is man puzzeld and loſt, when
he climes vp to higher contemplations, to conſider the
hidden things of Nature, as wee may plainely ſee by
Gods arguments to Iob, Iob. 38. 39.
                  If then the ſpirit of a man cannot infallibly iudge
of the things of a man, of his owne ſoule and body, or
of ſuch things as are ſubiected to his gouernment, how
shall he be thought a competent iudge to determine
the things of God, though we graunt him to be of as vpright
a heart as David, and as wiſe as Salomon himſelfe?
All that man can doe, is to iudge by apparance, and wee
ſee heere things may ſeeme otherwiſe then they bee.
                  Now beſides the inſufficiency of Man this way,1. Tim. 5. 21 we shall
finde other defects in him which accompany impotencie,
and are vnworthy of a Iudge: for in a Iudge two
things muſt be principally auoyded; preiudice, and parciality:
now both theſe we shall diſcouer in our Iudge,
Man.
                  
                  Firſt, Preiudice: Man naturally abhors all things propounded
by his aduerſarie, and the hate of the perſon
wil not ſuffer him to intertaine the truth of his diſcourſe,
but rather ſeeke arguments to oppoſe it, his iudgement
is ſo taken vp aforehand. Thus I haue ſeene the ſentences
of the Fathers reiected for hereticall by Romane Catholiques,
when they haue beene found in Luther or Calvin,

Whitaker or Perkins.
                  
                  Secondly, Partiality; Man naturally affects what either
proceeded from himſelfe immediately, or from his
neere, deere, honord, and beloued Predeceſſors, or ſome
that in his eyes ſeemes learned wiſe, honeſt, religious.
In which regard God himſelfe diſputes this point
with man, Ezechiel 18. 2. and in the 29. verſe, concludes
with an interrogation, with an expoſtulation,
ſaying, Yet ſaith the houſe of Iſrael, The way of the Lord is not
equal: O houſe of Iſrael! are not my wayes equall? or are not
your wayes rather vnequall? And this is come into fashion
againe, that Man dares argue the cauſe with his Maker;
and if God do not as man will haue him, ſubiect his actions
to mans reaſon, and a
                        •
                     e all his creatures; but that,
according to the rule of Iuſtice, he condemne ſome Reprobates,
he is like to be iudged the Author of ſinne.
And I wonder he ſcapes cenſure, for making fishes,
foules, beaſts: I muſe they finde no fault, becauſe he
made not all theſe to be men and immortall, and why
he made not men Angels, whilſt holy David wonders
at his extraordinary care & loue showne towards man,
ſaying; O Lord, what is man that thou ſo regardeſt him? or
the ſonne of man that thou ſo viſiteſt him? He wonders that
any man is regarded; theſe wonder, that all men, and all
creatures are not alike regarded. Thus man that iudgeth
by apparance, whoſe ſenſe and reaſon may be deceiued
and ſo deceiue him, as he deceiues others, who may bee
iniquus Iudex, a Iudge full of preiudice, full of partiality,
eſpecially in his owne caſe) is vnfit to decide a controuerſie
of this nature. And this therefore cauſed that reſolute
Luther to vtter that ſpeech for which he hath
beene ſo often and ſo vniuſtly taxed and chalenged,

                     That he preferd one Saint Paule, before a thouſand Ambroſes,
Augustines, Hieroms or Chryſostoms. Becauſe Saint Paul
by the iudgement of all thoſe was, for the firſt planting
of the Church, guided by the infallible direction of
Gods Spirit, after a wonderfull and extraordinary manner
and meaſure: But all theſe men graunt themſelues
that they might erre; nay, that they did erre, and ſo retracted
diuerſe of their former opinions; deſiring neither
to be beleeued nor followed farther, then their
words and writings should bee found conſonant to
the verity of the written Word of God.
                  Now then all the iudgement of Man; nay, of all men
contradicting the Word of God, is of a priuate ſpirit,
ſuch as Adam was directed by when he left the guidance
of Gods Spirit; of which Saint Peter ſpeakes, 2. P
                           •
                        t. 1. 19.
20. 21. If therefore a multitude of men (how learned,
wiſe, or holy ſoeuer they bee) should ioyne againſt
the Scripture, their authority muſt not carry it, for they
all erre, and their interpretation is priuate, though their
perſons, their places, their profeſſions be publique.
                  And one or a few men expounding with the Scripture,
doth not expound by a priuate ſpirit (though his
perſon perhaps bee priuate) but by the ſpirit of Truth
which directed the holy Pen-men of the Scripture; and
his opinion and interpretation is Catholique and orthodoxe,
whatſoeuer his perſon bee. Cyprian vvas a publique
teacher, yet interpreting ſome Scriptures to proue
rebaptization, his interpretation therein vvas priuate,
becauſe againſt the generall ſenſe and ſcope of Scripture.
And Augustine vvas a Bishop, and ſo a publike perſon
at whoſe mouth we are to ſeeke wiſedome, yet
when hee brought Scripture interpreted by himſelfe,

contrary to the generall ſcope, to prooue Children
should receiue the Lords Supper, his interpretation was
worthliy reiected as of a priuate ſpirit. All the founders
of Hereſies haue beene publike perſons, ſuch as were
Nouatus, Arrius, Eunomius, and with theſe diuerſe Bishops
of Rome haue ioyned eyther as authors of Hereſies, or
Sectators of ſuch; and heerein they were all led by priuate
ſpirits. Therefore Bellarmine confeſſeth, lib. 3.
cap. 3. De verbo. That the Spirit of interpretation (which in
S. Peters ſenſe is publique) is often giuen to priuate men.
                  
                  So then the Scripture muſt be expounded by the Scripture,
the darker place by the place more cleere. Man
muſt not ſeeke a fortification in Scripture for his opinion:
but he muſt be carefull to raiſe his opinion and
Iudgement, out of the Scripture, euidently confirmed &
explaned by it ſelfe, and by conference and coherence
of the ſame with it ſelfe; and this is publique interpretation;
whatſoeuer is contrary, is from the ſpirit of priuacy.
Veritas docendo ſuadet, falſitas ſuadendo docet.
                  
                  All this that I haue ſpoken then, is not totally to exclude
man from determining queſtions and doubts in
Diuinity, but to shew by what rule he ought to iudge;
that is, by no other rule then by the Scriptures: for I
gladly acknowledge, that whereas there is an authenticke
and fundamentall Iudge, Chriſt himſelfe (the beſt
interpreter of the Law being the Law-maker) ſo he
hath placed a miniſteriall Iudge, which is the Church,
which muſt interpret Scripture by Scripture, and euer
be wary not to contradict the vvill of the Law-maker
Chriſt. Now the Romish Sinagogue conſidering the
Church of Chriſt in a threefold manner: 1. Firſt, as it is
Eſſentiall; 2. Secondly, as it is repreſentatiue: 3. And thirdly,

as it is virtuall. They make the repreſentatiue part to conſiſt
in the Miniſtery; and this Miniſtery to flow from the
Pope as from the head; and to this part that is to the Pope,
they attribute that power which God hath giuen to the
whole Church. Now the Pope being thus inveſted in
abſolute power with an opinion of infallibility, laying
aſide the Scriptures, iudgeth without them; nay, againſt
them; nay, iudgeth them, and yet muſt not be chalenged
of error.
                  This wee iudge vnreaſonable, that a Man should make
his owne will the Churches lawe, and iudge in his owne
cauſe without examination. And therefore wee shew,Amor & odium & proprium commodū faciunt ſaepè Iudicem non congnoſcere verum. Ariſtotle: lib. 1. Rhe.
that man who iudgeth by his ſenſe or reaſon, is not ſufficiently
qualified for ſuch a buſines; or if he were naturally
ſo adapted, yet is he vnfit to iudge in this queſtion
which wholly concernes himſelfe, in regard of partiality
or preiudice, to both which he is ſubiect. Therefore
in queſtions betwixt vs and the South-Church,
Presbiter Iohannes is an vnfit Iudge; and in queſtions betwixt
vs and the Grecians, the Patriarch of Conſtantinople
is as vnmeet: and in controuerſies betwixt vs and Rome,
the Pope is not a competent Iudge. Eccleſiasticus. 8. 14.
Goe not to Law with a Iudge, for they will iudge for him according
to his honor.
                  
                  Let vs therefore ſeeke a Iudge who iudgeth not by
the outward apparance, whoſe ſence and reaſon cannot
be deceiued, who is neither preiudiciall not partiall;
who ſearcheth the reines and the heart; for vaine is the
iudgement of man, to whom this way ſeemes right,
when the ends thereof are the Yſſues of death. And this
wee shall finde in the Oppoſition, which wee come now
to handle.
               
            
            
               
               The Oppoſition, or Publique Iudgement.
               
                  1. The end thereof; or purpoſe pretended.
                  Wee had the way iudged before prima facie, by the
outward apparance, by the beginning thereof, and ſo it
ſeemed right. But heere wee finde fronti nulla fides, no
credit to bee giuen to the countenance, but the end bewrayes
the truth of euery thing. The woman beheld
the fruite which Sathan ſo farre magnified; She ſaw the
tree was good for foode, and pleaſant to the eyes. Geneſ.
3. 6. ſo she eate thereof and gaue part to the man. Thus
they iudged by the outward apparance, by ſeeming, and
were deceiued, euen then when their ſenſe and reaſon
were at the perfecteſt. But after they had eaten it is ſayd,
Their eyes were opened, and they knew that they were naked,
Geneſ. 3. 7. And then likewiſe they knew, that the curſe
of God, The day that thou eateſt thereof, thou shalt dye the
death (Geneſ. 2. 17) would ſurely light vpon them. So this
way ſeemed the right way to them to attaine knowledge
& happines, but they found the end thereof to be
the way of ignorance, of darknes, and of death. And as
with them, ſo with all their poſterity ſince, this hath ſucceeded
as a teſtimony of their hereditary ſinne, ſtill to
be deceiued with the ſeeming of things; inſomuch as
that is true which the Poet long ſince ſung.
                  
                     Fallit enim vitium ſpecie virtutis & vmbra,Iuven. ſat. 4.
                     
                     Cum ſit triſte habitu, vultu
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         & veſte ſeuerum.
                     The face and habit of an Anchorite,
                     
                     May be the couer of an Hypocrite.
                  
                  Therefore all wiſe men iudge of things not by
their shewes, but ſubſtances, and not by their beginnings,
but ends. Now the end of a thing is either
propoſitum, the purpoſe for which a thing is done; and ſo
the end of preaching is the ſaluation of ſoules, or Terminus,
                     
the iſſue or determination of a thing, as death is
the end of a mans life; and ſo it is heere properly taken.
A Iudge oftentimes ſaues a theefe, becauſe he hopes he
may proue an honeſt man, and doe good in the Common-wealth:
There is the firſt end, The Iudges purpoſe:
But the Theefe proceedes in his the euery till he brings
himſelfe to the gallowes, and thats the extreame end,
the vltimum vale. Of both theſe we intend to ſpeake
briefly, though the laſt only be proper to this Text, and
the firſt borrowed for illuſtration.
                  Firſt, then remembring wee haue Religion for our ſubiect,
let vs ſee what it is, together with the end thereof,
to what purpoſe it tends.
                  This is Chriſtian Religion,Auguſt. i
                           •
                         Ioannem. Tract. 23. cap. 
                           •
                        . that one God, not many, be worshipped:
becauſe nothing makes the ſoule happy, but only one God. The
infirme ſoule is not made happy in the participation of another
ſoule that is happy, but is happy in the participation of God; nor
is a holy ſoule happy in the participation of an Angel; but if an
infirme ſoule ſeekes to be happy, let it ſeeke from thence, whence
a holy ſoule is happy. For thou art not made happy by an Angel;
but from whence an Angel hath happineſſe, thou haſt it alſo.
                  Faith with a ſerious feare of God,Polan. Syntag. is the pure and true Religion;
as Feare containes in it ſelfe a voluntary reuerence, and carries
with it a right worship of God, ſuch as is preſcribed in the
Lawe.
                  
                     Religio dicta eſt eo,
                     Iſidor: lib. 18. Etymilog. 
                     quod per eam vni ſoli Dco religamus animas
noſtras, ad cultum diuinum animo ſeruiendi. Religion then
being the band or tyall whereby wee are faſtned and
bound to God as to the ſouereigne good, conſiſteth of
three twines, vz. of faith, of hope, of loue; and a threefold
corde is not eaſily broken. Now the proper or principall end
of this Religion is the glory of God, the ſubordinate end is
our ſaluation.
                  
                  
                     
That Religion therefore which moſt directly and
cleerely tends to the principall end, muſt needs effect
the ſubordinate end moſt certainely, and ſo muſt neceſſarily
bee the only true and direct way to life; and the
other, what shew ſoeuer it makes, muſt needs be the
way and Yſſue of Death.
                  
                  Againe, the glory of God is moſt aduanced heere in
this our way or Religion, by two affections of feare and
loue, and by the true fruits and effects of them. Now that
Religion which traines a man vp to feare God, and to loue
God, as God ought to be feared and loued, giues God
the trueſt glory, and ſo muſt neceſſarily be the truth.
                  Laſtly, this feare and this loue is then moſt rightly generated
and cherished in the ſoule of Man, and ſo Gods
glory moſt aduanced, when mans nature is truly ſet
foorth, and he thereby humbled in himſelfe, and ſo
taught to feare; and when Gods power and mercy is ſo
expreſt, as he hath beene pleaſed to reueale it to mans
comfort; That ſo man ſeeing his owne wants and miſery,
and Gods all-ſufficient power and mercy, might
feare and reuerence God as a good Maſter, might loue
and delight in God as in a good Father, and might wholly
ſeeke to him, and cleaue to him as to the chiefe and
ſouereigne good, able to ſupply and ſatisfie all his deſires aboundantly.
                  This being thus layd downe for a rule, let vs by this
comparatiuely proceed to try ſome points of Religion,
controuerted, which are fundamentall, or lye next to
the foundation, and iudge them right or wrong from
the nature and quality of their doctrine: that is, whether
they ayme at the right end, The glory of God, or at an oblique
end, the gaine of this world, and the glory of Man that

propounds them, according to that direction which
our Sauiour giues, Iohn. 7. 18. He that ſpeakes of himſelfe
ſeeketh his owne glory: but he that ſeeketh his glory, that ſent
him, the ſame is true, and no vnrighteouſnes is in him.
                  
                  1. Firſt, for Faith the foundation; Our Aduerſaries
teach a faith which only beleeues the power of God to
ſaue man: wee teach a faith which beleeues both his
power and will. Theirs teacheth feare; ours both feare
and loue; Theirs cloudes his mercy; ours giues true glory
both to his power and mercy.
                  2. Secondly for hope;
                     Spes boni incerti. our Aduerſaries teach a hope
which vncertainely expects a good to come; whether
they shalbe ſaued or no they know not, but they hope
well: whether there be a heauen prepared for them yea
or no, they know not, but they hope well. Wee teach
a hope which the Scripture teacheth: that is, an earneſt
out-looking, expectation, and longing, for the accomplishment
of thoſe gratious promiſes which God hath
made to vs in his Word. So our faith beleeues, that there
is a heauen, and a heauen prepared for vs; our hope longs
for the time when this shalbe perfected; and taught by
patience and experience, ſtayes the Lords leyſure, and
yet cries out,Apoc. 6. 10. 
                     How long, Lord, how long? They call this
hope Preſumption, but wee know they are preſumptuous
for calling it ſo.
                  3. Thirdly,Solent Haeretici ſemper proſpera polliceri, & caelorum regna peccatoribus pandere: vt dicunt parata ſunt tibi regna caelorum, potes imi
                        
                           •
                        ari maieſtatem Dei, vt abſ
                           •
                         peccato ſis. Accep.ſt
                           •
                         enim liberi arbit
                           •
                        i
                           •
                         poteſtatem. Hieron: Com: in Hier: cap. 23. for Charity; They teach what Charity is truly,
but in this they erre, that they make it (that is, the
charity of man) to be the cauſe which moues God to
ſaue vs; nay, which deſerues and merits ſaluation of God.
And this Charity they teach ſo to depend vpon Freewill,
as thereby they exalt the nature of man, conceale
his fall, and make the decree of God to be grounded vpon

the mutable and vnconſtant will of man. We on
the other ſide teach, that our ſaluation wholly proceedes
from the charity and loue of God, and that all meanes
conducing to that end, riſe from the ſame fountaine of
loue; and ſo our charity, as an effect of that charity of
God to vs, ſerues not as a cauſe moouing God to ſaue, but
followes as a cauſe declaring whom God will ſaue. And
that our Charity, as it is a fruite and effect of Gods Charity,
is true charity; and the works proceeding from that
charity of ours, good, but imperfect; good, as done by
a perſon accepted, imperfect as done by a ſinner, as done
by a babe which growes and labors towards perfection;
which perfection is not wholly to bee attayned, till this
imperfection be wholly put away, and corruption hath
put on incorruption. And therefore for merit, wee are
farre from it, as a doctrine oppoſite both to our charity,
and to the charity of God. To our charity, becauſe charity
is a free worker, not reſpecting the wages; if she
thinkes to merit, she is not Charity. To the Charity of
God; becauſe if God gaue for the merit of our workes,
heauen were not properly a gift, nor grace were not
grace; nor charity, charity: for charity is free. Thus euen
Adam himſelfe in his integrity could not merit, becauſe
bee had nothing but what he receiued, he was indebted
for his daily bread, and for the grace he had to ſee and
acknowledge this loue of God: ſo whilſt we are giuing
thankes for benefites receiued, wee are not paying our
debts, but running farther in; for euery grace that wee
haue is a new obligation: To him that hath shalbe giuen,
and wee are receiuing whilſt we thinke our ſelues giuing.
                  Againe, they teach, Though Chriſt dyed for vs, and

though Gods grace guide and direct our actions and affections,
yet there are ſome ſinnes left to be ſatisfied and
diſcharged by our ſelues, either in this life by workes of
merit or pennance heere, or heereafter by punishment
in Purgatory. Now this they doe teach, not euer perhaps
becauſe they ſo beleeue, but becauſe it is a profitable error,
and they know they may eaſily vndertake to pardon
all that come into Purgatory. Beſides, it is a great glory
for their Hierarchy to be ſticklers in ſo large and ſpatious
a roome as they fancy or faine it to bee; not only to
haue all earth, but all Purgatory alſo within the verge
of their Inquiſition. Now vvee teach the contrary, becauſe
we ſee this doctrine derogatory to Gods infinite
mercy and glory, and to the infinite merits of our Sauiour.
As if God had forgot to be gratious, or as if our Sauiours
merits and actions were imperfect as our workes
are; or rather indeed as if our workes were perfect to
merit & ſupererrogate, and his imperfect, not able to do
inough for all, vvhen our Sauiours death did ſatisfie for
all the faithfull, and vvas ſufficient for many vvorlds
more, and his merits vvere ſuperaboundant for vs, and
for all that beleeue and repent.
                  Fiftly they ſay, that after the vvords of conſecration,
the bread is changed into the body of Chriſt, as he was
borne, as he ſuffered. This they doe to exalt the dignity
of their Preiſthood: vvee teach the contrary, that it is
his body and truly eaten, but both by faith, after a ſpirituall
manner, as the Angels eate Chriſt in heauen by
contemplation. And this vvee teach, both becauſe vvee
haue good teſtimony of Scripture, vvith the whole choherence
thereof, and the Analagie of faith ſo to expound
it, as alſo becauſe it makes more for the glory of God,

and the humiliation of man, when our Aduerſaries doctrine
doth the contrary. For doth it not call in queſtion
the truth of Gods word, the truth of Chriſts body, when
we are led to imagine ſuch a body as might be borne of
the Virgin, or not born; might be crucified, or not crucified,
being neither to be felt, nor ſeene, nor taſted, yet to
be taken vvith the hand, eaten with the teeth, receiued
into the ſtomach? And doth it not exalt man, vvhen it
makes him able to make his Maker? And with his word
to make him ſo, as it should be in his power according
to his intention & will to haue him preſent or not preſent?
What is this elſe, but to ſit in the ſeate of God, and
to be exalted aboue all that is called God? Like in ſpirituals,
to that of the great Earle of Warwickes in the time
of H. 6. in temporals, vvho choſe rather to be called
Primus Comes Angliae, then Rex Angliae; and thought it
more honor to make a King, then to bee one.
                  Laſtly, they ſay they humble man more then we, and
exalt God more then wee: 1. They humble man more
whilſt they tell him his ſinnes are ſuch as he muſt not
preſume to go to God, but by meanes of Saints or Angels.
2. They exalt God more, whilſt they exalt his
ſeruants, and giue aſmuch reuerence to the Saints as wee
to God. To this wee anſwere, they arrogate to man,
whilſt they will ſee me wiſe aboue that which is written;
they derogate from God whilſt they make his ſeruice
common to the Saints, and can only colour it with
a diſtinction; nay, whilſt they make him and Chriſt only
ſeuere Iudges, and the Saints and Angels merciful, and
ſo their Mediators. They ought not to do euill that good
might come of it; this is euill to lye of God, whilſt they
faine him to bee what he is not, and deny him to bee

what he is. And of this kinde, and to this ende are all
their fictions in the Legend, to proue the Saints merciful,
and God ſeuere; yea the bleſſed Virgin Mary to be more
pitifull then Chriſt her Sonne and Sauiour, in whom she
was bleſſed more as a childe, then a Mother. That they
may do this the more ſafely, they contend and ſay, That
beſides the written word of God, there are many other
decrees and dogmaticall points and traditions neceſſarie
to be beleeued to ſaluation, which the Church (that is,
themſelues alone) haue in cuſtody vpon truſt and credit.
Now wee teach the contrary, aſwell becauſe wee haue
cleere teſtimony of the Scriptures and Fathers generally,
as of a cloude of witneſſes to proue the contrary, as
alſo becauſe it makes more for the glory of God in
things of abſolute neceſſity toward ſaluation, to gouerne
by poſitiue lawes of his owne, rather then by arbitrary
and changeable lawes of Man; and that he should reueale
to vs his will by his owne Sonne Chriſt Ieſus, who
came to ſaue vs, rather then to leaue vs to the vncertaine
relation of Man, who for ought wee know may be
Antichrist, and ſo intends to deceiue vs, though perhaps
he comes in sheepes clothing, or may ſeeme an Angell
of Light to bleare our eyes with apparance.
                  Wee might ioyne in this iſſue vvith them vpon all
the queſtions controuerted, but theſe shalbe ſufficient
to giue light to ſee the reſt at more leiſure. In the meane
time if wee caſt our eyes truly vpon the end of their de
                     
                        •
                     ignements,
vvee shall eaſily ſee, that gaine and glory
vnto themſelues are the only arguments which draw
them to fight for the Popes Supremacy, the Maſſe, Purgagatory,
Pilgrimages, and all the reſt of their opinions,
vvherein they are oppoſite to vs and to the Scriptures.
                  
                  
                     
To this end they are called Marchants, Reuel: 18. 23.
Becauſe for gaine and glory they ſophiſticate Religion, as
Marchants their wares, and thus make marchandize of
heauen and earth, and of God himſelfe. And as the
Marchants in London haue foreigne commodities whereby
they ſucke the ſweete ſap of the Country to themſelues,
and they in the Country haue meanes againe to
recall it; as Norwich by ſtuffes, Yorke by Cattell, ſome
places by vvooll and cloth, others by come, and others
by Mettals: Or as England vvith theſe commodities
furnisheth other Countryes, and ſupplies her owne
wants from thence; and Fraunce with her vvines buyes
her children vvooll, and Spaine, vvith Figges, Rayſons
Limons, and Oranges for ſauce, buyes herſelfe bread
and meat: ſo theſe ſpirituall Marchants chop & change
commodities, and toſſe to and fro by that meanes the
wealth, the pompe, the glory of the world, the fat of the
Earth, the Crownes of Kings. To this end Walſingham
had a lady to bring ſuiters and ſees Eaſtward, and Canterbury
had a Saint Becket to draw it Southward, The
North had a Winifrid, Scotland a Saint Andrew and his
arme, the Low-Countries a Lady of Hales, Fraunce a Saint
Denis, Spaine a Saint Iames, Italy a Lady of Loretto, and
euery Country vvas full of theſe Marts, where the
Saints did ſeuerall cures and ſeruices to the Church, and
had continuall Votaries, and thoſe of the frankeſt ſort,
as ſuperſtition is commonly a prodigall. And this vvas
a golden vvorld, and a glorious Religion to the eye, ſo
that vvee heare old men and women talke of theſe
things ſtill; but vvee know this was not ſound at the
heart; the way might ſeeme good to a man but the end
thereof were the Yſſues of death.
               
               
                  
                  2. The certaine ill Quality; or Determination.
                  
                     Is the Yſsues of Death] hauing ſpoken of the firſt end,
vvhich is the purpoſe and ſcope of this vvay, vvee come
to ſpeake of the Yſſue of this end; that is, The Terminus
vltimus or determination of this purpoſe and ayme, and
that is, Death; They are the Yſsues of Death. Life was promiſed
in their firſt apparance, it ſeemed the right vvay,
but vpon tryall wee finde Latet Anguis in herba, the end is
the Yſſues or wayes of death. A great diſtance betwixt
the promiſe and the performance, betwixt the pretence
and the Yſſue, the paſſage and the port, the ſtarting place
and the end of the race; vvhen life is proclaimed in the
beginning, and death meets vs at the concluding. I haue
fought a good fight (ſaith the Apoſtle Paule. 2. Tim. 4. 7. 8)
I haue finished my courſe, from henceforth is laide vp for me a
Crowne of glory which God that righteous Iudge shall giue me,
and not to me only, but to all that loue his appearing. Now the
Apoſtle hath fought, and if he had deſerued ex condigno,
might chalenge this crowne as a debt due to his worth,
but he doth not ſo, he expects it indeed out of grace,
of free gift; he doth not deſerue it by fighting, but he
obtaines it fighting, it is giuen freely by a righteous
Iudge vvho gaue him grace to fight, and promiſed him
both to ouercome and to triumph.2. Cor: 12▪
                      
                     My grace is ſufficient
for thee, makes Paule feare no buffeting of Sathan, no ſting
or pricke in the flesh, for that grace gaue him ſtrength to
fight and conquer, and vvas manifeſted the more by his
infirmity: for Gods power is made perfect through our weaknes.
And after he hath fought hee expects a crowne, that
grace is his aſſurance, he cannot chalenge it by any other
right, and in that right he is aſſured of it both for
himſelfe and all others who loue the appearing of our Lord

Ieſus Chriſt. To all that loue, not to all that fight; the affection,
not the action, is reſpected; the perſon, not the
paſſion is accepted. But now if Paule had beene of the
Romish faith, this ſpeech of his would haue beene
iudged preſumption; not preſumption to chalenge by
merit, but preſumption to chalenge of gift, and ſo reſolutely
to reſt vpon the grace of the giuer, as to aſſure
himſelfe and others of this crowne. Preſumption is faith
with them, and true ſauing faith is Preſumption. When they
heate him ſay, Rom. 8. 38. I am perſwaded, that neither
death nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor
things preſent, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor
any other creature, shalbe able to ſeperate vs from the loue of
God, which is in Chriſt Ieſus our Lord; they would gladly
make this only a probable perſwaſion, no certaine faith:
but others ſeeing this too groſſe a dallying with the manifeſt
ſcope of the Text, ſay, Saint Paule vvas aſſured of
the certainty of his ſaluation, of the happy end of his
right way by extraordinary reuelation only. But let it
be ſo; was it reuealed to him for others that beleeue too?
he ſaith ſo; for he ſaith nothing shalbe able to ſeperate
vs: Now then if it be reuealed to him for others, let vs
beleeue the reuelation, and apply it with vnfained faith
to our owne hearts in particular, as he did to his. And by
the way, obſerue what it is that Saint Paule builds his
faith vpon, ſo that nothing can preuaile againſt it. Is it
vpon Peter that rocke? Is it vpon Indulgences or Pardons
of man? Is it vpon perſonall righteouſnes, inherent iuſtice,
or his owne or other mens merits? No; It is vpon
that rocke Chriſt Ieſus; it is vpon the loue and Charity of
God, in and through the merits of Chriſt Ieſus our Lord;
which loue, not death, nor life, nor Angell, nor power,

nor heauen not hell can alter; for Gods loue is immutable,
he is not as man that he should repent: whom he loues,
he loues to the end; his wayes ſeeme hard, but the Yſſues of
them are the wayes of life.
                  Whereas therefore our Aduerſaries accuſe vs of nouel
preſumption, for teaching a faith that may aſſure vs
of our ſaluation, and (to elude this cleere place of Saint
Paul, and diuerſe other the like) ſay, This was reuealed to
him by extraordinary fauour. Wee know and confeſſe,
that hee as a worthy inſtrument of Gods glory, as a Maſter
builder, had many things reuealed vnto him for the
edification of the Church, but for this particular it was
no otherwiſe reuealed to him then it is to euery faithfull
Chriſtian, in vvhom the Spirit of God dwels, as in
a temple, and there teacheth them to offer Sacrifice, and
to cry Abba Father with teares and grones that cannot be
expreſſed. Well may there bee a difference in the meaſure
of the reuelation, not in the matter reuealed: Wee
know (ſaith Saint Iohn. 1. Ep. 3. 14.) that wee are tranſlated
from death to life, &c. and after, verſe 23. He that keepeth
his commandement, dwelleth in him, and he in him: and heereby
wee know, that he abideth in vs, euen by that Spirit which
he hath giuen vs. So the perſons are wee, not I, not Saint
Iohn alone but wee, all that beleeue, and loue; for this faith
and loue are inſeperable: Againe, wee are tranſlated, not
it is probable wee shalbe, but wee are, vvhich makes it certaine
by faith, as if it were done and accomplished: Laſtly,
we know this, and wee know it by the Spirit which
God hath giuen vs, the ſame Spirit that taught Saint
Paule and Saint Iohn is our tutor too. For other reuelations
Chriſt himſelfe hath ſilenced all pretences and shadowes,
and giuen abſolute authority to the Scripture opened

and interpreted by the Spirit of God to reſolue
all ſcruples in caſe of conſcience.Luk 16. 19 And this wee may ſee
cleerely in the Parable of Diues and Lazarus, where Diues
after he had failed of his perſonall ſuite, and could not
obtaine a drop of mercy for himſelfe, yet requeſted Abraham
to ſend one to his friends to forewarne them of
the ſtate he was in, not that they might pray for him, for
that vvas to no purpoſe, the tree was falne, but that they
might by repentance and amendment auoyde the danger
themſelues. To whom Abraham giues this anſwere,
They haue Moſes and the Prophets, let them heare them; ſo he
turnes them to the Scriptures wherein the will of God
is reuealed to euery man, what they should shun, what
they should doe, what they should beleeue, and how
they should liue. And when Diues perſiſting in his ſuite
ſaith; Nay father Abraham, but if one went vnto them from
the dead they will repent. Abraham replies definitiuely and
reſolutely, If they heare not Moſes and the Prophets, neither
will they be perſwaded though one roſe from the dead. So wee
ſee, he that doubts the Scripture, or beleeues any thing
againſt it, vnder pretence of reuelations from heauen,
or hell, or Purgatory, or the like fictions of Ghoſts and
Spirits appearing, is in a wiſe caſe, and may be drawne▪
into a fooles Paradiſe, but neuer into the true Paradiſe,
and ſo wander in this way which ſeemes right, but the end
thereof are the Yſſues of Death.
                  
                  To shut vp this point, obſerue the certainty of this
iudgement, as the Apoſtle Saint Iohn before in the 1.
Ep. 3. Chap: 14. verſe, ſpeakes in the preſent. Tence, we
know that wee are tranſlated, to note the certainty of
their tranſlation to glory; ſo heere Salomon ſaith, It is the
way of Death, and the end thereof is ſo, to note the certainty

of the thing. And this is a plaine proofe of the Spirits
aſſiſtance to diſcerne the end and determination of
a thing before the end be come; when otherwiſe it were
too late to doe it. For it is too late for Diues to repent
in hell, when the end is come; he should haue attended
better to Moſes and to the Prophets before, and beleeued
the word of God, not the foolish traditions of his forefathers
againſt the Word, or the idle old-wiues tales of his
foremothers, beſides the Word: he should haue attended
the admonition of the faithfull Paſtor and Prophet, and
not to the fained Legend of his flattering Pataſites,
trencher-fed Chaplaines. The perfection of all humane
judgement, is to iudge by the end and iſſue; and euen
heere wee often erre too: but if man goes farther of
himſelfe by nature, it is but coniecture and preſumption
ariſing from long experience in obſeruation of like circumſtances,
as the effect leades vs to the cauſe; but yet
euen then wee cannot ſay it is, or certainely it shall bee,
but it may be ſo, it may ſo fall out, it may be the end of
Death. But the Spirit of God ſees the end before it
comes; he ſees the thoughts afarre off, and iudgeth, and
warneth men aforehand inwardly by good and holy
motions, outwardly by the Scriptures; and he that will
not beleeue the holy Spirit of God in the Scriptures, it is
but iuſtice, if God giue him ouer to a reprobate minde,
that he should be ſeduced and beleeue lies, who would
not receiue the truth of God, but was tranſported with
reſpect of times, perſons, places, and other humane
Motiues.
                  And heere before wee part, I giue the intelligent
Hearer this one obſeruation by the way, that of all the
controuerſies betwixt vs and our Romane Adverſaries,
                     
we are not chalenged for doing any thing in the ſeruice
of God which wee ought not to doe: for wee beleeue
with them all the Articles of the Creede: wee pray as
Chriſt himſelfe hath taught vs, wee liue (at leaſt wee
teach, that allmen should liue) as God hath commanded
vs in the Decalogue. Only the exceptions they take at vs,
are for omiſſions, becauſe they ſay, wee do not ſomething
wee ought to doe; and our exceptions are againſt
them. 1. Firſt, for omitting ſome things which God
commandeth; 2. Secondly, for doing ſomething that
God commandeth, not after the patterne preſcribed, but
after another manner invented. 3. Thirdly, for doing
many things which God hath directly and expreſly prohibited,
prohibiting in the meane time what God hath
commanded. Now I deſire you ſo to obſerue this paſſage,
that you may take it vp rightly, and vnderſtand
what I meane.
                  I ſay therefore againe, the queſtions and controuerſies
betwixt vs, are not for the things wee doe, but of the
things that they doe. As for example, they dare not
finde fault with vs for praying as Chriſt taught vs, Our
father, &c. But the queſtion is, whether or no they doe
as they ought, whilſt they pray to Saints and Angels. The
queſtion is not, whether wee may pray to God without
Images or no, but whether wee may pray by, at, in to, or
before Images, with any reference to them, as they doe.
And ſo for Latin Seruice, for the Communion in both kinds,
the queſtions are about the things that they do, not
for the things wee do: ſo the doubt is vpon their ſide;
and ſuch a doubt it is, that the Pope would gladly haue
graunted Queene Elizabeth (of happy Memory) liberty
for her and her people to do theſe things as wee now

doe them; (as witneſſeth the learned B B. of Ely in his
Tortura Torti, and Maſter Camden in his An
                           •
                        ales), if the
Queene would haue taken licenſe from him, or would
haue ſubiected her Crowne to his Myter; for that was the
marke he shot at; the gaine of his Peter pence, and other
ſpirituall trading, and the glory of a Kingdome ſo obſequious,
ſo fruitfull, ſo helpefull as England had beene,
and might bee. But shee was too honorable to kiſſe
his foote for feare or hope, and too honeſt to receiue
any courteſie from him: which I adde the rather, to let
them ſee, who perhaps are not altogether vvell affected
toward vs, nor perſwaded of our truths, that there is nothing
practiſed in our Church, but that which finds allowance
and approbation from the modeſteſt and learnedeſt
of their ſide. And therefore they may well be
preſent at our ſeruice, and communicate with vs in our
Sacraments,The Popes worde only hinders them from Communion with vs: but Gods word bars vs from Communion with them. without ſcruple of conſcience (vnleſſe the
Popes countermand bee their ſcar-crow) although wee
may not ſafely communicate with them for feare of manifeſt
Idolatry, knowing that howſoeuer their way
ſeemes right in theyr eyes, yet the Iſſues thereof are the
wayes of death.
                  
               
               
                  3. The Publique Iudge, Salomon.
                  The laſt point comes now to be handled concerning
the true Iudge of this way, which is the holy Spirit of
God, directing the pen of Salomon the Publique Magiſtrate,
the King and the Preacher.
                  
                  A man, and a priuate ſpirit of a man, was the Iudge
of the apparance, the ſeeming good, the beginning of
this way; But God is the true Iudge, of the end, and iſſue
of this way. Man was an impotent Iudge, God an
all-ſufficient Iudge; Man was a Iudge preiudiciall and

partiall,Gen. 18. 25 God is an vpright Iudge: for shall not the Iudge of
all the world doe right?
                  
                  But the Pope of Rome ſteps in heere,Luk. 4. 6. chalenging to be
Iudge in this caſe by Charter (as Sathan did in the like
caſe) and to haue a Patent ſealed to that end by Chriſt
himſelfe.1. Reg. 2. 27 And for feare Salomon (who as King durſt diſpoſe
of the Preiſthood) should bring euidence againſt
him either by word or fact, he hath ſtopt his mouth,
and condemned him aforehand to Hell, and brought
out Traian the Emperor in his roome; who though he
were a Pagan, yet hath found ſo much fauour, as to be
preferd before Salomon;
                     In the life of Gregory the great. who was a Type of Chriſt, and
the wiſeſt Prince that euer reigned.
                  And doubtles if any other of the Prophets or Apoſtles
should preſſe him with arguments, he hath power to
ſilence them, and to cry vp and downe, what Scripture he
pleaſeth; to make Canonicall Apocrypha, and Apocrypha
Canonicall, ad benè placitum. For who would beleeue the
Scripture but for the Church? and who is the holy Catholique
Church but his Holines? at leaſt who is the head
thereof, who rules the roaſt there but hee? Now if any
of them vrge him too farre, and make againſt him,
he hath power to take order with them, either by binding
or looſing; which iuriſdiction in this caſe he excrciſeth
after a foure-fold manner.
                  1. By pronouncing them Apocrypha. 2. By eluding their
genuine meaning and ſence, by a foraigne and forced interpretaton
or expoſition. 3. By warranting an erronious
Iranſlation to be Authenticall, and the only true one.
                  4. Laſtly, by purging all humors that offend his humor. In
which regard wee ſee how the Auncient Fathers haue
beene shaued, clipt, ſcoured, washt, let blood, purged,

gelt, and mutilated: yea and many of the Neotericks of
their owne Men and faction, haue beene dieted, and caſt
into a ſweat, and hardly recouered with the application
of their Catholicon. And all theſe acts of theirs iuſtified
and defended with aſmuch eagerneſſe and shew of zeale
and truth, as the honeſteſt cauſe. Well may wee therefore
feare and flee from his cenſure, as from a Iudge full
of preiudice, full of partiality; becauſe it is in his owne
cauſe, where he will not limit his Prerogatiue royall, but
extend it beyond all degrees of compariſon. Yet though
he be our Aduerſary, let vs heare him a little, and ſee
what notes and Land-markes he giues vs, to know and
diſtinguish the true way from the falſe by, that wee may
follow them, if they both ſeeme and bee infallible; and
that wee may beware of them, if they only ſeeme right,
but leade to the way of death, and then ſeeke out others
that wee may cleerely ſee to be true.
                  Neither will the time permit, nor is it needfull to
bring forth all the marks of the true way, which the
Church of Rome hangs out. The principall only I will
briefly touch and point at. But before wee do it, I muſt
lay downe this ground of their owne which they giue
to diſcerne true notes by.
                  
                     True Notes of the Church must be ſuch as are able to conſtitute
the abſolute definition of the Church; ſo farre, that being
found, the Church is found; and being lost, the Church is loſt:
So ſaith Stapleton, in his proaem. lib. 4. Againe, they
muſt bee ſo proper to the Church, as they cannot be
found in any other ſociety or company of Men beſides;
And ſo notable, as they may bee more eminent and notable
then the Church it ſelfe; and ſo inſeperable, as
the Church cannot ſubſiſt without them. Such as theſe

                     Bellarmine requires in his 2. Chap: De Notis Eccleſiae. Againe,
they muſt be ſuch as Valentia aſſignes. Tom: 3. in
22. diſp. 1. q. 1. de obiect: fide
                           •
                        , punct. 7. In notis requiritur
vt Eccleſiae verae conueniant, at p
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         etiam vt illi ſoli.
                  
                  This premiſed, come wee now to bring the notes they
giue to theſe rules, that thereby we may trie their
truth.
                  1. The firſt note is, Antiquity; but this is neither
cleere, nor proper: for the malignant Church is neere as
old;Mat. 13. 30 
                           •
                        inite vtra
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        reſcere vſ
                        
                           ••
                         ad meſ
                        
                           ••
                        em. nay perhaps elder, then the true Church militant, of
which we now ſpeake, vvhich conſiſts of Men lapſed by
ſin, and reſtored by Grace. For the Church is called

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , quod est, euocare. Becauſe the elect
are by the outward preaching of the Goſpel, and the
inward operation of the Spirit called out of the Maſſe
of corrupted mankind, mixed in a confuſed lumpe,
where they were firſt euill, before the grace of God
wrought their wils to deſire to bee good: therefore Quae
naſcentia mala ſunt, ea creſcentia peiora; And ſo Antiquit as
ſine veritate, est vetus error. Error and Antiquity may dwell
together.
                  2. Secondly, they brag of Multitude, as of a certaine
note. But the moſt paſſengers trauaile (as our Sauiour
ſaith) in the broade way which leades to death: ſo that
heere it may be ſayd as Liuy ſayd of old in his firſt Decad:
Ferè fit maior pars, vincit meliorem. And therefore it is
that our Sauiour comforts his Church heere with
thoſe gratious words,Luk. 12. 32 
                     Feare not little Flocke, it is your Fathers
pleaſure to give you a Kingdome: as if he should ſay,
You are but few, a handfull; your enemies many, a
multitude, therefore you haue cauſe to feare; yet feare
not, God is ſtronger then man or Sathan, your Father is ſtronger

then your Aduerſary and his Legions. You are but little and
weake, you cannot conquer this Kingdome by force, no
more then Abraham could; It shalbe giuen to your faith,
as it was to Abrahams: you cannot merit it; if you could
then you neede not feare; it shalbe given freely; therefore
though in regard of your ſelues you haue cauſe to
feare, yet feare not in regard of the Donor, God. Laſtly,
you shall haue a Kingdome, you haue it not heere,
for then you neede not feare, no more then Rome doth,
but make all Kingdoms feare you rather; but it shalbe
giuen heereafter,IO. 20. 27. therefore feare not but be faithfull. Hope
well, and haue vvell.
                  3. Thirdly, they bring forth Succeſsion. But euill men
ſucceede one an other in euill places: this note therefore
is defectiue. Succeſſion of Perſons without ſucceſſion
of Doctrine is a deceſsion, a defection. The Preiſts and
Scribes condemned Chriſt and his doctrine out of the
viſible chayre of Moſes, as Antichriſt may doe out of Peters.
                  
                  4. Fourthly,Luc. 11. 1
                           •
                        . they boaſt of vnity. But there is a wicked
vnity in hell. And the Scribes and Phariſies, and Sadduces,
though they could agree together no better then
the Franciſcans and Dominicans, or the Secular Preiſts and
Ieſuits, yet they bound themſelues in a common band
of obedience vnder one head the high Preiſt, and the
then viſible Church of the Iewes, againſt our bleſſed
Sauiour and his Apoſtles.
                  5. Fiftly, they call themſelues the Catholique Church,
and preſume to carry it by that name. But the Iewes
before them did boaſt of the Church, the Church, the
Temple, the Temple, and called Chriſts doctrine both new
and ſingular,
                     Ier. 7. 4. Mar. 1. 27. and their owne, old and vniverſall; though

Chriſt told them he was before Moſes,
                     Mat. 19. 8. and ab initio no
                           •
                        
fuit ſic, there was a time when it was otherwiſe, when
their traditions (now growne fuſty with age) were nouelties,
or ſtale newes. Thus likewiſe they called Saint
Paules Doctrine,
                     Act. 24. 14. 
                     Hereſy. More they could not ſay againſt
Luther, or can ſay againſt vs.
                  6. Sixtly, they bring viſibility for a note. But this is
not a note of the thing, but the thing it ſelfe which wee
ſecke: for could the true Church be diſcerned to be the
true Church by all, there were an end of this argument,
and no farther vſe of theſe notes. But becauſe though
her being be viſible, and her true being bee viſible, yet her
being true, is not viſible to all; wee inquire for notes
whereby wee may not only diſcerne her true being, but
the being of her truth.
                  
                  Now all theſe notes (with diuerſe others of the
ſame kind) are not ſuch as are required by their owne
rules, as able to conſtitute the being of the true Church: for
a falſe Church may haue all theſe and more too; they
are not proper, for other ſocieties haue them; And if
theſe would carry it, then the South-Church might contend
for ſupremacy, and the Eaſt-Church would doubtles
carry it againſt all pretenders as the Mother Church,
For she is before Rome in time, she hath larger bounds, and
multitudes of people; Almost all the Apoſtolique ſeas, moſt of
the Patriarches, An Empire, Seauen vniverſall Counſels, The
Syrian language wherein Chriſt ſpake, The Greeke, wherein the
Scriptures of the new Teſtament was written; She hath Succeſsion
euen from the Apoſtles themſelues lineally without
interruption, They are at Vnity vnder one Chiefe,
and they call themſelues Catholiques; And yet for all
theſe, the Church of Rome (and that rightly) makes ſuch

exceptions againſt her, as wee doe againſt the Church
of Rome.
                  
                  Since therefore theſe notes are not eſſentiall, but accidentall;
not proper, but common; not permament, but tranſient,
wee ought to be wary how wee altogether truſt to their
probable direction, ſince all, or the moſt part of theſe are
ſuch notes as may accompany this way which ſeemes
right and is not ſo, and ſo may be made meanes to inſnare
and intangle our affections with preiudice and
parciality, and ſo to blinde our iudgements, that hauing
theſe wee shal be ſatisfied with shew and apparance,
though wee walke as Ioſeph and Mary did three days iourney
with the multitude of our friends,Luk. 2. 44. and neuer miſſe
Chriſt, as if he were none of our Company.
                  And I pray obſerue (to hold vs to our Allegory of a
way) if there were doubt of two wayes, which were the
right or the wrong way, and one that would vndertake
to direct you to finde out the right, should ſay; You
shall know the right way by theſe markes, It is an old
way, a beaten way, a way where Paſſengers trauell one after another,
It is a way by it ſelfe, or one way, it is called the old way,
and it is viſible; what were a man the better for theſe directions?
would he not thinke ſuch a guide out of his
wits? Eſpecially when he shall ſee both wayes alike old,
alike beaten; both vvayes to haue paſſengers ſucceſsiuely,
alike frequent, both wayes to be intire and ſingular, both
wayes to be called old, and both wayes to be viſible? Thus
both wayes doubtleſſe he would be wilde except he had
better directions: And yet this is the caſe of the Church,
which ſome would thus marke out to the beleefe and obedience
of all men. But to conclude, all theſe are no
true markes; but the Scripture is the true and vnfallible

Euidence to bound the Church out, to him that vvill
be heedfull to obſerue, and faithfull to beleeue, and
humble to obay, as we hope to manifeſt. Heere then it
were meete, I should giue you ſome infallible and inſeperable
note of the true way, hauing showne, or rather
pointed at the defect of theſe which the Church of Rome
produceth. But then I should offer violence both to
your patience, and to the Text; the time not permitting
ſo large a diſcourſe, and my Text leading me to diſcouer
the falſe way with ſeemes right, but giuing no warrant to
proceede farther. Only to conclude all, ſince it is within
my Commiſſion to manifeſt the falſe way, I will giue
you one note, a ſure one, whereby you may know when
you are out of the right way, that ſo you may shun error
and ſeeke truth, and enſue it till death, that in the end
you may finde euerlaſting life.
                  Briefly Chriſt himſelfe ſaith, I am the way, the truth, and
the life,
                     Ioh. 4. 
                     no man commeth to the Father but by me. He is the
way to walke in, the truth to guide you, the life wherewithall
you walke. And if you would finde this way, hee
himſelfe learnes you a rule,Ioh. 5. 39. 
                     Search the Scriptures, for in them
you thinke to haue eternall life, and thoſe are they that beare
witneſſe of me. And he there vpbraydes the Iewes, becauſe
they gaue no credit or heede to the Scriptures, but
preferd the traditions and doctrines of their forefathers
before it,Iohn. 5. 46. 47. ſaying, Had yee beleeued Moſes, yee would haue beleeued
me: for he wrote of me: But if you beleeue not his writings,
how shall yee beleeue my words? Therefore the Apoſtle
cals all Scripture 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,2. Tim. 3. 16 as a doctrine inſpired by
God to make men wiſe to ſaluation; and ſo beleeuing
himſelfe, and teaching others to beleeue, he praiſeth
Timothy for being from a childe brought vp in them,
                     2. Tim. 3. 15 and he

exhorts all men to follow him as he keepes in this way,
and vvalkes after Chriſt Ieſus and no otherwiſe. For ſo
long he is ſure he goeth right, and they may follow him
with ſecurity.
                  Now then I do not ſay vvhereſoeuer thou ſeeſt the
Scripture ſet forth for a ſigne, there Chriſt is vvithin:
there is the true way, the true Church. But I ſay whereſoeuer
thou canſt not ſee the Scripture, be aſſured thou art out of
the way: for the Scripture muſt be euer in thy eye, being
that ſetled Land-marke by vvhich thou muſt try and
know, and to vvhich thou muſt reduce and bring all
thy other coaſt-marks and ſea-marks. So it is that Antiquity
vvhich agrees vvith the verity of the Scripture; that
multitude vvhich vvorship God according to the rules of
the Scripture; that Suceſsion vvhich ſuceeed in the truth of
doctrine deliuered in the Scripture; that vnity vvhich beleeues
the Trinity taught in the Scripture; that Catholique
Church vvhich is founded vpon, and vniuerſally agreeth
vvith the truth of the Scripture; that viſible congregation
vvhich are ſeene to God, and vvhich ſee God as he reueales
himſelfe in the Scripture, that become notes by
vvhich thou maiſt ſafely trauaile in this doubtfull vvay
of mortality. So that the Scripture muſt euer be preſent to
make theſe infallible, though perhaps it be not of abſolute
neceſſity, that all theſe be euer preſent vvith the Scripture
to make the Church true. The Heathens of old burnt
the books of Numa becauſe he bewrayd therein the prophane
miſteries of their Idolatries. The Turks at this day
keepe their people in ignorance; no man muſt ſee into,
no man muſt diſpute or argue of their Sect.
                  And thus our Adverſaries of Rome deale vvith the
Scriptures; & reſembling heerin the Heathens & Turkes,

vvould yet make the vvorld beleeue, that they are the
only Chriſtians. And leſt they should ſeeme inſanire ſine
ratione, they haue a ſeeming reaſon why they permit not
the Scriptures to be in the mother-tongue of euery Nation
publiquely to be read by them; leſt forſooth (as
the Rhemiſts ſay in their preface) they should hurt themſelues,
as vvith fire, or water, or kniues, or ſwords, or the
like. And vvhy do they not put out the Sunne becauſe
it hurts the gazers eyes? or why put they not out their
eyes to preuent hurting, eſpecially ſince they miſ-leade
many a man to luſt and vanity? To argue from the abuſe
of things indifferent, to remoue the lawfull vſe of
them, is an abuſeof ſence and reaſon; But in things of
this kinde, of abſolute neceſſitie, it is an intolerable and
preſumptuous foolery. Nature cannot bee ſo blinde as
to ſuffer any but naturals to beleeue this their doctrine,
and to vvalke in this their way:Pro. 4. 18. 19. for Salomon ſaith, The way
of the wicked is as darknes: they know not at what they ſtumble:
But the path of theiuſt is as the shining light, that shineth more
and more vnto the perfect day.
                  
                  True; but vvill ſome ſay, All Heretickes hang out this
flagge, and all boaſt of the Scriptures: how shall wee
then know the true vvay from the falſe by that which is
common to all vvayes, or vvhich all vvayes at leaſt chalenge
and make shew of? Obſerue euen from this obiection
the force and authority of the Scriptures, vnder
which, falſehood aſwell as truth ſeeks to shelter herſelfe,
becauſe falſehood by this glaſſe learnes to trimme herſelfe
vp like truth. And looke as the Heathens by their
Idolatries proued aſwell that there vvas a God,Act. 17. 23. Rom. 1. as the
Iewes by their true vvorship: becauſe nature taught the
moſt barbarous Nation to adore ſome Deity, and rather

to make a God of a Calfe, a beaſt, a bird, a ſtone,
then to be a godleſſe Atheiſt: ſo all Hereſies and falſehoods
beare witneſſe for the truth and authority of the
Scriptures, vvhilſt they ſtriue to iuſtifie themſelues
thereby; knowing, without the Scripture all other their
arguments, notes, and pretences, how plentifull or plauſible
ſoeuer they bee, are nothing to the purpoſe; and
therefore they labour to wreſt the Scripture to their
fancie. And could the Church of Rome by this euidence
approue her preſent practiſe and doctrine, I aſſure my
ſelfe she would looke no farther, but vvould permit euery
man to reade the ſame at pleaſure; nay, she would
command the reading thereof vnder the paine of her
curſe, as now she forbids it vvith her Anathema. Ingenuous
therefore is this ſpeech of a Fryer of her owne;Math. Tileſius. Iuſti. cap. 5. 
                     Iudeos
Scripturis tanquam quibuſdam cancellis circumdedit Deus,
ne aliorum more Paganorum euaneſcerent, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         in adinuentionibus
manuum ſuarum-inſoleſcerent. God did impale the Iewes
with the Scriptures as with certaine bounds or abuttals,
leſt after the manner of Pagans they should apoſtate
and perish through the inuentions and deuiſes of their
owne hands.Cyrill. ad Regin. de fide. Therefore ſaith Cyrill, Neceſsarium nobis eſt
Diuine ſequi Literas, & in nullo ab earum praeſcripto diſcedere.
It is neceſſarie for vs to follow the Diuine Scriptures,
and to depart or vary in nothing from that which
they preſcribe.Iren. lib. 2. cap. 59. And Irenaeus: Scripturis diuinis, quae certa
& indubitata veritas est, in firma & valida petra eſt demum
ſuam aedificare: hac varò derelicta, alijs niti quibuſcunque doctrinis,
incertam effuſae arenae, vnde facilis ſit euerſio, est ruinam
ſtruere. To build vpon the diuine Scriptures, which
is the ſure and indubitable truth, is to build vpon a
firme and ſtrong rocke: but this being left, to rely vpon

any other doctrines vvhatſoeuer, is to build to certaine
ruine, vpon fleeting ſand from vvhence the ouerthrow
is eaſie.
                  Againe,Ambroſ. lib. de parad. cap. 
                           •
                        . In Scripturis diuinis non facilà reprehendamus aliquid, quod intelligere non poſſumus. they purſue this obiection farther, ſaying, If
it should be graunted, that with much ſtudy the learned
might attaine the knowledge of the true vvay from the
falſe by reading the Scriptures, yet how shall the ſimple
reſolue themſelues by that rule, vvhen the principall
queſtions ariſe from the variable expoſition of Scripture?
                  I told you before, that I gaue not this note as an abſolute
infallible marke to know the true way by, (though
being rightly taken, it is truly ſuch a note as is formerly
required, Eſſentiall, Proper, Permanent, and the principall
things whereby vvee are diſtinguished and diſcerned
from Iewes, Turkes, and Pagans) but I brought it to
diſcouer the falſe way, as by a light in a darke place. And
though the Ideot (as S. Paule cals him) be not able to
iudge of the Scripture, yet he hath an abridgement of
the Scripture, that is, certaine short rules drawne out
by the Apoſtles or Apoſtolique Men to guide his faith
by, and to try the ſpirits and the doctrine propounded;
this abridgement is called the Apoſtles Creede. Now
none can bee ſo ſimple, at leaſt in theſe dayes, (except
they bee beg'd, or go a begging) but they can vvith labor
and ſtudy (if they thinke the ſaluation of their
ſoules vvorth the vvhile) finde, vvhether the doctrine
taught, croſſeth and contradicteth either the Lords Prayer,
the Commandements, or the Articles of our Creede; all which
they haue commonly by heart. Yea God is often ſo fauorable
to theſe poore ſoules, vvho ſeeke him in true
humility with a ſight and acknowledgement of their
owne weakneſſe, and vvith a hunger and thirſt after

righteouſnes, that he reueales to babes and ſucklings,
vvhat he conceales from great Doctors and Rabbies: Inſomuch
as though Balaam himſelfe (blinded by couetouſneſſe,
and the deſire of gaine and glory) cannot ſee
vvhen his vvay is contrary to Gods vvay, and when the
Angel is ready to ſmite him,Numb 2 32. yet Balaams Aſſe can ſee this.
                  And they are worſe and more ſtupide then Balaams
Aſſe, that will not both ſee and confeſſe theſe flat contradictions,
oppoſing directly the written and reuealed
vvill of God. For it is eaſier to ſee flat contradictions
and oppoſitions, then things only diuerſe or diſſentaneous;
as weake eyes can diſcerne what ſtands in the
light, at leaſt what ſtops the light. To this end, whereas
God to his owne glory hath ſuffered Antichriſt mightily
to preuaile, and to ſeduce many by glorious shewes
of vnity and Antiquity, and generall apparences and flourishes
of truth, it hath pleaſed his goodnes in that Sea
& Kingdome of Antichriſt to leaue ſuch open & notorious
markes of falſehood,Abac. 
                           〈…〉
                        
                      as they which run by may reade
the Emnity betwixt the ſerpent and the ſeede of the woman
ſtill continuing & oppoſing the truth of the Scripture,
by doctrines directly contrary both to the outward
Letter of the Text, and inward meaning of the
Holy Ghoſt.
                  
                  And that I may inſtance briefely what I haue ſo peremptorily
affirmed, If they heare Chriſt ſay,Mar. 6. 
                     When yee
pray, pray thus, Our Father, &c. And then heare another
ſay; Nay rather when yee pray, pray thus, O Saint Mary
Queene of heauen, O Saint Michael, Saint Peter, Saint Paule,
&c. they vvill know this is not as it should be, and that
there is flat contradiction betwixt theſe two ſpeeches,
Thou shalt worship thy Lord thy God,
                     Mat 4. 
                     and him only shall thou

ſerue, which is the vvord of Chriſt, and this, Thou shalt not
worship God only, but the Saints and Angels alſo, which is the
voyce of Antichrist.
                  
                  If thou heareſt God ſay,Exod.20. 
                     Thou shalt make thee no grauen
Image, &c. and heareſt others ſay, Thou shalt make Images
and worship them. The Images of God and Chriſt thou
shalt adore with diuine worship; the Image of the Virgin
Mary and other Saincts vvith the worship that is due to the
perſon it ſelfe; and to this end shalt ſee them curtaile this
commandement out of their Catechiſmes, that by this
meanes, & at this gap they may bring their Whore with
all her abhominations in triumph into the Church, as
ſometimes the Grecians did their horſe into Troy; though
thou canſt not perhaps well vnderſtand their diſtinctions,
yet thou canſt diſtinguish this faſehood from truth,
and ſee how this their doctrine and practiſe contradicteth
the word of God: and therefore howſoeuer it may
ſeeme faire, & to be the right way to life, yet it is foule play,
and the end thereof must needs bee the Yſſues of death.
                  
                  Againe, when thou repeateſt in thy Creede this Article,
I beleeue in Ieſus Chriſt, &c. He aſcended into heauen, and
there ſitteth at the right hand of God the Father almighty, and
from thence shall come to iudge the quicke and dead, &c. And
heareſt a preſumtuous Prieſt with blaſphemous mouth
ſay, This wafer or peece of bread I will preſently make the body
of Ieſus Chriſt, the Sonne of God, and Sauiour of the world,
by croſsing it, and vſing three or foure words ouer it. Thou
muſt needs ſee that this binds thee to beleeue two contrary
things at once: for ſitting at Gods right hand, being
ſpoken to our capacity after the manner of men, betokens
a remaining and locall reſiding in heauen, touching
his bodily preſence; and comming from thence to iudgement
                     
aſſures thee, he will not come before he come to
iudge the quicke and the dead. And thou maiſt aſwell
call his birth, his life, his death, and all the reſt of his
actions & paſſions in queſtion, as this. Therefore learne
to vnderſtand the Doctrines that croſſe and contradict
one another, and whilſt thou beleeueſt Chriſt ſaying,
This is my body, beleeue, ſo as thou maiſt not croſſe the
Articles of thy Faith; but know, it is his body after no
carnall and fleshly maner, (for the flesh profits nothing. Ioh: 6.)
but after a ſpirituall and diuine manner. Not food for
thy ſtomacke, thy teeth, thy belly; but food for thy ſoule,
thy vnderſtanding, thy faith. And ſo hee cals the bread
his body heere; as himſelfe a dore, and a vine, and a rocke;
and Peter aſtone in other places of Scripture. And therefore
conſider, after Chriſt aſcended, he neuer appeared
to his Apoſtles in body againe, as he vſed to do often
before:Act.7. 55. But in heauen he appeared perſonally to Stephen
to confirme his faith. And when before his aſcenſion
he appeared to the twelue with whome Thomas Didimus
was;Iohn. 20. he did not vrge Thomas to beleeue any thing contrary
to his ſenſe of ſeeing, hearing, and feeling, but rather
willed him to confirme his faith by ſeeing and ſeeing,
what before he doubted. And then hee addes, Happy
are thoſe which ſee not, and yet beleeue; he doth not ſay,
Happy are they who beleeue contrary things to that they ſee, (as
they muſt do who beleeue the bread to be changed into
his naturall body, which they ſee and feele to be true
bread ſtill) but Happy are thoſe who beleeue when they ſee nothing
to the contrary, hauing the word of God (which cannot
contradict it ſelfe) for their warrant. As wee do beleeue
his Reſurrection and Aſcenſion which wee ſaw not, and
his comming to Iudgement in glory, which we hope to
ſee.
                  
                     
Thus when thou shalt heare Chriſt command thee
to take Bread and Wine in the Sacrament;1. Cor. 11. and a Prieſt
countermand this, and will thee to take bread only. Saint
Paule commanding thee from God to pray with vnderſtanding;
                     1. Cor. 14. 16.
and a Romane Prieſt willing thee to pray in a
ſtrange tongue. God himſelfe bleſsing Matrimony, and permitting
all men to marry; and the Apoſtle Paule ſaying,
Mariage is honorable with all men, and in ſpeciall tearmes, a
Bishop or Deacon ought to be the husband of one wife,
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Tim. 3. 2. 
                     &c. and
heareſt a Romane Prieſt ſay the contrarie; nay, inioyne
thee to do the contrary, and to binde thee by an othe
to do it: Then thou that haſt eares to heare, heare what S.
Iohn ſaith to thee,2. Ioh. 10. 11. 
                     If any come vnto you and brings not this
doctrine, (that is, brings any contrary doctrine to Chriſts)
receiue him not to houſe, neither bid him good ſpeed. And
heare what God gaue his people in charge of old in the
like caſe,Deut. 13. 1. 2. 3. 
                     If there ariſe among you a Prophet, or a dreamer of
dreames, and giueth thee a ſigne or a wonder: And the ſigne or
the wonder come to paſse, whereof he ſpake vnto thee, ſaying,
Let vs goe after other Gods (which thou hath not knowne) and
let vs ſerue them: Thou shalt not hearken vnto the wordes of
that Prophet, or that dreamer of dreames: for the Lord your
God proueth you, to know whether you loue the Lord your God
with all your heart, and with all your ſoule.
                  
                  So thou art not to beleeue him though he confirmes
his Doctrine by miracles; nay, ſuſpect him the more and
the rather for that: for miracles are the principall shelters
and pretences of Antichriſt, as thou maiſt ſee. Math. 24.
24. 2. Theſ. 2. 9. So then beleeue nothing which contradicts
the Scripture; for the Scripture cannot be contrary
to it ſelfe; becauſe it proceeds from the Spirit of
God, which is the Spirit of vnity, of loue, and of truth.
                  
                     
And to shut vp all this with a familiar example which
the weakeſt apprehenſion may conceaue, the ſleighteſt
memory retaine: Not long ſince there vvas a tryall before
the Iudges of Aſſize at Thetford betwixt two townes
for a Common,Oxborough. Gooderſtone. in which both claymed intereſt: The
one towne chalenged by preſcription, and pretended vſe,
and proued the vſe by them & their forefathers time out
of minde. The other parties produced an auncient Compoſition
in writing vnder the hand and ſeale of the Lords and Tenants
on both ſides. The Iudge then determined, that againſt
a writing there could be no preſcription; though, without
a writing, preſcription would be currant. Becauſe the
writing controuled their preſent cuſtome, and shewed,
Ab initio non fuit ſic; there was a time when their old vſe
was not, & therefore their claime was falſe. In prouing
their vſe againſt this compoſition, they proued themſelues
intruders, incrochers, treſpaſſers, euill neighbors:
It was ſo farre from doing them good, as it might haue
done them hurt, laying them open to euery mans action,
whom they had offended. So heere, wheere the
word is ſilent, there heare Antiquity, heare the Church, honor
tradition, preferre preſcription, cuſtome, vſe. If thou
doeſt not, then thou sheweſt thy ſelfe a ſelfe-wild Schiſmaticke,
or an obſtinate Hereticke. But where the Scripture
ſpeakes; where thou haſt that writing vnder hand and
ſeale, that old compoſition betwixt God and Man, appointing
Man his limits; there let not man preſume to intercommune
with God, but let the tongues of men and
Angels be ſilent. And whatſoeuer doctrine croſſeth
that, croſſe thou it out of thy Creed, or God will croſſe
thee out of the booke of life. Heare Saint Paule aduiſing
the Colloſsians, Let no man beare rule ouer you vnder

shew of a voluntary humility and worshipping of Angels,Col. 
                              •
                           . 18. intruding
into thoſe things which he hath not ſeene, vainely puft vp
by his fleshly minde. So whatſoeuer humble shew or pretence
he hath, he is puft vp, who preſumes to croſſe the
doctrine of the Scripture: And though he comes in
sheepes clothing,
                     Mat. 7. 15. with shew of mortification and contempt
of the world, yet inwardly he is a rauening wolfe, and
deſires to ſwallow widowes houſes vnder the colour of long
prayers,
                     Mat. 23. auricular confeſſion, and almes; And, though he
ſeemes a worme and no man, and creeping humbly vpon
his belly, lickes the duſt of the earth; yet beware, he may
be a ſubtile ſerpent, and no ſilly worme; for vnder the
like faire shew Sathan deceiued our Anceſtors in Paradiſe.
                  
                  Therefore attend Saint Paules admonition carefully,
where he ſaith,Gal. 1. 8. 
                     But though wee, or an Angell from heauen
preach any other Goſpel to you, then that which wee haue preached
vnto you, let him be accurſed. And as if this were not
ſufficient, obſerue how he riuets this commandement
or admonition againe,Gal. 1. 9. and againe, ſaying; As we ſayd
before, ſo ſay I now againe, If any man preach any other Goſpel
vnto you, then that yee haue receiued, let him be accurſed.
What you haue receiued you know in the Lords Prayer▪
                     
the Tenne Commandements, and the Creede, for theſe are
Epitomees and abridgements of all. If therefore Saint
Paule, or an Angell; an Angell that you were ſure came
immediatly from heauen; or Saint Peter, or his ſucceſſor;
any Man that you were aſſured without controuerſie
were his ſucceſſor; or any other Man or woman how
holy, chaſte, learned, or religious ſoeuer they bee, should
croſſe this doctrine, beleeue them not; nay, let them be accurſed,
ſaith Saint Paule. Much leſſe then beleeue the

dotage of men, their gulleries, impoſtures, fictions, melancholy
imaginations, dreames, viſions, and reuelations;
with which, being deceiued themſelues, they ſeeke and
indeauor to deceiue others.
                  You haue now ſeene the way, 1. What it is. 2. How it
may ſeeme good and not bee ſo. 3. How impotent, preiudiciall,
and partiall a Iudge man is, in his owne caſe. 4. You
haue ſeene the end of this faire way to bee falſe. 5. The
iſſue of that pretence to be death, whilſt life was promiſed.
6. Laſtly, you haue ſeene the Iudgement of Gods ſpirit,
shewing you the true notes to know the falſe way by. Submit
your ſelues now, and your ſenſes, and iudgements
to the direction of Gods holy Spirit, and thinke not
your ſelues or your Predeceſſors wiſer then Saint Paule,
then Salomon, then God himſelfe: but hauing found the
right way, the way to life, walke in it conſtantly, and
turne not backe to fables, and traditions, and falſehoods, in
which you haue too long wandred aſtray; for howſoeuer
that way may ſeeme right, and many of our forefathers
haue ignorantly vvalked in it, yet the iſſues thereof are the
vvayes of death: From which the Lord of his mercy deliuer
vs, and direct vs to be zealous according to knowledge;
and from faith to clime vp to practiſe, reforming
thoſe corruptions in our liues and manners; which now
by the courſe propounded in the beginning, wee come
to ſearch and lay open, in that which followes.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE SECOND
SERMON, PREPARED FOR
the Iudges, and preached vpon
Sunday, the Aſſiſes following vpon
Monday after.
            
               WEe haue ſpoken of the ſpeculatiue
part,Thammim the Theory, as the way was taken
for Religion; now we are to ſpeake of the
practicall part as the way may be taken for
the cuſtome and trade of our liues and converſations,
or rather for our paſſage, or vvalking in that
Religion which wee beleeue & profeſſe to be the truth.
And as the Lord ſaid by the Prophet Ieremy, ſo may I ſay
to you all.Ier. 21. 8. 
               Behold I haue ſet before you the way of life, and
the way of death: I haue showne you that way which ſeemes
right in the partiall eyes of man, who thinkes all his owne
vvayes cleane:
               Pro. 16. 2. And I haue showne you that way that is
both right and ſeemes ſo;Pro. 15. 24. 
               euen the vvay of life vvhich leadeth
to heauen.
            
            And now I proceed to exhort you to walke in this
vvay: for it is better not to know then not to practiſe
what wee know. An honeſt Turke which knowes not
the will of his Maſter, is to be preferd before a prophane
Chriſtian, who knowes his Maſters will and doth it

not,Luk. 12. 47 and therefore shalbe beaten vvith many stripes.
            
            A vvay then in this ſence of Salomon. is the cuſtomary
courſe of life which a man chiefely vſeth, whether it bee
in vertue or in vice. The whole race of mankinde naturally
walke in the roade and way of ſin and death: But
ſome are regenerate and called out of this way by faith
and repentance: others will not obay Gods word, but
rather chooſe to liue in the pleaſures of ſin for a ſeaſon.
And they are ſayd to be in their vvay, becauſe ſin reigneth
in them, tramples vpon them, & by cuſtome takes
away the ſence of conſcience; obdurating their hearts,
as a way is hardned by the feete of many paſſengers, ſo
as a plow cannot pierce the ſame. Thus men haue their
darling and beloued ſins which is their vvay, out of
which you can by no meanes put them; as a Hare ſtarred
before Greyhounds, will haue her accuſtomed way
and muſe, or die for it; ſo theſe.
            And thus a man is not ſayd to be in his vvay when
hee ſinneth of frailty, he then hath ſlipt out of his vvay,
and leaues not till he returne into his vvay by repentance:
but vvhen he ſins by cuſtome then he is in his
vvay. And a notorious ſinner is not ſayd to be in his
vvay if now and then hee comes to Church, prayes, receiues
the Sacraments, and forebeares groſſe ſinnes, or
does ſome ſingular and ſolitary good: for he is not well,
till he be out of this vvay againe, and like a dog returnes
to his vomite. Therefore a man is iudged wiſe or foolish,
good or bad, and to be in, or out of his vvay, by his ordinary
actions, not by a ſpeciall ſingle fact. For nemo
omnibus horis ſapit; Semel inſanivimus omnes, and in many
things wee offend all. It is therefore the generall courſe,
proceeding, and perſeuerance in vertue or vice that

brings life or death to our wayes: for the crowne of glory
is at the end of this race of vertue, & here death is at the
end of this race of vice: the end there of is the iſſues of death.
            
            
               Dauid committed Adultery and Murther,
                  
                     •
                  . King. 11. grieuous
ſlips out of Gods way; but being in thoſe ſins he vvas
beſides himſelfe, out of his wit, out of his way, and neuer
was at reſt till by repentance he returned and witneſſed
his ſorrow by that penitential Pſalme,
               Pſal. 51. in which he expreſſeth
cordiall repentance, and ſeemes to do corporall penance
in the Church to this day. His delight was in the
Law of the Lord, he vvas a man according to Gods owne heart;
A man, and therefore might erre, might ſlip out of the
vvay; but a man after Gods owne heart, therefore he would
walke with God as Enoch did,
               Gen. 5. 24. and was neuer well at his
heart till, he vvas reconciled to God by humble and
hearty repentance.
            
               Ieroboam was in his way all his life,1. King. 13. 33. 
               and ſolde himſelfe to
commit ſin: ſo that it is ſayd of diuerſe other Kings that
ſucceeded Ieroboam both in his ſeate and ſinnes, That they
did euill in the ſight of the Lord, and vvalked in the vvay of
Ieroboam, and in his ſinne vvherevvithall he made Iſrael to
ſinne.
            
            
               Ahab vvas not in his vvay vvhen vpon the Prophets
admonition he put on ſackcloth and humbled
himſelfe before God:1. King. 21 25. but he was in his way when he
followed the counſell of Iezabel, ſlue the Prophets of
God, and murthered Naboth for his vineyard.
            
               Iehu,
               2. King. 10 15. 16. though he ſlue all Ahabs children according to
the word of the Lord, though he would needs haue Iehonadab
ſee his zeale which he pretended was for God,
in killing all the Prieſt of Baall, and in taking the Images
out of the houſe of Baall, though he did many other

things tending to reformation of Religion and
the State. Yet all this while he was not in his element, in
his way: for preſently he was not well till he was committing
the ſins of Ieroboam, worshipping the golden
calues in Bethel and Dan. Therefore though the ſpirit of
God praiſe him for what he did well, yet it addes in the
end,2. King. 10 3
                     •
                  . 
               But Iehu tooke no heed to walke in the Lawe of the Lord
God of Iſraell vvith all his heart: for he departed not from the
ſins of Ieroboam vvhich made Iſrael to ſin.
            
            And thus much to shew what this way of practiſe is, and
when vve may be ſayd to bee in our vvay, or out of it.
            Now if thoſe men may be deceiued in their wayes,
who thinke they walke vprightly and like honeſt men,
vvhat shall become of ſuch as haue no vvayes, no vocations
to vvalke in, or of ſuch as know the vvay they
vvalke in, is the vvay of death, and yet continue to ſin againſt
their owne conſciences, and the very light of Nature?
If the honeſt Heathen or Turke, for whoſe truth
the Chriſtian dares depoſe, hauing had tryall thereof in
many bargaines; if the deuoute Iew, for whom Saint
Paule giues teſtimony:Rom. 9. 
               I beare them record they haue the
zeale of God though not according to knowledge. If the ſuperſtitious
Anchorite, vvho lockes himſelfe from all pleaſure,
and makes this vvorld a hell, that he might auoyd
Purgatory; if all theſe (I ſay) be condemned, when
their wayes ſeeme good to themſelues, hauing probable
reaſons to perſwade them that they are ſo; what shall
become of the irreligious Atheiſt, vvho like a foole
ſayth in his heart there is no God, and yet by naturall feare
is often taught to giue his heart the lie for ſo ſaying, and
knowes his way is the way of death, yet vvalkes in it?
what shall become of the prophane Naturaliſt and

Neuteraliſt, vvho is of all religions, or no religion; who
goes to an Alehouſe vvith better deuotion then to a
Church; and to a Play with greater delight and loue,
then to a Sermon? What shall become of the Mur
                  •
               herer,
Thiefe, Adulterer, Drunkard, Sodo nite, and of the
reſt of thoſe impadent ſinners vvho offend againſt nature,
and yet outface the light of the Goſpel, life of
the Law, and laugh Religion and Gouernement to
ſcorne? Theſe men ſee their vvayes are naught, yet they
ſit in the ſeate of ſcorners,
               Pſalm. 1. and vvalke in the vvay of the vngodly,
vvithout feare either of God or man. And their
eſtate may be reſembled to ſouldiars in a battell, who
ſeeing their fellowes die before, behinde, on the right
and left hand, and know their turne to be next, are yet
ſo tranſported vvith the preſent hurry and fury of the
fight, and their ſences ſo dam'd vp with the noyſe of
drums and trumpets, the neighing of horſes, the clashing
of vveapons, the thunder and lightning of the interchanged
artillery, as they cannot heare the heauy shrikes
and grones of their dying companions, but deſperately
goe on, and ſeeme ſenſeleſſe of danger, till indeed their
bodies be made ſenſeleſſe, and their ſoules more ſenſible
by death. So fares it vvith theſe, vvhilſt they are ſinning,
and their ſoules ready to bee ſlaine by ſinne, they
heare ſuch a thunder of othes, lyes, and laſciuious ieſts
and ſongs, ſuch drumming and toſſing of pots and
cannes, ſuch muſique vvhich the Diuell makes them, or
they rather make the Diuell, as they can neither looke
vp to attend the admonitions of God or man, of their
friends or foes, nor ſee the deſperate condition, miſery,
and ends of their dying companions, ſome ſlaine ſodainely,
others liuing miſerably beggarly, baſely, full

of rottenneſſe and ſores, deformed, filthy, lothſome to
the eye, to the eare, to the noſe; and the reſt of theſe,
and the beſt of theſe, going (as they ſay) to heauen
in a halter, if euer they come there. If the righteous
ſcarce be ſaued, where shall the vngodly, and ſinners appeare?
O Lord open their harts, that as they ſee their
wayes are euill, ſo they may leaue their euill cuſtoms,
and turne to thee with ſorrow and repentance, that if
it be poſſible, they may be ſaued from the pit of deſtruction.
            But leaue wee theſe vagrants, vvho either vvalke in
no vvay, or like rogues, and vagabonds trauaile vvithout
paſport, & come to ſpeake of ſuch as ſeeme to haue
warrant for their vvayes, though vpon tryall wee shall
finde them forged and counterfeite.
            Wayes are either 1. Vicinales. 2. Or Priuatae. 3. Or
Publicae.
            
               1. Vicinales vi.e. Or vvayes of vicinity or neighborhood,
are betwixt ſtreete and ſtreete, neighbor and
neighbor, houſe and houſe, in Cities or townes. And
theſe may be compared firſt vvith thoſe opinions in our
Religion, or conditions and manners in our liues,
vvhich vvee take vp by imitation of our Parents, Tutors,
Predeceſſors or the like. Thus by imitation and example
of others vvhome vvee reverence for knowledge
or deuotion, by the cuſtome and conſent of times and
places, wee are led as it were blindfold, to take vp vpon
truſt all matters of faith without examination of their
principles or grounds; vvhen if vvee vvere not kept
backe from ſearch by ignorant ſuperſtition, vve should
finde, that, As man naturally begets man to ſin according to
his depraued Image, and man is apter to follow man in euill

then in good; ſo both in Faith and manners wee are often miſ-led
and corrupted by our naturall parents and ſuperstitious predeceſsors:
by which reaſon, as the tares ouergrow the wheat,
ſo the foolish ouergrow the wiſe, the ſuperſtitious ouergrow
the truly religious; and the godleſſe, the godly; and
ſo ſtultorum infinitus numerus, the vvhole Earth is replenished
vvith ſuch people.
               For inſtance, wee ſend our children beyond the Seas
into Fraunce, Italy, Spaine, Germany; they returne not Englishmen
from thence, but Frenchmen, Italians, Spaniards,
Germans; They do not only bring home the
Language, which vvas the pretence of their trauell, but
their religions, manners, cuſtomes, diets, geſtures,
cringes, vices, diſeaſes: ſo that nothing heere now
ſeemes good to them, but all that they bring home
that ſeemes right in their eyes, they hate to be reformed,
preiudice hath ſo taken vp their affections and
iudgements aforehand.
               Thus young men taſte according to the company
which firſt enters and ſeaſons them. By which meanes
ſome ſmell of Rome, ſome of Conſtantinople, and the greateſt
number become like ſalt vvithout ſauour.
               
               2. Secondly, ſome vices by their propinquity and
neighborhood to vertues, do ſo reſemble them,that they
can hardly be diſtinguisht from them: and ſo deceiue many
a ſoule, who takes a ſpetious vice for a wholeſome
vertue, and reſteth ſatisfied with the shadow in ſtead
of the ſubſtance, as children are pleaſed aſwell with
counters and counterfeit coyne, as vvith pure gold and
currant mony.
               So prodigality is often taken for liberality, or for charity.
Spirituall pride is taken for Humility: Single incontinencie

or impotencie, is taken for chaſtitie; Temeritie is taken
for Fortiude: Securitie is taken for peace of conſcience:
Preſumption is taken for faith: vaineglory for Piety and deuotion:
cholericke folly, for zeale: And deadnes of heart, and
dulneſſe of affection, for Contentment.
               
               3. Thirdly, ſome naturall vertues, for neighborhoods
ſake, and for ſome reſemblance betwixt them, are often
miſtaken, for Theologicall vertues; And this point would
bee vvell obſerued; for it deceiues many both in judging
of others, and in iudging themſelues too, vvhilſt
either they conſider not the difference, or marke not
the proper concurrants to both, or diſtinguish not betwixt
Nature and Grace.
               
               Thus morall or ciuill honestie vvhich a Turke may
haue, lookes like true ſanctitie, vvhich the true Chriſtian
onely hath. So hiſtoricall Faith, vvhich vvicked men may
haue, and the diuels haue, lookes at firſt blush, to ſome
that haue eyes to ſee no farther, like iuſtifying Faith,
vvhich the Elect onely haue: So naturall loue, vvhich
Ethnickes haue, is miſtaken for Chriſtian Charitie: for that
a vvorke be good, that is, accepted of God, it muſt proceede
out of Faith, and be done in obedience to his commandement,
and to the end to glorifie him. Now this cannot be
vvithout knowledge, that is the ground of all: for how
shall they beleeue on him,of whom they haue not heard? Rom.
10. 14. Bona opera dicuntur opera Ethnicorum, aut ſecundum
apparentiam tantùm, aut quod ſubſtantia operis in ſe bona ſit, licèt
ſubiecto, obiecto, fine, alijſque circumſtantijs ſit malum. The
vvorkes of Ethnickes are called good, either by reaſon
of their apparence onely, or that the ſubſtance of the
worke is in it ſelfe good, although in reſpect of the ſubiect,
obiect, end, and other circumſtances it bee euill.
And againe, Opera Ethnicorum non idcircò mala dicuntur,

quod fiant ſimplicitèr, ſed quòd non fiant benè. The vvorkes
of Ethnickes are not therefore ſaid to bee euill, as they
are ſimply done, but for that they are not done well as
they ought to be.
               For that a naturall vertue be chriſtened, (as I may ſay)
vvithout vvhich it cannot be acceptable to God, there
muſt concurre theſe circumſtances:
               1. Firſt, that it be done in a right vvay, a right faith,
a right religion, which is onely in the faith of Chriſt:
other foundation can no man lay, 1. Cor. 3. 11.
               2. Secondly, that it be warranted by a ſpeciall faith;
that is, firſt, a certaine knowledge out of Gods word,
that it is a worke pleaſing to him, and not contradictorie
to his will: ſecondly, vvith a full perſwaſion that his
perſon, vvho performes it, is reconciled to God, in and
through Chriſt Ieſus; and ſo his worke, yea all his works
accepted, as the perſon and ſacrifice of Abcl was accepted
of God, Gen. 4.
               3. Thirdly, that it be done to a good end, that is, to
glorifie God, to teſtifie our loue and thankfulneſſe to him, for
his infinite loue to vs; and to make our owne election ſure.
And all workes done otherwiſe, how great ſoeuer they
be, how glorious a shew ſoeuer they make, either in our
owne eyes, or in the eyes of the world, are thoſe apparances
vvhich often beguile good men, (I meane, men
of good natures, of good naturall diſpoſitions and affections)
aud vvhich S. Augustine cals ſplendida peccata, gliſtering
ſinnes; promiſing life, but leading to death:
Their wayes ſeeme right in their owne eyes, but the yſſues therof
are the wayes of death.
               
            
            
               Viae priuatae.
               In the ſecond place we haue priuate vvayes, vvhich are

vvayes of eaſe for a mans perſon, or the priuate vſe of
his family, as garden alleys, vvalkes, back-wayes and bywayes.
And theſe haue their reſemblances in our generall
callings as Chriſtians, and in our particular callings, as
we are Miniſters, Magiſtrates, Lawyers, Merchants, or
the like.
               1. In our generall callings, wee haue priuate wayes,
vvhereby vvith Nouatus, vve thinke to goe to heauen
alone by our ſelues: As for inſtance, amongſt our Romish
Aduerſaries the infinite Orders and vvayes of perfection,
(as they call them) doe plainely manifeſt; and
vvith vs, that auerſeneſſe and ſingularitie of humour
vvhich preuailes ſo farre with ſome, as it cauſeth vvhatſoeuer
is commaunded by the lawfull Magiſtrate in
Church affaires, to be by them and their followers vtterly
miſliked; if for no other reaſon, yet for this, that it
is commanded, and in obaying they should commit, as
they ſay, three grieuous faults. 1. Sinne againſt
their conſciences. 2. Giue offence and ſcandall to their
weake brethren. 3. Infringe their Chriſtian liberty.
               2. In our particular calling, wee haue our priuate
walkes alſo, euery one neglecting the maine end at
which they should driue, and ayming obliquely, either
at priuate gaine, at vaineglory, or the ſatisfaction of
ſome baſe humor and paſſion. And to begin with the
Diuine, becauſe he should leade others right: The end
of his vocation is, by preaching to acquaint men with
the will of God, by praying to turne the wrath of God
from the people, and to obtaine a bleſſing vpon his labors,
and by practiſe to confirme ſuch in the true faith
by vvorkes, as he hath wonne by words to beleeue and
imbrace it: But doth he tend this errand? alas nothing

leſſe, for aſſoone as he is fligge, and comes fresh out of
the Vniuerſitie, if he bee croſt in his firſt preferment,
then he growes refractary to the State and preſent government
of the Church eſtablished; neither makes he
conſcience to miſ-leade others, ſo he may be head of a
faction, and be thought ſomebody. But if in his firſt
yeeres he meetes no checke, but gets preferment, his
ſtudy then is to grow with the time; and then he cannot
diſtinguish the warts, moles, ſcarres, and corruptions of
the Church, from perfections and graces: his ſtudy is
not to diſcharge one Cure well, but to procure and
charge himſelfe with many; to heape ſteeple vpon
ſteeple, as if he ment to climbe vp to heauen that way.
And after all to retire himſelfe to a Prebendary out of
the vvay, where like a bird in a cage he may be fed fat,
and prouide to purſchace ſome new and higher preferment,
but neuer ſing more.
               This his way ſeemes good to himſelfe (for I will not
vncharitably iudge him to ſin againſt his conſcience)
and yet he finds the iſſue thereof to be the vvayes of death.
But we muſt let him alone, he is in his way, it is in vaine
to moue him to leaue it, for he laughes both at the motion
and the man that makes it: he abounds in his
owne ſenſe, and will not be taught, but by ſence, by
feeling punishment when it is too late to shun it.
               The Lawyer is preſented next, the end of whoſe vocation
is to do iuſtice, and determine controuerſies truly
for the procuring and preſeruing of peace: But doth
he hold himſelfe ſtrictly in his courſe to accomplish
this end of his calling and profeſſion? Alas no. But he
demeanes himſelfe for the moſt part, as a man placed aboue
the Lawe; And what he doth is either againſt the

Lawe, or without a Lawe, as it were by his princely
prerogatiue,1. Tim. 1. 9. 
                  non eſt iuſto lex poſita, &c. There is no Lawe for
a Lawyer. Thus he may take what cauſe he liſt in hand,
though he know it be vniuſt: for his office (he ſaith)
is not to Iudge, but to pleade; and he ſpeakes therefore
with more affection and earneſtnes againſt the truth,
then for it: Becauſe a good cauſe will ſpeake for it
ſelfe, but he deſerues praiſe that maintaines an ill cauſe
well; and for this he shall be famous, and get Clyants,
and ſo get wealth which is that he aymes at.
               Againe, he may take what fees he will, though the
Law limits his takings, and cals the exceſſe, extortion.
He is the expounder of the Lawe, he is Lex loquens, the
tongue of the Law, and ſaith, That the intention of the
Lawe was to limit men that they should take no leſſe,
and it limits ſuch as can get no more.
               Againe, other Trades muſt do their worke, if they
wil haue wages; and muſt acknowledge the benefit they
receiue, and the Benefactor: but heere the Maſter is
the ſeruant; and whereas in all other vocations there
lies an Action in the Caſe againſt ſuch, as hauing taken a
valuable conſideration for their paines, will not performe
their worke; He, nothwithſtanding his fee, may
ſpeake or hold his peace as he pleaſeth: for though he
hath two handes to take fees on both ſides, yet he cannot
be at two Barres at once, and Demoſthenes, we know,
had as much for holding his peace, as AEſchines for pleading.
The Doctrine of Reſtitution he likes not, it is a
popish point; in all other things he can be content to
be Catholique, to be vniuerſall, to be for euery man:
To be for a man in one caſe, againſt him in another,
though the caſes reſemble: nay, perhaps to be both for

the plaintife and defendant in one caſe; and though he
cannot pleade for both, becauſe he hath but one
tongue, yet he may giue counſell to both, for that one
toungue is double; and takes fees of both, for that's the
end of all. His wayes ſeeme good and right; for can
he walke wrong who hath the Law, the rule of Equity
in his hand, and whoſe office it is to guide others right in
the way? Yes doubtleſſe, the end shewes, that Malè parta,
malè dilabuntur, the iſſues of all are the wayes of death and
deſtruction.
               
               Next looke vpon the Marchant as it were the Generall,
and all Mechanicks as vnder-Officers of commerce,
the end of their Profeſſions is, or should be, by commutatiue
Iuſtice to ſupply the neceſſities of each other,
and ſo of the State. But ſee how they propound priuate
gaine to themſelues, as the only maine end and ſcope of
all their labours. And vnder this couer what one can
cheate or cooſen his neighbor of, either by ſophiſticated
wares, or falſe waights and meaſures, or by any other
cloſe deuiſe or conveyance, he thinkes it tolerable,
nay laudable, a part of his trade, a miſtery (as he cals it)
of his profeſſion; without which he could not be a good
husband, or thought fit to deale in the world, or ſet vp
for himſelfe.
               Thus perhaps he will be curious in the duties of the
firſt Table, which touch not the corruptions of his profeſſion;
but for workes of mercy commanded in the ſecond
Table, he knowes not what they meane, or perhaps
they are ſuperſtitious and popish workes, though
he heare God himſelfe ſay,Hoſ. 6. 6. 
                  I will haue mercy, and not ſacrifice.
He will not ſweare perhaps; for that is too open
a ſin for his purpoſe; in this point perhaps he will be an

Anabaptiſt: but if lyes will ſell his euill-conditioned
commodities, he will let none lye by him, nor no man
lye beyond him. He will not breake the Sabaoth, no
not to eate, no not to feed others, not to doe good, he
is a ſtrict Sabbatarian, a Iew in opinion; but that day
or any other he will not ſticke to cooſen his credulous
brother, and aſwell may you truſt a Iew as truſt him.
Thus he growes rich, and treaſures vp wrath for himſelfe,
and in his whole dealing shewes himſelfe a wrong
Marchant, but a right Iudas, who wil gaine by the fayned
shew of godlineſſe, or by any other courſe. His way
ſeemes right to himſelfe▪ though the end thereof be the Yſſues of
death.
               
            
            
               Viae Puplicae, vel Pretoriae.
               In the third place wee haue Publique wayes, common
roads, the Kings high-way, which reſembles publique
iudgement, publique authority, and the Common
Lawes of the Land. For becauſe all men thinke their
owne wayes good, bee they wayes of priuacie, or wayes
of neighborhood, therefore God hath appointed Kings
and Iudges to bee life-tenants and Deputies in his
ſteade, to defend weake truth from ſtrong falſehood and
oppreſſion, and to decide euery controverſie accordin
to the right rule of reaſon and Equity contained and
expreſſed in the Lawes where they gouerne. Otherwiſe
vndoubtedly, if euery man might be his owne
Iudge, the Thiefe, the Murtherer, all would be quit, and
the Iudge and Iewry should ſmart for it; the Plaintife
and Defendant, all vvould be ſauers, and the Lawyer
should pay for all, who now is like to get all. To auoyd
therefore this confuſion, God hath ſet Caeſar to arbitrate
indifferently betwixt party and party, and giuen

him a Lawe and direct rule how to doe it, and that he
might do this freely without partiality, without feare or
any other thing that might miſ-leade his iudgement,
God hath ſet him aboue all, exempted him from all other
Iudge but himſelfe, and the Lawes which are his
rule and iudge. Now to the end he might be fully and
compleately furnished, God puts an other ſpirit into
him, as wee ſee in Moſes, and after in the 70. Aſſiſtants,
and in Saule, Dauid, Salomon and others who were extraordinarily
indued from aboue with Graces fitting their
imployments; and this Spirit vvhilſt it continues vvith
them, doth neuer contradict the publique voice, that is,
the Lawe of the State, but ioynes with it and ſpeakes
the ſame language, from whence perhaps that common
ſpeech aroſe, that the voice of the people is the voice of God,
if it bee ioyned vvith the voice of the King; and this
voice is to be heard and obayed for conſcience ſake,
being heere oppoſed to the Spirit of priuacie, which will
rule, though vvithout reaſon; and the more weake it is,
is for that the more vvilfull.
               Now this Spirit of priuacie (whoſe vviſedome conſiſts
in vvilfulnes) may be in a publique Perſon, when
for his owne or peoples ſinne he hath loſt the publike
ſpirit vvherewith God indues Princes. So the publique
ſpirit departed from Saule,
                  1. Sam. 16. 14. and a priuate mad ſpirit
poſſeſſed him,1. Sam. 18. vvhich made him hate Dauid, for louing
him, and being loued of God; to giue him his daughter
vpon purpoſe to enſnare and betray him; to deale falſely
vvith him in all his faire pretences; and laſtly, to croſſe
and contradict his owne religious Law for the extirpation
of vvitches, by conſulting vvith them.
               
                  Salomon vvas in the like caſe, vvhilſt by the vncleane

ſinne of Adultery he fell into the ſnare of Idolatry; he
croſt his people, and forgat his owne vvritings, vvhere
he ſaith,Pro. 28. 15 
                  As a roaring Lyon, and a ranging Beare, ſo is a wicked
Ruler ouer the poore people: Yet he thought himſelfe then
alſo perhaps as vviſe as before, becauſe he found himſelfe
as vvitty, and forgot vvhat he had vvritten, That
into a malicious ſoule wiſedome shall not enter: nor dwell in the
body that is ſubiect unto ſinne.
                  Sap. 1. 4. 5. 6. 7. 
                  For the holy Spirit of diſcipline
will flie deceite, and remooue from thoughts that are without
vnderſtanding: and will not abide when vnrighteouſnes commeth
in. For wiſedome is a louing Spirit, and will not acquit a
blaſphemer of his words: for God is witneſſe of his reines, and a
true beholder of his heart, and a hearer of his tongue. Wherefore,
for this, vvhen he recouered his former publique
ſpirit, he cryed peccaui and miſerere vvith his father David,
and vvrote that booke called Eccleſiaſtes, to bemone
and manifeſt his owne fall, and forewarne other Princes
to beware of the ſpirit of priuacie, that they may
hedge in their royall wayes vvith theſe conſcionable reſtrictions,
vvhereby they may be obayed for conſcience
ſake by their ſubiects.
               1. Firſt, Salomon, or Caeſar muſt not rule vvithout a
Lawe, nor by his abſolute power make any, but ſee to
the execution of thoſe that are made. It inclines therefore
too much towards tyranny for a Magistrate to exerciſe
an abſolute authority vvithout limit, and the Superiour
who rules vvithout a Lawe, or againſt Lawe,
vvalkes in no way himſelfe, but balks his owne high-way;
for a way is fenced, but the champian fields are for the
wild-gooſe-chaſe; and corners and holes for ſiniſter
actions. When as publique perſons should do publique
actions in publique,Gen. 23. 10. in the Gates of the City, in the Kings

high-way,
                  Deut. 22. 15 in the eye of all. For chamber-workes are ſuſpicious,
and carry a shew of priuacy and parciality. And
ſo it is ſayd by Liuy, that Tarquinius made the name of a
King odious at Rome, becauſe he ruled all Domesticu
conſilijs by chamber-Councell, as Rehoboam in Iſrael, and
Lewes the 11, in Fraunce. Thus Kings though they bee
in ſome ſort aboue the Law, becauſe they are diſpeuſers
of it, are not yet without a Lawe, becauſe they muſt
rule themſelues and others by it. And thus much the
crowne that a King weares teſtifieth, which is a type of
the loue, and acknowledgement, and conſent of the
people in his gouernement; and lets him ſee, that there
is a verge, a hoope, a compaſſe for the heades of Kings,
aſwell as of ſubiects, and that wee come to manifeſt in
the ſecond conſideration.
               2. Secondly, Gods Lawe is Caeſars verge, which
Caeſar muſt neither tranſgreſſe, nor ſuffer to bee tranſgreſt.
Where God hath ſet no Lawe, there Caeſars
Lawe (I meane the Lawe of the Land, which is the
hedge to this high-way of the King) muſt ſtand. And this
muſt agree with the equity of the Lawe of God, from
vvhence it originally takes life and ſtrength. For as
where it agrees with Gods Lawe, wee muſt obay it for
conſcience ſake; ſo where it contradicts or croſſeth the
Lawe of God, the Apoſtle Peter giues a generall rule,
It is there better to obay God then man.
                  Act. 4. 19. To cleere this:
               Thou ſayeſt thy conſcience tels thee, the Religion commanded
by the King, or ſome ceremony vſed in the
Church according to the Lawes eſtablished, is not agreeable,
but contrary to the truth; If thou canſt manifeſt
this by the word of God, then thy Conſcience tels
thee right, and thou art not to doe what is commanded

by man, though he ſpeakes humane Lawe, but
yet thou art to ſuffer vvhat is inioyned by him, ſo
ſpeaking with the Law, or ſo doeing as Executor
of the Lawe: and both theſe wayes thou obayeſt
God and Caeſar too; God actiuely, doing vvhat he vvils;
and Caeſar paſſiuely, ſubmitting thy will to Gods
holy ordinance, and obaying the Magiſtrate for conſcience
ſake. But if thy conſcience tels thee this or that,
and cannot proue what it tels thee, but by shifts and
shadowes; then it is not truly thy conſcience, at leaſt
no true but a lying conſcience that ſo miſleads thee; nay
rather, it is thy phantaſie, thy imagination, thy peeuish,
preiudiciall, and froward conceit; And thou art bound
to reſiſt, and breake thine owne crooked and peruerſe
vvill, aud to ſubiect it to the will of God, who hath ſubiected
thee to Caeſar. For Conſcientia non eſt contra ſcientiam,
ſed cum ſcientia, Conſcience is ioyned with knowledge;
thats the ground, otherwiſe thou ſetſt vp an Idol in thy
owne heart, and worshippeſt it, vvhilſt thou obayeſt an
erring and ignorant conſcience. For an Idol (ſaith Saint
Paule) is nothing in the world; and ſuch is thy conſcience, a
bug-beare, a Scar-crow, a Chimera of thine owne melancholly
imagination, or maleuolent invention: And
howſoeuer it may ſeeme right to thy ſelfe & thy Sectators,
or Sect maſters, the Yſſues thereof are the wayes of death.
               
               3. Thirdly, as the Lawes of God muſt guide our conſciences
in our rellgious duties, ſo the poſitiue Lawes of
the Kingdome muſt be the high-way wherein euery one
muſt vvalke in actiue obedience. And Kings and Iudges
are the diſpenſers and diſpoſers of theſe Lawes according
to reaſon. Neither shall they need in the execution
to ſatisfie euery priuate, curious, and contentious

head, which pretending conſcience, vvill diſobey, or
to ſatisfie euery delinquent with arguments, for then
his worke were infinite; but ſtrictly and directly to open
the booke, and to execute the Lawe of the Land, and
euery liege-man is to acquieſſe therein. For the Iudge is,
or ought truly to bee, Lex loquens, and doth but tell vs
the Lawe, and shew vs the high-way in which wee muſt
walke; and if wee liſt not to walke in it, wee muſt be
content to ſuffer for our willfull folly, or walke out of
the vvay, out of the reach of the Lawe. And there is
great reaſon for this, for God hath ſet Kings as his Deputies
to execute Iuſtice and Iudgement, he expects it at
their hands; and where any euill fals out for lacke of execution,
the fault is the Magiſtrates, if there be Law to
preuent it; of him shall the ſoule be required which perisheth
for lacke of gouernment; as the ſoule shalbe required
at the Paſtors hands, which perisheth for lacke
of inſtruction in the truth. Great reaſon is it therefore
he should haue power ouer ſuch as he muſt anſwere ſo
ſtrictly for, that he may punish them, or compell them
to come in, or keepe them for drawing others out of his
folde.
               So wee ſee, Iudg. 17. Micha ſets vp an Idol contrary to
Gods Lawe, he will haue a parlor-worship, a religion
by himſelfe: The reaſon of this error of knowledge and
conſcience is giuen there; Then there was no King in Iſrael,
but euery man did what ſeemed good in his owne eyes. So the
King is to ſee to Religion, and if Idolatry increaſeth, or
ſects, or ſchiſmes ariſe, it is counted the Kings fault,
if there bee a King; the fault ariſing heere for lacke of
a King: that is, of a fit perſon to execute the Lawe againſt
Idolatry. Likewiſe in the 19. Chap. of Iudges, the

Leuites wife is defiled after an vnſatiable & brutish maner:
The reaſon of this villaine, this iniuſtice, this error
in practiſe, is giuen as before, Then there was no King, &c.
So all diſorders of life are for lacke of execution of Iustice:
for God gaue the People a Lawe in this caſe; ſo they
lacked not a law, but a Magiſtrate to execute it. Againe,
in the 21. Chap. of Iudg: There are two barbarous facts
mentioned; the firſt, the bloudy deſtruction of Iabes Gilead;
the other, the rape of certaine virgins by fraude and
force, who came out, without feare of trechery, ſecurely
truſting to their owne innocence, and the peace of the
State. The reaſon of theſe diſorders is giuen as before;
Then there was no King in Iſrael, but euery man did what
ſeemed good in his owne eyes: There vvas a Lawe, but there
vvas none deſigned to execute it.
               Prayſed be God, vvee haue both King, Lawes,
Prieſts, and Iudges; how haps it then, that there are (I
do not ſay ſinnes, for there vvill be ſinnes as long as
there are men,) but ſuch common, open, crying ſinnes,
ſuch raigning, roaring, raging ſinnes, ſuch beaten roads,
common high-vvayes of ſinnes and ſinning, as if there
vvere no King, no Lawe, no Prieſt, no Iudge in England?
I ſpeake not of them, vvhich may pretend their excuſe
from the fraylty of our natures, and our procliuenes to
ſin, but of ſuch as are committed with a high hand, ſtanding
like theeues by the high-vvayes ſide at nooneday,
and robbing God of his glory, the Common-wealth of
their honor, and that vvith violence, vvith applauſe,
shaddowing their vnlawfull actions vnder the pretence
of Lawe it ſelfe, vvhich should reforme them. And
ſome of theſe for the manifeſtation of this point, I intend
to bring to the barre to anſwere for themſelues.
               
                  
But ſee I shall not neede; for impudent Sacriledge appeares
of himſelfe to confront the Pulpit and the bench
too; It is not a ſcarlet gowne that can fright Diues; for
he vvent in purple euery day. If Iuſtice helpe not, he
vvill ſtrangle Deuotion: for vvho vvill giue to God, if
the Diuell enioyes vvhat is giuen? Or vvho vvill giue
to the Clergie, to the poore, to charitable vſes, if the Athieſt,
the prophane perſon, the vncharitable vvretch,
the Politician, may ceize vpon it & ſell it, or the title to
i
                     •
                  , as he doth. It lyes only in the hands of Power and Authority
to ſtop his mouth; for he hath got ſuch countenance
and ſupportance as he ſits in judgement, and hath
giuen ſentence (like the Man of ſinne) againſt the Clergy,
that tithes are not due to them Iure Diuino; and
therefore he and his may ceize vpon them vvith Preſcriptions,
Impropriations, Prohibitions, like an other three-headed
Cerberus, Iure diabolico. The Country-people like
well, and vvill ſoone learne this leſſon, they thought before
it vvas no conſcience to pay tithes, but all being
due by almos, it vvas no theft, no ſacriledge, but vviſedome
and good huſbandry to keepe aſmuch backe as
they might; vvee expected reformation, and a reſtoring
of the oyle to the lampes, as God had lent theſe times
more light then others: But now there is cauſe to doubt
rather ſubſtraction, then to hope for reſtitution; much
leſſe to expect addition: Simony, Sacriledge, all are let
looſe and armed, and Iudas hath ſufficient colour to
ſaue like a theefe his oyntment from Chriſts members
and Miniſters, vnder pretence of charity, and releeuing
the poore; though Chriſt ſees the thiefe in Iudas heart;
and though Salomon knowes howſoeuer this way may
ſeeme right to themſelues, yet the end thereof is deſtruction to

the Church, and death to many a poore ſoule. But they are in
their vvay, rather vvilling to pay tenths to Sathan, then
to God; It is therefore ten to one, if one of ten, haue
grace to returne and to reſtore. God is iuſt, who, whilſt
they withdraw their hands and hearts from good, withdrawes
his grace from their hearts; they may heare, but
they profit not to obedience and practiſe; He will not
ſuffer ſuch to gaine grace by the preaching of the Word,
vvho for their owne priuate gaine vvould ſtarue the
Preachers of the Word.
               The Vſurer comes next as a brother in euill to Sacriledge.
This muſt not now be called a ſinne, it is juſtified
out of the Pulpit to be none; and it is growne to
be a profeſſion too, and the Vſurer is a free-man of euery
company, but not free in any good cauſe or company.
It was a ſin ſo vgly heeretofore, as none durſt
practiſe it, ſcarce durſt name it, but vvith the ſigne of
the croſſe, as if they had ſpoken of a Diuell: but it is now
ſo common, as he is ſcarce thought an honeſt man that
is not one: for he cannot be honeſt that is not rich, and
he cannot be rich vvithout this trade. This is the gulph
wvith ſinks and ſwallowes our Marchants, Clothyers,
Farmers, Owners, all. Men complaine of the Law, (and
that vvorthily) but this, this is the rocke that Shipwracks
all, and ſpoiles all trading and commerce, whilſt
the venter and hazard is the buyers and the ſellers; but
the certaine gaine fals betwixt both to the vſurer. This
Man payes neither duty to God nor the King, for his
trade hath no warrant from either. God forbids it, the
King tolerates it, as ſome States doe the practiſe of the
Stewes, or as our Sauiour ſaid of Diuorces, Moſes for the
hardnes of your hearts; ſuffered you to put away your wiues, but

from the beginning it was not ſo; the time hath not beene
long, ſince this ſinne came in requeſt for a vertue; nor
will it bee long ere the practiſers shall ſee, that howſoeuer
the way ſeemes good in their owne eyes, yet the Yſſues
thereof are the wayes of death.
               
               Next, the vſurer and the Sacrilegious perſon, who are
coupled like dogges, comes three together in a cluſter:
1. The Foreſtaller, 2. The Ingroſſer, 3. The Depopulator; as
ſeuerall ſpecies of one Genus; birds of a feather, who hang
together of a ſtring, and it is pitty they should not euer
ſo hang.
               The Foreſtaller (I meane not the petty foreſtaller of a
Fayre or Market, but the foreſtaller of Commodities in
a vvhole Country) bites cloſer then a Gooſe; for the
Gooſe eates all aboue the earth, but this beaſt eates
vp all commodities before they ſpring, aſſoone as they
are ſowne in the Earth, and therefore is a right earthworme.
               2. Neither when I ſpeake of Ingroſſers, do I intend
petty perſons, who ingroſſe vp this or that commodity;
but the Ingroſſer of Farmes, who like another Cain takes
poſſeſſion of all, and will not indure any man to thriue
or liue by him. Euery Farme, euery trade, euery Sheepes-courſe
is his. Nothing fatts him but a deere yeare, nothing
drownes him but a deepe and long ſnow: for if
that melts not the ſooner, hee melts. He hath in his
hands perhaps what would imploy and maintaine ten
houſeholds, and he ſcarce keepes one. Thus he beggars
himſelfe, whilſt he is not able to ſtocke all his Farmes,
nor giue them that compaſſe,Ariſt. Oecon. lib. Sterquilinium which Ariſtotle ſaith is the
beſt; namely, to compaſſe the ground about often with the
owners feete: hee beggars his Landlord, whilſt once in

ſeauen yeeres he hangs his Leaſe on the hedge,quod agro eſt optimum, veſtigia Domini. and
truſts to his heeles; he beggats the poore, whilſt he will
affoord them no abiding place in the Earth, nor no
imployment to preſerue them from Idleneſſe; and he
beggars the whole State, whilſt he breeds beggars, and
makes the ground vnfertile for lacke of tending; which
if it were in the hands of more, that could manure and
follow euery part; would yeeld more increaſe to the
Occupier, to the Maſter, and to the State of the Common-wealth.
               
               3. The laſt of theſe is the Depopulator, who to inhanſe
his Rents, puls downe all the petty Tenements and
Farmes, and will haue none dwell neere him. Aſſoone
as this is done, he lackes neighbors; thus the iuſtice of
God vvhips him by his owne hand. Then he hyes to
the City, vvhere the Dicing-houſe vpon the right hand,
and the Drinking-houſe vpon the left hand, and the Drabbing-houſe
before him, ſpends all that is left; or if any be
left, the tyre-woman, and the taylor, dogs and hawkes, and
Coach-horſes diuide it; and amongſt theſe he waſtes
all that, wherewith his predeceſſors feaſted themſelues,
and their poore neighbours. There are Lawes againſt
theſe, but often it concernes the Iury, the Iuſtices; nay,
the Iudges themſelues, and therefore the Lawes muſt be
ſilent in this caſe; for theſe wayes are good in their owne
eyes, though the Yſſues of them be the wayes of death.
               
               There come next to hand three others, who depend
of thoſe that went before, and whoſe profeſſion is practiſed
with a kinde of warrantable deceite; namely, the
Malſter, the Brewer, the Alehouſe-keeper; theſe drinke vp the
State, as the other did eate it vp; and for their ſakes,
drunkenneſſe is thought a tollerable, nay, a neceſſary

euill. Their pretences are the prouiſion for the poore,
or the raiſing of the price of corne, that the husbandman
may liue, and that the rackt Rent may not vndoe
him; but what he gets of theſe at the Barne dore, he
leaues at the Buttery-hatch. Mothes are no worſe in
cloth, ruſt in yron, nor whules in Mault, then theſe in
the Common-wealth. For ſince theſe were ſet vp, and
manly exerciſes cryed downe, our bodies are weakened
and corrupted, our ſpirits dulled, and made effeminate,
and we fitted for ſlauery, being euery day ouer-maſtered
and made ſlaues by drunkennes and exceſſe. And yet
there are ſome vvho ſuppoſe this trading to be as neceſſary
for the State, as Tobacco or the trade of the Eaſt-Indies;
and for my part I am eaſily induced to beleeue
them, vvhilſt I know the equall diſcommodity of all;
and ſee, that though their wayes ſeeme good to themſelues, yet
the Yſſues thereof are the wayes of death.
               
               Next theſe, the bribing Officer appeares, as in a
clowde; for his wayes are darke and paſt ſearching out,
except to him that can hold a candle before the Diuell.
Mammon brought him in, Mammon keepes him in, and
the exceſſe of his wife, child, ſeruants, giues notice to
all eyes, that ſuch brauery is not to be maintained without
bribes. And therefore vvhen poore men come to
paſſe any thing how iuſt ſoeuer, they are warned to open
their purſes vvide; and ſo whatſoeuer the cauſe bee,
their reedles eye shalbe made bigge enough for the Cable
or the Camell to enter.
                  
                     
                        •
                     ſai▪ 1. 23. Iuſtly may God complaine of vs
as of Iſrael. Thy Princes are rebellious, and companions of
theeues: euery one loueth gifts, and followeth after rewards:
they iudge not the fatherleſse, neither doth the cauſe of the
widow come vnto them. And Ier. 5. 26. Among my people

are found wicked men: they lay waite, as he that ſetteth
ſnares; they ſet a trap; they catch men. As a cage is ful of birds,
ſo are their houſes full of deceite; therefore they are become
great, and waxen rich. They are waxen fat, they shine; yea,
they ouer-paſſe the deeds of the wicked: they iudge not the
cauſe, the cauſe of the fatherleſſe, yet they proſper, and the right
of the needie doe they not iudge. Shall I not viſite for theſe
things, ſaith the Lord? shall not my ſoule be auenged on ſuch
a Nation as this?
               
               God himſelfe muſt viſit for theſe ſinnes, the Magiſtrate
will not; it is he that muſt be viſited; it muſt be an
omnipotent power that muſt therefore reforme this
generall corruption, that ſpreads ſo wide, and climbes ſo
high: for theſe wayes ſeeme good to the eyes of great men, yea
to ſome of the greateſt, (who should correct it) though
the Yſſues thereof be the wayes of death.
               
               Now I haue proceeded ſo farre I vvill conclude
with him that is the cauſe of all this, and that's the
Courtly Thiefe; who begges a Patent, that all theſe before
ſpoken of, and more too, may rob, as it were, with
vvarrant vnder his ſeale. But I doe him wrong perhaps
to call him thiefe, he is rather a Beggar; not a beggar by
the Kings high-way, but a Beggar of the Kings high-way;
ſo that no man may paſſe vp and downe in courſe
of Lawe and Iuſtice but hee takes cuſtome. Surely he
hath begg'd ſo long, that he hath almoſt made vs all
beggars, and therefore it is pitty there is no whipping
poſt for him. But aſſure himſelfe, though he be of the
number of the ſturdy and incorrigible perſons heere in
this vvorld, yet there is a vvhipping poſt for him in another
world, and he shall ſee, that though his wicked
wayes ſeemed good in his owne eyes, and in the eyes of his fellowes,

of his fooles, of his flatterers, yet the Yſsue of them are
the wayes of death and destruction.
               
               But vvhat should I need to dwell longer vpon particulars,
when not only this or that member, this or that
finger or toe, but the whole body is corrupted? Looke
vpon Religion, are not our aduerſaries on all ſides increaſed?
Do not all places ſwarme with ſchiſmes, ſects,
hereſies, and priuate ſpirits? Looke vpon our liues;
was there euer ſuch defect of charity, as if indeed it
were true which ſome ſlander vs withall, that wee teach
a ſolitary faith would ſaue, and that works were needleſſe;
nay ſinfull? was there euer generally ſuch an itch
of priuate wealth which euer forerunnes and effects the
ruine of the Common-wealth? Looke vpon all our
Proiects, of draining ſurrounded grounds, or whatſoeuer
other profitable pretence they carry, ſee if they
ayme not at the draining of the publique purſe, at the
milking of the ſtate by priuate Monopolies; as if England
were a hard ſtep-dame, and no indulgent Mother to her
prodigall and vngratefull children. Looke vpon our affections;
was there euer ſuch a deade luke-warme indifferencie,
a dow baked zeale, as if we cared not which
way the world went, all wayes were alike to vs? Looke
vpon man and wife, the Epitome of the Common-wealth;
was there euer ſuch iarres, ſo little loue, ſuch
chopping and chaunging of wiues and huſbands, ſuch
Nullities, ſuch playing faſt & looſe with the ſacred coniugall
knot, ſuch houſes ouerthrowne by buſie, pragmaticall,
and diſobedient Euahs, and effeminate, ſlauish,
and paſſiue Adams? Looke in the ſtreete, if you can diſtinguish
men and women aſunder by their apparell, or
behauiour; if euery Succuba ſeemes not an Incubus; ſo

that you had need of a Iury to inquire of their Sexes?
Conſider well if there be ſuch a thing as modeſty and
chaſtity or shamefaſtneſſe, left amongſt women, or
courage, manhood, and honour left amongſt men.
Looke vpon the higheſt, if they make any other account
of the poore then of their tame cattell (I except
their dogs and horſes, and perhaps their sheepe, deere,
hogges; for theſe muſt all be fed before them:) Looke
vpon the Commons, if their teeth grinde not with indignation,
as if they had ſtomach enough both to eate
the beaſts and their more beaſtly maſters. Looke vpon
all men, if ſinnes of all kinds doe not abound: See if
you can diſtinguish the man from the Maſter, but that
perhaps the man goes brauer, ſweates lowder, and
wilbe drunke ſooner. And if his Maſter keepe from
Church for conſcience ſake, he will keepe from thence
becauſe he hath no conſcience. Looke euery way if it
be not a shame to ſeeme good, much more to bee ſo:
If it be not a glory to regard neither God nor King, Religion
nor Lawe. If they be not the only braue fellowes
who dare doe the baſeſt acts moſt boldly, and in a drunken
deſperate moode, iuſtle ſober and ſilent Iuſtice
from the wall into the Channell. Behold if want hath
not made a violent ceizure of vs all; want of wealth,
want of ſtrength, want of courage, want of wit, want
of conſcience, want of grace; ſo that wee reſemble the
people of Laish ſpoken of in the 18. Chap. of the
Iudges, 7. 10. verſes, and ſo are a careleſſe, ſecure, irregular
Nation, a fit prey for any Conqueror.
               
               This is all true, all men ſee it and confeſſe it; but
where is the cauſe of this? Our ſinnes; they are both the
cauſe & the effect; for ſinne is punished with ſinne: And

we that are euill Cuſtomers to defraud God of his due,
muſt looke to haue ſtrict & ſeuere Searchers, and Controllers,
and watchers ſet ouer vs. But vvhere is that
cauſa proxima of ſinne? Sinne is a cauſe indeed of ſinne,
but it is cauſa remota, ſo that euery eye cannot diſcerne
that cauſe. Why, the next cauſe of ſinne which euery
eye may ſee, is the lacke of Execution of good Lawes; wee
haue them, but thy lie as Henry the fifts Bowes and Arrowes
at Pomfret Caſtle, with which he wan the battaile
of Agincourt; or Edward the thirds ſword in Weſtminster,
which he vſed in the Conqueſt of Fraunce, and tels vs
now what braue fellowes our forefathers haue beene:
Heere only is the difference, that ſword is euer drawne▪
but the ſword of Iuſtice is euer in the Sheath.
               Now my honorable Lords, you haue the ſword in
your hands, though not the ſcepter; draw it foorth, and
ſtrike with it the enemies of Truth and Iuſtice, who
wander out of the Kings high-way, in their wayes of
neighborhood, and wayes of priuacy. You heare Nehemiah
ſay, Cap. 6. 11. Should ſuch a man as I feare? It were a
shame. Should ſuch as you either feare, or fauour, or
reſpect cauſes or perſons? I cannot ſuſpect ſuch a cloud,
where there appeares ſuch a shining Sun of graces, and
gifts of knowledge and profeſſion. I dare not admonish
you of any thing, I am ſo confident of your integrity.
Yet becauſe I know as you are the eyes of the
State, the eyes of his Maieſtie, ſo you muſt ſee by othermens
eyes, and heare by other mens eares, I turne me
therefore to them.
               Honorable Gentlemen, the King hath made you Iuſtices,
to aſſiſt theſe Iudges in preſence, to ſupply by
your authority their abſence: Shew your ſelues as your

Predeceſſors haue done, vvorthy of your places; reforme
what you can, inform where you cānot, that the higher
power may. I know you know, you were not made Iuſtices
of peace, to the end to be ſilent, but to ſpeake. He
is vnworthy of his place, vvho attaines it onely for his
owne grace, to hurt his enemies, profit his followers, to
vphold his faction and partie; and therefore attends his
profit or pleaſure rather then his calling, vvhere withall
he thinkes his conſcience is not charged; but that it is
enough for him to ſit on the Bench, to tell the Clocke,
and keepe his Cushion warme. You know, and therefore
doe the contrarie; the Church, the Common-wealth
expects more from you, and I excite you to this
in their names.
               And you Gentlemen of the Grand-Enqueſt, and of
other Iuries, with chiefe Conſtables, and pety Conſtables,
I turne me to you: Conſider you are the eyes and
eares wherewithall Iuſtice ſees and heares; without you
shee is blind and deafe: let not preiudice or partialitie
take vp your affections therefore aforehand. Be not like
Band-dogs muzled for feare of biting: remember the dignitie,
authority and vſe of your places, and diſgrace
them not by your vnworthy cariage. The pooreſt Conſtable
is an eye to the richeſt and wiſeſt Magiſtrate: but
few of them I feare haue eyes to ſee it; and that their Certificates
would witneſſe, if they were ſtrictly examined,
which commonly are nothing but matter of forme, and
yet without either matter or forme.
               Conſider, I beſeech you, how Policie hath ſet one eye
ouer another, and how many eyes there are ouer-looking
all your voluntarie, your wilfull, your negligent
and partiall eſcapes; the petty Conſtables, chiefe Conſtables,

Grand-Enqueſt, the Iuſtices, the Iudges and the
whole County. And you that are next the loweſt,
conſider the like, and ſo ſucceſſiuely as you are ſuperordinate;
I aſcend to you honorable Iudges, who
know you haue a King aboue you too, vvho can diſtinguish
of wayes, diſcerne colours (though all ſcarlet
ſinnes, & crying crimes be kept from his eyes and eares
artificially):Eccl. 5. 8. & there is one aboue him too, who rules the hearts
of Kings as the riuers of waters; and being aboue him, he
muſt needs ouerſee vs all;Pſal. 97. 9. Pro. 21. 1. Act. 15. 8. for he is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the
ſearcher and ſeer of the heart.
               
               There is a double worke at the Aſſiſes, the triall of
Niſi prius, and Cenſure of manners: This, this laſt (my
Lords) is the needfull, the acceptable worke; for we
haue more neede of a Cato to reforme our corrupt manners,
then of a Cicero, or Antony, or Saluſt, to purifie and
polish our Language. Wee all ſpeake like good Angels,
but we liue like euill. The Country Contention makes
the Lawyer rich, but the neglect of Iuſtice makes vs all
poore. Heere nothing profits but due execution, which
is then done, when your honors do not only giue good
and learned Charges, and good examples by preſent actions,
but leaue an impreſſion for the future, and looke
at your returne for full obedience to your commands
and orders; which elſe are effectuall no longer with
ſome, then this my Sermon, which being taken for a
matter of courſe, is perhaps 
                     •
                  oſt by cenſure and ſcience
for a vvhile, but ſcarce touched by conſcience, or drawne
into practiſe by any at all, though that should be the
end of all hearing, as it is the end of all preaching. Now
to conclude; that both my Sermon, & your Lordships
charge, and all our actions may be to the glory of God,

and the good of this Common-wealth; Let vs ioyne together
in humble and harty manner, and commend the
end of this our preſent way of knowledge and the beginning
of your great worke of Execution and practiſe, which
followes, to his holy bleſſing and direction in faithfull
and humble prayer.
               Gratious God, thou that haſt giuen vs a way to walke
to heauen in, the way of thy commandements; and, vvhen
vvee did not keepe that way as wee ought, didſt in thy
mercy reueale the way of grace vnto vs in thy Goſpell, ſending
thy Sonne to be a way, life, and truth vnto vs. A way
to vvalke in, the life and ſtrength wherewithall vvee
walke, and the truth wherevnto wee vvalke: diſpoſe our
hearts to meditate, & to obſerue thoſe things that thou
haſt taught vs, and obediently to shew our thankfulnes
by labouring to practiſe the ſame in our ſeuerall vocations
with the care of good cōſciences to thy glory. Lord
giue vs grace to shun all wayes that ſeeme euill and are ſo; or
are euill, though they ſeeme not ſo. Let vs not be miſ-led by
wayes of neighborhood, by imitation or example, either of
our predeceſſors deceaſed, or otherwiſe abſent or preſent,
nor wander in our priuate wayes from the publique
rule of thy vvord, and the true end of our callings in
Church or Commonvvealth. Eſpecially (O Lord) keepe
vs from abuſing the Lawe for a colour of ſinne, as if vvee
had warrant and authority to iuſtifie our vvickedneſſe,
and durſt ſinne without feare of punishment in the
ſight of the Sunne, in the Kings high way like Robbers.
               And ſince we ſee, lack of execution of good lawes is the
cauſe of our euil liues, giue care & courage to thy Iudges,
& zeale and conſcience to euery other Officer of Iuſtice,
that all may ioyn together to root vp ſin, & to ſtrengthē
the man of God in the wayes of God, that wee may ſo

walke with thee heere in obedience as Enoch did; that as
he was, vvee may be heereafter tranſlated to vvalke
with thee in eternall glory through Ieſus Chriſt our
Lord and Sauiour. Amen.
            
         
         
            A Poſtſcript to all Chriſtian Readers,
eſpecially to my brethren and fellow-laborers in
the Miniſterie, and to the Freeholders.
            YOu haue ſeene the high-wayes of God and the King
playnely layde downe. Keepe you to the word
of God ſtrictly, for that is Gods high-way; 2. Tim.
3. 14. 15. 16. 17. Concerning the Kings high-way, that alſo
is his reuealed will in the Lawes of the Land; which,
although his abſolute will doe not conſtitute (as Gods
vvil doth) yet his conſent confirmes them as the Parliament
propounds them. In the Parliament then (which
is the whole State repreſentatiue) theſe high-wayes are
made; and the fundamentall cuſtomes of our State,
makes euery Freeholder a way-maker in this caſe, not
binding any man before he hath bound himſelfe by the
Knights and Burgeſſes who are his Spokeſmen.
            Bee therefore wary, when you heare a Parliament
ſummoned by his Maieſtie, whom you chooſe Knights
of the Shire, and Burgeſſes of Corporations; that is,
whom you conſtitute in your places to repaire or make
theſe high-wayes of the King, wherein you are bounde
to walke obediently for conſcience ſake: and remember
vvhat admonitions his Maieſtie hath giuen you often by
Proclamation to this end: eſpecially in the firſt yeere of

his Reigne, vvhen he found fault vvith ſuch as diſabled
their Counties and Corporations, vſing to chooſe ſtrangers
according as they were directed by letters or ſuperior
Command, as if they had no freedomes, or wanted
ſufficient men of ther owne to ſupply thoſe places.
And remember alſo how before this laſt Parliament
his Maieſtie (hearing and beholding vvhat packing,
plotting, and vndertaking there had beene vſed in this
important buſineſſe) did command all men to forbeare
writing and vnderhand ſolliciting for the place, either
on their owne behalfe, or others; and aduiſed the people
to choſe freely, & not to betray their owne liberties in
the choice. Better counſell you cannot haue.
            When therefore you heare of a Parliament towards,
let the Miniſters prepare the people, and warne them of
the worke in hand, and let ſuch as are Freeholders conferre
together, and (neglecting both their Landlords, or
great neighbours, or the Lord Liftenants themſelues)
looke vpon the wiſeſt, ſtouteſt, and moſt religious perſons;
and be carefull to chooſe ſuch as haue no dependancie
vpon Greatnes, nor ſeeke change of the State,
Lawes, and Religion, nor hunt ambitiouſly for place,
honor, and preferment; for there is danger in theſe: but
he that is religious, vvill ſtand for his Countries good;
and in chooſing ſuch, you shall pleaſe God and the
King, and profit your ſelues, and your poſterity.
            Finally, let none amongſt you bee ſeene idlely to ſit
at home, whilſt theſe things are doing in the full County,
as if it did not concerne you: but ride, runne, and
deale ſeriouſly herein, as for your liues and liberties
which depend heereupon. And as you ſee ſuch as are
contrary minded bandy themſelues together for their

party, to chooſe one of their opinion for their turne,
ſo ſee you doe the like, that you may countervvorke
them and hold the liberty you haue got; and the Lord
proſper you, and make you of one minde as one man,
that the Goſpell may ſtill flourish among you, that
mercy and truth may meete,
               Pſal. 85. 
               righteouſnes and peace may kiſſe
each other, that the Lord may giue that which is good, and the
Land may yeeld her increaſe.
            
         
      
      
         
            Errata.
            Fol. 10. lin. vlt. for alterations, reade altercations.
            Fol. 73. lin. 2. for villaine, reade villanie.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   