
      
         
            
            
            VOX DEI.
         
         
            
            The frontiſpice explaned.
            TRuth-telling Ramſy, Treaſon doth vvithſtand,
            And for the Kinges life liftes his happie hand.
            The Duke kils Briberie (bane of Commonweales)
            With fire-brand Faction, and ſo truely deales
            For Kinge and Kingdome, as a man that knowes,
            Vpon one roote, their equall vvelfare growes.
            The Prince falſe Vniverſalls doth deteſt,
            
               And, true of faith, is by the true faith bleſt.
            Hee for the Kinge the Kingdome and the Kirke,
            Like Hercules begins heroick vvorke,
            And ſets new pillars on the coaſt of Spaine,
            
            To bownd three-bodyed Geryon once againe;
            Who, vvith his dooble-headed dog, did drawe,
            
               Backward, againſt divine and humane Lawe,
            Kingdomes and Countries of ſeduced men,
            
            Into his darke, and Hell-reſembling denn.
            The Kinge hedg'd rownd with ſweete yet pricking roſes.
            And Thiſtles, in ſecuritie repoſes
            His bay-crownde heade, vvhilſt ſoe incircled Hee,
            Guarded by theſe, guardes theſe from tyrannie.
            
               Ieſus from Ieſuites and all ſpirituall harmes,
            Defendes his Flock vvith his all-mightie armes;
            Treades ſinne, and Death, and Sathan vnderfoote,
            Whilſt God the Father puts his blesſing to it.
            
               Then vvho giues back? who is on our ſide, whoe?
            Where wordes and Treatyes faile, reſolue to doe.
            
            
               
               
                  VOX DEI
               
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE READER
            IT may be thought (perhaps) by ſome, which shall vouchſafe
to reade this following diſcourſe, that my generall
aymes in this publication, are, to exaſperate the humor of
the tyme (too tart (as ſome thinke)▪ already) againſt the Common
Adverſary, and withall, to flatter my ſelfe into favour, by
needles repetitions of notable by-paſt actions.
            For the firſt, let ſuch know, that neither my minde, nor
my booke, looke higher then the middle Region, being both
bred, and converſing continually in the inferiour, where, they
haue no force to raiſe ſtormes of action, but to participate
in paſſion, with ſuch gufts as fall from aboue. I am not ſo
vaine-gloriouſly apprehenſiue, as to thinke my ſelfe able, to
raiſe the leaſt duſt, with any feete but mine owne; or to work
                  •
               
vpon the judgement of any man, with my weake oratory, to
moue him to a violent courſe, beyond his naturall inclination.
Yet thus much I ſay for my ſelfe, and my cauſe, that if
I should avme at what they object, and should accomplish
my aymes, I did no more, then the greateſt, wiſeſt, devouteſt,
amongſt them, profeſſe to doe, and practiſe continually, againſt
vs, & praiſe in others, ſo following their footeſteps. Witneſſe
that treatiſe (amongſt divers the like) which Scioppius, (a famous
Counſellor for the houſe of Austria) hath made againſt
the proteſtants, and intituled, Clasſicum Belli ſacri▪ Siue ſ
                     •
                  aſoria ad
Imperatorem de Christiani Caeſaris, erga Principes Eccleſiae rebelles offici
                     •
                  ,
& veris Haereticorum compeſcendorum rationibis. Fdito. 1619. A Trumpet
of the holy warre; wherem by authority of Scripture, pitifully
wreſted, and miſapplied, by reaſons of ſtate, and policy, violently
vrged, and wrung to force out blood, he moues, and
excites, nay, as it were, inforceth, the houſe of Auſtria in generall,
and in particular the Emperour (& ſo by conſequence
the King of Spaine) to a merciles maſſacre, of their ſubjects, &
neigbours, round about, againſt whome they may any way

pick a quarrell, 
                  •
                for point of Religion. And what needes the
blood of Austria be heated to this end?
            I am to be blamed (with others) therfore, if my zeale for
truth be any whit colder, then his for falſehood; and I am to
be pardoned, and excuſed, even by ſuch as are of his opinion,
if I purſue as eagerly (as he doth) the ſide, and cauſe I affect;
and reſiſt vnto blood, where he bloodely aſſaults my innocency,
or the innocent truth in me, and in others. Nay, let
this worke of his, moue all Counſellors, and others, that haue
place about Princes, and Power with them, to doe their dutyes
in a contrary courſe, and whet the edge of authority,
with all the arguments of their art, to shew it ſelfe sharpe
for Chriſt, and his cauſe, againſt Antichriſt, and his adherents.
And let not their goodly diſcretion, and moderation, delude
the world any longer, with vaine expectations, and promiſes,
as if they were (like Iobs faint freindes) lob 12. 2. the only people,
and that all wiſedome lived in them, and should dye with them; leaſt if
they dally any longer, the axe be layd to the roote of the tree, Mat. 3.
and they for their fruitles fearnes, without ſap of ſincerity
or piety, (only with a ſmoake or, shadowing of hypocriſy) be
caſt into the vnquenchable fyre of Gods juſt judgement. Aſſuredly,
Necesſity calls vpon vs, to do ſomething in time, for our cauſe,
and our freindes, or to prepare our ſelves to ſuffer all
thinges from our Enemyes. Spaine can eaſely charme France,
by the helpe of the Ieſuites, and Pope, to ſit ſtill, and giue ayme,
till his foote be vpon the neck of the Vnited Provinces; for it
wilbe made a warre of religion, which France, (as the eldeſt
ſonne of the Romane Church) is by all meanes to advance. If
then they can keepe vs back, but a while longer, either by
pretences, or promiſes, or gifts, or preſents, or penſions, or
East-Indian quarrells, or treatyes, or marriages, or threatnings,
or by any other meanes, the goale is gotten, and wee
muſt be forced to take the law from them, and to admit, not
only. T
                     •
                  lleration, but alſo Alteration of Religion, and perhaps

the Inquiſition alſo, into our land, in ſpite of our hearts
though wee, & our King with vs, ſay NOE never ſo loud; ther
will neither heare vs, nor beleeue vs, nor then admit of our
negatiue voyce. And I am perſwaded all that are not of this
minde, & ſo ready to take all occaſiōs, vſe all meanes, to prevent
it; are of their minde, and wills take all occaſions; & vſe
all meanes (though cloſely, and by degrees) to advance it.
            For the ſecond objection, made by ſuch, as thinke I am
out of favour, & intend hereby to flatter my ſelfe into grace
againe; I let ſuch know, that as I account the favour of my
ſuperiours, to be a great bleſſing, ſo (beleeving I never loſt it,
at leaſt by deſert) I profeſſe ſincerely not to ſeeke it, with
any corrupt or ambitious thought. If what I write offend not,
it is the yttermoſt extent, yea crowne of my happineſſe here;
being for the reſt contented, and holding it a thing indifferent,
to liue in any ayre, and to be buryed in any ſoyle; Since
I liue by faith, and expect the reſurrection of the just. But the truth
is, that as thoſe who looke on, doe often ſee, what the Gameſters
over-ſee; And as thoſe who ſtand in a direct lyne againſt
the mouth of the Cannon, cannot diſcerne the danger comeing
ſwifftly vpon them, ſoe well as thoſe that ſtād a-loofe
off, and obliquely: ſoe wee that ſtand removed from the
ſteeple, heare the noyſe of the bells diſtinctly, and where
they jangle, and where they ring round, and where they vary
with muſicall, and delightfull changes; which ſuch as ſtand
vnder, cannot ſo perfectly judge.
            And wee thinke wee ſaw the danger coming, and were
more ſenſible of it, then many ſeemed to bee, that ſtood with
in the dint: And now (hoping the greateſt ſtorme is over) wee
behold the deliverance with more admiration, then many
ſeeme to haue done, which ſtood neerer the danger. And to
this end wee write, that you may read, and ſee, and applaud
your owne felicity with ours, giving glory to God, and due honor
to the inſtruments, he hath beene pleaſed to vſe in this

great▪ and miraculous worke of his mercy.
            For to this end the Lord doth all his workes of wonder, accepting
well of their ſervice, who ſet forth his praiſe with the
beſt instruments that they haue; denyeing only to be gratious to
ſuch, as neglect his workes, or paſſe them by, without obſervation,
and threatning to punish ſuch ſeverely, who rob him
of his glory, either arrogating it to themſelves, or imputing
it vnworthily to others.
            Herein, therefore, I do but, with Moſes, ſalute God with a
ſonge, having paſt the red ſea, looking back vpon it with admiration,
and beholding Pharoh Exod. 15.and his Hoaſt in it,
with pitty and aſtonishment: I doe but, with Deborah, call vp
Barak, Iud. 5. to the triumph: And, with the Virgins, meete David,
1 Sam. 18. after his victory, with timbells & dances.
            This is the true end of writing this treatiſe, wherein if I
erre in any point of Divinity, Hiſtory, or Pollicy, either in
relation, or application, I referre my ſelf moſt humbly to
the favorable cenſure of the Church and State, not being
willing to commit a fault againſt either, or having done it, to
defend it with obſtinacy. Yet before wee part, giue me leaue
to ſay, that whilſt I hope wee are paſt the danger, I would be
ſo vnderſtood as a man that partly feared, wee were not.
Warre muſt be proclaimed with Spaine, before wee can be
fully reſolued; othevwiſe our offenſiue warres againſt the Emperour,
Bavaris, or any other, & our defenſiue, and divertiue warres
by aſſiſting the States Generall, will proue vndertakings againſt
our ſelues, and we (running our ſelves out of breath)
will ſoone learne to repent our forwardnes, & call for peace,
faſter then wee haue done for warre. Our comings in, muſt
be anſwerable to our expences, if wee meane to holde out:
for though the horſe be fat & ſtrong, yet if wee ride him continually
without provender, he will waxe weake, and leane,
and trye vnder vs. To warre with the Emperour &, hold peace
with Spaine, is to fight with one of our hands, againſt the Vnited

body of the Catholique league, aſſiſted with both their
armes of the East, and Weſt-Indyes, whoſe force is ſufficient, to
buy Briareus, to ſide with them, againſt God, and his truth, and
from whence, all the arrowes they shoote againſt Christen
                  
                     •
                  ome,
at this preſent, are both headed, and feathered; pluck
off theſe, and they hurt not. And the way to pluck off theſe,
and ſo to make peace, is to ſend out our Navie (as wee had
wont) to fish for gould in their ſeas. For our Navie is the right
hand of our State, of whole advantageous vſe, wee depriue our
ſelves, when wee warre in a cold and lame manner, only with
the left hand by defence, by divertion, and that by land, where the
enemyes ſtrength lyes. This is, to fight, and let him chooſe the
weapon, and to ſpend our blowes, where wee ſee him beſt
armed. It is the Navie that weakens the Enemy, by taking
from him, and ſpoiling, what he gets to ſpoile others. It is the
Navie, that cauſeth his Weſt-Indian Fleetes to be waſted home
with ſuch a guard, as eat's out the gaine of that voyage; though
they returne ſafe, but vndoes him, if they miſcarry. It is the
Navie that payes the troopes by land, & fills the Ercheaquer
faſter, then all the cuſtomes, & projects, vnprofitable peace
can invent, though it would ſtudy to exact ſtill from the induſtrious
Marchant, even to his vndoeing. Witneſſe our former
warres in Yreland, where there was no boote for the ſouldiar,
as in other parts may be found, (if at leaſt wee ſerue
them, and theirs, as they did vs, and ours, in the Paltz.) but all
the Army was to liue (as wee ſay) vpon the penny. And yet for
all that expence in Yreland, Scotland, Sweden, Denmarke, France, in
the Netherlands, and all other partes, where Antichriſt advanced
his counterfeit croſſe, againſt the croſſe of Chriſt, how rich was
the ſubject? how plentifull all proviſions? how quick all
trades, & trading? how well ſtored was the Ercheaquer with
Coyne, the mint with Bullion, the Tower, and all other places
with ordinance, ammunition, plate, hangings, jewells? The
expence, and waſte, of treaſure ſince, meerely vpon the old

ſtock, without any equall, annuall, and certaine ſupply, the
rayſing and allaying of golde and ſilver, without curing our
generall wāt (which Spaine withall the Enemyes, & warres our
Elizabeth had, could not make her do as her Epitaph tells you)
is a witneſſe of this truth beyond contradiction. If therefore
wee haue warres with the Emperour, & Bavaria, (heare my folly
and pardon it; wiſemen may proffit by the prating of fooles)
let vs haue it with Spaine; If wee defend the States, and our
ſelves, with the lef hand, let vs fight with the right hand alſo,
and put Spaine to his fence; let vs vſe both hands, or neither;
let vs (to conclude) fight in good earneſt, or lay downe the
bucklers, and ſubmit our ſelves to their mercy, who will,
without queſtion, cut our throates in kindnes with the vtmoſt
expedition, as they haue done our freindes, vpon the
ſame tearmes.
            Conſider I beſeech thee, adviſed Reader, how the Navy
(which I ſpake of) lyes now idle; a great & continuall charge
to the ſtate, the Marriners, the Officers, the Seamen of all
ſorts, waſte away, are vnprofitable, forget their profeſſions,
when, if theſe were imployed (as I haue ſpoken) they would
recover our reputation, be a ſecurity to our ſelves, a terror
to our enemyes, make vs againe Maſters, not only of the
narrow ſeas, but of the Ocean, beare their owne charges, &
helpe to defray others. In which regard (giue me leaue to
proceede in playing the foole) I ſuppoſe if the East-Indian
Fleete, and ſtock, were thus imployed, we would ſoone finde
the odds of the adventure, & neither the ſtate, nor the Marchant,
would repent them of the change, although wee
bought ſpice at the ſecond hand, or ſpent leſſe then wee doe
(as other Countryes vſe,) or permitted voluntaryes to trade
in thoſe ſeas.
            Perhaps the Hollander who findes how hard, or booteles it
is to ſayle againſt the ſunne, ſees his owne fault, and begins
to ſteere a contrary courſe, and though he ſtill hold his

ground, and trade in the Eaſt, yet finding it a drayne for the
treaſure of Christendome, it is probable he will leſſen his dealing
there,and ſeeke out Weſtward for gould and ſilver, to
feede that couetous Eaſterne climate, as wee may doe alſo, if
wee be not too wiſe to learne, and too proud to follow, when
they goe before.
            But ſome object, that what wee had wont to get alone in
the Weſt & South-ſea, the Hollander now meete's withall, and
takes vp, by fore-ſtalling the market; ſo that there will not
bee ſufficient, to beare the charges of both Nations. As if
the Hollander tooke all, and no fish paſt his net: Nay aſſuredly,
if both of vs went out vpon this errand, both should haue
more, whilſt one helped the other. Beſides the Hollander is
more numerous in shipping, and thoſe commonly of better
ſayle then ours, and ſo fit for ſcouts, to beate the water; ours,
are better built, better man'd, better armed, fitter for fight,
and ſo like to ſpeede better, if there should be fraude in fellowship.
            Thus much I thought good to add, not as a Counſellour,
but as an Intelligencer, for my King, and Country; and if any
ſay it ſuites me not, to ſtirre vp warre, being by profesſion a
Peace-maker: I anſwer, though I feare I shall haue no ſuch
force to moue that heavy Engine, yet the necesſity of the caſe
makes me attempt it, and put my hand, to a multitude of
others, who wynne hearts, and hands to this end: And the
ſame Necesſity pleades my excuſe, whilſt I ſeeme to tranſgreſſe
the lawes of my Commiſſion; ſince there is no other ſure
way to make peace, or to ſaue the effuſion of Chriſtian blood
(ſo much ſought after, and ſo ſweete in the taſt of thoſe wolvish
Antichriſtians) then thus to take this fire-brand, this Mainetainer
of quarrells (Gould) out of the hands of the common
Quarreller. If any thinke otherwiſe, I feare he shall finde himſelfe
deceaved, when it wilbe a shame for a wiſeman to ſay,
N
                     •
                  n putaram.
            
            
               
For my ſelfe, let men thinke of me as they pleaſe; It is 
                  〈◊〉
               
good in my opinion, to play the foole (as wiſemen ſay) in print 
                     〈◊〉
                  
ſelfe, ſince it muſt needes be done, as to ſuffer ſee many others to
doe it in my name, or to looke on, and hold my peace till my
King, Couutry, and Religion, be betrayed. Now though it
be not in my private power to remedy theſe evills, yet the
world shall witneſſe for me, I am free from the blood of all
men, and no way acceſſary, or priuie, to thoſe mynes which
are ready to ſpringe, to the hazard, not only of our ſtate, but
of the liberty of all Chriſtendome beſides. From which conſpiracy,
they can no way cleere themſelves, who having place
to ſpeake (bee it purdue, Sentinell, or Corps du gard, high or low)
hold their peace whilſt the Enemy approcheth. Canes latr
                     ••
                  
pro Dominis ſuis, & non vis me latrare pr
                     •
                   Chriſto? Mori poſſum, tacen
non poſſum. Hierom. Ap
                     •
                  l. 3. adverſus Ruffin
                     ••
                  . Dogs bar ke for
their Maſters, and will not thou haue me open my mouth for
Chriſt? I can dye, I cannot hold my tongue. God hath not give
vs the ſpirit of feare, but of power, and loue, & of a ſound minde, 2 Tim.
1. 7. Therefore after vox Dei, expect vox Regis, to follow with
the vtmoſt ſpeede; when the King hath heard Gods voyce 
                     •••
                  
                  ling,
wee shall heare the Kinges voyce ecchoing. Pray for this
houre, and in the meane time, pardon what errors thou m
                  ••
               
               teſt withall, whether of myne, or the Printers, be it in matter,
in wordes, or letters, or in pointes, the greateſt I ha
                  •
               e
obſerved to thy hand, it is like there may be more, ſince I
could not be neere the Preſſe, and the Printer vnderſtands
no English, therefore before thou reade, be entreated i
                  •
               
reforme ſuch as thou findeſt in the Catalogue.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            VOX DEI
THE VOYCE OF GOD
            
               ALl the actions, and vndertakings
of man, are, or
should be grounded vpon
ſome warrantable, and ſolid
reaſon, being cenſured
juſt, or vnjuſt, according
as they obſerve, or
tranſgreſſe, that generall
rule of Iuſtice: wherefore,
to avoyd confuſion, and that the idle, and induſtrious,
might be diſtinguished, the one from the
other, and the more wiſe, and dilligent, diſcerned
from the leſſe; God hath ſet an order in nature of ſuperiour,
and inferiour, as of day, and night, head,
and members, and of the members amongeſt themſelves.
And as in Nature, one worke of hers, exceede's
another, though the leaſt be wonderfull; and
as the whole worke (conſidered in the harmony)
exceede's any part thereof,Tho: Aq 22. q: 31. A: 3. 2.m though the part in it
ſelfe, be never ſo excellent: ſo the actions of man,
haue their dignityes, and degrees, and the more generall
they be, the more noble ever eſtemed: Yea,
a litle benefit done to many, is much more honorable
then a greater to one; Becauſe the worth of an
action, is meaſured by nothing ſo much, as by the
extent of helpe, it reacheth, to few, or to many, to

one, or to all: ſoe that private ſtudyes, or private
imployments, (though they content the minde better,
and may in themſelves be excellent) cannot be
compared, to ſuch as looke abroad to the publique,
though the one be liberall, (perhaps) and the other
mechanicall. Becauſe to this end, was man principal
created. First, for God; Secondly, for all that are Gods;
Thirdly, and laſtly, for himſelfe: ſo he was made for
many, and should therefore bend his ſtudyes, and
endeavours to benefit many: In which reſpect, we
ſee Moſes,
               Ex. 32. 32. Rom. 9. 3. and Saint Paul, wishing their owne ſeparation
from God, for the vniting of all to him, and our ſaviour,
who hath willed vs to follow him, as neere as
we can, (eſpecially in loue) gaue his owne life a ranſome,
for the whole world. Yea, in nature we ſee any
one member, (though never ſo excellent, and vſefull)
is cut off, for the ſafe-guard of the whole body,
if the body can ſubſiſt without it: He either knowe's
not himſelfe, and wherefore he was made, or
overvalewe's himſelfe aboue his owne worth, that
will not venter himſelfe for the ſaving of many,
though their delivery were not ſo ſure as his owne
loſſe. Man cannot dignify himſelfe more, then in
ſuch a hazard; ſince we redeeme things by an equall,
or ſuperiour value, and to ſaue many is to be worth
as many, as wee ſaue.
            When therefore we ſee the Church in daunger,
we muſt ſtand in the gappe, and ſteppe in, for her
reſcue, againſt all the world; for it concerne's Gods
glory, and Moſes ſtroue with God himſelfe in ſuch a caſe:
feare not thou therefore, to wraſtle with man. When
we ſee the common wealth in daunger,
wee muſt endeavour
her reſcue, with the hazard of our owne ſtates,

& liues, for it concerne's the welbeing of many
whereof we are parts, and for which we are, what we
are. Of this truth, all wiſer, and elder times, haue
beene perſwaded, as may appeare, by the many memorable
vndertakings, and actions of our predeceſſors,
in all places recorded for the direction, and incouragement
of the preſent, and future times: eſpecially
of that ſame valiant worthy of Iſraell, David, as
wee hope to shew manifeſtly, in the following diſcourſe,
grounded vpon theſe words of his to his brother
Eliab, mentioned 1 Sam. 17. 29. What haue I now
done? Is their not a cauſe? which words contayne the
concluſion of a dialogue, betwixt David, and his elect
brother; wherein wee intend to touch vpon theſe
perticulars, for the clearing of our ſayd diſcourſe,
and fitting it to all apprehenſions.
            
               First, wee will breifly shew who, and what he was,
that vſed this ſpeech.
            
               Secondly, wee will declare who, and what the perſon 
was, to whom he ſpake.
            
               Thirdly, wee will shew the occaſion, and time, when,
               
this ſpeech was vſed.
            
               Fourthly, wee will ſet forth the ſpeech it ſelfe, and 
what concluſions wee may draw from it, for our
purpoſe.
            
               First, for the perſon that vſed this ſpeech, it was
David, in whom conſider three things.
            
               His age.
               
            
            
               His Profesſion, or calling.
               
            
            
               His Relation.
               
            
            
               His age: he was in the flower of youth, about 23.
yeares olde, vngrounded, vnexperienced, litle in ſtature,
fayre, and effeminate, in appearance, not like

ever to be ſtout in performance.1 Sa. 16. 11 And this was ſeene,
when Saul afterwards,1 Sam. 17. 39. put his armour vpon him, he
was hardly able to beare ſuch a burden.
            
               
               Secondly, his profeſſion or calling, a shepheard, and
therfore peaceable, no fit man to make a ſouldier of;
we haue a Proverbe of ſuch tender, and quiet ſpirits,
[they are fit to keepe sheepe] & ſuch was he, not only fit to
keepe sheepe, (as many are, who keepe none) but ſuited
with an office agreable to his milde nature, for he
was a keeper of sheepe: Such was Abel, & therefore a
fit prey for a butcherlike brother:
               Gen. 4. 3. Such was Iacob, and his
ſonnes: Such were Moſes, & Aron; and of good shepheards,
they proved milde, & gratious governours;
ſo that it was ſayd of them to God by the Pſalmiſt:
               Pſ. 77. 20. 
               Thou
leddeſt thy people like sheepe by the hands of Moſes, & Aron. And ſuch a mā was David at this time, a good, & watchfull
shepheard, & therefore like to proue a good, & vigilant
Prince, but noe great, & valiant ſouldier. They
that converſe with wylde, & ravenous beaſts, learne
ſomewhat of their ſavage natures: For as the body
partake's of ayre, water, & other nourishments, & is
humored, & tempered accordingly: or, as man communicate's
with man, by converſation, & is judged to
be like the company he keepes, ſo every mā pertake's
with beaſts in their properties, & give's to themagayne
ſome of his, in exchāge. The Lyon, & Beare, learne
ſome civility of their keeper, as their keeper, take's
ſome bruitish cruelty from them: The maſter
learnes to be currish of his dogg: & the dogg learne's
curteſy of his maſter: Nimrod, & Eſau, cōverſing amongeſt
doggs,Pol. virg. de inven. 
                     •
                  e: l. 3. c. 5 became cruell, and bloody Tyrants.
            
               Marius was a braue ſouldier, but bloudy, & cruell, &
as an enſigne of his cruelty, he firſt gaue them names

of beaſts to the Romane Legions: calling one the Wolfe,
an other the Minotaure, a third the Horſe, a fourth the
Boare, a fift the Eagle, but none of them all, the Sheepe
that harmeleſſe creature: And doubtles Actaeon had
much of a beaſt within him, when his hownds puld'
him downe: on the other ſide David converſeth with
none but innocent, & harmeleſſe sheepe
                  •
                who are a
prey for every beaſt, vnlike is this man therefore, to
become a ſouldier.
            
               His relation; A brother: 1. by nature: 2. by ſubjection 
to one King: 3. by faith in one God: members of
one houſeholde, of one common-wealth, of one
Church; But withall, a yonger brother, by all probability,
the weakeſt of all, I am aſſured the yongeſt of
eight. An vnfit man therefore, for the preſent imployment.
And thus much for the ſpeaker.
            
               The perſon to whom, he ſpeakes is Eliab, whom likewiſe 
wee will beholde in a threefolde reſpect: 1. His age.
2. His Profesſion. 3. His Relation.
            
            
               His age, the eldeſt ſonne of Ishai, the eldeſt amongeſt
eight brethren, amongeſt whom David, the youngeſt
was a man growne; needes therefore muſt the eldeſt
be of mature yeares, & of great experience, able to
adviſe, able to execute; as for his ſtrength of body, his
ſtature promiſeth as much, as his yeares, for when Samuell
comes (by Gods commande) to annoynt one of
Ishaies ſonnes King, aſſoone as he ſees Eliab, the admiration
of his perſon (for it ſeemes he was like Saul, a
tall proper man, higher by the head then the common
ſort) makes him faſten vpon him for King, without
doubt, or queſtion, till God removes his carnall
eye,1 Sa. 16. 7 with admonition: Looke not (ſaith God) on his countenāce,
or on the height of his ſtature, becauſe I haue reſuſed him:

For God ſeeth not as man ſeeth: For man looketh on the outward
apparance, but the Lord beholdeth the heart.
            
            
               
               His Profesſion; A ſouldier he was now, thoug perhaps
a shepheard before, for it is ſayd: 1 Sam. 17. 13. That
the three eldest ſonnes of Ishai went, and followed Saul to the
battell: Now as he was of mature age, and of a gooly
preſence ſo, it is like, he was an olde ſouldier, of
great experience in the warres: And that as others
eſteemed him, ſuch ſo he knew his owne worth, &
value, wherefore like an olde, & expert Commander,
he taketh vpon him to curbe in, & reſtrayne, the inquiſitiue
ignorance, and rash foole-hardynes (as he
thought) of this ſilly shepheards lad, ſaying to him
(in anger) why cameſt thou downe hither? & with whom haſt
thou left thoſe few sheepe in the wildernes? I know the pride, &
the malice of thy heart, that thou art come downe to ſee the battell:
As if he should ſay, what didſt thou meane David
to preſſe to this place of dāger vncalled, from whēce
the ſtouteſt would gladly withdrawe themſelues, if
they could with the ſafety of their honors? doeſt
thou thinke thy ſelfe able, to doe more then we can
doe, who are ſouldiers by profeſſion, men of experience,
of approved ſtrength, & courage? Thou art
a babe, a ſuckling, an effeminate boy, a freshwater
ſouldier? Why; what a folly was it for thee, to leaue
the care of the sheepe, & come hither; to looſe them
there, thy ſelfe here? This muſt needes proceede
from that ambitious, & proude heart of thine, which
I knowe puff's thee vp, ever ſince thou wert entertayned
to be one of Saules Muſitians: But thou art
much miſtaken; it is farr more eaſy to compoſe a
ſonnet, in prayſe of ye conquerour, or to ſett a ſong
in perfect parts to the Harpe, then to obteyne a victory,

or to order an army: It is farre more eaſy to finger
the Harpe with nimble, and obedient fingers,
then to handle a ſpeare, the battell-axe, the ſworde,
and thoſe inſtruments of death, and warre: A conſort
of muſitians ſuits thee better, then a Company of
Souldiers; and that effeminate face of thine, doth
better become the foldes, and the sheepe-coates, or
the Court, and the prefence of fayre ladyes, then
the feild of Wolues, of Lyons, or of men, more terrible
then theſe. But thou art deſirous of noveltyes, to
ſee, and be ſeene, and here thou art come too
ſoone, to buy repentance, at a deare rate. To all
this David mildly, humbly, wiſely, and yet ſtoutly,
replye's, What haue I now done? Is their not a cauſe?
            
            
               His Relation: a brother, & elder brother, even the 
eldeſt of all; ſuch a one, as by the law, and order of
nature, was Davids ſuperiour, and might command
him:Gen. 49. 3 
               [Prior in donis, major in imperio. For not only the
firſt male that openeth the wombe, was ſanctifyed to
God, as his parte, to be a perpetuall type, and figure
of Christ our King, and Governour, till he came in
the flesh; But alſo, amongſt all Nations, the rule of a
famil, or countrey, was confer'd vpon the eldeſt:
Vntill there were Kings, they were in ſtead of ſuch,
and when there were Kings, either they were choſen
out of theſe, or theſe were their ſubſtitutes, in ſuch
familyes, and places, where they reſided. Now Ishai
being a very olde man, and noted for ſuch in the
dayes of Saul, as wee ſee at the 12. verſe of this Chapter,
the care, both of houſe holde goverment, and of
ſtocke, muſt reſt vpon the eldeſt ſonne, the heire of
all: who, (as a parent) might challenge rule over his
youngeſt brother, & require a juſt accompt of him

for his sheepe, which he might well ſuſpect were negligently
left in the wildernes, without a keeper,
through the wyldnes, & vanity of his younger brother.
And therefore David doth not anſwer him, as
Cain anſwers God, Gen 4. Am I my brothers keeper? what
haue you to doe with me, am I your shepheard? as
divers Yonckers would now anſwer their elders: But
he replye's with a tarte kinde of mildnes, giuing (at
once) a teſtimony of the loue he beare's his brothers,
perſon, how much he regard's his admonition,
as alſo making an Apologie for him ſelfe, & glauncing
at his brothers prejudice, and partiality, who would
not ſee the apparant cauſe at this time, enforcing
his forwardnes: Therefore he ſend's him home to
beholde the beame in his owne eye, ſaying [What haue I now
done? Is their not a cauſe?] And this shall ſerue for
the perſons; come wee now to the occaſion of this
diſcourſe.
            
               3. The Occaſion.
            
            The occaſion of this diſcourſe, and argument,
held betwixt David, and his elder brother, was this.
The Army of Iſraell, and the Army of the Philistins,
having lyen longe in the feilde, and Ishai, having
in the Army, three of his Sonnes following Saul;
the olde man longing to heare how they did, and
deſirous to ſend them ſome fresh victualls to
releiue them, as alſo to procure for them the favour
of their Captayne, ſend David to viſite them, to
redeeme their pledge, and to ſalute their Captayne
with a preſent of ten fresh cheeſes, v. 17. 18. He, comming
early to the Campe, finde's both the Armyes
ſet in array, ready to joyne in fight, and withall heares
a great shout, ſuch as they vſe to giue at the

firſt onſet. The young man bring hardy (though
litle) and deſirous to be one in the number that
should fight for his Country, and religion, and ashamed
to looke on, and giue ayme, whylſt others
vnderwent the hazarde, & heate of the day; leaue's
the things which he brought with the wagon-maiſter,
and made all the haſthe coulde to reach the armye
before they reached each other: Comming thither,
he finds things in great diſtraction, by reaſon of Goliah,
a mighty Champion of the Philiſtins, who ſtood
boaſting againſt the whole armye of Iſraell, challendging
and deſyring an able and equal Oppoſite to be
ſent out to him. To this Bravado he adds blaſphemy
agaynſt God, and dishonour and diſgrace to the King:
He beholde's the pride and inſolency of the heathenish
army out of the confidence they had in
their vnmatchable Champion, and withall he ſee's
the baſe feare and cowardiſe of his owne Nation,
whoſe courage was quenched with the brauery of
one man: How then (thinks he) it is likelie that
they should ſtand agaynſt many? agaynſt all? To
behold this, his hart burnes within him; Zeale to God,
allegeance to his prince, loue, and dutye to his Country,
make's him inquiſitiue, what this shoulde meane,
how it shoulde happen that ſoe many shoulde be a
frayde of one, or that one shoulde dare to affront ſo
many: Thus at length his priuate thoughts breake's
forth into wordes: What (ſayth he, to the ſtanders by
who gaped, & gazed vppon the Gyant and fled at his
words, at his ſight, as men frighted and out of their
witts) what shall be done to the man that killeth this Philiſtim,
and taketh away the shame from Iſraell? They anſwer, to
him that killeth him, the King will giue great riches: and will

giue his daughter, yea & make his fathers houſe free in Iſraell
Perhaps theſe promiſes were the immaginations &
pratlings of the people, the vnderhand whiſperings
of policye, to ſtirre vp ſome mans courage to vndertake
the combat. For we neither heare theſe things
publiquely proclyamed, nor repeated, and promiſed,
when David came to ſpeake with Saule, and went
about his worke with this approbation, nor chalenged
after, whē 
               David had performed what he vndertooke,
and had ſlayne Goliah. Howſoever, his elder
brother, who obſerue's his behauiour narrowly,
overbeare's his diſcourſe, how he, like an able Champion,
ſpeake's and queſtions, as one that meant to
vndertake the matter; and, either out of contempt
of his brothers youth, or out of envy, leaſt the
yonger shoulde wyn prayſe from the elder, or out
of loue and care of his yonger brother, knowing
his forwardnes, but withall his weakenes, and in ſufficiencye,
for ſuch a buſines, with ſuch an enemy,
whoſe match the whole hoaſt afforded not, check's
him & reſtrayne's him from this rash vndertaking,
by preſenting his youth, his trade, his other buſines,
to his remembrance; why camest thou downe hither
(ſayth he) with whome haſt thou left thoſe few sheepe in the wildernes?
I know thy priae and the malice of thy harte that
thou art come downe to ſee the battell. To whom David replied,
in ſerious, and ſad manner, what haue I now done?
Is there not a cauſe?
            
            
               Thus much for the occaſion of this diſcourſe.
            
            
               The fourth thing conſiderable, is the ſpeech it ſelfe, wherein
obſerue.
            
            
               
               The manner of deliuery.
            
            
               
               The matter deliuereed.
            
            
               
For the manner of deliuery, David reply'es not
poſitiuely, but by way of queſtion or expoſtulation;
as men that deale with envious cavillers vſe to doe,
and as our ſaviour dealt with the high Preiſts, and
Scribes, and Elders continually? for indeede this manner
of ſpeech is of more force then a bare affirmation;
I
                  •
                argue's a litle more life, and ſpirit, it ſtirre's
the bloud of the ſpeaker, and alter's the ſleepy diſpoſition
of him that oppoſeth, as water caſt in a
mans face rayſeth from a ſwound. If he had ſayde,
[brother I hope I haue done nothing but what I ought to doe,
that which I haue a iust cauſe to doe;] Though he had then
ſpoken as much as now he doeth, in effect, yet his
ſpeech had loſt much of the grace, ſpirit, and vigor
it hath; As pictures, though well proportioned, if
they want their proper and naturall shadowing, &
be not well ſet off, looſe much of their bewty, and
delight not a curious beholder; So words, where
they are not expreſt with alacrity and fervor of
mynde, fall flatt, lye dead, and worke not vpon the
affections. There might then haue beene a doubtfull
diſputation of the fact, and cauſe, and much
might haue bene alleaged too, and fro, whether he
had done well, or noe, in comming to the feilde, in
leauing his sheepe, in queſtioning about this quarell,
as if he ment to intrude him ſelfe for a party. And
with the inequallity of his ſtrength to hazard the
honor of the whole Army: But ſpeaking thus quickly
and reſolutely, by way of interrogation, ſaying; What
haue I now done is their not a cauſe? Hee by this queſtion
putt's all out of queſtion, and driue's his brother to
ſee,Sect. & confeſs that ther is a cauſe. And (me thinke's)
I ſee the bloud ſtartle in his face, & the ruddy youth

lookes redder then he had wont, that Zeale which afterwards
eate vp his hart, appeares in his countenance,
and at length, though he purpoſed to keepe ſilence, his
tongue brake looſe into theſe or the like words. O
Brother is there not an apparant cauſe requiring mine, and
yours, and all our attentions, Is it not paſt deniall, paſt colouring,
almoſt paſt remeay? Truly I admire how you, and the
reſt of theſe valiant and able men, and profeſt ſouldiers, can ſo
long looke on, and heare, & ſee the name of God blaſphemed,
and your King ſcorned, and your whole Nation challendged,
braued, and dishonoured, with patience? I wonder that you,
being my elder brother, doe not leade me one by example, and
incorage me with applauſe, in this high honorable, and holy vndertaking,
rather then reſtrayne me by your coldnes and quench
my Zeale by your vnſeaſonable vpbraydings? I wonder any
man should not be ashamed to reprehende my forwardnes: Nay
I wonder all of you are ſo backward when ſuch neceſſity requires
the expreſſion of yours beſt abillityes. It is not ſeaſonable diſcretion,
but dulnes, and do
                     •
                  tishnes, that pul's vs back from
timely action, neither is that temper, which can heare, and ſee
theſe things, with ſilence, the ſober vertue of a man, which wee
terme PATIENCE, But the cowardice or ſenceles and ſlothfull
ſtupidttie of an Aſſe; A poyſon miſtaken for a preſervatiue,
a vice for a vertue. Iſraell had wont to haue Ioſuahs, and Gedions,
and Baruch
                  •
               s and Iepthae's, and Sampſons, who
coulde ſright a whole hoaſt of theſe vncircumſiſed Philiſtims:
Iſraell had a Deborah, who (though a wooman) had courage
enough to daunt a whole, Armye of Infidels; O then what a
shame is it, that the King amougeſt all this multituae, should
finde never a man to ſtand, betweene him and reproach? to hazard
his life for th honor of his Prince? O, what a shame is it,
that amongeſt all theſe brethren of one father of the flesh, one
father of the faith, Abraham, there is not one that dare ingage

his life for the redeeming of all? O, what a shame is this,
that whilst wee call our ſelues the people of God, and ſay wee alone
profeſſe the true religion, and ſerve the true God truly;
there is not one member in the whole boay, that dare preſent it
ſelfe, to ſtopp the mouth of this blaſphemous and vncircumciſed
Philistine, or honor himſelfe, & his family, by his endeavour, to
doe i
                     •
                   though with the loſſe of his owne life?
            
            After ſuch a manner (me thinke's) this worthy
ſeemes to expoſtutate the caſe with his brother, and
to wring from him, by a kinde of loving violence,
a confeſſion of the truth of all this diſcourſe: he ſee's
now the neceſſitye of the caſe, the vertue of his brother,
and ſoe David leaue's him to veiwe his owne
error, to ſee his owne shame, by a ſilent reflection.
            One valiant man,Sect. by his example, putts ſpirit
into a thouſand (as lampes light each other) and
many Cowards met in a heape, infect the whole
crowde, and by their ſecure & ſenſuall arguments,
begett a ſenſleſnes of honour in the harts of their
next neighbours. The cuſtomary beating of a Lyons
whelpe make's him as tame, as a Lambe: and perſons,
naturally valiant, may be made artificiall cowards,
by being brought vp vnder the rodd, and taught to
swallow baſe and groſſe inuryes without chewing.
Thus the ſlaues of Sparta, rebelling agaynſt their
masters, and being encountred with baſtinadoe's in
ſtead of ſwords, loſt that courage which made them
take armes, and like true ſlaues ſubmitted themſelues
to their olde bondage. Such mindes feare
not the cryme, but the punishment, and thinke that
there is nothing diſhonorable▪ but that which diſturbe's
their priuate peace, and that ſlothfull ſecurity
wherevnto they are accuſtomed from youth;

I cannot but thinke there were valiant men in this
Armye: It is a great part of valour in a Prince to gather
an army: Some tyrants dare not truſt their
owne guard: or ſuffer an aſſembly of their owne
ſubjects to meet. Theſe are poſſeſt with ſuch a timorous
ſpirit as the English Poet diſcribe's; Feare' himſelfe
to bee, whome he bringes in, flying away from himſelfe, whilſt
no man purſuſe's him, and affrayde of the clashing of his owne
armour: Inſomuch, as that which should keepe him
from feare, is the cauſe of his feare: But Saule was
ſoe farr from ſuch baſe puſillanimity of ſpirit, as he
was perſonally preſent in this Campe, and had before
giuen proofe of his valour agaynſt the Philistims,
by ſingle oppoſition.
            Agayne, it is probable that Ionathan was in the
Campe, with diuers other Worthies, of whoſe valour
there was no queſtion. I am ſure Davids three bretthren
were there, & all likely to be valiant men; ſoe
that it is wonderfull, that none of theſe offered
themſelves to the combat in this quarrell. But perhaps
one diſcouraged an other, and the backwardnes
of ſome dishartned others, and ſome out of vnſeaſonable
modeſty woulde not offer themſelues,
leaſt they should bee thought proude, or ambitious,
or the like (poore ſpirits that will be frighted from
good purpoſes by the ſcoffes, jest's, and reproches, of ſluggards
and cowards, who dare doe nothing but cenſure good mens
actions, and call their owne baſenes and trechery, loyall diſcretion.)
Or,Tydeus corpore, animo Hercules. laſtly, God tooke away there harts, and infuſed
a double ſpirit into David, that his power might
be ſeene in weaknes, and how he is able to overthrowe
the proudeſt adverſarye, by babes and ſucklings;
even with weake meanes, or without meanes, or by

contrary meanes.
            
               David therefore, beholding all this with ſorrow,
and ſeeing ſuch a generall diſpoſition in the whole
army to faynt and fly, rather then to fight, or as
beaſts are, in droues, driuen to be butchered, when
being ſingle and out of the crowde they woulde
breake looſe, he awaken's the ſleepy courage of his
brother and the reſt, with this quick expoſtulation,
what haue I now done? Is there not a cauſe?
            
            From the Manner of ſpeaking wee deſcend to the
Matter or ſubject of Davids ſpeech; which, in fewe but
weightye words, containe's the motiue or impulſiue
cauſe of his famous attempt, & atcheiuement
following immediatly after.
            For whilſt he ſayth Is their not a cauſe? he take'es the
cauſe as graunted and evident enough. Let vs then
labour to finde it out; for all actions (and ſoe this)
are warrantable, or wicked, as they haue an evident
cauſe to juſtifie or condemne them.
            
               CAVSES are either ordinary, or extraordinary:
            
            Thoſe which we call ordinary, are all ſecond cauſes,
which are readie at hande, lying open to the
eye of vulgar obſervation, and proceeding by a legall
& common courſe of Nature. Extraordinarie cauſes
are either wholy hid, or farther remooved; ſo
that they are not ſeene at all, or, (at leaſt) not by all.
The higheſt among'ſt ordinarie cauſes (for wee
ſpeake of that ſpheare wherein the rule of man is
wholy buſied, and taken vp) is the ſovereigne, or
ſupreame Power, and all other powers ſubordinate to it.
This hath conveniency and vtility as the moſt proper
end of it's operation and ayme. For though it be
convenient & profitable to haue ſuch ſubordinate power

ſetled, yet it is not of abſolute neceſſity that wee haue
them.
            
               Extraordinary cauſes, in this claſſe, or forme, haue
Necesſity for their proper and direct ende, and begin
onely to worke when there is defect of operation
in the ordinary cauſes: as Phyſick is adminiſtred
to helpe decayed nature, and expell malignant humor.
Thus when Saul, the ſupreameſt amongſt ordinary
cauſes in the common wealth of Iſraell, is
ſlack in his office; God rayſeth vp David to quicken
his zeale: and when Ely growes olde and negligent,
and through indulgence ſuffers his ſonnes to abuſe
their office; God rayſeth vp Samuel to provoke him
to more dilligence. And thus, at all tymes, in defect
of ordinary paſtors, God hath rayſed vp prophets to
teach his people, and to publish his judgements openly
and playnely,It is (as I haue before noted) very-vncertayn whether ſuch promiſes were ever propounded on no, by the King; becauſe wee never ſee them repeated, challenged, or performed by Saule to David after the worke wrougt though with the perill of their
owne liues.
            If any man object (therfore) that the reward propounded
by the King ver. 25. was the principall
cauſe that excited David to vndertake this quarrell,
I doubt not to ſay they are much deceiued: For
though intiſements to vertue, and indowments for
vertue doe well; and though men come ſeldome to
the markett, where nothing but bloud, and blowes
are to be bought, and ſolde; yet true fortitude is
not mercenary, nor coulde all thoſe words, make our
worthy dip his finger in bloud, by vndertaking a ſingle
combat, except a greater neceſſity call him
forth, then prayſe, or profitt, or pleaſure, or preferment.
It muſt not be an ordinary, but extraordinary
cauſe, therefore, that moue's this extraordinary perſon:
and what other thing coulde that be, then the

preſent daunger wherein he beheld the church and
ſtate involved, together with the deſperate ingagement
of the King, and Kingdomes honor. Hee ſee's
all theſe in hazard to receiue either a totall overthrowe,
or (at leaſt) a violent and vnrecoverable
blowe, by this Blaſphemer: For will it not ſtagger true
beleeuers when they ſee the enemy braue God (as it
were) to his face, and goe away vnpunished? The
wicked then encourage themſelues in infidelity,
and with open mouth deride, and diſcreditt the former
miracles of God ſoe much ſpoken of. For if God
doth not every day create new worlds, or confound
olde enemyes, or produce new miracles, man will
not beleeue that ever he made the world, or confounded
the rebellious race of idolatrbus Gyants, or
ever did a miracle, or perhaps ſcarce thinke there
is a God to doe ſuch thinges; At leaſt, that he is not
the true God, except he marcheth away with the conquerour.
For proſperity and externall glory ſo bewicheth,
and dazeleth the eyes and judgements of
mortall men, as they cannot ſuſpect guilded falshood,
nor embrace ragged truth. And therefore
Rabshakeh, comming agaynſt Ieruſalem, by the commaunde
of Sanacherib King of Ashur, elevated with his
former victories, crye's out with an open and jmpudent
mouth, and demaunds of the Iſraelites, wherein
they trust and put confidence that they doe not preſently render
themſelues to the mercy of his Master? where (ſayth he) is the
God of Hamah? and of Arpad? where is the God of Sepharuaim?
or how haue they deliuered Samaria out of my hands?
whoe is he among all the Gods of theſe lands that hath deliuered
their Country out of my hand, that the Lord should deliver
Ieruſalem out of my hands? The text ſayth the Blaſphemer

receiued no anſwere, till God ſtopt his mouth with a miracle:
For all then, and there, were colde, benumde,
and ſilent, as perſons decayed in ſpirit, and fitted
for that defection and forreigne Captiuity, and ſubjection,
which not long after followed.
            But our Champions heart burne's more hott in
this place, with zeale and indignation to ſee and
heare the boaſting, and blaſpheming enemy, rayle agaynſt
the God of Iſraell, of whoſe loue and power,
David had large experience, and whoſe name, (by
way of thankfulnes) he had extraordinary cauſe to
defend from diſhonor whilſt he had power, make's
him begin the onſett (as it were) to this conqueſt, by
conquering his priuate feares, his brothers frownes,
and the cavelling exceptions of all other envious
beholders, with this bolde and braue demaund,
what haue I now done? Is there not a cauſe? And
thus much of the cauſe or matter here mentioned
to shew, that it was a cauſe of neceſſity which compeld'
his vndertaking for Is there not a cauſe? hauing
reference to nothing els then to the publique perill
and common calamity of the church and ſtate
threatned by this idolatrous Champion. Which is
a cauſe more then ſufficient, to compell him that
is a true member of the myſticall body of Christ, to
shew his Spirituall life by ſtrugling for the generall
liberty. The concluſions therefore from hence deduced,
are theſe following.
            
               
               CONCLVSION 1.
               Firſt, there muſt bee an apparant cauſe of
necesſitie, to juſtify every extraordinary action or vndertaking,
performed by a priuate perſon.
               APriuate Perſon is hee that hath noe direct or
publique calling to the action he vndertake's:
In which ſenſe a publique perſon in one kind, may
be a priuate perſon in an other reſpect. Aron is a publique
perſon to ſacrifice, but not to rule, and
Vzziah is a publique perſon to gouerne, but not to
ſacrifice. A magiſtrate is a publique perſon, but not
for all actions: for if he take vpon him to adminiſter
the Sacraments, he therein becomes a priuate
perſon. Nay when he doeth any acte of Iuſtice without
a Law, he then laye's by the prerogatiue, and
dignity of a publique perſon, and acts the parte of
a priuate man. Becauſe the lawe is the inſtrument,
& ſword of the publique magiſtrate, without which
to ſtrike is to Tyrannize, and without which, to converſe
in any puplique buſines, is to become priuate.
Thus wee ſee Mayors, & other ſubordinate officers,
who are shadowes & types of the ſupreame, goeing
abroad without their Swords & Maces (the enſignes
of their offices) become priuate (for the preſent
time) till they aſſume thoſe types of their authority
agayne, which ſerue as publique and notable inſtruments
commanding all men to take notice of
them, and to obey them as publique executors of
the lawes. Soe the King ſaieth moſt excellently, in
the beginning of his ſpeach made to the Parliament,
the 26. of March, 1621. that the end why Kings
are appointed of God, is, to put the lawes of the ſtate in execution.
                  
Theſe are the executors of the law, which is the
will of the ſtate, wherof they are heads; and when
they doe their owne wills againſt, and not with the
will of the ſtate (that is the law) then they become
private perſons in thoſe perticulars, becauſe they
ceaſe to be executors of the law, as Kinges ought
to bee.Kinges (as his matie, ſaith moſt excellently) are married to the people by lawes, the capital breach of law only is adultery in this caſe admitting a divorce; as wee ſee thoſe members are cutt off from the Kinges ſpouſe the Comonwealth, which by rebelliō & treaſō, proue themſelues to be members & childrē of an adulterous generatiō baſtards & no ſonnes legitimate,
               
               Now every man whither priuate or publique, is
a member of the Common-wealth, wherein hee liue's,
and ſoe hath noe power of his owne body, to diſpoſe of it
this or that way, eſpecially to hazard it in a ſingle
Duell, or the like, without licence. And the more
high excellent, & emnient the perſon is, the leſſe
abſolute liberty hath he in diſpoſing himſelfe, and
the more intereſt hath the Comon-wealth in him. Becauſe
wee ſee every member claymes more intereſt
in the head, hart, liver, lungs, (thoſe principall parts)
then in the reſt: for if any of theſe bee miſſing diſſolution
followe's to the whole body, if any be defectiue
a generall decay and conſumption enſue's; but
if the body looſe, a toe, or a finger, or a foote, or a hand,
or an eye, or a tongue, the loſſe is not ſoe great, the
danger not ſoe deſperate. Now then, for any man
to hazard his perſon in a ſingle Duell, without manifeſt
neceſſity, is to comit violence to the Comon-wealth,
and to rend a limbe from the fame. I call it
neceſſity, when he is aſſaulted, or when he beholds
the Church, ot State aſſaulted, all which, he is
bound to defend by the law of nature. Nam ex ſole
defenſione oportet bellum juſtificare naturaliter. And, defenſio
priuata est juris naturalis: multo magis publica. Soe wee
may defend the law and religion, wherein all men
haue equall intereſt, againſt all invaſion of power

or policie; and all actions done in the behalfe of
theſe, are actions of defence, and juſtifiable by the
law of nature, otherwiſe not.
               
                  Cain is the firſt Duelliſt wee find in ye world,Geneſ. 4. he
kill's his brother when he should haue ben his brothers
keeper. Noe cauſe of neceſſity prouok's him on,
but malice and envie; Soe that when God come's to
examine, arraigne, and condemne him for the murther,
though he can churlishly ſay to God. Am I my
brothers keeper? yet cannot he ſay with our innocent
combatant, what haue I now done? Is their not a cauſe?
               
               
                  Simeon and Levy (bretheren in evill) make a kind of
party againſt Hamor and Shechem, and ſecond each
other, both in the plott & practiſe: but being queſtioned
by their father for this villany, though they
alleadge a kind of ſeeming reaſon, and ſay, should he
abuſe our ſister as a whore?
                  Geneſ. 34. yet that very reaſon argue's
their action to proceede from pride, malice, and revenge,
and not from reaſon or religion, or any other
cauſe of neceſſity; for reaſon, and religion, and necesſitie
would rather haue required their liue's. that they
might by marriage haue made amend's for their ſin
& violence offered to the virgin, all poſſibility whereof,
was now taken away, by this rash act of the
young men: Who therefore could not juſtlie ſay to
their angry father in their owne defence, what haue
wee now done? was there not a cauſe?
               
               
                  
                     
                        ••
                     ab kills Abner, and Amaſa, both after a baſe and
bloody manner, David behold's both with greife,
but dares not punish either of them, the Text adds
the cauſe, hee was but new ſetled,2 Sam. 3. 39. and the ſonnes of
Zeruiah were to ſtrong for him. Envie, and malice, were
the impulſiue cauſes of Ioabs treachery, ſoe that

when he fli'es to the hornes of the Altar, as challenging
the priuiledge of Sanctuarie, and is by Salomon
commād, according to Davids former charge, drawn
from thence by violence and ſlayne, that blood might
haue blood, he cannot ſay in his owne defence, as David
here doeth; what haue I now done? Is their not a cauſe?
               
               
                  To come to other actions, done by priuate
perſons, to priuate and indirect ends, howſoever the publique
good were pretended.
                  
                     KOrah, Dathan, and Abiram, conſpire againſt Moſes,
and Aron, and whatſoever shew they make to
reduce things to good order in the State, & Church,
yet it is manifeſt that pride, ambition, and diſobedience
were the bellowes which kindled that fire in their
harts. For the Church and Comon-wealth were gouerned
by Gods law and direction, and noomutation
like to enſue, except it were wrought by themſelues,
and therefore becauſe it was not the true fire of
zeale, but of faction, which ſtirred that combuſtion,
God conſumed them with the fire of his wrath, and
the earth opened her mouth,
                     Num. 16. 
                     and ſwallowed them vp.
                  
                  
                     Saul makes a rash vowe (as Ieptah did before) pretending
zeale in doeing it, and ſuch zeale in executing
the tranſgreſſors thereof, that his owne ſonn
muſt dye (a ſonn that deſerued ſoe well of the father,
ſoe well of the Comon-wealth, hauing that daie
with his armour-bearer chaſed the Philiſtims, and obteyned
the victorie) only becauſe he taſted a litle
hony; It was no zeale, but ſuperſtition, that made
the vowe, there was noe neceſſitie to keepe it, but a
neceſſitie compelled Ionathan, by eating, to refresh

himſelfe, hauing ouer ſpent his ſpirits before in
the battell. The maker of the vow was blame worthy,
the breaker blameles; ſuperſtition, made it,
neceſſitie brake it: The maker, ſoe his owne lawes
bee obſerued, care's not for Gods; conſcience muſt
bynd other men to him, but noe conſcience can
bynd him to God; For (wee ſee) he that is ſoe carefull
here to kill all, as he bind's the people by a
vowe to doe it, a while after can ſpare Agag and the
beſt things, notwithſtanding the comandement of
God, and think's he ſinneth not in tranſgreſſing Gods
will, willfully, and preſumptiouſlie, though he condemn's
his ſonne to death for violating his vnjuſt
will, ignorantlie.
                  
                     Haman (the favorite of Ahazhuerus) becauſe Mordocay
will not bow the knee,2 Sam. 14 whē that bubble paſſeth
by, waxeth angrie, and think's himſelf wronged and
dishonored; All the reverence which his flatterers,
followers, and the whole ſtate and courte giues him,
doth not ſoe much pleaſe him, as this ſingle neglect
of one man vexeth him. For Pride, like, Couetouſnes &
lust, and all other vices, hath nothing, except it hath
all. Therefore for Mordocaies ſake, he will bee revenged
of the whole nation, but pretend's publique
good,Eſter. 4. 
                           •
                        5 
                     it is not (ſaith he) for the Kings proffit to ſuffer
them.
                  
                  
                     Herod is pleaſed in ſeeing the daughter of Herodias
daunce, and therefore Iohn Baptist's head muſt pay
for the muſicke. Neither could the innocency of the
man ſaue his life, but Herods byrth-day, moſt become
the day of his death.
                  The Church mournes when Tyrants are borne,
and the Godly faſt, and pray, and weepe, when the

wicked feaſt, and play, & revell. Herod hath ſworne
and therefore religiouſly will keepe his vowe, Iohn
Baptiſt muſt dye. O ſuperſtitious hypocrite, noe neceſſity
cauſed the to vowe, nor is their any to make
thee keepe it; To doe good at all times neceſſitie
comaunds vs, to doe miſcheife at any time, noe neceſſitie
compell's vs. In this thou art religious, but
to keepe Herodias they brother Phillips wife, that never
troubles thy conſcience; Hypocrite ſtrayne out
guats, and ſwallow camells. Soe Lewis the eleueneh
of France, would not ſweare by the Croſſe of Saim
Loro of Angiers, but any other oath he would take,
and hauing broken them, kiſſe the leaden God, which
he wore in his cap, and all was well, his conſcience
was quiet; Aſſuredly (what pretence ſoever men
make) he that liue's in any open ſinne, without remorſe,
and repentance, hath noe religion in him:
Superſtition may poſeſſe him, and guild him without,
true wiſedome and devotion cannot ſecure him within.
                  
                     Demetrius the Silver-ſmith pretends religion to
ſtop the doctrine of Saint Paul: Yet couetouſnes, &
his priuate proffit was the end of his vproare, and
for that cauſe, he gather's together a factious troope
of perſons, interreſſed in the ſame crafte, and comodity,
Act. 19. 24. 28. with a greedy acclamation ſaying, Great is Diana
of the Epheſians.
                  
                  Now all theſe might and did pretend cauſes to
extenuate the haynouſnes of their facts, nay perhaps
to juſtify them altogether (for there is noe act
but hath his cauſe, and be it neuer ſoe fowle, put's
on a fayre vyzour) but none of theſe can cleare
themſelues to haue any other impulſiue cauſe, then
the corruption, and praevarication of their ownevile

natures. They cannot ſay that either neceſſitie
to prevent ſome imniment danger, or to procure
ſome certaine or probable good, excited them to
worke, neither can they juſtifie themſelues with
ſuch an expoſtulation as our Duelliſt here doeth, ſaying,
what haue wee now done? Is their not a cauſe?
                  
                  They muſt therefore confeſſe their actions to
be grounded vpon ambition, pride, vayne-glory,
malice, envye, or ſome other oblique, and crooked
cauſe, and ſoe to be ſinfull, & cenſurable, together
with all ſuch, as shall hereafter reſemble them.
               
            
            
               CONCLVSION 2.
               A Second Concluſion from hence deduced
is, that necesſitie ſupplie's the place of an ordinary calling
and warrants the vndertaking of any action for the avoyding
of a certaine miſcheife, either to the ſtate where
wee liue, or the true religion which wee profeſſe.
               WEe ſee in nature, that when the eye waxeth
blynd, the hand, grope's, the foote beat's for
way, and the eare, by liſtening, ſeeke's to guide the
body right, and to ſupplie the place of an eye; Soe
the eye (where men are deafe, and dumbe borne)
apprehend's by ſignes, and ſends back her owne
conceptions, by a viſible kind of language. One
member ſupplie's the place of an other in ſervice of
the whole body; neither doth the head (where reaſon
reſide's) find fault with the comunitie of partes,
and exchange of their portions. The mouth in caſe
of neceſſitie, think's noe ſcorne to become a draught
and purging place to the ſtomack by vomit: neither
doth the ſtomack (in caſe of neceſſitie) refuſe meate
that is ſent vp by gliſters. Nature makes vſe of any

parte in any office, for preſervation of the whole
man from ruine. In the reaſonable faculties of the
ſoule, the jmagmation ſtand's in ſtead of memorie,
by begetting newe Ideas in braines that be inclyned
to be ouer-hott, and drye, and the memorie ſupplie's
the defect of judgment, by following former
preſidents, where the brayne inclyne's to ouermuch
moyſture; and all parts bringing intelligenc to the
reaſonable ſoule (the Governeſſe of all) shee reject's
none before examination, nor cenſure's any for
doing the office which belong's to an other, whilſt
the other is defectiue, and this doth not neglect it's
proper function. Soe that the ſoule hauing neede of
all, maks vſe of all for the comon benefit: In-ſoemuch
as if the foote by tripping giue's her warning
of that which the eye should haue ſeene, she doth
not therefore neglect to looke out, becauſe the intelligence
come's from a blynd guide, but therefore
she looke's out, to ſee if the foote ſay true or noe, &
ſoe let's the eye ſee it's owne fault in the dilligence
of the foote. The Apoſtle vſeth this argument to perſwade
the Corinthians to vnity,1 Cor. 12. 21. 22. 23 24. & shewe's that there
is a fellow-vſe or neede, that one member hath of anotther,
and that likewiſe their ought to be a fellow care
one for an other,1. Cor. 12. 25. and alſo a fellow feeling or compaſſion
of common afflictions, one with an other. And ſince
euery member partak's with the head and whole body,
1 Cor. 12. 26. in paine or pleaſure, in houor or dishonor, therefore
it concern's euery member, to looke to the
preſervation both of themſelues in perticuler, and
of others in generall. Becauſe noe member can ſay
they are abſolute in themſelues, and haue noe needs
of another. The eye doth not ſee for it ſelf alone,

but for the foote, and whole body. It concerne's
the Eye therefore to watch, that if the eare (by
accident) should be negligent or lett ſlip a remarkeable
obſervation, which concernes neceſſarily
the whole body, that the eye might be in ſtead of an
eare, and giue notice to the ſoule by ſome viſible
motion. And thus wee ſee the eye ſteadfaſtly faſtned
vpon the ſpeaker, or any other object, keepes the
imagination from wandring, and makes the eare
more attentiue to the voyce, and apprehenſiue of
the meaning. And ſoe, whilſt the eye takes a napp, or
in the darke, when it cannot ſee, it concernes the
eare towatch for it ſelfe, for the eye, & for the whole
body: for though it be true that the eye cannot
heare, nor the eare ſee, yet there is ſome ſuch affinity
betwixt all theſe members in their ſeuerall operations,
as inables the one to ſupply the defects of an
other,Nature hath ordinarily made the tongue to ſpeake to the eare; but God extra ordinarily did ſpeake by the tongue to the eye, Act. 2. 3. and knits all in a perfect and happy ſociety?
As wee ſee in the elements though nothing be more
oppoſed then the fyre and water, yet they are mixt
in the ayre which is hott and moiſt; the fyre is hott
and dry, and the ayre is hott and moiſt: Now though
the ayre and fyre be diuerſe, yea meere contraries,
as the one is dry, and the other moiſt, yet they are
eaſely married together as they are both hott; Soe
the water is cold and moiſt, and the earth cold and
dry; as the one is moiſt, and thother dry, they haue
neede of each other, and yet they fall out and fight;
but as they are both cold, they eaſely agree and
are compounded in one body. And thus it is in the
members of the humane body, compoſed of theſe
elements, and thus is it in the Church and Comon-wealth,
which is a myſticall and politique body compoſed

of theſe men; Now therefore, hauing thus beheld
the comunity of the parts even in nature, let
vs looke into a few examples, following this reaſon or
law of nature, and there ſee how actions, (otherwiſe
queſtionable) are warranted, and juſtified by neceſſity,
when they reſpect the publique.
               The King of Sodome rebells againſt Chedorlaomer
King of Elam;Gen. 14. 4. It is vnlawfull to rebell, vnlawfull to
aſſiſt rebells, yet Lot takes his part, and is taken priſoner;
Abraham thinks it noe injuſtice to joyne in
confederacy with this rebelling King, but that it is
lawfull to make an invaſiue warre to reſcue his brother
Lot. The reaſon is, nature bynds him to it, and
if hee should neglect his duty in this caſe he were
worſe then an infidell. Nay religion bynds him to
it, and a righteous family calls for helpe. Herein Abraham
though he aſſailes, doth but defend, according
to the law of nature; for if they had not firſt
inuaded the Church, and taken Lot, Abraham had
ſate ſtill, but now his aſſault is taken as a defence, for
otherwiſe the Church, & faith of the church, could
not be defended.
               The Church is in diſtreſſe, & in hazard to receiue
a blowe by this meanes: Hee is noe living parte
of the Church, that ſuffers any parte to fall, whileſt
his hand can vpholde it. I had rather pull the houſe
with Sampſon ouer my head, then grynde in a mill,
like an idolatrous and blynde beaſt, all my life, to
the rejoycing of vncircumciſed Philiſtims. Surely
Sampſons death,Iud. 16. 30. 2 King. 25 Num. 31. 6. was more honorable thē 
                  Zedechias life,
yet both loſt their eyes; when religion is at the ſtake,
the Preiſt who (is a man of peace) maye excite to the
warre; nay muſt blow the trumpet, & muſt ſound the

                  Alarum: And then doubtles Salomon, the peaceable
builder of the Temple, may draw his ſword, for the
gloſſe, or brightnes of that ſword of juſtice is not
ſtayned, nor the edge bated, with any other ſpott
or ſtroke, then the touch of innocent blood. But
that (like as Aqua fortis eats into ſteele, or as the
blood of Goates ſoftens Diamonds) doth indeede ſoften
the mettall, and ſoe turnes the edge of authority,
that it cuts not at all, or only cuts the abuſer
and perverter of it. This wee ſee in Abraham who
after this very warre (and only then) is bleſſed by Melchiſedesk,
the King, and Preift of peace. Yea Melchiſedeck
accepts the tythe of the ſpoiles, & by his acceptance,
confirme's vs in the lawfulnes of the like acquiſition;
for had the goods beene ill gotten (as they
muſt needs bee were the warre vnlawfull) that King
of juſtice would not haue pertaken, nor receaued any
portion of it for himſelf, or for God: but now his acceptance
approues the action, and warrants our imitation;
ſoe that, if any man queſtion the fact, shall
beholde Abraham ſtands foorth. Like David in this
place, and ſaith, what haue I now done? Is their not a cauſe?
               
               
                  Moſes, beholding with ſorow the bondage of his
Country-men, and how baſely the Egyptians inſulted
over them, provoked by the neceſſity of the caſe,
offered himſelf to be their deliverer, and in revenge
of a wronged Iſralite, ſlew an oppreſſing Egyptian: but
they (notwithſtanding Gods worke for their weale)
were loth to be admonished of any error, & therefore,
where he laboured to vnite them in loue, they
requite him with accuſation, and caſt in his teeth
what he had done for their good, with the hazard
of his owne life. This make's him ſlee, but

they ſmart for it fourty yeares after.
               
                  Phineas in caſe of neceſſity, though a Preiſt, a man
of peace, when he beholds manners corrupted, religion
profaned, Iuſtice contemned, ſteps vp and armes
himſelf with the weapens of warr, and executes
judgment vpon two impudent offenders, hauing
the neceſſity of the caſe ſor his calling, and the approbation
of God after the fact, to encourage our
zeale in the like. The noblenes of blood should be
noe warrant to protect notorions ſinners from
shame and punishment,Num. 25. 7. if like Phineas our harts were
inflamed with the loue of God and his truth.
               
                  Deborah a woman, modeſt, vertuous, in the time
of neceſſity becomes a Iudge, becomes a Captaine. At
other times to doe thus, had neither beene the part
of a modeſt, nor vertuous wooman; now not to doe
it, when neceſſity calls her out, were to become as
beaſtly and ſlauish, as thoſe be, who should cenſure
or condemne her for doing it.Iud. 4. 4. 9
               
               
                  Sheba, flying into Abel, Ioab beſeigeth him therein;
The Citty being brought to extremity,2 Sam. 20. 13. 15. noe way likely
to auoyd ruine, a woman ſteps vp among the
Captayns, and Councellors, and by her wiſdome, in
caſe of neceſſity, finds a meanes to ſatiffie Ioab, and
to ſecure the City.
               In caſe of neceſſity, Azariah withſtand's the King,
ſaying, It pertaineth not to thee Vzziah, to burne in cenſe vnto
the Lord, but to the Preists the ſonnes of Aaron that are conſecrated
for to offer incenſe: Goe forth of the ſanctuary: for
thou haſt tranſgreſſed,
                  2 Chr. 26. 18. 
                  and thou shalt haue noe honour of the
Lord God. Had not the Preiſt bene ſtout in this caſe he
had bene worthy of that leproſy, which the Prince
was plagued withall, for being too ſtout. It was

here found true which Salomon ſaith, Better is a poore &
a wiſe child,
                  Eccl. 4. 13 
                  then an olde and foolish King, which will noe more
be admonished.
               
               The Iewes vnder Ahazhuerus are in great daunger
of a generall maſſacre by the practiſe of an ambitious,
and irreligious favorite; Mordocay ſends word
to Eſther, who is ſafe her ſelf, and ſecure in the armes
of the King, that shee would remember her inocent
Countrey-men, and beſtirre her ſelf in the time
of this extreame neceſſity; shee reſolue's preſently
to doe her beſt in this buiſines, and layidg a ſide all
reſpect of the Ceremony of the Court, the Majeſty
of the King,Est. 4. 14. 15. 16. the terror of a contrary law, shee goe's
on with this reſolution, If I perish, I perish.
               
               Let theſe examples that follow be of credit with
the Reader according to the credit of thoſe Apocriphall
books from whence they are taken: Yet this
will follow that thoſe who penned the books were
of this judgment, & the times wherein theſe books
were penned, approued, and praiſed theſe actions,
and ſoe would haue done the like, if in theſe dayes
they had liued and met the like occaſion as was
then offered them. And to this end did they write▪
and propound theſe examples to our imitation; nor
can wee chooſe but reverence their antiquity,
though wee doe not Canonize their verity.
               
                  Iudith another woman in caſe of neceſſity for preſervation
of her Country, and Religion, hauing before
given teſtimony of her Chaſtitie, Modeſty,
Charity, Contentment, in a retyred courſe of life, as
if now shee had layd by or forgot all theſe, and become
vpon a ſuddayne wanton, and looſe, and merciles,
and monſtrous, vndertaks a worke which makes

men tremble. Whilſt they thinke vpon it, and
shews how ſtrong God is in weake inſtruments, when
he begins to worke.
               
                  Good old Tobit in caſe of neceſſity buryes his bretheren,
though with the hazard of his owne life and
eſtate; he is banished for this, but the ſame God that
ſet's him to worke, raiſes him freinds at Court to
helpe and reſtore him. Archiacharus beg's his goods,
which were confiſcated, and his life, which was forfeited,
for this pious offence, and rectore's them vnto
him. Yet being reſtored, he doth not therefore
ceaſe doing good in time of neceſſity, for feare of
the penalty threatned, and formerly inflicted; nor
can his mocking neighbors fright him from his duty,
but he reiterate's the ſame charitable, and holy tranſgresſion
againe, and againe, whileſt if any man repr
                     •
                  
                  hends
him for it, he can ſay with David: What haue I
now done? Is their not a cauſe?
               
               In neceſſity, rather then chaſtity shalbe condemned
by injuſtice, becauſe she would not bee deflowred
by luſt, God ſtirs vp the ſpirit of young Daniell,
(without an ordinary calling) to cōdemne them that
were ordinary Iudges, and to cleare the innocent
from imminent danger. For whereſoever I haue an
occaſion offered me by God, to doe good, I haue a calling
and command, from him to doe it.
               In neceſſity, Mathias withſtand's ſuch as ſacrifice
contrary to the law, and whilſt the vſurping King
commaunds the doeing of it, he kill's the perſon
that preſumes to doe it: And for this is parralelde
with zealous Phineas, whoſe like act of neceſſary (yet
extraordinary) juſtice, without an ordinary calling
or warrant, on the behalfe of God, and the truth, was

ſo farre from finne and shame as it was counted vnto
him for righteouſnes vnto all generations for evermore;
and is ſtiled by the Pſalmist, according as
the ſeptuagint expounded it, a prayer of peace, a ſweet
ſmelling ſacrifice of attonement, which cauſed the
conſuming peſtilence to ceaſe.
               To ſpeake of Prophets both ordinary, & extraordinary,
after all theſe, who haue done the like in their
kind, as Ieremiah, Micheas, Eſay, Daniell, Amos, with otthers;
were but to proue what nothing but tyannous
cuſtome dare's, and nothing but invicible ignorance,
or villanous Atheiſme will deny,Objection or call
into doubt. But if any shall ſay, theſe are no preſidents
to follow becauſe they were extraordinary:
I anſwer,Anſwer. therefore they are to be followed, becauſe
they are extraordinary: For their examples fitt extraordinary
times, and occaſions beſt. And yet what
action is done, but a man might ſay as much of it, if
that were enough to make it lye dead, and vſeles.
But who can know, whether an other man hath the
ſame extraordinary mover or noe, where the ſame
cauſe preſent's it ſelfe? verely none, but the perſon
himſelfe, who hath the teſtimony of his owne conſcience
to acquitt, or condemne him; other men,
judging by the naked fact, or badd ſucceſſe, may miſjudge,
and condemne a worke for wicked, which
proceede's (perhap's) from the good ſpirit of God.
And this muſt neede's be true, except wee thought
the ſpirit of God, that ſpake by the Prophets, ſpeake's
not now to Gods people in the Church; but that (Oh
blaſphemy) God were now growen olde and become
blinde, or deafe, or dumbe, or forgott himſelfe, and
his poore afflicted flock. Breifly, whilſt ſome will not

beleeue God when heſpeakes, and workes by extraordinary
meanes, and others will not beleeue him
except he ſoe ſpeake's, and worke's, wee are come
to that paſſe that wee ſee not our tokens: neither will
wee heare others admonishing vs, nor doe what wee
ought without admonition, nor ſuffer any man to
ſpeake, or doe worthily without an vnworthy cenſure.
               To conclude this point, though the actions of all
theſe men before recited, might be called in queſtion
(as many of them were) by a cavilling and envious
enemy, and ſome of them challendged of partiality,
others of ſingularity, of popularity, preſumption, pride,
diſobedience, irregularity, treachery, or the like. So
that none shoulde eſcape vncontroled; yet, they
all paſſe currant in the Church vnder the generall
warrant of Necesſity, and may all ſtand vp with theſe
words of David in this place, what haue wee now done?
Is their not a cauſe? Such a cauſe there was, as if Abraham
had not fought, he had bene regiſtred for lack
of good nature, for lacke of courage, for lack of
zeale, in his frends caſe, in the ſtates, in Gods. And
as this Father of the faithfull, ſo should all that ſucceede
him, aſwell in religion, as greatnes, and goodnes
of minde, haue vndergone cenſure in their perticulars
for omiſſion, as now they haue by their worthes
attayned, the favour of God and men.
               For in the caſe of neceſſity, God himſelfe diſpenſeth
with his written law; Becauſe the law of Nature,
which he hath written in every mans hart,G
                        •
                     . 38. 26. Exod. 17. 20. 21. Iud. 3. 15. ſubjects
him thervnto. So that it excuſeth, or (at leaſt)
extenuateth (in ſome ſorte) the inceſt of Thamar, the
diſobedience of the Midwiues, the cruelty of Ehud, &

                  Iael,
                  1 Sa. 19. 2. Pro. 6. 30. Tho: Aqu: 22. q. 62. st. 5. 4. the falshood of Ionathan, bewraying the Councell
of his Father, his King: inſomuch as Salomon ſaith,
men diſpiſe not a theefe that ſteales for necesſity: Yea, in caſe
of neceſſity it shall be lawfull to breake the Sabboth,
and to eate the shew-breud, to diſpoſe of the holy
veſſells; to omit circumciſion; For a woman to circumciſe,
and all this without blame; whilſt all of them
haue this Buckler of Davids, to defend themſelves
from obloquie, What haue I now done? Is their not a cauſe?
Vbi vrget necesſitas, excuſabilis est diſpenſatio: vbi vtilitas
provocat, laudablis eſt; vtilitas, (inquam) communis, non propria.
               
               Neither is this a Paradoxe in divinity, nor yet a
thing practiſed only amongeſt the Iewes, but a law
vniverſall, both of nature, & nations. So that whereſoever
wee shall finde man, wee shall finde the footſtepps
of this practiſe; And the more noble the nation
is, the more frequent the examples. The Grecians,
and Romanes, shall ſuffice, and ſome few amongeſt
them.
               
                  Codrus, King of Athens vnderſtanding by the oracle,
the benefit his Kingdome should receiue by his
loſſe, and the loſſe it should haue by his life, diſguiſed
himſelfe, and provoked an enemy with harde
words, and then expoſed himſelfe (voluntarily) to his
enraged, and ſuddaine revenge; that ſo, by his ſinguler
daunger, and death, he might procure the generall
good of all.
               
                  Mutius Scevola, for his countrey, in time of neceſſity,
attempts the death of Porſenna, a publique enemy,
and miſſing to performe what he would, he becomes
more famous, whilſt he burnes his miſtaking
hand, in his enemyes fyer, to let them ſee, that as

they punished him for attempting, he willingly punished
himſelfe for miſſing; with this reſolution he
conquer's the inraged King, who leaues the ſeige,
more afrayd of the vertue of Scevola, then of all
Rome beſide. Indeede this was a profe'ſt enemy but
are men the leſſe daungerous enemyes, for being
hidd, cloſe, and vnknowne, or becauſe they profeſſe
the contrary, and only by practice declare
their evill intents; I trow not.
               
               
                  Scipio, a modeſt and humble man (who fled preferment
in time of peace, when the moſt vnworthy
hunted after it, with money and meanes) ſought the
helme in a ſtorme, when all fled out of a ship-wrak't
eſtate, which was ready to ſinke, and ventred his
owne life for the ſauing of many.
               
                  Pompey, who wrung from envy the ſurname of
Great, being to paſſe out of Cicile by ſea to releiue
Rome with corne, in a time of extreame famine, the
wynds ryſing, the ſea raging, and the marriners fearing
to weigh vp their ankors, in ſuch a ſtreſſe, he
preſſeth them forward with this reſolute incoragement,
It is neceſſary that I goe, but not neceſſary that I liue.
               
               
                  Horatius Cocles, maintayned a Bridge againſt the enemy,
till part of it was broken downe behind him,
and then looking back, and ſeeing his Country to
be freed, by his perſonall daunger: Hee leapes into
the water with theſe words in his mouth,Seneca: Epiſt. 120. veniat ſi quis vult, ſic euntem ſequi. 
                  Let him
come after me, who ſoever will follow me, ſo goeing before, & leading
the way: I will travell no further in this infinite diſcourſe;
our owne age wants not preſidents of thoſe
who haue interpoſed their liues in caſe of neceſſity,
for the reſcue of the late Queene deceaſed, of the ſtate
& church thē
                  Sect. perplexed: of our King, & the church of

                  Scotland in times paſt, and can it be leſſe honorable
to doe as much for the King, ſtate, or church, at this
preſent?Necesſitas non ſubijci tur legi. The: Aquì 1. 12. q. 
                        ••
                     . ar. 6. Necesſitas dat legem non ipſa accepit. Se neca. The Prouerb ſaith, Necesſity hath noe law; the
meaning is, that neceſſity is a law, aboue all lawes:
And I call it Necesſity, when the King who is the head,
or the ſtate which is the body, or Religion, which is
the ſoule, is in queſtion to receiue preiudice. Theſe
liue together, theſe dye together; to be engaged,
for theſe is to be happy, to dye for theſe, is to be
ſafe; Therfore I conclude that in this caſe, necesſity
ſupplyes the place of an ordinary calling.
               
               If any man deſires further ſatisfaction, and thinkes
theſe examples of antick liberty, & vertue, too
farr out of fashion, to be revined in theſe dayes, degenerating
from true nobility, and declining headlong
toward ſecurity, let him in the troubles of
France, heare the Lord de la Nove in this point, who
ſpeak's, like a noble man indeede, freely, & playnly.
               
                  And becauſe (ſaith he) at this apprehenſion of the preſent
evill, ſome holde it may be, that the King encloſed will giue a
commandment to his ſubjects, not to ayde his estate now perishing;
shall this defaulte be an excuſe for the ſubject? wee owe
loue, obeyſance, ſubjection, & fidelity to our King, who not withſtāding
may dye: but we owe ſo much to our country, as cānot dye.
               
               When Lodovic-Sforce began to aſpire to the ſoveragnity
of Millan,
                  Com: l: y. 0. 2. he found the Dutcheſſe her wiſdome and
courage to be the only barre in his way, as for the Duke
himſelf, out of his ſimplicity, credulity, or obſtinacy,
he became an intelligencer againſt himſelf revealing
his wiues councells, & purpoſes, to Lodovic his ſubtill
enemy, & the ſecret vndermyner of his eſtate. By
which meanes, he ruined himſelfe & his poſterity, &
advanced Lodovic-Sforce his defignes, more ſurely, and
ſpeedely, then Lodovic-Sforce himſelfe,

or the ableſt, and moſt malicious traytor, could haue
done. Say now therefore, the Duches her ſelfe, or any
other of the cheife perſons with, or without her, had
oppoſed Lodovic on the Dukes behalfe, or oppoſed
the Duke himſelfe, ſtanding againſt himſelfe obſtinatly,
and ignorantly, for Lodovic-Sforce, should theſe
perſons, ſo doing their dutyes, be counted (for this)
traytors? I trow not. Nay, I am perſwaded if they
should not thus doe, they were rather ſo to be accounted
traytors. I doubt not the Duke himſelfe once
deliuered from his owne folly, and freed from the
fraud, and flattery of Lodovic Sforce, would haue willingly
acknowledged, and bountifully rewarded the
benefit: Though now, whilſt theſe evill ſpirits poſſeſt
him; like a man that were bewitched to ruine,
he was like enough to prayſe falshood, and flattery,
and to punish faith, and fidelity, ſtyling treaſon obedience
and duty.
               There is a queſtion whether ſuch did well or noe,Commine 
                        •
                     . 6. 6, 7.
as kept Lewis the 11 from the windowe in his ſicknes.
Their diſobedience aroſe from love; but this jmagination,
which loued well that flattery he had bene
vſed vnto, ſuppoſed this duty of their's a capitall
cryme, and therefore deſiring to haue his will, though
it were to hurt himſelfe, and to vpholde his authority,
though with the decay of his health, and life, (in
the iſſue) he banish't them the court, to teach others
a blynd obedience, & that Kings ought to be obayed, though
it be to the ruine of themſelues, and the ſtate.
               
               
                  Saul perhaps would haue blamed his armour-Bearer,
if he had not ſufferd him to haue killed himſelfe:
But thus to doe, had bene a holy, and acceptable diſobedience,
whilſt he might haue bene a meane to

ſaue his ſoule. And ſurely Lewis the 11, and Saul, were
madd, and poſſeſt with evill ſpirits, whilſt they were
in theſe humors, ſo alſo are all ſuch, who will be
offended with thoſe that informe them, of troth's,
that they caſt not away themſelues, and Kingdomes,
but will not be angry with ſuch as flatter them falſely,
but rather reward them for helping forward, and
haſtening the ruine of themſelues and ſtates.
               All thoſe edicts whereby Bullinbrooke qualifyed, &
ſtayd the peoples duty, from ſtirring for Ric
                        ••
                     rd the
ſecond, and whereby he ſtrengthned himſelfe, for
the depoſing of that King, came out in the Kings
owne name. But what doe you think the King would
haue blamed them (though for the preſent perhaps
he would, eſpecially whilſt he was in Bullinbrooke power)
if the nobility, and commons, had joyned for
his reſcue, or any man excited them to that end?
Would he (being free) haue called ſuch traytors?
I trow not; but rather knowne, and eſteemd them his
trueſt ſubjects.
               When Augustus feaſted Antony, and Lepidus in his
Galley, the Captaine of the Galley came to him, and
whiſpering in his eare, tolde him now he coulde
make him maiſter of the world, by cutting the cable
and falling into the ſea whilſt thoſe two competitors
were in his power. Thou shouldſt haue done
this (quoth Augustus) without my privity; now to
doe it would not become. Some ſervices are only
acceptable when they are acted; they are firſt to be
done, and then are wee to aske leaue for doeing of
them, when the apparant neceſſity may pleade our
pardon. Henry the eight, concluded peace with
France, vpon theſe conditions, that the King of France,
                  
shoulde pay him a certaine ſumme of money, vpon
payment whereof, he should reſtore Bolloigne to the
French, and in the meane time, all things were to
ſtand, as then they ſtood without alteration. Preſently
after Chatilion, Captaine of Mountpeaiſier, begun
to rayſe a Bastilion, which might annoy and endaunger
Bolloigne; this being obſerued by the Lord Grey,
(then Governour of Bolloigne) who ſaw the intent of
the enemy, how vpon advantage of the commiſſioners

                     •
                  verſight, in compoſing the articles of agreement,
great diſadvantage might befall the Kings
towne, and a ready way be made for the enemy to
enter by fraud without money, which he could not
otherwiſe enter by force, without payment of a
great ſumme agreed on: He with his troopes fell
vpon the enemyes workes, and razed it to the
ground, and this was accounted good ſervice, being
once done, though againſt the articles; becauſe neceſſity
vrged it, to repayre an overſight, when if he
had ſtayd for commiſſion, or ſought one to warrant
his worke, he might haue bene prevented, in the
worke, and that would never haue bene graunted
by publique warrant which he ſought, and ſo on
all ſides, he should haue beene blamed. I know ſome
write that he had warrant vnderhand brought him
by worde of mouth, by Sir Tho: Palmer, let this be
graunted, yet by the King (as King) that is, with his
councells conſent, and by publique inſtrument, he
was not only, not warranted, to doe it, but prohibited
from doeing it; which yet, being done, was accounted
the beſt peece of ſervice that ever he did.
               Heare the Lord de la N
                        •
                     ve, to this purpoſe in an
other paſſage▪
                  
               
               
                  
Solon ſayd, that in a diviſion a good citizen ought not to
ſtand ſtill, but to take the better part, in reſpect of his Band to
the Common-wealth. But ſay (ſaith he) our Country were not
devided but overthrowne: Say it were not in perill only to be,
but almoſt alltogether loſt. Should wee in the midſt of ſo great
diſorders, thinke it wiſdome, and allegiance, and piety, to ſitt
with our armes croſſe-folded, till our throats be cut, our lawes,
religion, and ſtate, altred, when reaſon bids vs throwe them abroad,
and beſtirre vs nimbly for the ſuddayne ſafegaurd, and
reſcue of all? shall I meet with Incendiaries, who ſee to ſet the
Countrey one fier, and not ſtopp them, but ſtay for a commiſion?
shall the Father of a Family be ſeene madly to 
                     〈◊〉
                   his owne houſe
over his eares, and kill himſelfe, whilst the wife children, and
ſervants obediently looke on, and weepe, but dare not offer to
hinder it? shall it be ſinne in them to ſtay him from ſuch a
foule fact, to hollde his hands? to deſire him to be better adviſed
to cast on water? I think none will be ſo madde as once
to affirme it.
               Then doubtles, our combatant David, may kill Goliah,
an enemy of God and the ſtate, though Saul
ſend's not for him, and might after the fact juſtify
himſelfe with this ſpeech of his to his brother: What
haue I now done? Is their not a cauſe?
               
            
            
               CONCLVSION 3.
               A third Concluſion from hence deduced,
is, that negligence, in a caſe of Necesſity: that is, where the ſafety
of our Prince, or our Country, or our Religion, is in
daunger, argue's the negligent, of cowardice, luke-warmenes,
ſlavery, or treachery.
               AS before wee haue ſeene the care, on member
hath of an other in mutuall love (a kinde of

commutatiue juſtice) ſo wee may behold how all the
members apply themſelues, eſpecially for the ſafeguard
of the moſt principall members. Inſomuch at
if the head, or heart be aymed at, the hand enterpoſeth
it ſelfe to defend theſe parts, and rather receiue's
the wound it ſelfe, then ſuffers the blowe to
touch them.In extrema neceſſitate, magis licet de ſerere filios quam parentes, quos nullo modo deſerere licet propter be neficia: Th Aqua: 22. q. 31. A. 34. m. The reaſon is, becauſe the conſervation
of the whole body conſiſteth in the vitall, noble, and
principall parts; ſo that if through the eyes defect,
any miſchaunce happen's to it ſelf, or to any part of
the body, eſpecially to the head, or to the heart, it
shall not be blamed alone, but the eare, and every
member, shall pertake both of the shame and detryment.
Becauſe it is judged not a perticular, but a generall
neglect; ſince, if all had not bene equally negligent,
the vigillancy of ſome one, had giuen warning
to the reſt, and ſoe the daunger had bene avoyded.
               Bodyes pollitique; are beſt ſeene in bodyes naturall;
and what is here orderly, cannot be there abſurde.
Cicero is a member, a ſervaunt; a childe, of the
Common-wealth; yet is he truly what he is, called
the father, of the Common-wealth. The eldeſt of a
family is by nature in place of a King to the reſt: Yet
in caſe of neceſſity, in age, or ſicknes, or the like infirmity,
the youngeſt may both governe, and provide
for the elder; as young Storcks feeding the olde,
and as gratious children novrishing; and informing
their decrepid, and ignorant parents. In defect of
Kings, Preiſts haue governed, and in caſe of neceſſity
Vzziah being remoued for leproſie, Ionathan his ſonn
reignes in his ſtead. Yea, at ſuch extraordinary times,
Women haue ſtept to the helme, ſo carefull is nature,
                  
ſo carefull is pollicy, ſo carefull is grace, for the preſervation
of the whole, that they reject not the helpe
of any, nor truſts & hazards the ſecuring of all, vpon
one, though that one ſeeme never ſo dilligent or able.
Which laudable cuſtome to prevent generall
inconvenience, ariſing from perticular neglect of
ſome ſpeciall duty, whereby the publique may be
indangered, they ſay the Cranes vſe, by naturall inſtinct.
For notwithſtanding they haue one, of their
owne Company that keepe's watch, whilſt all the
reſt ſleepe, yet, that they may not ſeeme ſecurely
to hazard all vpon the dilligence and truſt of one,
all that ſleepe ſtand vpon one legge, & hold a ſtone
in the other foote, whoſe weight may keepe them
waking, at leaſt, make them perticulerly watchfull,
and wary, againſt all feares and daungers, whch may
ſuddenly invade them in generall. Soe in Armyes
the Per-due giue's notice to the Sentinell, the Sentinell
to the Corporall, the Corporall to the Captaine, ank court
of guarde. Who being too weake to reſiſt the daunger,
giue's alarum to the whole body. Now if any
ſurpriſe be made, the fault is imputed as well to the
Generall, who perhaps notwithſtanding ordered and
commaunded all things well on his part, as to the
ſleeping Sentinell whoſe perſonall neglect loſt the
liue's, and honors of ſo many. And therefore it concerne's
all to be watchfull, and to doe their beſt, for
the publique ſervice, where the loſſe, and daunger,
or benefit, and honour, befall's to all alike. This is
inſinuated in the partition of the prey, betwixt the
ſouldier that fought,Num. 31. 27. and the reſt of Iſraell that ſtayde
at home; where though the greateſt share befell the
ſouldiar, who indured the heat, and hazard of the

day, yet all who ſtayde at home, had thir parts, and
shares alſo in the prize or booty, and none were excluded;
that all might be admonished thereby, how
they had share, and common intereſt in the gayne or
loſſe, honour, or dishonour, of each other. Ruben
                        •
                     
                  
and Gad, and the halfe tribe of Manaſſes, were ſeated
vpon the neere ſide of Iordane toward the wildernes,
by the way of indulgence; yet they were enjoyned
to paſſe over armed to helpe their brethren, in the
conqueſt of their portions, and not to returne till
they were in poſeſſion, and the church ſetled
in peace. For it is a shame for one member to
looke on (as ſenleleſſe) whileſt the reſt are in ſuch
jeopardy.
               And therefore,Iud. 5. 15. 16. 23. in that ſong which Deborah & Barach
ſung after the victory, wee heare of great thoughts of
heart for the deviſions of Ruben; and wee heare this curſe
pronounced againſt pollitique (or rather negligent)
Meroz, who ſtood Neuter whilſt religion was in
queſtion, Curſe yee Meroz (ſaith the Angell of the
Lord) curſe the inhabitants thereof, becauſe they came not to
helpe the Lord against the mighty. Doth God then ſtand in
need of helpe? doth the Almighty ſtand in neede of
helpe againſt the mighty? noe ſurely; it were madnes
to think ſoe. But becauſe God hath appointed
meanes for the effecting of his worke here belowe,
therefore ſuch as are faithfull, offer themſelues to
his worke, knowing it is his will they should doe ſoe,
and it is their honour, ſo to be imployed in this ſervice,
where a crowne of glory is layde vp for the
workeman. None then will ſtand Neuter in this caſe,
who are perſwaded of the truth of Gods promiſes.
Such only, who ſeeme indifferent, or wholy withdraw

themſelues, who doubt, and waver, in their
faith, or like fooles haue ſayde in their hearts their is noe
God. For this cauſe the Edomits are called cruell, and
curſed by God, becauſe they ſtood on the otherſide aloofe off,
looking on in the day,
                  Obad. 1
                        •
                     
                   
                  that ſtraungers carried away the ſubſtance
of their yonger brother Iacob. And Gideon after his victory
over Zeba, and Zalmunnua, raced Succoth, and Penvell,
which refuſed to victuall his army in their paſſage
over, or to aſſiſt him in thoſe warres, & taught the inhabitants
of thoſe cittyes, by bryars, and thornes, a
ſenſible kinde of inſtruction, what it is to become
Neuters, when the welfare of the Church, and
ſtate, is in queſtion, and how worthily, whilſt they
will take part with neither ſide, they become a
prey to both ſides.
               It is a shame whil'ſt Heathens, and Idolaters bynde
themſelues in ſtrict leagues, that Abraham, and Lot,
should not helpe each other: or that whilſt Oreb,
and Zeb, Zebah, and Zalmunnah joyne in confederacy,
Succoth, and Penvell shoulde not releiue Gideon.
Much more shame is it, that whilſt Turkes, and
Heathens, and Idolatrous Papiſts; ſtand together in
one, and haue their Catholique leauges, to extirpate
vs, and the truth wee poſeſſe, which is, and hath
beene a maine, prime, and principall point, in all
their articles, treatyes, and tranſactions, concluded
betwixt them, from the dayes of Charles the
Fift, to this preſent, ſuch as profeſſe the true faith,
should for pollitique and worldly reſpects, or perhaps
without reſpect of policy, or profit, abandon
their diſtreſſed neighbours and brethren. Whatſoever
ſuch ſay in pretence of their backwardnes,

the true cauſe is either perſonall cowardice, becauſe
they dare not provoke a falſe enemy, nor truſt a true
God, or lukewarmenes in religion, becauſe they are indifferent
which ſide prevayle's, ſo their bodyes, and
temporall eſtates be ſafe; or ſlavery, whilſt they jmagine
their is no other honour then to enjoy the
vayne, and beaſtly pleaſures of this life for a ſeaſon,
though vpon the baſeſt conditions that can be; 
                     
                        ••
                     
trechery, whilſt, either for golde, or ſome other corrupt
bayte, which they haue ſwallowed, the ſafety
of Prince, of ſtate, of religion, is caſt behinde their
backs, and they deſire change, as vermine that haue
eaten rats-bane, doe fresh water, which they drinke
till they bur'ſt with drinking.
               Thus cunning practicioners haue learned their
art of the Devill, and doe ſo poſeſſe, and bewitch the
hearts, and eares of Princes, as often the better the
cauſe is, the worſe it is like to ſpeede. For they are
able to caſt aſpercions vpon innocence her ſelfe, and
to palliate the fowleſt cauſe, with fayre and honeſt
pretences. So that men knew not well what part
to take, whilſt it is hard to diſtinguish right, and
wronge, a ſunder.
               If the cauſe be just (as they vſually oppoſe ſuch
cauſes) then they perplex it with other knots, and
queſtions of doubt. If it be vnjust (as they commonly
take part with error) then they lyne, and interlay
it with a mixture, and florish of right, that ſo the appearance
of truth may beguile the eyes of the vnwary.
When ſuch traytors as theſe beginn to worke,
they loue like ſpydars, to make the whole webb out
of their owne boſomes,Neb. 6. 6. and when they entend moſt
miſcheife, pretend, all for the publique good, and

lay treaſon to the charge of all honeſt men, whome
either they ſee able, or willing, to ſtand in their way.
Yea, with great care, they adviſe Princes, and Princes
too often follow their adviſe, to avoyde that
Councell for wicked, which may ſeene to diſcover
the leaſt part of their wickednes. When Haman entende's
to worke his maiſter to deſtroy the Iewes,
                  Heſt. 3. 8.
that (amongeſt them) Mordocay might perish, he pretends
the Kings profit to be the grounde of his
Councell, It is not for the Kings profit (ſaith he) to ſuffer
them. Notwithſtanding wee muſt not be diſcouraged
with theſe encounters, but prepare our ſelues to
meet them with greater reſolution. If Sanballat and
Tobiah conſpire together to hinder the repayring of
Ieruſalem, they pretende the Kings prerogatiue 
                     〈◊〉
                  
call all thoſe rebels which ſtand for religi
                     ••
                  
                  ▪ This
doeth not diſcourage Nehemiah,
                  Neh. 2. 19▪
                   but 
                     〈◊〉
                   him to
greater vigilancy,Neh. 4. and more 
                     〈◊〉
                  , in the worke.
So that the people become 
                     •
                  ouldiars, and artificers
at once, holding a ſw
                     ••
                  de in one hand, and a toole
in the other. Fo
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  y ſuch men, and after ſuch a manner,
muſt the temple of God be built, and the temple
of 
                     
                        •
                     ntichrist pulde downe; namely by thoſe that
are couragious and diligent. And though Sanballat
proceede's by plots, and practiſes to hinder the
worke and to rayſe vp falſe Prophets (like the Ieſuits
in all Chriſtendome, and the Arminians in the vnited
Provinces) to diſcourage the Prince, and people, and
to diſtract, and divide them, yet reſolute Nehemiah
reſiſteth this temptation,Neh
                        •
                     m. 
                        •
                     
                   and breake's forth into
theſe honorable and holy termes: Should ſuch a man
as I am flee? who is being as I am (that is, a Captayne & Commaunder)
that would goe into the temple to liue? Yea, though

the enemy hath penſioners, and intelligencers, amongeſt
the Princes of Iudah (for this is no new Italian,
Spanish, or Ieſuitiall, deviſe) yet, will Nehemiah be
conſtant to the truth, true to the ſtate. For villaynes
only, and cowardes, will be frighted from their faith,
with the bellowing of Roman Bulls. Surely, as dayly
warres make the ſouldiar expert, and as the faithfull
are bettered by affliction, ſo it awaken's a wiſe
& diligent man to know, that there are many ſpyes,
watching his words, and many enemyes hunting to
finde advantages againſt his actions: And as thus it
is, in the microcoſme of priuate eſtates, ſo it is, in the
megacoſme of publique wealths alſo. There is nothing
more ſecure's an eſtate, then to haue an enemy, and
not
                     •
                  ing more corrupt's a ſtate, then ſecurity and
peace, which ſoftneth, and make's effeminate the
heart of men, with immoderate pleaſure: So that,
as a tree laden with fruit, ready to drop into the
mouth of him that shak
                     •
                  s it, or as full eares of
wheate, jnviting the shearer to 
                     ••
                  tt them downe, the
dore ſtands open (like a light houſewifes houſe to
every ruffian, without reſiſtance) to him that dare's
attempt to enter like a conquerour, nay, w
                     •
                  orelike,
and with importunity, it preſents it ſelfe to ſubjection,
with all the opportunity, and advantage,
that may wooe any luſtfull enemy to attempt.
               So God ſaith of Nineveh,
                  Nuham. 3 12. 13. 
                  All thy ſtrong cittyes shall be like
figtrees with the first ripe figgs, for if they be shaken they fall
into the mouth of the eater: Behold thy people within the, are
women, the gates of thy land shall be opened to thy enemyes,
and the fire shall devoure thy barrs. And ſuch a ſtate was
Laish, ſecure, made drunke with peace and plenty,
having no buſines, that is, by way of warre, with

any man, but by way of trading and merchandiſe
perhaps with many, and therefore in daunger to be
indamaged by every man. It is farre otherwiſe with
him that is incircled with enemyes, for he prouides
for warres, leaſt he should become a ſcorne to his
enemyes.Neh. 2. 17 
                  Yee ſee (ſaith Nehemiah) the miſery wee are
in, how Ieruſalem lyeth waſte, and the gates thereof are burnt
with ſyer, come let vs build the walls of Ieruſalem, that wee be
noe more a reproach. It is well Ieruſalem is in miſery, for
by this meanes Nehemiah is induced to builde: By
this meanes the Iſraelites prouide to withſtad an invaſion;
by this meanes the church and ſtate is preſerved
from being a reproach to the enemyes of God.
God therefore, where he intends to preſerue a ſtate
and Church, permits forreigne offences to vnite
the natiue members, and ſtirrs vp enemyes, to exerciſe
them, & awaken them, leaſt the weaker truſting
too much, to the fained fidelity and freindship
of the ſtronger, should be vnawares ſoddaineiy ſurpriſed,
& devoured. And though the time of peace,
be a pleaſant time to flesh and blood, the time that
wee pray for, as being a type, and shaddow of our
eternall Sabboth, yet ſuch a time is not free from Idolatry,
and other inconveniences, though Salomon himſelfe
were then the ruler. Winter is not ſo pleaſant as
Summer, but more wholſome, it hath not ſo much
fruits; neither hath it ſo many weedes: Wee ſee
the fyre never flames higher, then when the winde
labours to blow it out: And becauſe God loves a cheer
full giuer, and a fervent and ſincere doer, hateing a doughbaked
profeſſor, therefore, ſometimes he ſuffer's Sathan
to rayſe vp ſtormes of perſecution, temptation, and
oppoſition, thereby to kindle the zeale, and courage

of his ſervants. Inſomuch as nothing can anger
the man of God more,2 Kin. 13. 18.19. then to behold Ioash the King
whom he entended to encourage in Gods cauſe, ſo
colde, in the expreſſion of hate to the enemyes of
God, whilſt being willed by the Prophet to ſtrike the
ground, he ſmites it but thrice, and then ſtaye's his
hand. Thou shouldst haue ſmiten fiue or ſixe times (ſaith the
Prophet) ſo thou shouldst haue ſmiten Aram till thou hadst
conſumed it, where now thou shalt ſmite Aram but thrice. So
                     •
                  
much doth lukewarmenes diſadvantage it ſelfe,
when it will not zealouſly purſue an occaſion and
opportunity offered by God, for the rooting vp of
his enemyes, the inlarging of his Church, and procuring
perſonall honour to thoſe that are the Actors in
ſo holy a worke.
            
            
               CONCLVSION 4.
               A fourth Concluſion from hence deduced
is, that to punish ſuch as are forward in caſe of necesſity to doe
ſervice to the King, State, and Church is in justice. To cenſure
and reprehend ſuch, proceeds either out of ignorance,
or flattery, or envy; not to reward ſuch,
is improvidence.
               ALl this will neceſſarily follow, vpon the precedent
diſcourſe; for if that be true which hath him
ſayd before, that the law of nature (which is the law
of God and men) impoſeth this duty vpon all men, to
offer themſelues to the ſervice of the King, State,
and Church, where neceſſity compells, though noe
other perſon or power, calls vs out, and if the act
of David be therefore juſtifiable, becauſe he hath
this cauſe for his buckler againſt the challeng of his

inraged brother, then were it great in juſtice to punish
David for this, ſince he doeth but his duty, and
were rather puuishable if he did it not. Saul may aſwell
malice him after the victory, becauſe the people
applaud his conqueſts with ſongs of triumph, as
punish him now for preſenting himſelf to the combate,
and shewing his good will, and ready minde to
doe good. But ſuch pride and injuſtice poſeſſeth the
harts of men, as they can find noe readier way, to
pay benefits then by injuryes; ſo that whileſt David
is preparing to fight for his brother, againſt the Gyant,
who quarrells with all Iſraell, his vngratefull brother
is quarrelling with him, as if he intended to punish
him for fighting. And this is Davids lot after, and
allwayes; for whilſt he is taking care, and framing
his fingers to pleaſe the furious and poſeſſed King,
the King is ſtudying how to doe him a miſcheife,
and with a devilish intent makes his fingers the inſtruments
of his injuſtice, caſting a javelin at him, with
hope to nayle him to the wall. O Iuſtice art thou
blynd, as foolish men haue fayned thee? or is injuſtice
like thee, in being blynd, and ſoe miſtaken for
thee? for ſurely this is the Common miſery of all
the ſervants of God, to haue their words, their actions,
their intentions miſconſtrued, and to be purſued
with hate, by thoſe eſpecially, whome (aboue
all others) they take care, and ſtudy to purſue with
all offices of loue, and allegiance.
               
                  Secondly, to reprehend ſuch proceeds out of ignorance,
flattery, or envy, for was it not great ignorance,
and a grand folly, in the brother of David, to chide
him for doing that, which it concerned every good
ſubject to doe? that is, to looke into the ſtate of the

Army, and to enquire the cauſe of that generall
feare, with intent to doe his beſt to prevent it? This
is moſt cleere. Yet folly is ſuch another Lapwing, as it
diſcover's its owne neſt with crying, and ſcreeking
at all that come's neere it. Therefore Syracides ſaith,
when a man of vnderſtanding beareth a wiſe word,
                  Ca. 21. 26▪
                   
                  he will comend
it, and encreaſe it, but if an ignorant man heare it he
will diſallowe it, and caſt it behind his back.
               
               But perhap's not ignorance, but flattery is the find-fault
in this place, for oftentimes ſuch actions (like
ſome meate) though never ſoe well cooked, ſeaſoned,
and ſerved in, relish not right in euery pallat.
Now the eare trieth words,
                  Iob. 34. 3. 
                  as the mouth meates, and meate
is rejected, not ever for its owne faulte, but ſometimes
through the vitiouſnes of the taſte, ſometimes
for lack of ſtomack, whileſt wee are overcloyed, and
ſurfeited, and ſome time wee are led even in this
ſenſible things by example, ſoe that froggs & mushrumpes
being in fashion, are preferd before the beſt
and wholeſomeſt meats. And thus it is both in wordes,
and actions where ſometime, men diſlike for
lack of judgment, ſometime out of confuſion or faſtidiouſnes,
and ſometime for company or fashion
ſake. There are alſo a kind of creatures that take liberty
to cenſure all things but themſelues, & thinke
it a diminution of their glory, not to be the firſt that
find faulte, or the only, & ſingular perſons (perhaps)
that doe ſoe. Nothing muſt paſſe currant but vnder
their priviledge, and commonly they will be contrary
to all others, and to reaſon and religion too, they
were (elſe) vnworthy to be leaders, or to be the bretheren
of the inviſible order of the Roſacruants. Theſe
are (too often) of eminent place, & may be sharpe,

quick, & curiouſly inquiſitiue, in obſolete, obſcure,
and needles trifles, but never ſerious in fundamentall,
and neceſſary points. There is a certaine ſubtility
(ſaith Siracides) that is fyne,
                  Eccleſ. 1
                        •
                     . 22. 24. 
                  but is vnrighteous; and there
is that wreſteth the open and manifeſt law: yet their is that
is wiſe, and judgeth righteouſly.
               
               To theſe word-watchers, there adhaere a number
of Sicophants, who either to ſeeme wiſe, will ſay
as they ſay, and ſooth vp their errors, or at leaſt to
preſerve themſelues, in favor will not ſay otherwiſe,
whatſoever they think. Thus it might be
here (though I affirme it not to be ſoe) but ſuppoſe
it probable, whileſt I conſider the weaknes, and
proclivity of frayle man, to take part with ſtrong
iniquity of the preſent time, againſt ſingle, and
ſimple, Truth and vertue, I ſay, it might be, that
Eliab in this reproofe, ſeconded ſome other great
Commaunder: who thinking it vnfit (as the counſellors
of Hezechias did afterwards, 2 King. 18. 26.) that the
preſent ſtate of things, and the cowardice of the
greateſt Iſralites should be blowne about through
the crowde, for feare of diſcouraging all (as wickednes,
(like age,) is loth to looke in a glaſſe, for
feare of beholding it's owne wrinckles, and deformityes)
or judging it vnfit that vnexperienced
youth, should be buſy in debating, or inquiring
after matters of ſtate, or affaires of warre;
or that a shepheards lad, should ſtep beyond the
reach of his Sheep-hooke, and out of the ſent, or
ſmellof his Tarr-boxe, thought to quench this fiery
ſparke by a timely reproofe. But this water make's
it burne feyrcer, and flame brighter, for
hypocricy may, but ſincerity cannot, be thus

diverted from a direct courſe; ſince conſtancy, and
perſeverance alone, is that which diſcovoreth an artificiall,
fayned, and forced apparance, from a true
naturall,Seneca Epist. 220. and proper exiſtence. Nemo potest diu perſonam
ferre fictam, cito in naturam ſuam recidunt, quibus veritas
non est. As cloathes dyed with blockwood will
looſe their colour, when ſuch as be well woaded,
will continue without ſtayning.
               But perhaps neither ignorance, nor aſſentation,
but envye moved Eliab to reprove David in this,
being loth that his younger brother should be his
elder in honour; for he ſees this action would every
way tend to his prayſe: If he failed, yet to offer himſelfe
was honorable: if he fell, yet to dye ſoe, was
better then to liue otherwiſe: if he came of vpō ſafe,
and vpon equall tearmes, it was admirable: if he conquered
(as that could not be jmagined) the honour
that he should reape thereby, (beſides the reward)
was ineſtimable: whileſt he should remaine vnparraleld.
Theſe ſeeds of envye are ſometimes ſowen,
even betwixt brothers, whileſt they cannot endure
to looke vpon the brightnes of each other. Cayne
envyes Abell becauſe God loues him: The ſonnes of
Iacob hate Ioſeph, becauſe their father affects him, and
in token of affection giues him a party coulored
coate.Ge. 37. 34 Act
                        •
                     . 7. 9. Iud. 8. 1. 2. 3. The Ephramits are angry with Gedeon, becauſe
he had beaten their enemyes (the Midianites) without
their aſſiſtance: The reaſon of this, I thinke, is either
becauſe vice hates vertue in whatſoever ſubject he
meets her: or becauſe the prayſe of one man, ſeemes
to be a ſecret check, and reproofe to an other.
For this cauſe cowardes cannot abide another man
should be couragious; nor prophame perſons, that

others should be religious: and ſuch diſlike the beſt
action that is done, and ſay it ought not to be done,
becauſe they dare not doe it, and therefore it is faulty
and punishable, becauſe they did it not. I feare
that Eliab whileſt he challengeth his brother of this
cryme, ſaying, I knowe thy pride and malice of thy hart &c.
May be juſtly taxed of malice and envye himſelfe:
as Aristippus tould Diogenes, thou reprehendeſt me of pride
for wearing my apparrell neate and hanaſome, but I ſee thy
pride in thy ſlouenly attire, and in that thy affected beaſtlines,
and may eaſely ſpye it, through the holes of that rent and torne
mantle of thyne.
               
               Not to reward ſuch is improvidence; Legibus propoſita
(ſaith Cicero) ſunt ſupplicia viris, praemia virtutibus.
Actions are either ſuch as ought to be punished, or
rewarded, (for to be pardoned is a kind of punishment)
and the lawes reſpect both. Now if this action
of Davids be not to be punished, becauſe he doth
therein nothing, but what proceeds from a ſuperaboundant
meaſure of loue and duty to God, and to
his King and Country, then ought he to be rewarded
For as the royall ſcepter belongs to Ahaſuerus to
ſtretch out in mercy toward Eſther, and the ſword to
ſtrike Haman in juſtice; ſoe alſo doth it belong to the
King, to watch, and read, and receiue information
of Mordocay his good ſervice, & to remember, that
though it were regiſtred, it was not rewarded. As it
were injuſtice for this to punish Mordocay, ſoe is it improvidence,
not to rewarde him; for whileſt wee neglect
ſuch as benefit, or endeavor to benefit the
Church and Common-wealth, wee shew our ſelues
vnthankefull to God, who rayſeth vp the inſtrument,
and vnthankefull to man, whoe was made the inſtrument

And ſoe to be moſt vnworthy of that benefit▪
For he that is the meanes of ſaving the Princes life,
deſerves all that the Prince can doe for him; but he
that preſerves the life of the ſtate, or indevours to
doe it, preſerves both the Princes life, and his honor
alſo, and more then that, all that his life and honor
depends on, which is the preſervation of his
peoples liberty. This David here doth, and therefore
merit's whatſoever is propounded, though reaſon
of ſtate (that myſtery of iniquity) delayde him in
all theſe points, and deludes his expectation, as it
vſeth to delay, and delude the expectation of the
beſt deſervers.
               
                  Saul yet (if wee may build vpon the private diſcourſe
of the private ſouldiers) propounds a reward
to any that performes this ſervice, viz; Great riches:
for he that should doe ſuch an acte as this, might
want wealth but was ſtored with native worth, and
nobility enough. For either titular Nobility was then
noe reward, or ells Fortitude was then the only Nobility.
               
               Secondly, his daughter to wife: for he could not
place her better, she should receiue the addition
of honor by this marriage, rather then parte with any.
Noble blood not then ran in ignoble veynes.
               Thirdly, make his fathers houſe free in Iſraell: for he
well deſerved it, that by this act should make all
Iſraell free. Soe a Mouſe may deſerve liberty of a
Lion, and a ſubject more then a ſoveraigne can give.
And this is the reaſon (perhaps) that he went, and
others too often, goe vnrewarded, except it be with
injuryes and reproches: becauſe devilish policy
ſaith men may ſupererrogate, or deſerve too much,

when by a vertuous action hee ſeemes to leſſen his

                     •
                  uperior.
               But this is a blind and beaſtly Paradoxe to quench
the ſpirit of the beſt deſerver: for as a ſouldier cannot
leſſen his Generall by any extraordinary vndertaking
and action, but muſt needs rather heighthen
him, ſince all is derived from him, and directed
to him, and digeſted, and concocted by him: ſoe
neither can a ſubject detract from his ſuperior by
doing honorably; ſince he is both the center, and
circumference of the Common-wealth, and (in the
generall) pertakes of every perticular mans felicity,
and growes greater by their greatnes, as the body
by the encreaſe of the members, whileſt they pertake
of his beatitude as members of the ſoules infuſion.
Yet this peece of pollicy was as old as Achitophell,
and it ſeemes then held to be an Aphoriſme of
ſtate: For Ioab was acquainted with it, when he lay
before Rabbah,
                  2 Sam. 12▪ 27. and therefore deſired David to come
vp, and take the citty in, that he might alſo take the
honor of it, to himſelf, and ſoe free Ioab from the envy,
& jealouſy, which attends great perſons, growne
ſoe, by great actions, as darke shadowes attend the
beautifulleſt bodyes in brighteſt ſunshine.
            
            
               APPLICATION.
               Now followeth the Application of all we haue ſayd.
               ANd now may it be lawfull for me, without ſuſpition
of flattery, to touch vpon ſome particulars
of this age, and in our owne ſtate, by way of Application.
               
               I muſt confeſſe, I may miſſe many good deſervers,
whoſe names ought to be found with thankfull

remembrance here, but are refered to bookes of
more leaues, and of longer life.
               Here only I intend to point at ſuch, who are notable,
& remarkeable with vs, for ſome ſpeciall ſervices,
as Saul was for ſtature amongſt the Iſraelites, or
as litle David was in the overthrow of great Goliah.
               
               I will begin with that Honourable WORTHIE
whoſe happy hands were made (by Gods mercy)
the inſtruments to preſerue his Majeſtyes life, in that
(almoſt) incredible conſpiracy of the Gowryes. The
continued liberty and freedome of this faithfulnes
ſince, in ſpeaking forbidden truth, without feare, or
flattery, when none other either would, or durſt, is
a witneſſe, and evidence, of the truth of that ſervice,
beyond the power of Envy, Suſpicion, or Incredulity,
once to calumniate, or diſcredit. O may he ever
continue ſuch ſtill, to the aſſurance of his Princes
ſafety, and his Countryes proſperity; and never
may a faithfull and valiant hand, meete with an envious
tongue to detract from it, or be vnited to a
falſe and flattering tongue to diſgrace, and dishonour
it, with lying, and ſoothing contradictions.
               Let none thinke themſelues neglected that (from
hence) paſſing over ſoe many yeares with ſilence, I
skip to him, who was a long time held to be the child
of Fortune only, but now is found to be the favorite
of vertue alſo. Whilſt he shot vp ſodainely, who did
not take him for a gourd, and expect his more ſodaine
withering againe with wishes? But now who
doth not looke vpon him, as vpon an Oake, or Cedar
ſound at the heart, like to laſt long, and be profitable
for the vpholding of the Church, and State,
vpon whoſe branches birdes may build with ſafety,

and vnder whoſe shaddow, all diſtreſſed creatures
may finde shelter againſt the fury of violent ſtormes?
It was therefore, well ſayde of one, by Propheticall
rapture (to paſſe by whatſoever elſe, was evill
ſayd) that the firſt honours he had, were freely giuen,
this laſt faithfully earned; the ſucceſſe shewe's the
truth, though then it ſeemed no other, but a ſtraine
of poëticall fury,
               How many curſes did fill his ſayles goeing towards
Spaine? inſomuch that had he not beene imbarqued
in one bottome with his Highneſſe, for whoſe
proſperity all thoſe curſers (& many others prayed)
his veſſell muſt needes haue ſunke, with the waight
of thoſe woes. But now how many bleſſings and prayers
attend his proſperity, from the ſame hearts, &
mouthes, ſince his returning, when they finde, he
hath showne himſelf more faithfull to God, to the
King, Prince, and his Countrey, then the firſt Scene of that
Act, and our following feares, could either aſſure vs,
or ſuffer vs to jmagine?
               When wee firſt heard them ſet out (for ſee them
wee could not, and it was happy wee did not) our
hearts were filled with aſtonishment, doubt, deſpayre;
wee gaue them for loſt, and our ſelues with
them, and with them and vs, our lawes, libertyes,
land, and (what was deareſt) our religion. Is there
redemption from hell, thought wee? yes, hee came
from thence a conquerour, who aſſures vs, that no
hell vpon earth, can hold Gods elect, who are the
true members of that triumphant head.
               Now that wee may bee more ſenſible of our danger
then, & ſoe of our deliverance now, making good
vſe of both; of the firſt to humble vs, and to make

vs wiſe for the time to come, to prevent the like (if
it be poſſible) by repentance, and watchfulnes; of
the other, to moue vs to thankfulnes, both to God,
as to a moſt gratious father, and protector of his
Church, turning all things, (yea the worſt) to the beſt,
for his ſervants; and to thoſe inſtruments whome it
pleaſed his divine majeſty to vſe in this errand, for
the happy accomplishment of this worke; it were
convenient wee should caſt back our eyes, to times
paſt, and conſider how it ſtood with vs, and all the
reformed Churches in generall, when his Highneſſe, with
the Duke of Buckingham, ſet out about this buſineſſe
by his Majeſtyes commandement, and what opinion
wee, and all others of the beſt affected (both ſtrangers,
and natives) had, of that jorney, and of the perſons
that vndertooke it.
               All Germany was then in combuſtion, as if it had
beene a generall fire, prepared, and kindled at the
Romane Catholique coſt, for the true profeſſors, who
were to become Apostates, or Martyrs.
               
               The Palatinate lay proſtituted, vnder the beaſtly
and bruitish command, of three inſulting Enemyes,
who ſatiſfied, or at leaſt, ſerved, their vnſatiable luſt
by turnes, vpon the fatteſt, and fayreſt parts of it,
as the So
                        •
                     omits would haue vſed the Angells,
                  Gen. 19. 5. or as the
men of Gibeah,
                  Iud 19. 27▪
                   did vſe the Levits wife.
               The Hanſe Townes trembled like a quarry in the
foote, and began to treate of their comming in.
               The Vnited Provinces, ſaw the whole bent of the
warre vpon them, & that they were by vs deſerted,
and by the enemy ſwallowed in expectation.
               The Protestants in France, put their confidence in
flight, as their laſt refuge, which they were ready

to take, had God left them a place in the world, whether
they might haue fled, with ſafety, in that vniverſall
Deluge.
               The Papiſts in England, and Yreland, began to take
poſeſſion of the Chaire, and Pulpit, and durſt be ſo
bould as to share out our honors, and punishments,
to deſigne ſome of their owne to the helme, and all
of vs, to the barre, and to the block, to the tree
                     •
                  , &
to the ſtake. Thus ſtood the world, or worſe.
               For the perſons, and mens opinions of them,
and the actions vnder their handes; Firſt for the
Duke they tooke him to be vnſetled in religion,
but wholy devoted to the ſervice wherein he was
imployed. A younge man, vnfit for lack of experience,
to manage great affaires, or to incounter
ſingle the Grandees of Spanye, and Rome, with the
Ieſuites at their elbowes.
               And, though they conceived him to be beſt affected,
yet even that beſt of his, adminiſtred occaſion
of ſuſpition, what then should they thinke of other
Miniſters, who had no meanes to build vp their ambitious
fortunes, but by this fatal overture? Great
Counſells paſſe through the handes of many Agents;
and though wee had beene reſolued of the
ability of this one, as wee were of his ingenuity, yet
the mixture of others, more reſerved, and corrupted,
might taint him, or turne the worke intended
to our ruine. Wee ſawe his power with his Majeſty,
and the Prince, wee knew who was his wife, who
was his mother; and all wee could then ſee of him
made vs ſuſpect, and tremble the more, the more
we ſaw it.
               Secondly for the Prince, wee looked vpon him

as vpon a moſt obedient child to a father who knew
how to command with loue, & to lead gently, where
he could not driue conueniently. Wee ſawe him of
a ſweete nature, and for that the eaſier to be abuſed
& wrought vpon by art, as his royall father, of farre
more experience, had beene. Wee ſaw him ſuch as
wee could haue wished, in all reſpects, but in this
MATCH: but there wee wondered, the whole world
could not afford him a bewty, wherevpon to fixe his
affection, but that one, whome none of his trueſt hearted
ſervants could affect, as knowing it both, in
being Spanish, and Romish, to be fatall to him, to the
State, and Church. Could there come therefore
ſuch a croſſe to vs, as this was like to proue, that
Death should rob vs of our first hope, & a worſe enemy
then Death of the ſecond? Even ſuch an enemy
as profeſſedly ſought the ſubverſion of Church and
State; ſuch an enemy as expreſt loue to the brother, only
by ſeking the vtmoſt of hate, & malice, to his beſt-beloved,
and only ſister; ſuch an enemy as was not ſatiſfied
with the ſpoile of the body, fortune, and State, except
alſo, it could accomplish the deſtruction of the
ſoule: which, with a vaine glorious zeale, it ambitiouſly
hunted after. I ſay, could there come ſuch a
croſſe? I should haue ſayd, could there come ſuch a
curſe to our Land? His Highneſſe, being the hope of
our land for the future, when he went forth, the
whole continent ſeemed ſoule-les; recovering the
ſwound, wee ſought him whom our hearts loued, and
found him not; wee were beaten for ſeeking him,
and might not complaine. Hee ſeemed to turne his
back vpon vs, as if he had deſired a new loue, contemning
our deſires, teares, prayers. Our hearts

were fild with jealouſy and indignation, even to that
height, that we were tempted by fraylety, and fury to
reject him, that had wholy caſt vs of. But loue and duty
would none of theſe breaches; his loue, our dutyes awaked,
and wept, and were ſoone reconciled. Hee
returned alone, and shewed by his ſingle returning
alone, that he loued vs, and found none abroad ſoe
loving him as wee did. Wee welcomed his returne
with the joyfull shout that attends a Prince from
the mouthes of his faithfulleſt ſervants; and this was
ſtill the foote of our ſonge of thankſgiving, God be
prayſed that he is come home ALONE.
               
               Doubtles had he not come home alone, he should
haue had but halfe this hearty welcome; the curteſy,
and cuſtome of the land muſt needes haue devided
it betwixt the Partners; nay, I am verely perſwaded,
they would not then haue had the halfe, to
devide betwixt them.
               Thirdly for his Majeſty, wee beheld him with that
awefull reſpect, as men that hung vpon his lips, and
counted his words oracles. When wee read his writings,
they ſpake nothing but what might ſecure our
feares, informe our ignorance, reſolue our doubts
for point of Religion▪ Wee wished Rome might once
be ſoe happy, as to haue ſuch a learned, and judicious
Pope; then wee doubted not but he would caſt the
triple crowne of Antichrist, at the feete of Christ; and
renouncing his vſurpations, be a leader of others to
reformation▪ ſc
                     •••
                  ing any longer to be a baſe ſpirituall

                     
                        •
                     ander, for the houſe of Auſtria in generall, and
of Spayne in particular. But when wee beh
                     •
                  ld for all
theſe hopes, ſtrengthned with ſerious and ſolemne
promiſes often iterated, for procureing free paſſage

to the Goſpell, and the advancement of the true 
                     •
                  
reformed religion grounded therevpon, that notwithſtāding
a retreate was made, both out of Bohemia,
and the Palatinate, which gaue way, and roome for ſuperſtition,
and Idolatry to enter, and reigne; that
his Majeſtyes children were abandoned, and ſuch
freinds as ſtuck to them dishartened; that it was
diſclaymed to be a warre of religion on our ſide,
when the adverſe partyes profeſt it for ſuch, by their
league, as if they gloryed in falſehood, though wee
ſeemed to be ashamed or weary of the protection
and defence of truth, notwithſtanding it were an office
appertaining to our ſtile; that the enemy made
his Majeſtyes authority the Vsher, to giue eaſy entrance,
and the Bridge to giue ready paſſage to all
his purpoſes of conqueſt; that at home the lawes
were ſilent, and ſuch ſilenced, as ſpake with their
warrant againſt Traytors, that by this meanes ſwarmes
of locuſts flew over, & bred in every hole, and
vnder every hedge, and bush, nay durſt neſtle in the
heart of the Citty, that this match was ſo ſought after,
that the votes, and weale of the people, Nobles,
Clergy, Councells, Commons, old▪ young, all for
                     •
                  ,
all ſides were ſlighted, and neglected, that vnder
this vaile, all the projects of advantage, for the enemy
of our ſtate, and religion, went currant, and that
all intelligence from freinds, allyes, and our o
                     ••
                  e
choice Miniſters, imployed at home, and abroad
were returned without credit, that nature, and honour,
and grace ſeemed all, to be wilfully blinde in
purſuing this way of perdition. Then what shall I
ſay? wee doubted, nay out of doubt wee were next
dore to deſpaire. This only held vs vp, that wee had

large experience of Gods mercy, and knew his Majeſtyes
wiſedome ſo great, as wee could not thinke he
intended his, & our owne, totall, and finall, deſtruction
in this match, when wee could ſee nothing elſe
in it, to moue him to purſue it ſoe earneſtly. Wee
alſo had heard how his Majeſty profeſt to make it
his Maſter peice; and therefore wee armed our ſelves,
with expectation of a happy iſſue at the concluſion,
and held out this bucklar of humane faith, againſt
all feares, and dangers, which shewed themſelves
moſt openly, marke the end, for there is ſome good beyond
our ſight, in his Majeſtyes Eagle-eye. Wee knew his
Majeſty knew better then wee, whome he had to
deale withall; and that, ſlighting all other Counſell,
it would fall heauily vpon his honour, herein to be
miſled or abuſed; ſince he ſtood alone, except the aſſiſtance
of ſuch hollow trunkes, as he choſe and vſed
to ſpeake through. Therefore wee caſt about what
the advantage of this match was like to be, and what
his Majeſtyes aymes were, what was the dowry propounded,
whoſe price and value should recompence
all theſe hazards.
               For mony, it could not be any ſumme; for Spayne
was not able to giue ſo much, as could counterpoiſe
the peril▪ 
                  Bewty & blood should finde themſelues debtors,
meeting ſuch a exchange in a man a husband, as
all the proud, and high houſe of Auſtria, could not equall
by a woman, a wife.
               
                  Strength by alliance could not be the ayme, ſince we
intend no conqueſts, but should meete with an Ally
that would vſe our aſſiſtance to that end, for the accomplishment
of his vniverſall Empire, to our owne
loſſe, & ruine. Beſides what neede wee the ſtrength

of others, eſpecially of ſuch as can afford none by
reaſon of their infinite, and diſtracted imployments,
when wee hold it a ſinne to vſe our owne, except it
bee in guarding their coaſts, to our coſt and prejudice.
               For the reſtoring of the Palatinate, that was too poore
a conceite, for our hopes to ſtoope to: ſince when
the treaty was farre advanced, at leaſt on our ſide,
(as his Majeſty beleeued, and taught vs to beleeue)
the quarrell was not then begun with the Emperour,
much leſſe proſecuted, as afterward, with the Spanish
force, and fury; and ſo that could not be in our
eye, as an object to ſatiſfy our thirſt for this match,
and for the portion expected by it. And wee had
hope that this treaty would haue ſtayed, and turned
the tyde, and torrent, of thoſe violent proceedings,
which fell out in the interim, and countermaunded
Spinola, (thereby to indeare our alliance, and to manifeſt
how ſerviceable, and profitable it would be to
vs), rather then by ſuch a treacherous progreſſe, to
ſteale vpon our ſecurity, and credulity, and by open
force, to our temporall, & their eternall, dishonour,
to take enough from the ſiſter, to make a convenient
portion for the brothers bride. What heart that hath
a drop of British blood in it, could heare with patience,
much leſſe beare theſe injuryes, & ſtill court
the Spanish Braues, with the ſtile of Magnifico, and
thinke a Dowry (ſoe taken) a fit preſent, & portion
for our Prince to receaue?
               Some therefore (who could not ſwallow theſe
choke-peares) jmagined her Dowry should be one
of the Indyes, or both. Others more probably
thought that the King of Spayne, weary of his Low-Country

warres (where like an vnthriſt he playde
away all his eſtate at hazard) and ſeeing no way to
come of with his honour, and to relinquish ſo bad
and chargeable a quarrell, where he drowned his
Indyes as in a bottomleſſe Gulph; He (I ſay) had, by
the ſublime witt of Gondamore, or by the inſpiration
of our King through Gondamore, conſented to ſend
the Arch-Dutches Iſabella to a Monaſtery, to be mother
of the few maydes there, & to eſtate the Prince with
Inſanta Maria, in thoſe Provinces, cauſing the States
Generall to winde vp all ends in this bottome, and to
conſent to hold of his Highneſſe in cheife, as thoſe
Provinces did of France, before Charles the Fift got them
releaſed; and ſoe all controverſyes should be compounded,
all Chriſtian ſtates ſecured in peace, and
his ambitious, and blood-thirſty ſword sheathed, or
the point of it turned from Chriſtendome toward
the Turke▪
                   Alſo wee thought herewith, that his Majeſty
had the promiſe, and aſſurance of a free & generall
Councell; and that in the meane time he had
conditioned, and articled for liberty of conſcience,
in all the Dominions of Spayne, without which he
would not, by any meanes, afford it at home. Then
(thought wee) when a Parliament is called, and the
match propounded, oppoſition ariſing, theſe conditions,
never before dreampt of (by the vulgar) being
published, and confirmed, both conſent & applauſe
will follow, with admiration of his wiſdome, that
brought all theſe ends about, and tyde in a true lovers
knot, deſerving indeede for this, to be preferd
before Salomon: becauſe Salomon by an idolatrous
marriage rent his Kingdome, ruined his houſe, and
introduced idolatry intermixing it with true worship:

but he by the like had vnited his Kingdomes,
ſetled his houſe, enlarged his Empire, caſt out idolatry,
and ſo ſpred the goſpell, that true worship
was welcomed beyond the pillers of Hercules, or
whereſoever [Plus Vltra] is written, with a Spanish
pen
                     •
                  ill.
               Thus wee thought, & lower then thus, wee could
not, wee would not, deſcend; and theſe thoughts
and hopes, charmed our tongues, hearts, and hands,
making vs, as it is ſayd of Abraham, to hope beyond, and
aboue hope.
               
               But when wee ſaw the Prince paſſe privately out
of the land, ſo meanely attended, and farre otherwiſe
then became (as wee thought) the ſtate and
Majeſty of our Nation; eſpecially to a place and people
that ſtood vpon forme and outſide only, and
bombafted their reputations with the winde of
complement, and a garbe, or facing of majeſticall
gravity; when wee ſaw ſilence proclamied, and none
permitted to ſpeake for the ſecuring of their owne
lawes, libertyes, or religion; yea the Counſell it ſelfe,
shut vp in blinde obedience, and as litle acquainted
with theſe privy proceedings, as the Commons; the
pulpit alſo limitted, and taught in what language to
ſpeake, both to God in prayer, and thankſgiving for
the Prince, and people, and from God to the Prince
and people in exhortation, inſtruction, and information;
when wee all ſeemed no other, then beaſts in
a market to be bought, and ſould, and muſt not be
acquainted with the price, and condition of our
owne captivity, nor know to what butcher wee
should be delivered; when wee ſawe the great intertainement
his Highneſſe found, (at leaſt) in print;

though, I prayſe God for it, as wee thought, ſo it fell
out for truth, that the Pen-man, had more of the
Painter, and Poët, in him, then of the History ô grapher,
& knew better what should haue beene done, then
what was.
               When wee ſawe the Chappell building here, for
Baal, and the Prieſts, and Ieſuites filling every corner
of the ſtreetes; whilſt they were pulling downe the
Churches of God in the Palatinate, and whilſt his Highneſſe
Chaplaynes were enjoyned ſilence in Spayne,
when wee ſaw every pocket ſtuft with popish pamphlets,
and that the dore began to waxe narrow, at
which the Proteſtants ſent out, and let in, their labours
for the preſſe, when wee ſaw a gag for the Goſpell
(like a Giant) might walke abroad with liberty in
the ſunneshine, when a Proteſtant Piſmire, might
ſcarce creepe in a darke corner, without queſtion:
when wee ſaw a clogd diſpenſation beg'd,A clogd diſpenſatiō, ſo cald cheefely, becauſe it is a perpetuall clog to the conſcience of the receiver, thoug an Antichriſtian Ape may weare it with eaſe for faſhion ſabe. or dearely
bought, at the handes of Antichriſt, for the beſt of vs,
and diſpenſations freely given by vs, to vnclog the
worſt of his: when wee ſaw articles ſolemnely agreede
on, for the freedome of ſuperſtition, and idolatry,
without ſoe much as a thought, or touch, for
the advantage of truth, and that in the preſence of
God, who abhorred ſuch ſacrifice, and vowes: when
wee heard, and read, the title, and ſtile, of Holynes conferd
vpon Antichrist, and more ſtrong, and powerfull
reaſons given to moue the King and Clergy
of Spayne, to conſent that the match might proceede
with the vtmoſt ſpeede, becauſe it tende alltogether
to the advancement of the Roman-Catholique
cauſe; what should wee thinke (poore ignorant ſoules)
what could wee jmagine? but that we were almoſt

miſerable people, hated of thoſe wee loued moſt,
and caſt away, by thoſe wee truſted moſt? yea, wee
thought that God had determined to ſcourge vs for
our pride, and ingratitude; and to this end had taken
wiſdome from the wiſe, and cauſed that they should
haue eyes and not ſee, eares and not heare, hearts
and not vnderſtand, but that the Lord intended to
bow downe all our backs; becauſe wee relyed too
much vpon man, and gaue not the glory to God, as
wee ought. Thus were wee in a kinde of Hell vpon
earth, full of anxiety, perplexity, & feare; nothing
but ſighing, weeping, hanging downe the head,
as perſons confounded, and drowned in deſpayre.
               But loe, on a ſodaine the ſunne aroſe, and with it
our comfort: Heavineſſe may indure for a night, but wye
comes in the morneing. His Highneſſe returnes ALONE,
ô words of comfort!Pſa. 30. 5. as chooſing rather to dye a
Virgine, and liue an Angell, then to be marryed by Antichrist;
and now God begins the firſt worke, and giues
the Omen, the onſet to the reſt that followes, beating
downe the Black-fryars, whilſt the Chayre was vſurped
by a bolde, and famous factor for Antichriſt, ſurrounded
with a rabbement of his ſuperſtitious, and
forward followers, who would needes haue the VAN,
or right hand file, in his reſtitution, and with a VENGANCE,
they had it.
               After this a Parliament is ſummoned, wherein the
King ingenuoſly▪ confeſſeth the injuryes receiued,
where he leaſt ſuſpected them, and where he deſerved
moſt gratitude; and here he vnmasketh all the
myſteryes, hid before in the cloudes of concealemēt,
dealing faithfully with his people, as a Prince that
had found, and expected, to finde faith in them againe

towards him, and his. He reſtores vnto them
their wonted lawfull libertyes, and freedome of
ſpeech; knowing that where there is not liberty, there can
be no fidelity, and where there is ſreedome of the tongue, there
can be no danger of the heart, or hand. And here begins
that firſt Act which changeth the black and tragicall
Scenes into triumphant furniture, promiſing a more
happy, & harmonious cloſe, and concluſion, by Gods
omnipotent arme (miraculouſly turning the hearts of
Princes, as the ruiers of water) then wee could otherwiſe
ever haue hoped for, had not theſe narrow ſtraights,
and difficultyes proceded. For hereby Popish-Spanish,
policy, which is nothing but Hypocriſy, are ſtript ſtarke
naked, the faithfull, & vnfaithfull ſervant diſtinguished,
the truth revealed, wee forewarned, and ſo I hope armed;
our King and Princes honor ingaged, for vs to fetch
off, with loyall and zealous ſervices, aud Gods mercy,
both in diſcovering, & preventing, theſe traynes, &
traps of perfidious Enemyes, magnifyed. He that ſits
in heaven, langhes them to ſcorne.
               
               That this may appeare more to the life, let vs ſee
the Heroick Perſons, acting their owne parts, ſeverally,
and joyntly.
               
               And firſt for the Duke: He in Spayne diſchargeth
the truſt repoſed in him by the King, attending
faithfully vpon the Prince, and vſing all indeavour
to ſearch out, vnlocke, and diſcover, the ſecrets of
the Spanish Cabinet. Comming home, he vſeth his beſt
art, and credit with his Majeſty, to reſolue him of
the Spanish fraude, and falſehood, and of the loyalty
and fidelity of his owne flock. He take's care to let
the world ſee he had learned to abhorre the idolatryes
of Rome, and to loue the true Church better,

by beholding the follyes, & fylthines of that ga
                     •••
                  
ſtrumpet, the great Bawde of Babylon. He preſents
plainely to the Parliament, the hard paſſages his Highneſſe
had paſt in Geryons denne, whereinto he was drawen
backward. How he was ſet by policy, vpon the
rack of loue, to torture him from his religion, or (at
leaſt) to betray him by his owne, and cauſe him to
deny his master, and maker, with his mouth! In deteſtation
of which foule fact, his Majeſty ſaith moſt excellently,
and like himſelfe, That he who diſſembles with God, i
                        •
                     
not to be trusted with men. Take truth from the mouth
of a Prince towards his people, and faith from his
heart towards God, and you diſmantle him, diſrobe
him, of all his regall honors, and ornaments, and
make him a beaſt like Nabuchodonozor,
                  Dan. 4. 27▪ 28. 29. 30 and of the jmage
of God, cauſe him to carry the jmage, and ſtampe
of Sathan.
               He preſents alſo that foule plot, and conſpiracy
of theirs, to demaund ſuch conditions of his Majeſty,
as they intended should not advance the marriage,
but, as they hoped, would ſtirre vp a rebellion,
and then they kindly proffeſſed, to ſend home
his Highneſſe with an Army, to maſſacre his owne innocent
lambes. O perfidious people, whome do you
tempt? thinke you a breſt harbouring any ſuch baſe
and bloody thought, can be hatched any where but
in Spayne, or be of any blood, but the ancient Moria
                        •
                     ,
Auſtrian, or Ottoman? The Irish wolves may be (perhaps)
thus ſauage, but our very Maſtiues are more civill, ſociable,
and humane, as for our people, eſpecially our
Princes, they are of too noble, and generous a ſtraine,
to haue ſuch an inhumane conceite come neere
them. Inceſt only, breede's this barbarous blood, and

                  Idolatry only infuſeth ſuch ſpirits. Goe exerciſe this
curſed courſe, according to your old cuſtome, amongeſt
the Indians, & teach the Caniballs that Europe
hath a people who call themſelues Chriſtians, and the
cheife Catholiques (forſooth) amongſt theſe, doe worship
the Deuill, more cunningly, and devoutly, then
thoſe that make profeſſion of it, and thinke ſcorne
not to exceede any point, or part of barbariſme, which
thoſe reaſonable beaſts can practiſe againſt Nature,
though it be in eating vp their Parents, or betraying
their freinds to death, with whoſe liues, & honours,
they are truſted. O England! behold in what a danger
thou were at this inſtant, and beware how thou
wittingly ſuffereſt thy ſelfe to fall into the like againe;
behold the heart of Spaine, and Rome, towards thee, and
forget it not, behold what blood is bred there in the
breſts of ſuch as goe over, tainted, and corrupted
before, when they dare venture to poyſon the pure
fountaine of ſovereignity, and to tempt our Prince, (as
the Serpent did Adam) to looſe his Paradiſe,
                  Gen. 3. Mat. 4. for a Pomegranate▪
                  
or, as Sathan did our ſavio
                        •
                     r, to worship him, for
the Kingdomes of the world, which he ſaw but in
shadow (being all but shadowes) as the Pope can
giue Kingdomes, and as the King of Spaine, is the Catholique,
and vniverſall King in conceite.
               Could theſe men thinke him ſo ſtupid (although
they thought vs ſo,) that he would flee from the armes
of his owne, whoſe faith, and obedience, hee had
long knowne, and flee into the armes of ſtrangers,
from whoſe imbracings, never any eſcaped with life,
and limbe, and who were never true to any man, but
for their owne ends, that they might deceiue the ſecond
time for their greater advantage, and but once for

all? Did they thinke his Highneſſe could be ſecure
with them, and not with his owne flesh, and blood?
that he could chooſe but ſee, it he returned vnder
the protection of their ſtandards, how he came like
a priſoner (as Charles of Burgundy carryed lewes the 11.
before leige: or as Edward the 4. brought Henry the 6. into
the feild) to conquer for their poſſeſſion, and his
owne captivity? meerely to make theſe Kingdomes,
Spanish Provinces, and his royall father, and himſelfe,
their vaſſalls?
               And could they dreame that the ſubjects of England,
and Scotland, were no better taught, by the preaching
of the Goſpell for 60. yeares continuance,
then (at the firſt dash) to rush into rebellion, as if
they had beene fed (like ſwine) out of the legend,
& taught diſloyalty by the Loyalists, like mad dogs,
to byte their Maſter? O no, the Lord be prayſed,
they ſee, and the ſucceſſe shewes the difference, betwixt
our Princes, & people, trayned vp in the truth
of Christ, and theirs 
                     •
                  uſled vp in the faults, follyes,
and falſehoods of their idolatrous and Antichriſti
                        ••
                     
                  
predeceſſors. Goe forward therefore (great Duke)
thus to ſpeake, and deale plainely, and truly, like a
true and noble Englishman, and God will bleſſe thee,
and eſtablish thy houſe for ever; thy Enemyes shall
ſee it, and gnash their teeth, and whilſt they ſeeke
thy head for their advantage, finde a heart in thy boſome
vnder thy Princes buckler, and with the peoples
aſſiſtance, able to guarde thine owne head, and
ſtrike off the proudeſt of their heades, that dares demaund,
or attempt thine. Was truth yet ever cald
treaſon before? or was there ever any Nation ſo inſolent,
as to demaund the head of any noble member

of our Parliament, becauſe he faithfully vſed the lawfull
liberty of his place, and diſcharged the truſt repoſed
in him by the Prince, and State, whome he
was bound to ſerue, as being borne theirs by nature,
and made theirs, by election, honor, and bounty? Do the
Spanjards thinke ſo baſely of the Brittish, as wee muſt
not caſt vp their corrupted, and poyſoned ſweete
meats, whereof wee haue ſurfetted? and becauſe
they haue ſome of our Offall for their ſervants, and
penſioners, therefore do they thinke wee all ought
to bee ſoe? Do they thinke wee ought, (like Idiots)
to forget our religion, for their ſuperſticion? and
the allegeance due to our owne naturall Prince, to
advance the ambitious progreſſe of their Catholique
Kingdome? were they once ſo flesht with one head,
as they now long for more, and thinke all bound to
ſatiſfy their longing? or are the braines of a wiſeman,
the only ſauce for a Spanish Ambaſſadors table? I haue
reade, that the parts of mans body, are nourished by
the like parts; And it may be the Catholique conſumption
of witt, muſt bee recovered with this Catholicon.
               
               
                  The wolfe would with the shepheard make no peace,
                  Till hee hung vp his dog, then warres should ceaſe.
                  
                     Phillip of Macedon, dealt with Athens thus:
                  
                     Phillip of Spaine, intendes no worſe to vs.
               
               But I hope wee are better taught, then thus to
reward our faithfull freindes with vngratefull diſloyaltyes.
No▪ no, goe forward (great Duke) and proſper,
whilſt thou doeſt nothing but what may juſtify
thee, & what thou maiſt juſtify before all the world,
by the example of that worthy, David, and with his
wordes ſaying, what haue I now done? is their not a cauſe?
               
               Thus having vſſhered his Highneſſe▪
                   into our diſcourſe

by this honorable ſervant of his, the Duke of
Buckingham, wee will proceede in the ſecond place
to shew thoſe graces, and favoures, which haue, and
doe flow, from the Prince toward vs, ſince his returning,
contrary to the wishes, and endeavours, of our
Enemyes, and our owne feares.
               How art thou to be extolled O excellent Prince! who
being ſingly, (as it were) ſent out to encounter the
greateſt ſtateſ
                     •
                  men in the world, that beleeue they
haue fraude enough (which they call witt) to vndermine
all the ſtates of Chriſtendome; and being beſides
diſadvantaged by ſuſtaining the place, opinion,
perſon, and (perhaps) the affection of a Louer, having
alſo ſome corrupters of thy owne boſome freinds,
haſt notwithſtanding ſtood firme to God, to thy ſelfe,
and to vs? Is it not a great and dangerous temptation,
(ô all yee that know what temptation is, what it
is to be ſiffed, what it is to reſiſt) that young men meet
in the world, vpon their firſt ignorant entrance?
How many of theſe miſcarry at home? how few returne
vnmaymed from forreigne parts? I appeale
for witneſſe, to the ill times, ill men, and ill manners.
But for a Prince that is young, to be expoſed to tryall,
vpon ſuch hard and vnequall tearmes, and to come
off ſafe, and to conquer, is (as I thinke) a taske no leſſe
admirable then that of Hercules, if that were as true,
as this is. A young man with ſmall experience, againſt
the aged, and experienced; A David againſt Goliah, and
an Army of Philiſtims; One (as it were) alone, or which
is worſe with a Company devided, againſt many vnited in
one; A Prince, the gainefulleſt object of fraude, againſt
private perſons, the ſubjects of falſehood, and ſuch as
profeſſe the art to deceiue Princes; A moſt affectionate

louer of the body of Her, whoſe bewty was layd
but as a baite in his way, whereby the Fisher-man of
Hell, and Purgatory angled for the deſtruction of his
ſoule, againſt his owne flesh and blood, and the paſſions
of loue with all other advantages which cunning,
and practiſed ſeducers could take, and vſe for
their owne ends, and purpoſes; for him, I ſay, ſo
encountred, and ſurrounded, to breake looſe, and
to conquer, is a worke of ſuch wonder, and ſo aboue
humane conceite, that God alone shall reape the glory
of it, being farre beyond the powre of man to
doe▪ or almoſt to beleeue, now it is done. The principall
inſtrument that God was pleaſed to vſe in this
great worke was his Highneſſe owne wife heart guided
by Grace, and ſummoning vp all thoſe helpes,
which that Grace had formerly inſtilled into him,
by hearing, and reading the word of God, his fathers
writings, and obſerving the variable paſſages of the
times, beſides the ſpeciall proviſion of all kinde of
arguments, and armour of proofe, for the minde,
but layd in before, by his royall father. I intend
not to detract from other helpes, that he found
by the dayly mementoes of the Duke, and other
faithfull Attendants, who ſtood Sentinell continually
for his ſafeguard; but this I ſay, the cheefe was
his owne, and lockt vp in his owne boſome; and
this God gaue him immediately, becauſe God would
haue the immediate prayſe come vnto him. For if
wee conſider the whole courſe of the Story, and
ſee the iſſue, how, contrary to all expectation, it
hath beene convayed, and carryed, and at what
a contrary quarter, it is now arriued from the
point of the Compaſſe, by which it ſet out,

all men muſt needes ſee the naked, & bleſſed, arme
of God, and aſcribe the whole glory to him, for bringing
our Prince home, and that ſo ſoone, and that vpon
ſuch tearmes, hereby alſo wee may playnely diſcerne
that many of thoſe actions of his in Spayne, and of his
Majeſtyes in England, at which our feares were frighted,
and tooke the Alarum, were only falſe-fires, rayſed
to bring him off with ſafety, whome they had too
ſuddenly ingaged, vpon preſumption of the Spanish
faith, which is too vniverſall to bee truſted. And
now he is come home, ſee how he carryes himſelfe,
as one truly taught of God, & jmitating our ſaviour.
For ſince his returne hee hath done the greateſt
worke of wiſdome, and goodnes, within mans power
to accomplish, reconciling vs to his fathers favour,
who before ſeemed to be halfe abandoned to his
fury, in that wee might not be acquainted with his
will, nor truſted with his Counſells. He hath alſo
broken downe the partition wall betwixt the English,
and Scottish Nations, and hath made vs one people
in affection to the King, for civill, as to God, for religions
reſpects. Yea, now religion is ſecured, and
thoſe jealouſyes taken away; what Englishman doth
not imbrace a Scottishman as his brother, when they
haue all one God their father, and all one Church their
Mother? There is no bande, like that of religion,
which tyes vs one to an other, vnder one King to
Christ, and (in Christ) tyes vs all to God.
               
               He hath alſo renued the fellowship, and communion,
betwixt the King his father, and vs his poore
ſubjects, in the high Court of Parliament, where he
ſits dayly to heare ſuits, and petitions, to mediate
betwixt the King, and people, to direct, animate, and

incourage the true, faithfull, and honorable Patriots,
to ſuppreſſe the petulancy, and rectify the exorbitancy,
of any Prevaricator, that durſt appeare in
that preſence,Iob. 1. like an other Sathan amongſt the children
of God, to ſuggeſt evill, to ſeduce from good,
to caſt in demurres, occaſions of delay, or ſcruples,
and queſtions, occaſions of diviſion, as I thanke God,
there are none that will or dare. What benefit can
be like this? what thanks, and prayſe, can be ſufficient
to extoll it? Is not this a temporall ſalvation?
Is not he a temporall ſaviour, a true Ioſuah, that doth
thus? Yes, yes, the Lord is pleaſed to call Kinges
Gods, and himſelfe a King; to borrowe of Maſters,
Fathers, and temporall deliverers, the propriety of
words, and phraſes, to fit our capacity, and to shadow
out his workes of wonder; It is no robbery
therefore, to aſſume ſome of thoſe flowers, to adorne,
and inrich the actions of ſuch perſons, as he
hath before adorned, & inriched with inward grace▪
to imitate him in the diſcharge of their dutyes, and
the high places he hath called them to, and therby
to ſet them off, and shadow them more illuſtriouſly,
to the life, by compariſon. Not as if there were any
degree of compariſon betwixt God, and man, the infinite,
and finite, his worke being for ſoule, and body,
mans, for the body only; his, for ever, mans, for a
time; his, abſolutely, and of himſelfe, mans, in, and
by him; but that there is compariſon betwixt the
laudable, and Heroick actions, and vndertakings of
men amongſt themſelues, ſome approaching neerer,
then other, to the greateſt, though all, (yea, the
neereſt) ſtand aloofe off, at a diſtance vnmeaſurable
by any rule, but the infinite mercy of God in the

alſufficient merrits of Christ.
                  Pſal. 45. This Pſalme is compoſed of Salomon, a type of Chriſt, and may be applyed to algodly princes, who are the deputyes of Chriſt, and jmages of God. 
                  Gird thy ſword therefore
vpon thy thigh, ô thou moſt mighty Prince, with thy glory, and
thy Majesty, and in thy Majeſty ride proſperouſly becauſe of
truth, and meekenes, and righteouſnes (the armour, the ornament
of Kings, and Princes) and thy right hand shall
teach thee terrible things. Thine arrowes are sharpe in the heart
of the Kings enemyes, whereby the people fall vnder thee. Thy
throne (ô Prince!) is for ever and ever; the ſcepter of thy
Kingdome is a right ſcepter. Thou lovest righteouſnes, and h
                        •
                     
                     teſt
wickednes: therefore God thy God hath annoynted thee
with the oyle of gladnes aboue thy fellowes. And if any frontles
Enemy dare be ſo impudent, as to take exception
at thy by paſt actions, & at that preſent change
which they finde, and feele in thy proſperous proceedings,
thou haſt (ô moſt excellent Prince!) a sheild in
the Armory of David to defend thy ſelfe, thy honor,
and reputation, whilſt thou maiſt juſtly ſay, with him,
What haue I now done? Is their not a cauſe?
               
               I should now conclude this gratious, and glorious
act, with preſenting his Majeſtyes perſon, and performances
to the eye of obſervation. But Kings
(like the ſunne) muſt not be gazed vpon with open
eyes. It shalbe ſufficient to touch vpon ſome perticulars,
where I may walke ſafely (as I hope) without
exception.
               His Majeſtyes entrance into England, was as showers
of raine into a fleece of wool; ſo falling gently, received
as gently. The inauguration promiſed a happy
progreſſe. It could not be diſcerned whither he entered
by ſucceſſion, or election; the peoples deſires
ſo concurred with his right, as that he tooke poſſeſſion
by both. And it ſeemes had not God, and Nature,
deſigned him to the chayre, by a fayre & lyneall pedigree,

he might haue beene ours by choice, if among
foreigne Kinges, wee had choſe. His governement
ſince, hath beene only vnhappy in this, that
he hath over-loved peace, which is the happineſſe of
all ſtates, but hath beene our affliction. It may bee,
becauſe God himſelfe will haue no peace with the wicked,
                  Eſ. 48. 22.
much leſſe permit his ſervants to haue it. God, and
Baal, cannot dwell together. Or it may bee, becauſe
we croſt the will of God, with humane wiſdome, and would
needes haue peace, when he cald vs to warre. Or it
may bee, that wee ſought for that happineſſe here, which is
reſerved for the ſaints here-after: to liue in peace within
the militant Church, as the ſaints doe in the triumphant.
Theſe, ſome, or all of them, may be a cauſe
why that bleſſing of peace, is turned to a curſe, to
weaken vs, which makes others ſtronger; to impoverish
vs, which makes others richer; to devid vs, which
vnites others: for woes, wants, and warres, abound
by this meanes; becauſe wee haue not firſt made
our peace with God, but rather with the Enemyes of
his truth, and honour.
               And to juſtify my conjecture, this laſt act declares
it clearely. For whereas it hath beene purſued
with all the heate of affection, managed with all the
wiſdome of flesh and blood, ſecrecy vſed in the conveyance,
and the whole myſtery, wrought by the
handes of moſt artificiall, and able inſtruments, and
ſeconded with all the advantages, both ſides could
wish: Yet, God hath broken the threefold corde a ſunder,
and turned all thinges to a cleane contrary
courſe, as he did when out of darkenes, he brought
light, & out of the rock, water. This is the Lords doeing,
and it is merveylous in our eyes.
               
               
                  
What injuryes, and wronges, his Majeſty hath received
in his children, ſtate, ſubjects, ſubſtance, and
honor, by this meanes, the world know
                     •
                  s but too
well; and God ſurely would haue the enemy to do it,
and his Majeſty to ſuffer it, that being now exaſperated,
he might revenge Gods cauſe, with his owne,
and for it, reape honor to God, and to himſelfe. The
more ſincerely his Majeſty hath dealt, the more falſely
they; to let him ſee, though there bee faith to be kept with
Heretikes, yet there is none to be giuen to them, nor expected
from them. Princes are to vſe plaineſſe, and perſpicuity,
with their ſubjects, policy, and reſervednes, with ſtrangers:
Chriſt ſpake to the Iewes in parables, but to his
owne, it was giuē to know the myſtery of the Kingdome of God.
               
               And now, as if all before had not beene enough
to provoke a peaceable Prince to a juſt warre, behold
what God hath permitted theſe fyre brands, and
boutefewes of Chriſtendome to attempt, by accuſing
the Prince, the Duke, and whole ſtate of Treaſon,
Was there ever ſuch a practiſe jmagined? of what
do they preſume that dare be thus bolde, impudent,
impious? Is it of their owne power? Noe aſſuredly,
for they are in ours, whilſt they doe it. Is it of their
party here able to back them, and beare them out?
of our patience to ſuffer them whatſoever they doe?
or proclivenes to credit them whatſoever they
ſay? I know not whether they build vpon theſe, or
other groundes, of this I am ſure the plot equalls,
or exceede's the Gunpowder treaſon; becauſe, although,
that aymed at the lives of all, yet it did not touch
their honors; this ayme's at life, and honor of the
beſt, yea, of all, to ſet father, againſt the ſonne▪ the
ſovereigne againſt his ſubjects, one hand againſt another.

And to what end? that they in the meane
time may diſtract affavres, hinder reſolutions, withdraw
hearts, and hands, from ſuccouring the Kinges
children, and freinds, ready to perish by their Tyrannyes;
that they may arme their owne pernicious
faction, with pretence to be a guarde for the Kings
perſon, and ſoe, ſince they cannot rayſe a rebellion,
and devide the Prince, and people, that their Armyes
may enter to ſtickle betwixt them (as they indeavored
in Spayne) now they would devide the father,
and the ſonne, and cleaue this knot by a wedge
of the ſame wood, I meane by the Hiſpaniolized, and
Romanized, natures in England. Since this, (by Gods
grace) hath fayled, I know not to what they can proceede
except it be to accuſe the King himſelfe, which
they will not fayle to doe, if it may fit their turne,
vnleſſe his Majeſty do juſtice vpon them, and make
an honorable preſident for all poſterity, that Ambaſſadours
preſume not to doe, what their Maſters dare
not, and for which, even Kinges themſelues being
in foreigne Provinces, were liable to accounte. Wee
read how zealous David was in redeeming the honor
of his owne Ambaſſadours,
                  2 Sa. 10. 4▪
                   becauſe they were innocent,
and revenging theſe indignityes offered to
them vnworthily: Had they merrited evill, he
would never haue protected them, but doing their
dutyes, his honor was ingaged in them, & for them.
And if he did thus for a few of his ſervants, what
would he haue done for all his ſervants, yea, for all
his ſubjects,2 Sam. 24▪ 17. for whoſe ſafety he offers his life? Nay what
would he haue done for them, and for his ſonne, his
only ſonne, with them? Even the ſame (I hope) that his
moſt excellent Majeſty will doe for his ſervants, his

                  ſubjects, his ſonne.
               
               Now therefore, to cloſe this wandring diſcourſe,
(mighty Sovereigne) ſince by thy ſervant, by thy
ſonne, by thy ſelfe, mouth to mouth, thou haſt revealed
thy fore-paſt actions, and paſſions, and preſent
intents towards vs, and wee (with all the world)
are witneſſes of thy integrity; draw thy ſword, and
cut aſſunder this Gordions knot, which all thy wiſedome
cannot vnty. And as that painter by caſting
his penſile (in a rage) from him, made (by chance)
ſuch a fome for a mad Dog, as he could not otherwiſe
light vpon by art, & induſtry: ſo God may bleſſe
thy hand, that going boldely on, whilſt he call's thee,
and leade's thee, and following him in ſimplicity, and
truth, without reliance, truſt, or dependancy, vpon
the ſecurity of thy owne head, or arme, thou mayeſt
happily ariue, at that period, thou wouldeſt bee
at, and force that reſtitution, and peace, which thou
canſt neither beg, nor buy.
               There is nothing to feare but the Ieſuits hand, let
thy hand therefore fright them, and their adhaerents
farre from thee, out of thy Dominions. Hee that
ſtands vpon ſimple defenſe, ſtands but halfe armed,
nor altogether ſoe; but he that ſtands to offende,
doth (by that posture) ſtand ready for all aſſayes, both
guarding himſelfe, & putting him to his guard, who
(like Ishmaël) hath his hand againſt every man. Behold
how thou art incircled with myriads of ſubjects,
and millions of Saints, & Angells; God ſends theſe
to defend thee, and ſecure thy doubts. Looke vpon
the Prince, thy bleſſed Sonne, the Queene of Bohemis,
thy diſtreſſed Daughter, ſee how fruitfull shee is.
And thoſe children of hers, joyntly, are like oliue branches

round about thy table, a hedge of quickſet round
about thy walkes, a wall of flesh and blood, and bones,
round about thy life; and each of them ſeverally is
an armour, a guard, of thine. Who dares touch thee,
that conſiders who is thy ſucceſſor? and who dare
touch him, that conſiders her that followes? and
thus ſucceſſively, if malice be infinite, thy ſecurity is
noe leſſe.
               Thus they being thy guard, thou muſt needes be
theirs; they preſerving thy life next vnder God (for
beleeue it, O King! it had beene, and were now, worſe
with thee elſe, then with Henry 4. of Fance) thou muſt
needes preſerue their eſtates, with thy vttermoſt
power; and ſo protecting each other interchangeably,
God that hath gratiouſly rayſed you for them, &
them for you, will protect you all, with his omnipotent
arme. And if any cavilling Enemy, that dares
not touch your perſon, shall dare yet to attempt
your honor, and fame, for falling from Spayne, and
ſayling a new courſe, you haue that buckler of Davids
to hold out againſt them, in defence of your
ſelfe, and your honour, What haue I now done? Is their
not a cauſe?
               
               Thus I haue brought the Prince, and Duke of Buckingham
from Spayne,
                  1 Sam. 1
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   like Ionathan, and his Armour
bearer, from chaſing the Philistims, in their garriſon
vpon the rock. They called Ionathan, & his Armour-bearer,
vp the cliffe in contempt, elſe they would
not haue gone; ſo doth Spayne call theſe with mockings,
injuryes, ſcornes, accuſations, challenges, and
infinite other intollerable affronts. A ſcend then, and
conquer, God will deliver them into your hand.
               And thus haue I brought his Majeſty (like David)

from the overthrow of Goliah, with the ſonges of th
                     •
                  
virgins, the acclamation, and applauſe of Nobles, Commons,
Clergy, Schollers, Citizens, Souldiars. God make thee
ſtrong, and cauſe thee to remember how thou haſt
ſlaine a Lyon, and a Beare, and a Gyant; and what
are the reſt of the vncircunciſed rout, more then
theſe?
               To conclude therefore, O yee worthyes of Scotland! to
you wee will rayſe trophees for ſaving our ſovereigne:
To thee Buckingham, for ſerving thy King, thy
Prince, and Countrey, faithfully, in a falſe, & crooked
generation: To thee, O Prince! for thy obedience
to God, and thy Father, with loue to thy loyall
loyers: To thee, O King! for hearing our petitions,
and not deſpiſing thy poore peoples deſires, in ſeeking
redemption of Gods honor, and thine: And to
thee, O God! for rayſing vp theſe inſtruments of our
temporall ſalvation, and for ſaving theſe, and all of
vs, eternally by the blood of thy Sonne.
               
                  2 Sam. 23. 15. 16. 17.
                  And David longed, and ſayde, 
                        •
                      that one would giue me
drinke of the water of the well of Bethlehem, which is by the
gate. And the three mighty men brake though the hoste of the
Philiſtines▪
                      and drew water out of the well of Bethlehem,
that was by the gate, and tooke it, and brought it to David:
nevertheleſſe he would not drinke thereof, but powred it out
vnto the Lord: And he ſayde, But it farre from me (ô Lord!)
that I should doe this: Is not this the blood of the men, that we
                        ••
                     
in jeopardy of their liues? therefore he would not drinke▪
                     Theſe thinges did theſe three mighty men.
                  
               
               FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            VVHere faults appeare in Letters,To the Reader. Points, or Words,
The Printers ignorance excuſe affords:
And where the Matter or the Forme doth hault,
The Author may hope pardon for his fault,
Since as the One, knowes of the tongue no part▪
The other, knowes as little of the heart.
            PAge 1,Errors in the Preface. line 25, reade rationibus. Edito. page 2, line 19, reade ſ
                  •
               arnes,
page 3, line 2, reade they page ib. line 3, reade our page ib. line 6,
reade will page 4, line 14, reade Timbrels page ib. line 24, reade
otherwiſe page ib. line 30, reade expences, pa. ib. line 33, reade tyre
ib. reade Emperour, and hold page 5, line 16, reade wafted page ib.
lines 19, & 31, reade Exchequer page 7, line 25, reade ioyne page 8,
line 16, reade wilt.
            
            PAge 2.Errors in the Booke. line 6. reade principally p. 3. l. 2. r. part, p. ib. l. 13. r. eldeſt
p. 4. l. vlt. r. the p. 6. l. 9. r. him ſuch, ſo p. ib. l. 32. r. the p. 8.
l. 10. r. brothers perſon, how p. ib. l. 28. r. ſent p. 9. l. 1. r. being
p. ib. l. 20. r. is it p. 10. l. 8. r. his p. 12. l. 12. r. on p. ib. l. 18. r. your
p. ib. l. 29. r. amongst p. 13. l. 9. r. expoſtulate p. ib. l. 24. r. iniuries
p. 17. l. 15. r. idollatrous p. 18. l. 20. r. vndertaking. For, theſe
words, Is there not a cauſe, haue p. 20. l. 13. r. high, excellent,
and eminent p. ib. l. 26. r. ſame. p. ib. l. 28. r. or p. 21. l. 4. r. the
p. 24. l. 4. r. thee p. ib. l. 8. r. thy p. ib. l. 9. r. Hypocrits p. ib. l. 12. r. Lou
p. 25. 26. r. for the way, p. 26. l. 3. r. imagination p. 29. l. 20. 21
r. fact, Behold, Abraham ſtands forth, like p. ib. l. vlt. r. flye, p. 31
l. 11. r. laying p. 32. l. 10. r. reſtores p. 33. l. 10. 11. r. tyrannous
p. 36. l. 13. r. the Shipwrackt p. 37. l. 16. r. ſeruilitie, p. 38. l. 21.
r. his p. 39. l. 15. r. Bulling br
                  •
               okes p. ib. l. 28. r. become me▪
                p. 41.
l. 32. r. one p. 43. l. 19. r. and p. 44. l. vlt. r. Such only, ſeeme p. 45
l. 24. r. profeſſe, p. 46. l. 21. r. know p. 47. l. 5. r. ſeeme p. ib. l. 32
r. VVho is he being p. 48. l. 29. r. thee, p. 52. l. 17. r. theſe p. 54. l. vlt.
r. profane p. 55. l. 6. r. and the malice p. 56. l. 25. r. Noble blood
ran not then in Ignoble vaines. p. ib. l. vlt. r. ſaith a man p. 57
l. 2. r. Superiour. p. 62. l. 19. r. vſeing p. 65. l. 26. r. an exchange
p. 67. l. 29. r. and tyde them faſt in p. 69. l. 27. r. moſt p. ib. l. 30.
r. tended p. ib. l. vlt. r. a moſt p. 70. l. 15. r. but ioy p. ib. l. 23 r. rabblement
p. 71. l. 12. r. preceded. p. ib. l. 13. r. is p. 72. l. 22. r.
proffered p. 73. l. 5. r. that do worship p. ib. l. 13. r. wer
                     •
                  
                p. 77
l. 21. r. layd in before, p. 83. l. 13. r. Natiues p. ib. l. 24. r. thoſe
p. vlt. l. 23. r. thorough p. ib. l. 27. r. Be.
         
      
   