
      
         
            
            The ſchoole of Vertue, and booke of good Nourture for chyldren, and youth to learne theyr dutie by. Newely peruſed, corrected, and augmented by the fyrſt Auctour. F. S
            With a briefe declaracion of the dutie of eche degree.
            
               Anno. 1557.
            Diſpiſe not councel, rebuking foly 
                  •
               eme it as, nedefull and holy.
            ☞
            ¶ Imprinted at London in Paules Churchyarde at the ſigne of the Hedgehogge by Wyllyam Seares. ❧
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The Auctours name in verdyt.
            
               S SAye well ſome wyll   by this my labour
            
               E Euery man yet   Wyll not ſay the ſame
            
               A Amonge the good   I doubt not fauour
            
               G God them forgeue   Forſt me blame
            
               E Eche man I wyſhe   It ſhall offende
            
               R Reade and then iudge   Where faulte is amende.
            
               
                  Face aut Tace.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The ſchoole of vertue.
            FIrſt in the mornynge when thou doſt awake
            To God for his grace thy peticion then make.
            This prayer folowynge vſe dayly to ſay
            Thy harte lyftynge vp Thus begyn to pray.
            
               ¶ The mornynge prayer.
               
                  O God from whom al good gifts procede
               To thee we repayre in tyme of our nede
               That with thy grace thou wouldſt vs endue
               Vertue to folowe and vyce to exchue:
               Heare this our requeſt and graunt our deſyre
               
                  
O lorde moſte humbly we do the requyre.
               This day vs detende that we walkynge aryght
               May do the thynge acceptable in thy ſyght.
               That as we in yeares And body do growe
               So in good vertues we may lykewyſe flowe
               To thy honour and ioy of our parentes
               Learninge to lyue well and kepe thy cōmaundmentes.
               In flyinge from all Vice ſynne and cryme
               Applyinge our bookes not loſynge our tyme.
               May fructifye and go forwarde here in good doynge
               In this vale of miſerie vnto oure lyuees endynge.
               
                  
That after this lyfe here tranſitory
               we may attayne to greater glory.
               The Lordes prayer then ſe thou recyte
               So vſynge to do at mornynge and nyght.
            
            
               ¶ Howe to order thy ſelfe when thou ryſeſt, and in apparelynge thy body, Capitulo. i.
               FLye euer ſlouthe Cato. and ouer much ſlepe
               In health the body therby thou ſhalte kepe.
               Muche ſlepe ingendereth diſeaſes and payne
               It dulles the the wyt and hurteth the brayne.
               
                  
Early in the mornynge thy bed then forſake
               Thy rayment put on thy ſelfe redy make,
               To caſt vp thy bed It ſhalbe thy parte
               Els may they ſay that beaſtly thou art.
               So to departe and let the ſame lye
               It is not ſemynge nor yet manerly
               Downe from thy chamber when thou ſhalte go
               Thy parentes ſalute thou and the famely alſo
               Thy handes ſe thou waſhe and thy hed keame
               And of thy rayment ſe torne be no ſeame
               Thy cappe fayre bruſht thy hed couer than
               
                  
Takynge it of In ſpeakynge to any man.
               Cato doth councel thee Cato. thyne elders to reuerence
               Declarynge therby thy dutye and obedience.
               Thy ſhyrte coler faſt to thy necke knyt
               Comely thy rayment loke on thy body ſyt.
               Thy gyrdell about thy waſt then faſten
               Thy hoſe fayre rubd thy ſhowes ſe be cleane.
               A napkyn ſe that thou haue in redines
               Thy noſe to clenſe from all fylthynes.
               Thy nayles yf nede be ſe that thou payre
               Thyne eares kepe cleane thy teath waſhe thou fayre.
               
                  
If ought about thee chaunce to be torne
               Thy frendes therof ſhewe howe it is worne.
               And they wyll newe for thee prouyde
               Or the olde mende In tyme beinge ſpyde.
               This done thy ſetchell and thy bokes take
               And to the ſcole haſte ſee thou make.
               But ere thou go with thy ſelfe forthynke
               That thou take with thee pen paper and ynke.
               For theſe are thynges for thy ſtudy neceſſary
               Forget not then with thee them to cary.
               The ſouldiar preparynge hym ſelfe to the fielde
               
                  
Leaues not at home his ſworde and his ſhielde.
               No more ſhulde a ſcoler forget then truly
               what he at ſcole ſhulde nede to occupy.
               Theſe thynges thus had Take ſtrayght thy way
               Vnto the ſchole without any ſtay.
            
            
               Howe to behaue thy ſelfe in going by the ſtreate and in the ſchoole. ii.
               IN goynge by the way and paſſynge the ſtrete
               Thy cappe put of Iſocra. Salute thoſe ye mete
               In geuynge the way Cato. to ſuche as paſſe by
               It is a poynte of ſiuilitie.
               
                  
And thy way fortune ſo for to fall
               Let it not greue thee thy felowes to call
               when to the ſchole thou ſhalte reſort
               This rule note well I do the exhort.
               Thy maſter there beynge Salute with all reuerence
               Declarynge thereby thy dutye and obedience.
               Thy felowes ſalute In token of loue
               Leſt of inhumanitie they ſhall thee reproue.
               Vnto thy place appoynted for to ſyt
               Streight go thou to and thy ſetchel vnknyt
               Thy bokes take out thy leſſon then learne
               
                  
Huubly thy ſelfe Behaue and gouerne.
               Therein takynge payne with all thyne in duſtry
               Learnynge to get thy boke well applye
               All thynges ſeme harde when we do begyn
               But labour and diligence Virgil. yet doth them wyn.
               we ought not to recken and coumpt the thyng harde
               That bryngeth ioye and pleaſure afterwarde
               Leaue of then laboure and the lacke rue
               Lament and repent when age doth inſue.
               Deades that deſerued Fame and greate prayſe
               Buried had ben we ſe in oldedayes.
               
                  
If letters had not then brought them to lyght
               The truth of ſuche thynges who coulde nowe reſyght
               Applye thy minde to learnynge and ſcyence
               For learnynge in nede Cato. wyll be thy défence
               Nothinge to ſcience compare we may well
               The ſwetenes wherof all thynges doth excell. Cicero
               
               And Cato the wyſe this worthy ſayinge hath
               That man wantinge learnynge is as the image of death. Cato.
               
               The rootes of learnynge moſt bytter we deme Ariſtot.
               
               The fruites at laſt Moſte pleaſaunt doth ſeme.
               Then labour for learnynge whyle here thou ſhalt lyue
               
                  
The ignoraunt to teache and good example geue.
               So ſhalte thou be thought A membre moſt worthy
               The common welth to ſerue In ryme of neceſſitie.
               Experience doth teache And ſhewe to thee playne
               That many to honour By learninge attayne.
               That were of byrthe But ſymple and bace
               Suche is the goodnes Of Gods ſpeciall grace.
               For he that to honour by vertue doth ryſe
               Is double happy and counted moſt wyſe.
               If doubte thou doeſt Deſyre to be toulde
               No ſhame is to learne Beinge neuer ſo oulde.
               
                  
Ignoraunce doth cauſe Great errors in vs
               For wantynge of knowledge Doubts to diſcuſſe
               Then learne to diſcerne the good from the yll
               And ſuche as thee warne Bere them good will.
               when from the ſchoole ye ſhall take your waye
               Or orderly then go ye twoo in aray
               your ſelues matchynge So equall as ye may
               That men it ſeynge May well of you ſaye.
               In commendynge this your laudable wayes
               whiche muſt nedes ſounde to your great prayſe.
               Not runnynge on heapes as a ſwarme of bees
               
                  
As at this day Euery man it nowe ſees.
               Not vſynge but refuſynge Suche foolyſhe toyes
               As commonly are vſed In theſe dayes of boyes.
               As hoopynge and halowynge as in huntynge the foxe
               That men it hearynge Deryde them with mockes.
               This foolyſhnes forſake this folly exchewynge
               And learne to followe this order inſuynge.
               In goynge by the way Neyther talke nor iangle
               Gape not nor gaſe not at euery newe fangle.
               But ſoberly go ye with countinaunce graue
               Humblye your ſelues towarde all men behaue. Iſocra.
               
               
                  
Be free of cappe and full of of curteſye
               Greate loue of al men you ſhall wyn therby
               Be lowly and gentyll and of meke moode
               Then men con not but of you ſay good
               In paſſynge the urete Do no man no harme
               Vſe thou fewe wordes and thy tounge charme.
               Then men ſhal ſee that grace in the groweth
               From whom vertues So aboundantly floweth
               when thou arte come where thy parentes do dwell
               Thy leaue then takynge Byd thy felowes farewell.
               The houſe then entrynge In thy parence preſence
               
                  
Humbly ſalute them with all reuerence.
            
            
               ¶ Howe to behaue thi ſelfe in ſer: uynge the table. Cap. iii
               
                  VVhen thy parentes downe to the table ſhall ſyt
                  In place be ready For the purpoſe moſte fyt,
                  with ſober countinaunce Lokynge them in the face
                  Thy handes holdynge vp this begyn grace.
               
               
                  GEue thankes to God with one accorde Grace before meate.
                  
                  For that ſhall be Set on this borde.
                  And be not carefull what to eate
                  To eche thynge lyuynge the Lorde ſends meate.
                  For foode he wyll not Se you peryſhe
                  
                     
But wyll you fede Foſter and cheryſhe,
                  Take well in worth what he hath ſent
                  At this tyme be therwith content.
                  Prayſynge God.
               
            
            
               ¶ So treatablie ſpeakyng as poſſible thou can
               That the heaters therof May thee vnderſtan.
               Grace beynge ſayde Lowe cueſie make thou
               Sayinge muche good May it do you.
               Of ſtature then yf thou be able
               It ſhall become thee to ſerue the table.
               In bringynge to it Suche meate as ſhall nede
               
                  
For thy parence vpon that tyme to fede.
               Diſſhes with meaſure thou oughteſt to fyll
               Els mayſte thou happen thy ſeruyce to ſpyll.
               On theyr apparell Or els on the cloth
               whiche for to doe wolde moue them to wroth.
               Spare trenchers with napkyns haue in redynes
               To ſerue afterwarde If there come any geſſe.
               Be circumſpect
                     •
                   ſee nothynge do want
                     •
                  
               
               Of neceſſary thynges that there be no ſkant.
               As breade and drynke ſe there be plentie
               The voyders with bones Ofte ſe thou emptie.
               
                  
At hande be ready If any do call.
               To fetche or take vp If ought fortune to fall.
               when they haue done then ready make
               The table vp fayre In order to take
               Fyrſte the ſaulte Se that thou couer
               Hauynge by thee Eyther one or other
               thynges from thy handes then to conuaye
               That from the table thou ſhalt take awaye.
               A voyder vpon the table then haue
               The trenchers and napkyns therein to receaue
               The croomes with a napkyn together them ſwepe
               
                  
It at the tables ende In a voydex them kepe.
               Then before eche man A cleane treanchour lay
               The beſt fyrſte ſeruynge As iudge thou ſoone may.
               Then cheeſe with fruite On the table ſet
               With Biſketes or Carowayes As you may get.
               Wyne to them fyll Els ale or beare
               But wyne is meteſt If any there were.
               Then on the table Attende with all diligence
               It for to voyde when done haue thy parence
               Eche ſyde of the clothe Do thou tourne in
               Foldynge it vp At the hygher ende begin
               
                  
A cleane to well then On the table ſpreade▪
               
               The to well wantynge the cloth take in ſteade.
               The baſon and ewer to the table then brynge
               In place conuenient theyr pleaſure abydynge.
               When thou ſhalt ſee them redy to waſhe.
               The ewer take vp and be not to raſhe.
               In powrynge out water More then wyll ſuffiſe
               The table then voyde that they may ryſe.
               All thynges thus done forget not thy dutie
               Before the table Make thou lowe curſie
            
            
               
               ¶ Howe to order thy ſelfe ſyttynge at the table. Capitulo. iiii.
               O Chyldren geue care your duties to learne
               Howe at the table you may your ſelues gouerne.
               Preſume not to hyghe Socra. Cato. I ſay in no caſe
               In ſyttynge downe to thy betters geue place.
               Suffer eche man Fyrſte ſerued to be
               For that is apoynte Of good curteſie.
               When they are ſerued then pauſe a ſpace
               For that is a ſygne of nourture and grace.
               Saulte with thy knyfe then reache and take
               
                  
The breade cut fayre And do not it breake.
               Thy ſpone with pottage to full do not fyll
               For fylynge the cloth If thou fortune to ſpyll.
               For rudnes it is thy pottage to ſup
               Or ſpeake to any his head in the cup.
               Thy knyfe ſe be ſharpe to cut fayre thy meate
               Thy mouth not to full when thou doſt eate.
               Not ſmackynge thy lyppes As comonly do hogges
               Nor gnawynge the bones As it were dogges.
               Suche rudenes abhorre Suche beaſtlynes flie
               At the table behaue thy ſelfe manerly.
               
                  
Thy fyngers ſe cleane that thou euer kepe
               Hauynge a Napkyn thereon them to wype.
               Thy mouth therwith Cleane do thou make
               The cup to drynke In hande yf thou take.
               Let not thy tongue At the the table walke
               And of no matter Neyther reaſon nor talke. Plato.
               
               Temper thy tongue and belly alway
               For meaſure is treaſure the prouerbe doth ſay
               And meaſure in althynges Cicero. Is to be vſed
               what is without meaſure Ought to be refuſed.
               For ſilence kepynge thou ſhalt not be ſhent
               
                  
where as thy ſpeache May cauſe thee repent
               Bothe ſpeache and ſilence I ſocra. are commendable
               But ſylence is meteſt In achylde at the table.
               And Cato doth ſaye Cato. that in olde and yonge
               The fyrſte of vertue Is to kepe thy tonge
               Pyke not thy teethe at the table ſyttynge
               Nor vſe at thy meate Ouer muche ſpytynge.
               this rudnes of youth Is to be abhorde
               thy ſelfe manerly Behaue at the borde.
               If occaſion of laughter at the table thou ſe
               Beware that thou vſe the ſame moderately.
               
                  
Of good maners learne So muche as thou can
               It wyll thee preferre when thou art a man
               Ariſtotle the Philoſopher this worthy ſaying writ Ariſtot.
               
               That manere in a chylde are more requiſit
               then playnge on inſtrumentes and other vayne pleaſure
               For vertuous maners Is a moſt precious treaſure.
               Let not this ſaynge In no wyſe thee offen
                     •
                  e
               For playnge of inſtrumentes He both not diſcommende.
               But doth graunt them For a chylde neceſſary
               yet maners muche more ſee here he doth vary.
               Refuſe not his councell Nor his wordes diſpiſe
               
                  
To vertue and knowledge By them mayſte thou ryſe.
            
            
               ¶ Howe to order thy ſelfe in the Churche. Cap. v.
               VVhen to the Churche thou ſhalt repayer
               Knelynge or ſtandynge to God make thy prayer.
               All worldely matters From thy mynde ſet apart
               Earneſtly prayinge to God lyfte vp thy hart.
               A contrite harte Pſal. l. He wyll not diſpyſe
               whiche he doth coumpt A ſweete ſacrifice.
               To hym thy ſinnes ſhewe and confeſſe
               Aſkynge for them Grace and forgyuenes.
               
                  
He is the Phiſition that knoweth thy ſore.
               And can to health A gayne thee reſtore. Iames the. i.
               
               Aſke then in fayth Not doubtynge to haue
               The thynges ye deſyre ye ſhall then receaue.
               So they be lawfull Of God to requyre
               He wyll the heare and graunt thy deſyre.
               More mercifull he is then pen can expreſſe
               The aucthor and gener here of all goodneſſe.
               All ye that laboure Math. x. and burdened be
               I wyll you refreſhe In commynge to me.
               Theſe are Chryſtes wordes the ſcripture is playne
               
                  
Spoken to all ſuche as here ſuffre payne.
               Our wylles to his worde then let vs frame
               The heauenly habytacion therby we may clame.
               In the churche comly thy ſelfe do behaue
               In vſage ſober thy countinaunce graue.
               whyle you be there taulke of no matter
               Nor one with an other whiſper nor chatter.
               Reuerently thy ſelfe Order alwaye
               when to the Churche thou ſhalt come to pray
               Eche thynge hath his tyme Conſyder the place
               For that is a token of vertue and grace
               
                  
The Lorde doth call it Luke. xix. the houſe of prayer
               And not to be vſed As is a fayer.
            
            
               ¶ The fruites of gamynge, vertue and learnynge. Capitulo. vi.
               O Lytle chylde Eſchewe thou euer gaine
               For that hath brought Many one to ſhame.
               As dyſynge and cardynge And ſuche other playes
               which many vndoeth as we ſe nowe a dayes.
               But yf thou delyght In any earthly thynge Cicero.
               
               Delyght in knowledge Vertue and learnynge.
               For learnynge wyll leade thee to the ſchoole of vertue
               
                  
And vertue wyll teache thee Vice to ſubdue.
               Vice beynge ſubdued thou canſt not but floryſhe
               Happy is the man that vertue doth noryſh.
               By knowledge lykewyſe thou ſhalt doubtes diſcerne
               By vertue agayne thy lyfe well gouerne.
               Theſe be the frutes By them we do take
               Curſed is he then that doth them forſake.
               But we erre in wyt In folowynge our wyll
               In iudgynge that good which playnly is yll.
               Let reaſon thee rule and not will thee leade
               To folowe thy fanſie A wronge trace to treade.
               
                  
But ſubdue thy luſte and conquer thy wyll
               If it ſhall moue thee to doe that is yll.
               For what hurte by game to many doth growe
               No wyſe man I thynke but doth it well knowe.
               Experience doth ſhewe and make it manifeſte
               That all good-men can it but deteſte.
               As ſtrife and debate murder and thefte
               whiche amonge chriſtians wolde god were lefte.
               with curſynge and bannynge with ſwearyng and tearyng
               That no honeſt harte can abyde the hearyng.
               Theſe be the fruites that of them doth ſprynge
               
                  
with many more as euill that cometh of gamynge.
            
            
               ¶ How to behaue thy ſelfe in 
                     •
                  aulkynge with any man. Capitulo. vii.
               IF a man demaunde a queſtion of thee
               In thine aunſwere makynge be not to haſtie.
               waie well his wordes Iſocra. the caſe vnderſtande
               Eare an anſwere to make thou take in hande.
               Els may he iudge in thee little wit
               To anſwere to a thynge and not heare it.
               Suffer his tale whole out to be toulde
               Then ſpeake thou mayſt and not be controulde.
               
                  
Low obeiſaunce makyng lokinge him in the face
               Tretably ſpeaking thy wordes ſee thou place.
               with countinaunce ſober thy bodie vprighte
               Thy fete iuſte to gether thy handes in lyke plight.
               Caſte not thyne eies on neither ſyde
               when thou arte praiſed therin take no pryde.
               In tellynge thy tale neither langh nor ſmyle
               Such folly forſake thou baniſh and exyle.
               In audible voice thy wordes do thou vtter
               Not hie nor lowe but vſynge a meaſure.
               Thy wordes ſe that thou pronounce plaine
               
                  
And thai they ſpoken Be not in vayne.
               In vttryng wherof Kepe thou anorder
               Thy matter therby thou ſhalte much forder.
               whiche order yf thou Do not obſerue
               From the purpoſe nedes muſt thou ſwaru
                     •
                  
               
               And haſtines of ſpeche wyll cauſe thee to erre
               Or wyll thee teache to ſtut or ſtammer.
               To ſtut or ſtammer is a foule crime
               Learne then to leaue it take warnyng in tyme.
               How euyll a chylde it doth become
               Thy ſelfe beynge iudge hauinge wiſedome.
               
                  
And ſure it is taken by cuſtome and vre
               whyle yonge you be there is helpe and cure.
               This generall rule yet take with the
               In ſpeakynge to any man Thy head vn couered be.
               The common prouerbe remember ye oughte
               Better vnfedde then vn taughte.
            
            
               ¶ How to order thy ſelfe being ſente of meſſage. Cap. viii.
               IF of meſſage forthe thou be ſente
               Take hede to the ſame Geue eare diligente.
               Depart not awaye and beyng in doute
               
                  
Know wel thy meſſage before thou paſſe out.
               with poſſible ſpede then haſt thee right ſone
               If nede ſhall requirr it ſo to be done.
               After humble obeiſaunce the meſſage forth ſhewe
               Thy wordes well placinge in vttringe but fewe.
               As ſhall thy matter ſerue to declare
               Thine anſwere made then home againe repare.
               And to thy maſter therof make relacion
               As then the anſwere ſhall geue thee occaſion.
               Neither adde nor deminiſh Socra. any thynge to the ſame
               Leſt after it proue to thy rebuke and ſhame.
               
                  
But the ſame vtter ſo nere as thou can
               No faulte they ſhall fynde to charge thee with than.
               In moſt humble wyſe loke done that it be
               As ſhall become beſte a ſeruantes degre.
            
            
               ¶ Againſte Anger, Enuie, and malice. Cap. ix.
               IF thou be ſubiecte and to anger thrall
               And reaſon thee rule not nedes muſt thou fall
               Conquer thy wyll Pericles. and ſubdue thy luſte
               Thy fanſy not folowing thy cauſe though be iuſte.
               For anger and furie wyll thee ſo chaunge
               
                  
That thy doynges to wiſe men wyll appeare ſtraunge.
               Thine anger and wrath ſeke then to appeace
               For wrath ſaith Plato Leades ſhame in a leace. Plato.
               
               The haſtie man Iſocra. wantes neuer trouble
               His mad moody mynde his care doth double.
               And malyce thee moue to reuenge thy cauſe
               Dread euer god and daunger of the lawes.
               Do not reuenge though in thy power it be
               Forgeue the offender being thine enemie.
               He is perfectely pacient we may repute plaine
               From wrath and furye Plato. himſelfe can retrayne.
               
                  
Diſdayne nor enuie The ſtate of thy brother
               In worde nor dede not hurtyng one another. Seneca.
               
               Debate and diſceate contencion and enuie
               Are the chiefe frutes of an euyll bodie.
               And Salomon ſaithe The harte full of enuie Salomon.
               
               Of him ſelfe hath no pleaſure nor commoditie.
            
            
               ¶ The fruites of charitie, loue, and pacience. Cap. x.
               CHaritie ſeketh not that to her doth belonge
               But paciently abydinge ſuſtainynge rather wronge.
               Not enuiynge but bearinge with loue and pacience
               
                  
So noble is her nature forgeuing all ofence.
               And loue doth moue the mynde to mercie
               But malice againe doth worke the contrarie.
               whiche in the wicked wyll euer beare ſtroke
               Pacience thee teacheth therof to beare the yoke.
               where pacience aud loue to gether do dwell
               All hate and debate with malice they expell.
               Loue conſtant and faithfull Pithagoras doth call Pithagoras.
               
               To be a vertue moſt principall.
               Plato doth ſpeake Plato. almoſte in effecte
               where loue is not no vertue is perfecte.
               
                  
Deſire then god to aſſiſte thee with his g
                     •••••
                  
               
               Charitie to vſe and pacience to imbrace.
               Theſe three folowinge will thee inſtructe
               That to vertues ſchoole they wyll thee conducte.
               And from vertues ſchoole to eternall bliſſe
               where inceſſaunt ioie continually is.
            
            
               ¶ Againge the horrible vice of ſwearynge. Cap. xi.
               IN vaine take not the name of god
               Swere not at all for feare of his rod.
               The houſe with plagues he threteneth to viſit
               
                  
where othes are vſed they ſhall not eſcape it.
               Iuſte are his iudgementes and true is his worde
               And ſharper then is a two edged ſworde.
               wherfore beware thou his heauy indignacion
               And learne to lyue well in thy vocacion.
               wherin that god ſhall thee ſet or call
               Ryſinge againe if it fortune to fall.
               By prayer and repentance whiche is the onely waie
               Chriſt wolde not the death of a ſinner I ſaye.
               But rather he turne From his wickedneſſe
               And ſo to lyue in vertue and goodneſſe.
               
                  
what better art thou for this thy ſwearyng
               Blaſfamouſlye the name of god tearyng.
               Prouokynge his yre and kyndlinge his wrath
               Thee for to plauge that geuinge the hath.
               Knowlage and reaſon thy ſelfe for to rule
               And for to flee the thynge that is euyl.
               Senica doth councell thee all ſwerynge to refrayne Seneca.
               
               Although great profite by it thou mighte gaine.
               Pericles whoſe wordes are manifeſte and playne Pericles.
               
               From ſweryng admoniſheth thee to obſtaine.
               The lawe of god and commaundement he gaue
               
                  
Swearynge amongſt v
                     〈…〉
                   in no wyſe wolde hau
                     •
                  
               
               The councell of philoſoph
                     ••
                   I haue here expreſte
               Amongeſt whom ſweryng was vtterly deteſte.
               Much leſſe amongeſt chriſtians ought it to be vſed
               But vtterly of them cleane to be refuſed.
            
            
               ¶ A gainſte the vice of filthy talkynge. Cap. xii.
               NO filthy taulke in no wiſe vſe
               Thy tonge therby for to abuſe.
               Of euery idell worde an accumpte we ſhall tender
               All men I woulde this ſayinge to remember.
               To god for it at the generall daie
               
                  
In earneſt or ſporte we ſhall ſpeake or ſaie.
               whiche daye to the iuſte ſhalbe moſt ioyfull
               And to the wicked againe as wofull.
               As we here doe ſo ſhall we receaue
               Vnles we repente and mercy of god craue.
               If god wyll deale with vs ſo ſtraight
               For thinges that be. of ſo ſmall waight.
               Then haue we cauſe to feare and dreade
               Our lyues lewdly it we haue leade.
               Thy tonge take hede thou doe refrayne
               From ſpeakyng wordes that are moſte vayne.
               
                  
Thy wyll and witte to goodnes applie
               Thy mynde exerciſe in vertuous ſtudie. Ariſtot.
               
            
            
               ¶ Againſte the vice of lyinge. Capitulo. x. ii.
               TO forge to fayne to flater and lye Plato.
               
               Requiere diuers collours with wordes fayre and ſlye.
               But the vtteraunce of truthe is ſo ſimple and playne
               That it nedeth no ſtudie to forge or to fayne.
               wherfore ſaye truth how euer ſtand the caſe
               So ſhalte thou fynde more fauour and grace.
               Vſe truthe and ſay truth in that thou goeſt aboute
               For tyme of althinges the truthe wyll bringe out
               
                  
Shame is the rewarde For lying dewe
               Then auoyde ſhame and vtter wordes trewe.
               A lyar by his lying this profet doth get
               That whan he ſaith truth no man wyll him credet.
               Then let thy talke with the truth agree
               And blamed for it thou ſhalte neuer bee.
               Howe maie a man a lyer ought truſte
               But doubte his dedes his woordes being vniuſte.
               In tellyng of truth there longeth no ſhame
               Where vttring of lyes deſerueth much blame.
               And though a lye from ſtripes ye once ſaue
               
                  
Thriſe for that once it wyll the beſceue
               Truſte then to truth and neither forge nor fayne
               And followe theſe preceptes from liyng do refraine.
            
            
               ¶ A praier to be ſaide when thou goeſt to beode.
               O Mercifull god heare this our requeſte
               And graunte vnto vs this nighte quiet reſte.
               Into thy tuicoin oh lorde do vs take
               Our bodies ſlepynge our myndes yet maie wake.
               Forgeue the offences this daye we haue wroughte
               Againſte thee and our neighbour in worde dede and thoughte
               And graunte vs thy grace henſe forth to flie ſinne
               
                  
And that a newe lyfe we ma
                     •
                  e nowe beginne
               Deliuer and defende vs this night from all euell
               And from the daunger of our enemie the diuell
               Whiche goeth a boute ſekyng his praie
               And by his crafte whom we maie betraie.
               Aſſiſte vs oh lorde with thy holy ſprite
               That valiantly againſt him we maie euer fighte
               And winning the victorie maie lifte vp our voice
               And in his ſtrength faith fully reioice.
               Saying to the lorde be all honour and praiſe
               For his defence bothe now and alwaies.
            
            
               
               ¶ the dutie of eche degred. brefely declared.
               
                  YE princes that the earth rule and gouerne
                  Seke ye for knowledge doubtes to diſcerne.
               
               
                  ye iudges geue iudgement according to righte
                  As may be founde acceptable in the lordes ſight.
               
               
                  ye prelates preache purely the worde of our lorde
                  That your liuings & prechinges in one maie accorde.
               
               
                  ye fathers and mothers ſo your children inſtructe
                  As maye them to grace and uertue conducte.
               
               
                  
                  ye chyldren lykewyſe obey your parētes here
                  In all godlineſſe ſee that ye them feare.
               
               
                  ye maiſters do you the thynge that is righte.
                  Not lokynge what ye may do by mighte.
               
               
                  ye ſeruauntes applie your buſines and arte
                  Doinge the ſame in ſingleneſſe of harte.
               
               
                  ye huſbandes loue your wyues and with them dwell
                  All bitterneſſe ſet aparte vſing wordes gentell.
               
               
                  ye wynes to your huſbandes be obedient alwaie
                  
                     
For they are your heades and ye bounde to obeie
               
               
                  ye perſons and vickers that haue cure and charge
                  Take hede to the ſame and 
                        •
                     ou
                        •
                      not at large.
               
               
                  ye men of lawe in no wyſe delaie
                  The cauſe of the poore but helpe what ye maie
               
               
                  ye that be craftes men vſe no diſceite
                  Geuing to all men tale meaſure and weighte.
               
               
                  ye that be landlordes and haue houſen to let
                  At reaſonable rentes do them forth ſet.
               
               
                  
                  ye merchauntes that vſe the trade of merchandiſe
                  Vſe lawfull wares and reaſonable priſe.
               
               
                  ye ſubiectes lyue ye in obedience and awe
                  Fearyng gods ſtroke and daunger of the lawe.
               
               
                  ye rych whom god hath goods vnto ſente
                  Releue the poore and helpe the indigente.
               
               
                  ye that are poore with your ſtate be contente
                  Not hauinge wherwith to lyue competente
               
               
                  ye mageſtrates the cauſe of the widdow and fatherles
                  
                     
Defende againſte ſuche as ſhall them opreſſe
               
               
                  All ye that are called to any other office
                  Execute the ſame acordinge to iuſtice
               
               
                  Let eche here ſo liue in his vocacion
                  As maie his foule ſaue and profet his nacion
               
               
                  This graunting god that ſitteth on hie
                  we ſhall here well lyue and after well die
               
               
                  Famam virtutis m
                        ••
                     s
                  Abolire nequit
               
               ꝙ. F. S.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Im printed at London in Paules Churchyearde. By william Seare
                  •
               .
            
         
      
   