
      
         
            
            
            THE SECOND PART OF VOX POPVLI▪ or Gondomar appearing in the likenes of Matchiauell in a Spaniſh Parliament, wherein are diſcouered his treacherous & subtile Practiſes To the ruine as well of England, as the Netherlandes Faithfully Tranſtated out of the Spaniſh Coppie by a well-willer to England and Holland.
            
               The ſecond Edition.
               Simul Complectar omni
                     •
                  
               
               Gentis Hiſpanae decus
            
            Printed at Goricom by Aſhuerus Janſs. 1624. Stilo nouo
         
         
            
            
            TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTIE PRINCES, FREDERICK and ELIZABETH, by the Grace of God, King and Queene of Bohemia, Princes Palatines of the Rhine, &c.
            AS ALSO To the moſt Illuſtrious and victorious, Maurice, Prince of Orenge, Count of Naſsau, &c.
            
               Moſt High Moſt Illuſtrious Princes,
            
            
               THAT I haue adventured in theſe vnfaithfull times, ſo full of ſuſpition and danger, to paſſe (without leaue) your guardes, and to preſſe into your Preſence, I moſt humbly craue pardon, having I confeſſe no other excuſe

then that common one of the Countrie, it was out of my loue, out of my loyalty, for ſuch (moſt gracious Q: Elizabeth) hath heeretofore your reſpect beene towards mee (farre vnworthy God knowes of any of the leaſt favours from ſo Magnificent a Princeſſe) that ever ſince, I haue contended with my ſelfe, to adventure and Act ſomething, that might haue power ſtill to preſerue me in your Royall Memorie, but albeit I had the will, I find my ſelfe wanting in my Abilitie. And moſt Illuſtrious, Prince Maurice, ſince I haue had ſometime dependance on your Excellence, I hold it my Dutie gratefully to repay, ſome part of what (I cannot ſay iniuſtly) I haue gained vnder you that is Obſervation, eſpecially of the double dealing, and cunning Iuggling of the Spaniard with all Nations. And ſince a little Treatiſe of a Spaniſh Conſultation (whether really acted, or poetically faigned I know not) came to my hands, firſt written in Spaniſh, now by my ſelfe tranſlated into Engliſh, onely for the behoofe and loue I beare aſwell to England my natiue Countrie, as

to the Netherlands. I haue ſent it abroad, good it may doe, hurt it cannot. Abundans. cautela non nocet: heerein you ſhall perceiue the Curtaine (though not fully) drawne, from before the Spaniard, that the world may for certaine ſee, that hee is not ſo beautifull, as many of our Engliſh (who ſo long haue doated on him) would make him to be, nor on the other ſide ſo terrible, that your Dutch neede to feare him, how grimme & terrible ſoeuer he lookes vpō them. But your Excellence knoweth him (as we ſay) Intus & in cute; & can limne to the life better, then any penne in the world can decipher him, wherefore I vrge him no farther. I onely leaue it to the world to thinke of (ſince hee aymeth at the Monarchy of the Weſt, euery thing els being to little for his Ambitiō (whoſe great Grand-ſire the Earle of Halſpurge was within theſe nineſcore yeares, of as mean eſtate and revenue, as an ordinary knight of England,) how much I ſay, concernes it England, and your vnited Provinces, to hold faſt each by either, which now by all meanes he laboureth to part and divide,

not vnmindfull of a Matchivillian and old Maxime;
                  Divide, et Impera.
                But I truſt Almighty God (as hee hath already begun) will open the eyes of all Chriſtian Kinges and Princes, in time not onely to prie into, but effectually to oppoſe, theſe his immenſe and ambitious deſignes, which elſe in time may fall heauie vpon our children and poſteritie, I end; humbly beſeeching the King of Kings and Kingdomes, the Almighty Lord of Hoaſtes: Moſt High, Moſt Illuſtrious Princes, to protect the perſons of your ſelues and children, with his grace to multiplie your Honors and Dignities, foure-fold to reſtore your eſtates, and after many yeares to crowne you in Heaven, with the Diademes of Glorie and endles happines.
            
               Who is moſt devoted vnto your Highneſſes, in all Loyall affection T. S. of 
                     Ʋ.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
                  THE SPANISHE PARLAMENT. 
                  Ingentibus exidit auſis.
               
            
            
               AFter the ſhouts and acclamations of all true hearted Engliſh, for the ſafe and ſingle returne of the Prince of Great Brittaine, had made the roofe of Heauen to reſound, and with the noyſe hād ſhooke ſuch a terror into the ill affected body of Spaine, that a cold, and benumming feare, ran through her

ioynts, her friends began to bethinke themſelues, of a timely recomfort, to finde the meanes a freſh to rouſe vp her ſpirits, (by this time halfe repenting her ſelfe of parting with ſo pretious a pawne, (the poſſeſſion whereof ſhe imagined, might haue tied vs to haue preciſely kept day, (though it were likely to haue had prooued more fatall vnto her, then euer was the gold of Thouſouſe to Cepio's Souldiers) and as it falleth out among ſicke perſons, ſome of ſounder iudgement then the reſt, about her inparticular and euery one in generall giuing their beſt opinions, vndertooke (ſo ſhe would be ruled) to rid her off that ſit and diſtempered perplexity.
            And for this purpoſe appointing for a further conſultation to be at Seuill in Audaluzia, whether already the King with moſt of the Nobility had retired themſelues in regard (they ſayd) the Engliſh who were in number about ſeauen-ſcore, had not long before eaten vp all the prouiſion in Madrid, and within thirty miles about, there came as trueſt and old-friends to her eſtate, the Arch-biſhop of Toledo, the Dukes of Medina Coeli, of Braganza, of Ville Hermoſa, of Hijaz, D. of Infantado, D. of Cea, D. of Seſa, D. of Veragua, Marques of Malagon; Count de Penna-fiore, Count de Monterry, Count de Sanstephano, &c. Eſcalona, the Marques of Caſtello, Rodrigo the Admirant and Conſtable of Caſtile, Count Olivares, Count Gondomar, Pedro de Toledo, Gonzales de Cordua, Lewes de Velaſco, with ſundry others of remarke and note, of the chiefeſt Nobility, whither being come, and hauing made choyſe of a goodly and faire Pallace, anciently belonging vnto

to the D. of Beiar principall of the family of the Zanigas, in a faire great Chamber hung with rich Arras, ouer the leather guilded. Guara Mazilla's, after many an enterchange of complement, each as his precedence required tooke his place, like a colledge of wiſe Phiſitians to conſult of the ſtate of that body and Kingdome, how with medicines (as Phyſitians call them) to preuent her future danger, withall for the preſent to repayre the ruine of her reputation and credit with the world, (ſince now her plots and practiſes are ſmoaked, their gordian knots vntwiſted euen by children: Laſtly, how to gaine by ſtrong hand, what all this while ſhee could not compaſſe by artes and policie.
            Being all ſet and ſilent, the Duke of Medina Coeli, ſtoode vp and ſpake as followeth.
            My Lords, it hath pleaſed his Catholique Maieſty the King our Mr. to giue way to this our meeting and Parlamentary aſſembly, to conſult and aduiſe among our ſelues, what courſe is moſt fitteſt to be holden of vs, in in theſe tempeſtuous times, for the weather being changed, and the bright beames of our hopes ouer-caſt, we are from euery ſide to expect rage▪ and ſtormes. You are not ignorant how there is now a Parliament holden in England, that bode vs no good, in Holland a dayly conſultation with preſent preparation, In France a Councell together with an vnaminity of Kings and Peeres, for ſome great vndertaking: How nerely then concernes it vs of Spaine, to be vigilant, and to looke about vs: firſt, for the maintenance and aduancement of

the Catholique Religion, and holy Church: Secondly, for the defence of his Maieſties Kingdomes and Territories: Thirdly, to heare the grieuances of the people groaning vnder the heauy burthen of exaction and oppreſſion, though the couetuouſneſſe of publique offices. Fourthly, for the ſupply of the Treaſury which a late hath beene much exhauſted, partly by preparation by Sea againſt our Common enemies, Turkes, and Hollanders, and partly by the extraordinary entertainment of Charles Prince of Wales, the charge wherof amounted to 49. thouſand Ducates. Fift, and laſtly, for giuing the world ſatiſfaction, and the taking away of thoſe vile ſcandales and imputations, which euen within theſe few dayes haue beene, and are hourely caſt vpon vs, eſpecially, (as they giue it out) in dealing doubly and diſhonorably with England, concerning the Treaty of the Match.
            He hauing ended, the D. of Braganza the next began thus.
            I am ſorry that I liue to ſee the day, that the Honor of Spaine which was wont to dazle the eye of Europe with the vnſufferable ſplendor of its brightneſſe, ſhould now be ouer caſt with the blacke cloud of diſgrace, and the name of a Spaniarde ſo redoubted ouer the world, become branded with the infamous attributes and epithites of falſe, ambitious, proud, and cruell, and thoſe Nations who were wont to adore vs for our faith, contemne, and ſcorne vs now for treachery and falſhood. Certes loyalty and the Religious obſeruance of our promiſes

and faith, was anciently held our prime vertue, inſomuch that Fey de Spagna grew into a Prouerbe, like the gold of Ophir out valewing any other, that I ſpeake no new thing, or vntruth, you may plainely perceiue it by the multitude of diſcourſes, pamphlets and paſquills that are dayly vented againſt vs from all parts of the World, wherein wee art ieſted at, derided, diſgraced, by verſes and vnſeemely Pictures, eſpecially of late dayes, from Holland, France, and England: yea as I vnderſtand in ſongs and Ballades, ſung vp and downe the Streetes in many places: whence this imputation, vpon ſo iuſt and braue a Nation, ſo potent a Monarch (at the brandiſhing of whoſe ſword Europe trembles) ſhould proceede, I cannot gheſſe, yet deſire to be ſatiſfied herein, in the King my Mr. and kinſmans behalfe, my kinſman, for you all know my neere alliance vnto his Maieſty, and my Poeſie may intimate no leſſe vnto the world which is Pues vos, nos, after you, we, being next in blood if the iſſue Royall ſhould faile.
            But I am a fraide the ill carriage of ſome priuate men at home, (perhaps our Embaſſadors in For. raine parts,) haue throwne this aſperſion vpon vs, hauing eyther giuen abroad to many ouertures of our deſignes, or attempted their ends with ouermuch haſt and violence, which in time and by gentle hand might haue beene eaſier won, as a bough whoſe fruite we meane to gather, is brought downe by degrees, which elſe might breake and we looſe our longing.
            Surely, in the firſt, me thinke our Nation ſhould not eaſily offend, we being eſteemed the moſt cloſe

and reſerued to our ſelues in the world, as the euent of our greateſt and moſt important actions haue ſufficiently ſhewne. Did we not in 88. carry our buſineſſe for England ſo cunningly and ſecretly as well, in that well diſſembled treaty with the Engliſh neere Oſtend, whereto for vs were deputed, Aremberge, Champigny, Richardot and other, as in bringing our Nauy to their ſhores, while their Commanders and Captaines were at bowles vpon the hoe of Plimouth, and had my Lord Alonſo Guzman, the Duke of Medina Sidonia had but the reſolution (but in truth his Commiſſion was otherwiſe) he might haue ſuprized them as they lay at Anker, and the like. In Ireland when Don Ivan d' Aquila had gotten footing in the Iriſh ground ere any of the miſt. How were our plots and correſpondence with Biron carryed, with infinite the like examples.
            Touching the latter, the Spaniſh Nation hath of all other in the world beene held for the moſt ſober, ſtayd, and wiſe, and were wont neuer to attempt any thing but vpon great and long aduice, accounting it with Quintus Fabius more honorable to bee accounted droanes or cowards, then to hazard our affaires, or Armies, French like, onely in a vaine-glorious haſtineſſe to gaine the Honor of charging the firſt. So that it ſeemeth ſtrange to me that we haue I know not vpon what grounds incurred the hate and ſcorne of other Nations, and that we eſpecially of the Nobility ſhould be thought ill of ſince of Nobility ours of Spaine, hath beene euer held the moſt illuſtrious and eminent of the world.
            The Duke hauing made an end, Gondomar eaſily

rayſing himſelfe from his chayre wherein he ſat vpon two downe pillowes, and reſting himſelfe vpon a little Braſill ſtaffe, ſpake as followeth.
            My Lords, I can deriue this ſlaunder of our Country, and hate of our ſelues from no other fountaine then the Fanaticall humors and diſtracted ſpirits of ſome of the Engliſh, who find themſelues not a little gall'd and vexed with our politique delayes heretofore, and now our finall reiection, and (I hope) ſhaking hands with that Hereticall Nation for euer, for if your Alteſes and Honors will but conſider what aduenture and boote we haue made by them, I thinke you will ſay we might well endure theſe Britiſh Northen and cold blaſts: meane time in ſo ſuffering for our Catholique King, and in the Catholique cauſe we ought to take ſuch approbry rather as an Honor vnto vs then otherwiſe.
            Moreouer, if we ſhall conſider who are the Authors of theſe lying Plamphlets, wee ſhall finde to proceede from the pennes of light and vnſtayed wits, with intent eyther to winne the opinion of good intelligencers and ſtatiſtes together with the aiery applauſe of the Vulgar, or to rayſe to their deſperate Fortunes, when the tempeſt is ouer, (as it oft hath happened) and now likely we being fallen off from England, and the Treaty at an end.
            Yea, but quoth the Duke of Medina Caeli, what ſhould be the reaſon of that inbred and Naturall hate the common people of England ſhould beare to vs, and our Country aboue any Nation in the world, the Hollanders, Turkes, and Indians excepted.
            
               
               Arch. B. Toledo.
               Quoth the Arch-biſhop of Toledo, herein we are much deceiued, for his Catholique Maieſty and our ſelues all haue very many faithfull and faſt friends in England, who would not ſticke to hazard their liues and fortunes in the Seruice of his Maieſty, might time and occaſion be offered, yea, and ſome none of the meaneſt.
            The Marqueſſe of Caſtello Rodrig, then ariſing vp with a graue countenance, and a deliberate vtterance ſaid, is it poſſible that any place in the world ſhould bring forth ſuch a monſter, as a traytor to his Country, or allow bread to any owne ſo vnnaturally baſe, as to draw his ſword, and ſide with an enemy againſt her, I will ſay that for our Spaine, I do not remember or euer had read, that ſhee afforded a Traytor, or ſo much as one that ſerued a ſworne enemy againſt her Prince.
            By your fauour, quoth Lewes de Velaſco, what Country-man was he of Count Iohn of Naſſau's regiment, that tooke the Admirant of Arragon priſoner at the battaile of Neuport.
            
            It is true quoth Gonzales de Cordua, he was a Spaniard, but examples hereof are very rare.
            Quoth Gondomar, ſo they are, and though England be the colder Country, yet it hath bred more venemous Creatures of this Nature, then euer Spaine, yea euen vnder the Sunne-ſhine of their mildeſt and moſt moderate gouerments.
            Whence quoth the Duke of Eſcalona ſhould this proceede.
            I will tell you (quoth Gondomar) my opinion,

the Engliſh naturally are deſirous of nouelties, and innouations, and as it were ſicke in the ſoft beds of their long liberty, peace, and plenty, (which they enioy vnder as wiſe and as good a King as euer liued) they ſuppoſe nothing wanteth to their full happineſſe but change and variety: I muſt liken them to Giotto of Florence his Aſſe, who when he went along with a rich ſaddle of beaten gold on his backe with a Crowne and Scepter lying thereon, yet he could not chooſe but ſmell vpon a Carriers packe-ſaddle as it lay at an Inne doore.
            Hence are ſtrangers the moſt admired and entertayned amongſt them, and if of quality preferred many times to place and preferment before the Engliſh, though perhaps their are many who deſerue better. I haue ſeene their a torne and tatter'd French Lacquay, but as this day arriued out of France, and the next, he hath ietted in the Court in his Tiſſue or Scarlet at the leaſt: what preferment came that arch-hypocrite Spalato vnto. Aſcanio the Frier, who left his wife in St. Martins lane, and ranne againe to his Order. And a poore and ignorant Italian Mountebanke, ſought after for his skill as if Aeſculapius or Machaon were againe raiſed from the dead, yea, when but a Spaniſh gowne (happily of the Embaſſadors Lady, or of her gentlewoman) how was it ſought after by Ladies, and Taylors for the faſhion, happy was ſhe that could firſt get her into the Spaniſh faſhion, to their no ſmall charge, the Spaniſh garments exceeding all other in fulneſſe, compaſſe, and length, which by this time it may be they haue conuerted into Cuſhions.

My Lords, you would hardly haue forborne laughter, to haue heard how I haue beene enquired after for Maiſters for the Spaniſh tongue, (that I may ſay nothing of ſo many bills ſet vp in euery corner of the City by Profeſſors) nay I could haue no ſeruice almoſt done me of my Mullettors and Groomes, for being employed in teaching the Spaniſh among Ladyes and their maydes, though I knew, I tell you, Engliſh muſt be that they were to truſt too when all was done.
            Touching my ſelfe being Embaſſadour there from his Catholique Maieſty, and the ſole inſtrument in the Treaty for the match, which the Catholiques there ſo long thirſted after, if I ſhould relate vnto you the particulars of mine owne entertainment, you would (I ſuppoſe) imagine I told you wonders beyond beleefe, for beſide the great and gracious reſpect I found, and fauors I receiued from his Maieſty of Great Brittaine, and ſundry of the Nobility, who ſeemed wholy to be compounded of curteſie and Nobleneſſe, there paſſed not a day wherein I was not viſited, by ſome of the beſt ranke, or receiued ſome preſent or other, from Catholique Gentlemen, or their Ladyes, (ſo welcome was the very thought of the Spaniſh match vnto them) I returning them againe, with thankes, large promiſes, and apparant hopes of preferment, when the time ſhould come.
            And be it ſpoken among our ſelues, ſince wee are falling off from England, I made better vſe of their kindneſſe then ſo, for there were few Catholiques

in England of note, from whom in this regard, I wreſted not out a good round ſumme of money: Sir Robert Cotton a great Antiquary, I heare, much complaineth of me, that from his friends and aquaintance onely I got into my purſe the ſumme at the leaſt of ten thouſand pounds, I deny it not; and true it is, I borrowed of the good old Lady W. of the Pariſh in St. Martins in the Feilds 300 pounds, or thereabouts, promiſing her repayment (whereof I will not faile) ſo ſoone as Donna Maria, the Infanta ſhould arriue in England, and for the vſe hereof, I promiſed to make her mother of her maydes, perſwading her, it was not fit that ſo graue and good a Lady as her ſelfe ſhould lye obſcured in priuate, but rather attend vpon my young Miſtreſſe, the braueſt and moſt hopefull Princeſſe of the World, vpon theſe hopes ſhe turned Catholique, and ſince I neuer ſaw her. I ſold moreouer, the place of Groomeſſe, of her highneſſe Stoole, to ſix ſeuerall Engliſh Ladyes, who were eager of it, only cauſe be they might take place before their fellowes: I loſt nothing neither by a Noble Gentleman, whom I cauſed to be knowne for a kinſman of the King my Mr. for that he was deſcended from the noble and ancient family of Aiala in Spaine, theſe are but mites and crums in regard of thoſe great preſents, and many pentions I had ſent me vnder-hand, from the Catholiques from all parts of England during my aboade there, had my finger but aked, or beene ill diſpoſed (as I often was in body) I had ſent me iewels, ſweet-meates, perfumes, linnen, Roſewater, and a thouſand of ſuch trifles, only I returned them thenkes, and promiſed them or their friends preferment, when time ſerued.
            
               If you were my Lord, ſo nobly entertained in England, quoth Braganza, whence is it, or vpon what occaſion haue wee gotten to our ſelues the ill will and diſtaſt of that Nation.
            I muſt confeſſe, quoth Gondamer, the common people of England beare generally an inbred ſpleene toward vs, as it ſeemeth by many rude affronts, we were offered there by the baſer ſort, contrary to the will and pleaſure of his Maieſty of great Brittany, who publiſhed many Edicts and Proclamations in our behalfes, puniſhing many times the offenders ſeuerely as they could be taken, but why the name of a Spaniard ſhould be ſo become odious vnto them, is a queſtion I cannot eaſily reſolue.
            Some thinke that there is a naturall antipathy or contrariety of affection betweene our diſpoſition and theirs, they liuing in the North, and we in the South; which being (as Charron a French Author obſerueth) neerer to the Sunne, the inhabitants are more crafty, politique, and religious, (though he his in that) euen to ſuperſtition and Idolatry, where as on the contrary, thoſe of the North (howſoeuer goodlier in perſon, better faced, and more beautifull then our ſelues by reaſon of the coldneſſe of the climate, preſeruing inwardly the naturall heate, and radicall moyſture,) are plaine ſimple, nothing ſo religious contemners withall, of the glorious ceremonies of our Church, wherewith we haue drawne more Heathen in eyther India to Chriſtianity, in one yeare, then they can with their Lutheran and Caluiniſticall Sermons in all their liues.
            This very ſelfe ſame thing (quoth Gonzales) I

once vrged by way of argument to an Earle of Germany who was a profeſſed Lutheran Heritique, and his reply herein was, ſo are fooles and children taken with bells, gilt pouches, and colours, and our Ladies and faire Gentlewomen, (we ſee) oftentimes woed and wonne, onely with a braue out-ſide on the back of a baſe knaue, when an honeſt man, and of deſeruing parts is reiected, in a plaine and ordinary ſuite of cloathes, and not held worthy the looking after.
            They talke as they are (quoth Gondomar) I am ſure theſe drew more to my little priuate Chappell in Holborne, then their beſt Preachers of Sermons could doe to any Church they had.
            But quoth the Duke of Hijaz, it may be they hate vs for the ſame cauſe, that France, Germany, Italy, and the reſt of the Countryes of Europe, for that many of vs are diſcended of the Mooriſh race: wherefore we are termed of them in Italy, Marani, and of other Moros Blancos, and Nue Vos Chriſtianos: For indeede it was but in the yeare 1492. when Granado was recouered from the Moores, Mahomet ſirnamed the Little, and ſonne of Muley Albohaceu being King thereof, though Toledo and Cordona long before, and it may be they hold vs ſtill infected with Mooriſh mindes, and a ſpice of their manners, though they are aſſured wee are Chriſtians, yea and the moſt Catholique too.
            I heare (quoth Signior Gondomar) it is obiected in their now preſent Parliament, that in all treatiſes for the ſpace of theſe two hundred yeares, Spaine hath dealt with the Engliſh, fide punica, neuer kept

touch with them in any ſerious capitulation, but euer ayming at her owne ends, vſed theyr aliance and freindſhippe but as a ſtale or ſtalking-horſe ouer their backes to ſhoote at others, or ſerue her owne neceſſities for the preſent, and hereof their Antiquaries (they ſay) haue found many preſidents. Among others they affirme and proue, to the preiudice of our Treaty, that Charles the fift was firſt himſelfe bethrothed to Queene Mary and I know vpon what tricke and policie he vntied himſelfe againe, and vſed the meanes to conferre her vpon Prince Philip his Sonne.
            But the very truth is, they carry a vindictiue reſolution againſt vs euer ſince our intended conqueſt of them in 88. and peraduenture the powder-plot in 1605. which yet ſeemeth Manere alta mente repoſtum. Indeed Henrie the 4. of France, ſirnamed the GREAT, laboured at one time a reconſiliation betweene vs, but he found the rootes of eithers diſcontent ſo deepe, and the ſore ſo vnſaluable, that hee gaue it ouer in the end. Touching mine owne perſon, I was generally hated, I confeſſe, of the common people: for no other cauſe, I imagine, then for the great grace and fauour I was in with his Maieſtie, vnto whom I had free acceſſe at all times, and his gracious eare to any reaſonable ſuite or requeſt I could demaund, the particulars of the Seruice I did to the King my Maſter (whom God long preſerue) I thinke are not knowne vnto you, I omitting no one houre or minute of time wherein I did not benefit either him by my ſeruice, my ſelfe by experience, or a freind by a good turne.
            
               For during the time of my abode in England, and whileſt I lay in London, I got partly by the meanes of well affected freinds, and partly by mine owne experience (for in ſommertime, vnder the colour of taking the ayre, I would take vew of the countrie) I had perfect knowledge of the eſtate of the whole Land: for there was no Fortification, Hauen, Creeke, or Landing place about the Coaſt of England, but I got a platforme and draught thereof, I learned the depth of all their Channels, I was acquainted with all Sands, Shelues, Rocks, Riuers that might impeach or make for inuaſion, I had perpetually in a Role the names of all the Ships of King Iames his Nauy Royall, I knewe to a haire of what burthen euery ſhip was, what Ordinance ſhe carried, what numbers of Saylors, who were the Captaines, for what places they were bound, which were in repaire and fit for ſeruice, and which not, I knewe the ſtrength of the Tower of London, what Armour, Ordinance, ſmall ſhot and powder it might afford. You knowe moreouer my Lords, I acquainted the King my maiſter with Sir Walter Raleighs intended voyge to Guiana, and euery particular thereof, when it was but in embroyne, and when he himſelfe vowed onely three were acquainted with his purpoſe and reſolution, but the fourth ſhould neuer know what he intended vntill he had ſet footing in America: yet I ſay, I knew what he aimed at, what courſes he ment to hold, where to land, what places he meant to ſurpriſe, what forces he carried, and by what way he reſolued to returne: with all which particulars, as I haue already ſaid) I acquainted you

long ere he went, and he was no ſooner gone but I was aſſured I had his head at my deuotion, to take it when I liſted (hauing ſufficient matter to alledge againſt him) and at laſt, though his treaſon for which he ſtood condemned many yeares before) was the hatchet, yet the hand was mine that gaue him the blow: for it concerned vs aboue all the reſt in caſe we ſhould fall off from England, and burſt out into our old enmitie, to make away with him, who would haue proued the onely Boutifeu and Cendiarie of the world, in ſtirring vp the hatred of the Engliſh and other Nations againſt vs, he being a darling of our late deadlieſt enimie Queene Elizabeth, and one of the laſt men to be borne of thoſe great ſpirits, and experienced Captaines the time of her raigne produced. His Majeſty (I humbly thanke him) tooke eſpeciall notice of this ſeruice of mine (and as it was told me) gaue me great thankes for it aboue the reſt.
            I was no leſſe diligent for the diſcouerie of the Inland, then for the Shores and Sea-coaſts: For there was neuer a Sheire in England, but I better know the eſtate, power and qualitie thereof then the Inhabitants, euen the beſt of them themſelues did. I could in particular relate the nature of the ſoyle, what power of men and horſe they were able to raiſe, who were the cheife and of moſt abilitie and credit in the countrey, who the moſt antient Gentlemen, what they were worth in their reuenues and eſtates, how they ſtood affected in Religion, who were Puritanes, and who Catholiques, and among Catholiques who ſtood for vs, and who (for ſuch

there were) were indifferent or againſt vs. And which moreouer is of equall conſequence, there was not a Sermon preached at Paules Croſſe, or indeed in any other Church of the City or place in the Kingdome, that did but touch the hemme of my maiſters garment, or was any way preiudiciall vnto vs or the match (which we ſeemingly intended) but I had my Leame-hounds ready in euery corner to draw after them dry foote, and fetch the Authors coram nobis, to their coſt, as one Dr. Euerard of St. Martins, was for his bold and malapert inueighing and continually preaching againſt vs and the match, ſilenced by my onely meanes, for (I ſayd) and often told my beſt freinds, till the mouthes of ſuch Rabſhecahs were ſtopped, no vnitie or ſincere reconſiliation of either Nation: (for the effecting of which now was the time could poſſibly be expected)▪ One whiting, beſides a Dr. of deuinitie, Mr. Clayton for his Spaniſh Ewe, in a Sermon at St. Paules croſſe was layed vp for his lauiſh tongue, and had like before to haue ſmarted for a Sermon he made before his Majeſtie at Wanſted in Eſſex in Auguſt ſome two yeares ſince, taking for his Text, remember Lots Wife, Luk. 17.32. And I thinke Ward of Ipſwich eſcaped not ſafely for his lewd and profane picture of 88. and their powder Treaſon, one whereof, my L. Arch-biſhop I ſent you in a letter, that you might ſee the malice of theſe deteſtable Heretiques, againſt his Holineſſe and the Catholique Church.
            Neither was there any publique ſpeech made openly in any Court of Iuſtice, were it in either houſe of Parliament; Starre-Chamber, Countrey Aſſize

yea, nany times vttered priuatly in the Court, but I got an inkling, and made good vſe thereof: yea, I was partaker of Goſſips newes in the Citty▪ brought to mine owne bed chamber by my well knowne and priuate freind, &c. Mrs. M. of Fleet-ſtreet.
            
            Indeede Signior Gondomar, quoth one, herein conſiſteth the pythe and marrow of your ſeruice, but if you pleaſe proceed.
            I againe entertained, to my no ſmall charge, Intelligencers in euery Countrey (indeed Catholique Prieſts) whoſe liberty out of priſon I obtained for that very purpoſe: for being abroad they did vs a threefold ſeruice: Firſt, they gained ſoules to God, freinds to the King my maiſter, and money good ſtore in our purſes: for I got out of Engliſh Catholiques to mine owne vſe threeſcore thouſand pounds at the leaſt.
            For the firſt, it hath bene certified me for a certaine, & by report from many of their own mouthes, that the numbers of ſoules which they haue gained into the boſome of the Church ſince the remiſſion of the penall Lawes againſt them, and their freedome by my meanes obtained, amounteth to the number of eight and thirty thouſand and odde.
            Secondly, they haue confirmed the Catholiques, and made them ſo faſt for the King our Maiſter, that they haue auowed vnto me diuerſe times, that rather then miſſe of the Match, they would make vp the beſt part of the Infanta's portion out of their owne purſes, yea, though it were with the ſelling or pawning of all their plate and Iewels.
            Within the Cittie for a ſmall matter, I feede

certaine diſcontented and neceſſitous Catholikes of the Engliſh
               ▪ to walke the common and moſt frequented places of the Citty of London as St. Paules Church, the exchange, now and then among the Ordinaries, to learne the Common newes, out of which many times I picked good matter.
            Neither could the States of Holland, or the Embaſſadours of any other Forraine Prince carry their buſineſſe ſo cloſe, but with my Maiſters golden Key, I could finde a meanes to diue into their Cabbinets, reſeale and ſeale againe their packets, without the helpe eyther of Arthor Gregory, or his old acquaintance Phillips.
            
            It was not one of my worſt peeces, to hold the Engliſh in ſuſpence, with an apparant ouerture of the Match, and dilatory promiſe of Golden Mountaines, with the age of old Saturne againe, when euery oake on Greenewich parke, Sudaret roſcida mella, till the pallatinate was loſt beyond recouery, a matter of maine conſequence: for hereby Bohemia with the reſt of the Emperours Territories being ſecured aboue, our maiſter may at pleaſure call to his ayde the Emperours forces (who it ſeemeth for this purpoſe hath made a League with the Turke for theſe twentie yeares) together with the ſtrength of Tilley,
               
                  Die caeſe 
                        •••
                     
                     mer.
                and the D. of Bauaria ioyned, & with his owne forces ſuddainly (for now is the time) giue Holland ſuch a Camiſado, as the beſt wits of the So the Spaniard ſcornfully cals the Hage where the States vſually reſide
               Cheife Chamber, will be to ſeeke of their old-ward, and wonted pollicie.
            Yea (quoth Don Pedro) but imagin this plot were reſolued vpon, ſhall we thinke the Princes of

               Germany, King of France, and England, and other their old freinds and allyes, will ſtand ſtill as idle Spectators, and not runne in with their ſwords drawne to their reſcue? Or that the Hollender who hath beene ſo long weather beaten at ſea, is not able to diſcerne this ſtorme a farre off, and take in his Sayles ere it ſhall hazard his ſhippe, yes without doubt; and howſoeuer wee may flatter our ſelues with the eaſineſſe of the Conqueſt, wee ſhall aſſuredly finde it as hard a taske as euer Spaine vndertooke.
            It is true, you ſay (quoth the Admirant of Caſtille) what haue we gained of them for theſe fiftie yeares ſpace and vpward, euer ſince Don Iohn of Auſtria, the Duke of Alua, Lewes Requeſens, were Gouernors, and vndertooke the Low-Countrey Warres, but ſound knocks, with the fruitleſſe expence of many a million.
            Quoth (Lewes de Velaſco) a ſhorter cut for the Conqueſt of thoſe Rebells, had beene long ſince taken,The error of the Duke of Alva.
                had the Duke of Alva beene ſo wiſe as to haue ſecured himſelfe of Brill, Fluſhing, and the reſt of the Frontier, and Sea-Townes, he then might haue beene Maiſter of all the reſt within at his pleaſure, for ſo long as they were open and free, they were to the others, as the mouth to the ſtomake or body, which could not poſſibly famiſh, ſo long as it was ſupplyed continually from England, and other places, but this by the way.
            All what (quoth Gondomar) I haue already ſaid is but a praeludium or ſmall Preface, to thoſe proiects I had in my braine, if (as vnluckily it hapned)

the Treaty had not ſuddainly broken off, but beene ſpunne out a yeare or two longer, which indeede was the maine plot, and had beene effected,The Prince in Spaine before he was looked for. had not the comming ouer of prince CHARLES in Perſon into Sraine, with the Duke of Buckinghaus ſpoyled all, for howſoiner we made a ſeeming ſhew of reioycing at his comming, and did him all honnor beſeeming ſo great and worthy a Prince, yet to ſpeake the truth my Lords, you all know we wiſhed him a thouſand miles off; and I beleeue ſome of the Engliſh themſelues were here ſorry that he had engaged himſelfe in ſo long and teadious a Iourney.
            But quoth the Duke of Hijaz ſtanding vp and turning himſelfe to the Duke of Medina Coeli, and the Archbiſhop of Toledo.
            
            How may it be conceiued that the Prince of England his arriuall in Spaine, ſhould eithet praeiudice vs, or the Treaty of the Match a whit, ſince he found here the greateſt content he could deuiſe, he had a ſight of the Lady Maria la Infanta his Miſtris, whoſe ſelfe knowne and ſeene exceeded her fame, he was entertained and attended vpon by the moſt compleate and generous Nobles of Europe, and had that entertainment, no Nation could afford the like. Laſtly Maiorem habemus fidem ijs quae occulis vſurpamus, quam quae auribus haurimus.
            
            Quoth the Duke of Eſcalonia, the effect hath fallen out quite contrary, for the Engliſh report ſince their comming home, they neuer came into a baſer Countrey in their liues, where they could get meat neither for themſelues nor their horſes,Great want of victuall & prouiſion in Spaine.
                nor ſaw ſo much as one handfull of graſſe in two hundred

miles riding, and if they dined at one place, they were faine to goe 30. or 40. miles ere they could get any thing to their ſupper,He that ſurfers are a Spaniards Table, truſt me I will pay for his phyſicke. and then perhaps a peece of leane Kid, or Cabrito, a Tripe, Tone's or ſuch like, indeede I remember when the Prince lay at Madrid, wee were faine to ſend ſeauenteene miles off for a Calfe, for his Highneſſe dyet, as for Mutton we may kill none without eſpeciall Licence from the King, for fiſh our Riuers affoord none, and wee being moſt temporate our ſelues, how ſhould our dyet agree with their ſtomackes, who are accounted the greateſt feeders of the World.
            I verily beleeue indeede (quoth Gondomar) that thoſe places they call in England, Eaſt-cheape, and Smith-field Barres, kills, and vtters more Beefe and Mutton in a month, then all Spaine cats in ſeauen yeares, which plenty our men meeting withall, at our firſt comming ouer into England, and ſince ſome who attended Don Inioſa (as I lately heard) did ouer eat themſelues, and died ſhortly after.
            The poore and miſerable ſurface of our Country,The Princes going ouer in perſon, was happy for England.
                (quoth Eſcalona) the ſcarcitie of victuall and hardneſſe of lodging was not all, the Prince of Wales by comming in Perſon diſcouered our plot, and found how faire ſoeuer wee pretended, wee meant nothing leſſe, when he thinking (as alſo did the King of Great Brittaine his Father) nothing had beene wanting to the abſolute conſummation of the marriage, but the Rites of the Church, he found all as Raw and as backward, as he had beene all this while in a dreame, and no ſuch matter euer thought of: ſo that he found the Honnor of our glorious

entertainment to be but as a delicate ſawce to help digeſtion.
            The Marques of Caſtello Rodrigo then ſtepping vp, ſaid, I will adde one thing more, and whereof if he liues, he vowes not to be vnmindfull of; and that is as I am inform'd,Adde moreouer the digging vp of tho bodies of our buried dead, caſting them into the Sea. ſome affronts done him by the Clergie, as that rude and barbarous putting him out of a Church which his Highneſſe came in to view: the arreſting and taking, away of a young youth a Page, who attended (I think) on Maiſter Mounteague in a manner from his heeles, which young Gentleman (they ſay) cannot be heard of to this day; with that (inſolent and affrican pride) of reſtraining him from that liberal acceſſe and conuerſe, (not denied elſewhere to a meane perſon) with the Lady Maria Infanta his Miſtris (which Princes by their his owne right may Challenge, he being equivalent in birth, and the rareſt endowments of body and minde, to any Prince whatſoeuer in the world) with whom in all his time of his being here, he had not aboue twice talked, and then before either the Queene, or your ſelfe Signior Olivares, or ſome other, if he had any thing to ſay afterward, it was by vs to be penned to his hand, and to be ſpoken before witneſſe, we muſt aſſuredly think and expect that ſo great and eminent a Prince, and the darling of that Nation, howſoeuer he could wiſely ſmoother his diſcontent among vs in Spaine, we may one day perhaps finde the fruites of our double dealing, and the effects of his haught and incenſed courage, well knowing how, like a young Lion, though yet in his Denne, and ſcarce acquainted with ranging, his

teeth and nayles are growne to that length, that he is paſt ieſting or playing withall.
            Indeede my L. Olivares, you are much blamed for that diſcouery and light you gaue to Buckingham of our deſigne,The Infanta by her Faherts will, bequeathed to the Emperors Sonne. and the ſecret and tenor of the laſt Kings will, wherein he charged vs not to match with England, But rather to hold a faire Treaty with them, hauing as you all know bequeathed Maria the Infanta to the Emperours Sonne, ſo that now the Engliſh ſuppoſe themſelues manifeſtly deluded.
            Quoth the Duke of Seſa, they know it well enough, and I beleeue wee ſhall finde them ſo ſenſible of it, that wee had beene better to haue playd faire, then to hazard the looſing of our reſt by ſuch an encounter.
            Now I pray you let vs take into our conſiderations, the miſcheifes which are like to follow.
            Firſt, it is thought herevpon they haue called a Parliament which conſiſteth of the King, Prince, all the Lords Spirituall, and Temporall, or the Gentry, and Commons of the ableſt iudgments, and vnderſtanding in the Land, vnto this Parliament: the King (they ſay) hath wholy referred himſelfe, not onely for the examination and redreſſe of all abuſes and miſdemeanors at home, but for the diſcuſſing and ſearching into all plots and practices of others abroad,The Vnity & ſweet conſent of the King & his people in this preſent Parliameent obſerued that may ſeeme any way to preiudice the quiet and well gouerned eſtate of his Kingdomes, without interpoſition or mediation, ſo that the King and people goe all on and together, with that alacrity and conſtancy, in prouiding for the

good eſtate of the Kingdome, as the like hath no beene ſeene theſe nany yeeares, Prince CHARLES himſelfe being there early and late, aſsiduus & accubuus, amongſt them, whom (I am informed) with the Duke of Buckingham, wee haue our prime and principall oppoſers.A diffiernce betweene the Duke of Buckingham, and Count Olivars which the Papiſt giue out (though falſly) to be the firſt occaſion of the breach of the match.
            
            I muſt confeſſe (quoth Count Olivares) there fell a difference betweene the Duke of Buckingham, and my ſelfe, which ſome haue raſhly and inconſiderately giuen out, to be the onely cauſe of this breach, for they ſay before that time all things went forward in as faire a way as might be.
            Indeede quoth Toledo, the Catholikes of England haue ſo giuen it out, laying all the fault vpon the Duke of Buckingham, who is not guiltie of any ſuch thing, I will excuſe him, that peece was hammered vpon our owne Anuile: Buckingham is a Noble, Wiſe, and Generous Prince, vpon whom the King his Maiſter hath deſeruedly conferred his grace, and thoſe tranſcendent Honnors, yea though for no other former merit elſe then the reſolute and wiſe carriage of himſelfe, in the buſineſſe of this Treaty amongſt vs, whereby he hath not onely aſſured himſelfe of the affection and heart of the King and Prince, but infinitely for his faithfull ſeruice (another Fidus Achates) vnto him gained the generall loue of the Common people, as it not long ſince appeared, when he was ill after his tedious Voyage by Sea, (the Prince himſelfe all the time healthy and ſound) for whoſe returne the people had beene exceſſiue, and beyond meaſure, had it not beene ſomewhat allayed, and tempored with the report

of Buckinghams ſickneſſe,The Duke of Buckingham for his true ſeruice to the King and Prince, and State, heartily beloued of the people. they praying as heartily for his recouery, as if he had beene ſome good land-Lord, or great Houſe-keeper amongſt them, whoſe loſſe had beene halfe their vndoing.
            It were to be wiſhed, quoth Don Mendoſa, that the Prince of Wales, and himſelfe with the reſt of the Parliament, were not vpon iuſt cauſe I confeſſe, ſo bent againſt vs. I remember, quoth the Arch-biſhop, when I was a young Student, a ſaying of Seneca, Ingenuitas non recipit contemptum, Ingenuitie or a generous ſpirit, can in no wiſe brooke contempt, ſhall we imagine then a Prince, yea ſuch a Prince as CHARLES of Wales, and onely Sonne to the King of Great Brittaine, vpon whom and whoſe action's as a bright blazing Comet Europe begins to fixe her eye, affraid and doubtfull, where the fatall effect of his diſcontent will light, will carry coales, and not cry quittance with his enemies, yet doubtleſse, his mettle is of another temper, and not ſo flexible as ſome take it; for mine owne part I would not haue him our enemy, if his friendſhip could be had, though with the expence of many millions of Ducates.
            
               
                  Cuius contrari
                     
                        •••
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      eſt.
               As if Spaine, quoth Rodrigo, needed to feare that angle of the world England, haue not we euermore giuen them their hands full? haue they not more feared our Fleets and Armies, then we theirs? do we not equal them in men, and expert Commanders, aſwell by land as by ſea? do we not exceede them in Treaſure, and money from our Indian mines? that like euer-running Fountaines, are neuer drawne dry, that I may ſay nothing of the courage of our people,

our wiſedome and policy whereby wee haue made our ſelues maiſters of ſo many goodly Territories, and gained ſo many braue victories both at Sea and Land.
            Had we an enemy, quoth the D. of Cea, of farre leſſe abillity and power then England is, we ought not ſo ſleightly to contemne him,A quarrell about a load of Calues-skins coſt the D. of Burgundy the loſſe of his life & whole eſtate. the wofull experience whereof our Nation naturaly haughty and opinionate of their valour, as well as others, haue proued, the Duke of Burgundy out of an inſolent pride ſo comtemned the Swiſses, the quarrell ariſing betwixt them, but for the tole of a load of Calues skinnes; that at the laſt by them, he was depriued both of his eſtate and life, at that vnfortunate encounter at Nancy.
            
            Who could with-hold the Arch-duke Albertus,
               The Spaniards pride & contempt of vs, how deare it coſt them at Neuport.
                and our grand Captaines from bidding Prince Maurice battle at Neuport: But ſcorning the enemy in regard of his ſmall number, in reſpect of theirs, together being puffed vp with that petty victorie againſt the Scots the ſame morning, they had the reward of pride and contempt of a weake aduerſary, for the Arch-duke was forced to flye, ſauing himſelfe very hardly, leauing dead behind him, the oldeſt and beſt Souldiers Spaine had. Let vs beleeue the weakeſt may doe vs a miſcheife, as is wittily ſhowne by Aeſop, in that fable or apoligy of his, between the Eagle and the Conies. But by your fauour my Lord, you are much miſtaken in the eſtate and ſtrength of England; and quallitie of the people, and ſo you will tell me, if we ſhall haue to doe with them, as we haue found, and had in former times, let vs

thinke two of the acceſſion of Scotland vnto that Kingdome,The ſtrength of Ireland, at this preſent, and how Ireland ſtandeth in good termes, and is at this time ſo well peopled with Engliſh and Scottiſh, that there is not ſo much as a ſtarting hole left for Rebellion, or ſo much ground to ſpare in that Countrey, that might affoord any freinds horſe of ours a bottle of Hay, much leſſe ſuffice for an Armie to martch ouer, and to be maintained vpon.
            I might hereto adde the valour and ſufficient fidellity of that Noble Gentleman, Sir Henry Carie Lotd Viſcount Falkland, the now preſent Lord Debuty thereof, with many other braue Spirits, that are imployed in his Maieſties ſeruice in that good Countrey.
            But to returne to the Parliament of England, what effects heare you is it likely to produce, or wherein is it thought to prooue praeiudicious to the King our Maiſter, or to the Catholique Religion.
            Firſt replied Gondomar, it is likely to goe worſe with the Catholiques then euer, as who muſt expect no fauor, but muſt prepare themſelues to vndergoe the ſharpeſt cenſure, and animaduerſion of the Law againſt them, yea whoſoeuer ſhall be found abettors, maintainors, concealors of their plots, or harberours of their perſons, ſhall ſuffer for the ſame in like manner; and I heare ſay, that there is a Proclamation either comming forth, or publiſhed already to that effect, and now they are to depart the Realme by a prefixed day.
            But what (quoth Count de Monterey) will then

become of them, or by whome ſhall they be entertained? will they returne to their Coledges againe at Doway, Rhemes, Roome, Villadolid,
               The Seminary Colledges beyond the Seas, almoſt empty at this time. and other places, ſome whereof I haue lately ſeene, and obſerue to ſtand emty.
            Nothing leſſe (quoth Gondomar) for I am perſwaded though many wil colourably depart though returne againe ſhortly by new ports and new names moe will remaine behinde, (and ſince neuer likely againe to haue ſuch an opportunitie of profeſſing themſelues openly, and execiſing their functions, which they could doe in a freinds Chamber, and many times in the common Innes) for the better avoyding ſuſpition, and concealing themſelues; ſome will turne School-maiſters in priuate mens houſes, as there are many in England, ſome Gentlemen Vſhers vnto Collapſed Ladies are, ſome ſuch there are in Drury lane: the L. T. in Yorkeſhire hath one followes her in that Nature, the L. S. not farre from my old houſe in Holborne in London, the L. M. neere vnto Stratford-bow: Some Falconers whereof I know two, the one in Suſſex, the other in high Suffolke, only one I was acquainted withall, who was the keeper of a Parke, and a good Huntſman, and of whom I haue had many a good peece of Veniſon, if he be liuing, I know another Prieſt who hauing liued with an antient Lady of great eſtate, and of good credit, by reaſon he was enuironed with a peſtilent crew of puritans on euery ſide, and the better to colour his abſence from the Church, learned the art of Cookery, and is growne ſo expert therein, within a ſhort ſpace, that hee is able to dreſſe a Dinner

with ſuch arte, and good meat after the Engliſh faſhion, that neuer a Cooke in all Spaine, is able to ſet the like by it, and his manner is, when he hath layed his meate to the fire, to goe and ſay Maſſe, which finiſhed by that time, or ſoone after his meate is boyled and roſted, which with a cleane Apron, and white ſleeues with ſome ſmall helpe of a kitchin boy, he ſerueth vp to his old miſtris.
            
               
                  Eraſmus.
               Quoth the Arch-biſhop, this was the condition of the old Chriſtians,The number Preiſts & Ioſuits in London only is 
                     •
                  55 in a manner for euery pariſh two if Maſse were vp againe. vnder the perſecuting Emperours, of which times it is ſaid; Ingenioſares fuit illis temporibus eſſe Chriſtianum.
            
            Without doubt quoth Gondomar, they will bee ſeuerely proceeded againſt in this preſent Parliament, and that for many reſpects.
            Firſt, by reaſon of their number, and dayly increaſe, whereby they became formidable to the State.
            
               God be thanked the houſe is well rid of them.Secondly, becauſe of the correſpondence they held with vs, for by their meanes wee vnderſtood the ſecrets of their State, knew what they did, or ſpake in their Parliaments; in a word they were our onely inſtruments for any imployment, were it neuer ſo deſperate.
            Thirdly, (wherein I muſt needes ſay, they were to blame) they abuſed the Kings grace, and Lenity towards them,The Kings lenity abuſed. with their inſolency and affronts oft times brauing their Aduerſaries in the ſtreetes to their faces, Preachers in their Pulpits, Iudges and Iuſtices on the Bench, that had they ſo done with vs in Spaine, they ſhould haue ſoundly ſmarted for it, of what Religion ſoeuer they had been.
            
               For example, vpon Eaſter munday laſt, in the after noone,Aske Maiſtes Primroſe of the truth hereof▪
                came a Ieſuit formally attired in blacke to the Court, then at White Hall (the day following, being the day of the Kings healing of that diſeaſe, they call there, the Kings euill, what time a great throng of people of all ſorts being gathered together, at the doore of Serieant Primroſe, who was to take the names, and to ſearch ſuch as had need of helpe) thruſt into the Chamber, and being demaunded what buſineſſe he had there, faining himſelfe to be in drinke, made anſwer, he had none, neither knew he how he came there; they ſeeing him in ſuch a caſe, would haue carried him into another roome, and haue layd him vpon a bed, but he refuſed it, and hearing by chance Mr. Primroſe, and one Mr. White conferre in Latine together, he ſuddainly brake out, and ſaid, know you not ſuch a one who attendeth vpon ſuch a Lord, he is my brother and a Catholique, whereat Mr. White replyed I pray get you gone, I care for no ſuch company, where vpon he would haue drawne his Dagger, and had not companie been nigh, he had doubtleſſe ſlaine him; and no ſooner was hee out of the Chamber, but he returned with three or foure more of his freinds and acquaintance, daring him to come forth, and deeply vowing to be reuenged vpon him and the reſt within, &c.
            Fourthly,No treaſon commonly without a Preiſt or Ieſuit at one end of it. becauſe (ſay the Engliſh) they are the only engines and complots of all Treaſons, authors of Tumults, and ſeditions within the land, they inſtance long ſince the reb
                  •
               ellion in the North, of late the Gun-powder Treaſon, Watſons plot with that

of St. Walter Raleighes, and many more the like.
            Fift and laſtly, becauſe their carriage not anſwering the reuerend and high dignity of their profeſſion, they are growne odious (ſay they) to thoſe euen of their owne ſide, for indeede they are the only boone Companions about the Towne, looſing hereby much of their valew, which I like not of. St. Francis was reputed ſo holy a man,After the naming of St. Francis, you are to licke your lippes. that the Popes Holineſſe ordained, that whoſoeuer did but name St. Francis, he ſhould licke his lippes after, ſo ſweete and Saint-like was his life and conuerſation: Yet now I remember at my departure out of England, I gaue it ſome of them in charge, to get what they could, of whom, or by what meanes ſoeuer, becauſe I foreſaw their harueſt would be ſhort, and the money would ſtand vs all in ſtead, for indeede the greateſt part was at my deuotion, and to be employed as I ſaw cauſe.
            And this ſtirred vp one Gee an Apoſtate Calviniſt to publiſh a peſtilent and malicious againſt the Prieſts and Ieſuites, reſiding in and about London, wherein after hee hath diſcouered their practiſes, he ſetteth downe in a Catalogue at the end all their names, with the places of their lodging, what bookes they haue at any time publiſhed, with the names of Catholique Doctors of Phyſicke, and Apothecaries, to their no ſmall diſgrace, and praeiudice.
            The things my L. quoth Seſa, at your beeing in England, were by your meanes wont to be ſeuerely looked into, and puniſhed.
            It is true, quoth Gondomar, either hanging or loſſe of the Authors cares had enſued, or elſe I had

miſſed of my ayme; but the caſe is now altered, I was then powerfull, and in grace, and by my pollicy effected thoſe things, which were they now to be wrought againe, would require the labour and all the ſtrength of Hercules.
            
            But my L. quoth the D. of Braganza, what newes lately from England, in what ſtate ſtands things there, and how doth D. Inioſa carry himſelfe among the Engliſh, at this turbulent ſeaſon, and amidſt the deepeſt of their diſcontent, & diſpleaſure againſt vs?
            Well enough (quoth Gondomar) and the better if he be carefull to obſerue ſome directions I gaue him, at my laſt departure, but for nouelty ſake, I will produce a Letter I receiued from him, written with his owne hand, within theſe few dayes.
            My L. all health and happineſſe euer attend our Soueraigne, his Catholique Maieſty,The Proclamation againſt Prieſts and Ieſuites. next your ſelfe and yours: You are much deſirous to know to heare what the Engliſh Parliament hath already effected, or what they entend touching our ſelues, and the Catholiques, and the rather by your wiſedome, that you might preuent further dangers, which if foreſeene, are euer the better encountered withall, and withſtood: Either houſe of Parliament with great vehemency againſt the Catholiques, hauing publiſhed a Proclamation for their finall baniſhment▪ and our ſelues euery day grow more odious & in cōtempt with that Nation then other, which I cannot remedy, I did what lay in my power, and according to my direction, to breake off this Parliament,So all the World ſuppoſeth. by laying an aſperſion vpon the Prince, and D. of Buckingham, to breed a iealouſie in the Kings Maieſty, which is heynouſly taken of all the land, whereupon I hoped that

the Parliament would haue ſoone beene diſſolued but my art failed me; and I haue gained nothing but diſgrace, the enmity of the Prince and Duke, together with the hate of the whole Land, inſomuch that your ſelfe S. Gondomar were wont to paſse free and vnmoleſted,The better ſort neuer gaue you ill vſe. (except at once, or the ſecond time, when the Offendors were impriſoned and puniſhed, we cannot paſse (though no violence I confeſſe is offered) but wee haue the bans and reuilings of the multitude, I meane the baſer ſort, wiſhing we had neuer come here.
            The Diuell driue vs home againe, withall I had three or foure of the Proclamations for the baniſhing of the Preiſts and Ieſuits, paſted on my wall, hard by my doore: a Coachfull of my Gentlemen were by chance, hard by the Savoy ouerthrowne, but Lord what a ſhout was there among the multitude for ioy; ſome interpreting the ſame to be mal
                     •
                  m
                     •
                  
                  men to our Nation, but Deo gratias there was no harme done.
            But are not theſe affrontes and vnſeemely dealing of the Common people with Embaſsadours, ſoundly puniſhed.
            Yes indeed (quoth Gondomar) it is much againſt his Majeſty, and the will of the State, who by publique proclamation, haue vpon a ſeuere penalty forbidden any whatſoeuer, eyther by word or deede, to doe them any affront or iniury, but it ſeems our dealing hath deſerued it, how happeneth it then that theſe are not reſtrayned, replyed the M. of Mandeſario.
            
            Is it impoſſible (quoth Gondomar) to charme the tongues of a multitude, beſide they are people of

the worſer condition,No Nation more benigne and curteous to ſtrangers, then Engliſh. for of the better ſort we are reſpected with all obſeruance: but let vs proceede with the contents of my Lords Letter.
            Heere came foorth about February likewiſe, a Proclamation for the baniſhment of all Preiſts▪ &c. out of the Kingdome of Ireland, but it is to be hoped, that there be ſo many of the cheife Magiſtrates and Gentlemen in Ireland, ſo well affected to the Catholique cauſe, that it will doe vs no great hurt in thoſe parts, though the cracke be terrible.
            Count Mans field arriued not long ſince in England, and had great intertainment, but what his errand or buſſneſſe was, I could neuer learne,A notorious practice of the Spaniards to diſcouer the buſineſſe of a Turkiſh Embaſsador with the eſtates, at the Hage in Holland.
                though I tryed all the meanes I could to know, I am wanting in nothing inſomuch as in ſome ingenious and good intelligencer. That (quoth Gondomar) is a fault which muſt be remedied, I remember of late yeares, there came a great perſonage, a meſsenger (call him Embaſsadour I may not) from a Viſ
                  •
               er in Conſtantinople to the Eſtates of Holland, to the Hage, and there was ſent from Antwerpe to inſinuat into his acquaintance, afterward into his ſeruice, a naturall borne Spaniard, who had beene formerly a ſlaue in CONSTANTINOPLE; and ſpake the Turkiſh tongue, as naturally as if he had beene borne there, withall he knew the freinds and kindred of the ſaid Turkiſh Gentleman, and could call them by their names, and told him he was ſuch a mans ſonne of the Citty, who being taken Priſoner when he was young by the Spaniards,Of the truth hereof enquire of Cap. I. B. he was detayned as a Galley-ſlaue amongſt them many yeares, and hauing now made an eſcape, fled to him for ſuccour, and deſired to ſerue him as an Interpreter, he beleeuing

all true that he ſayd, entertayned him to attend on him in his Chamber, it fortuned that on a time when the Eſtates of North-Holland were inuited by the Prince of Orange to a Supper or Banquet at his Court in the Hage, and with them this Turkiſh Embaſſador, one of the Company a Dutch man, of North-Holland, obſeruing his carriage and countenance▪ and remembring that his garbe and condition was Spaniſh, and moreouer avowing he had ſeene him in Spaine, cauſed him in deſpight of his new maiſter to be ſearched, and at the inſtant found about him directions how to carry himſelfe, and which was the maine plot, to diſcouer what was the Turkes errand to the Eſtates, hereupon it being the time of Peace, he was baniſhed, and at Delft put into a Boate and ſent away, vpon paine of his head neuer to returne into Holland againe: but theſe diuiſes are like Stratagems in warre, once eluded neuer to be put in practiſe againe.
            Well to proceede,Prouiſion for making 
                     •
                  kady the Nauy. he writes vnto vs moreouer how and with what alacrity the Parliāment with one conſent haue granted Subſidies for furniſhing and rigging vp the Nauy, and preparation for war.
            But writes he nothing, quoth Velaſco, where it is thought they will appoint Sedem Belli, the home of that warre.
            That quoth Gondomar is a ſecret among them, but I thinke his Maieſty will reſerue that to himſelfe.
            Why quoth Lewes de Velaſco, there ſhould be nothing ſo ſecretly carried amongſt them, but we ſhould know it.
            The times (replyed Gondomar) are not now as heretofore, and when I was in England, our beſt intelligencers,

and the Catholiques are not in that grace as they haue beene: we haue had in times paſt many friends, euen in the Parliament Houſe, but they haue now ſo ſifted and cull'd them out, yea if but ſuſpected, that we haue little hope of diuing into their Actions.
            The Prince of Orange with the Eſtates of the Low-Countries, haue taken the ſame courſe, for whereas their intendments and reſolutions, where and when to make a warre, was knowne in common to them all of the Councell, (ſo that what they determined or concluded of, wee knew it the ſame night, or the next morning, witneſſe the ſurpriſe of Breda with a turfe Boate, and their enterpriſe vpon Antwerpe) the Prince of Orange reſerues that within his owne breſt, whereby things are now carried with farre more ſecrecy,The enterpriſe vpon Bred
                        •
                     
                   in Brabant.
                and good ſucceſſe then before. But how happened it quoth C. Monterey that Breda (as I haue heard) was ſurprized notwithſtanding.
            By meere accidents (quoth Gonzales de Cordua) for Antonio Lancavechia the Gouernour, which happened not in ſeauen yeares before, lay that night from home (I meane the Caſtle) at Geertrudenberge ſixe miles off, when the ſame night came letters vnto him from a friend, on the other ſide,The friend was ſuſpected to be Mounſier Barneuelt.
                which reuealed the plot, but leauing his ſonne Deputie Gouernour he durſt not open them (for vpon the opening once of a loue letter that came to his Father from a Lady, his Father charged him neuer to meddle with looking into any letter that was directed to him againe) but laying them vp till his father came home, the Caſtle and Towne wherein were 5000. men horſe and foot, with threeſcore and ten hidden cloſe vnder

curſes miraculouſly taken, the griefe whereof as ſome thinke, coſt the Prince of Parma his life.
            But quoth Caſtello Rodrigo, Signior Gondomar, if there remaine any more newes from England, impart it freely, we are I hope of one minde.
            Quoth the Arch-biſhop of Toledo, I haue heard that ſince this little time of reſpite and freedome, wherein the Catholique Religion hath taken breath a little, there haue beene many miracles done in England.
            
            Yes aſsuredly very many (quoth Gondomar) I heard it credibly reported for a truth, that St. Patricke viſibly appeared to many Religious Prieſts and Friers at his Purgatory,This is as true as St. Francis cate a Spider, and ſcratched her againe out of his thigh. confirming and preaching vnto them dayly, propheſing moreouer, a great time of percution ere long to befall vpon them. Moreouer our Bleſsed Lady appeared to an Engliſh mayd, arraied as bright as the Sunne, with the Moone vnder her feete, whereupon ſhe became wholy to be conuerted Catholique.
            No doubt quoth the Duke of Medina Coeli, many of this Nature are meere impoſtures, what thinke you my L. Arch-biſhop.
            No queſtion, quoth Gonzales de Cordua, I cannot be perſwaded that, that which they call the holy Blood of Boxall, which the Bradanders and all the Netherlands viſit in Pilgrimage, and euery yeare lookes as red and freſh, as if it had beene taken from the body but yeſterday, can be the very blood of Chriſt.
            Nor that a young married wife ſhall haue a child the ſame yeare if ſhe can ſtride ouer at once Saint

               Rombauts breeches at Mechlin.
            
            Nor that as many of the Hollanders hold that Mary was buried at Hueclom, for which cauſe it hath beene in times paſt a place by Pilgrimes much frequented ſince we hold her Aſſumption into heauen, for quoth the Arch-biſhop, Signior Gonzales theſe are Contraria in eodem obiecto, you are a Souldier, and you know for the moſt part they are none of the deuouteſt men, I wiſh you rather modeſtly and piouſly with the Church, that all theſe things are true. Abuſes may creepe in by accident, but neuer to be publickly allowed by the Sacred Authority of the Church.
            No, how chanced it (replied Gonzales) that a Painter of Shertogenboſch (my Lord of Gorbhendonck gouernour of the Towne,I my ſelfe haue often ſeen the picture, though neuer worſhipped it. told me the tale) beeing deadly in loue with a faire and beautifull Lady neere to Pirroy Hueſden, and being to drawe our Ladies Image for a Chappell, either in St. Iohns, or ſome other Church in the Boſch,
               The Church of Rome like one of her Images take off the golden coate of ceremony, vnderneath it is rubbiſh, or a rotten block. to inſinuate himſelfe the farther into this Ladies fauour, drewe her picture with her young ſonne in her armes, which he hung vp for our bleſſed Ladies picture, and is at this day worſhipped with great deuotion, as if her ſelfe were diſcended from heauen, and were there in perſon.
            I cannot beleeue (quoth the Arch-biſhop) there was any ſuch thing, if there were) ſo long as it brings in good ſtore of mony to the poore Prieſts of the Church, it may eaſily be endured: beſides, if theſe things ſhould be ouer narrowly looked into, it would hazard the credit of the Catholicke Church, betraying

to the vulgar and ignorant her greateſt myſteries, and as it were, pulling off her faireſt plumes, expoſe her naked to vulgar ſcorne and contempt.
            But the D. of Eſcalono, who had ſitten ſilent this good while, now ſtepping vp ſayd, the end of our preſent aſſembly, is not to trouble our ſelues about theſe by▪ diſcourſes and triuiall matters, now it ſtands vs in hand to looke to our ſelues, to prouide money, men, and all neceſſaries for the warre with all ſpeed, holding it fit to call home our Embaſſadour, who I beleeue hereafter is like to get no better anſwere concerning our affaires with England, then Mendoza did of Henry Cary, Baron of Hunſdon, and Lord Chamberlaine, in the dayes of Queene Elizabeth, who beeing commanded by the Q. to giue him his anſwere, ſhe denying him acceſſe, by reaſon (ſay the Engliſh) his demaunds were inſolent and vnreaſonable, told him the Queene hath commanded me to anſwere you, my anſwere is, Setting your Oranges and Limmons aſide, a figge for your Embaſſage, his meaning was, ſauing for ſauſe for their Hennes and Capons, they could liue, neither caring for vs, nor our Country.
            
               A Banquet ſent out of Spaine to Prince Charles, not long ſince.It ſeemeth (quoth Villa Hermoſa) they care not much for that neither, for when as a various and a delicate Banquet, ſuch as Spaine afforded, was ſent ouer, whether by your ſelfe my L. Olivares, your Lady, or ſome other, to the Prince of Wales, I heard that the Prince touched not any whit of it, but the figges and other iunkettings were giuen ſome to one, ſome to another, and at laſt refuſed, euen of Boyes and Pages, for feare there ſhould be dropped

in a figge, or two worſe relliſhed then their fellowes.
            Then Caſtello Rodrigo ſtood vp and ſayd, Spice the Engliſh are ſo bufie at home to prouide for themſelues, and happily to offend ſome body elſe (whom yet we know not) let vs alſo timely prouide leaſt we be to ſeeke, paries cum proximus ardet, and like true hearted Patriots and loyall Subiects to our Catholique King and Country, euery one ſincerely and freely deliuer his opinion, and reaſons how our Religion, our ſelues, friends, and allyes might be beſt ſecured, in caſe the ſtorme ſhould fall on our heads, for this was the maine end of our meeting.
            Then quoth the Duke of Medina: Signior Gondomar, ſince you are beſt acquainted with the ſtate and affaires of England, giue your aduiſe what is beſt to be done, whither to haue open warre with them, to wind them vp ſtill with new pretences and ouertures of the Match, or to entertaine a (ſeeming) league of amity and vnity, and the Infanta to take her Fortune elſe where.
            For the firſt, (quoth Gondomar) I vtterly diſallow it, that we vpon no apparant ground,
                  Spaine vnwilling to be at oddes with England.
                and probable reaſon ſhould prouoake ſo potent and irreconcilable a Nation, who are content to let vs alone, ſo that they may enioy their peace and quiet, you know the danger of awaking a ſleepie Lyon, but hereof by the way, I will tell you a pretty and a pleaſant accident of a ſleepie dogge, that happened at my beeing in England,
               
one D. W. well knowne about Paules and Feete-ſtreete in London, (a place whereto I many times reſorted) for ſome priuate occaſion) finding his Dogge a great huge Maſtiue lying faſt a ſleepe by his Kitchin fire,A tale of D. W. Dogge. ſayd to a friend that ſtood by, my Dogge is faſt a ſleepe, I will (to wake him) go hallow in his eare, hee no ſooner began to hallow, but the Dogge (vſed to no ſuch alarmes) leaped vp, and laying his forefeete on his Maiſters ſhoulders, tare him downe on eyther cheeke from the eyes, almoſt to the mouth: Let vs by no meanes hallow in the eares of the Engliſh, For firſt, we are not ſo well furniſhed with men, munition, or money, as the World imagineth, or Arſenalls Magazines and Store-houſes in Sevill, Cadiz, Lisbone, being almoſt diſ
                  •
               urniſhed of all manner of munition and neceſſaries, though they ſeeme otherwiſe.
            How haue our Fleetes miſcarried of late yeares,
                  Spaine greatly endamaged of late yeares. ſome by diſtreſſe and fouleneſſe of weather, others by depredation and piracy of the Hollanders taken or ſunke, Moreouer, conſider how our eyther Indies (euen at this preſent) do Laborare in extremis, We neuer (ſince the firſt Conqueſt of the Weſt by Columbus) in more apparant daunger of looſing them, then at this time, by the great and vnexpected ſucceſſe of the Hollanders in thoſe parts, yea within theſe few moneths.
            For the Fleete of Holland arriuing at Lima in Perru, eyther tooke or ſunke the very beſt

Shippes of our Nauy, or beaten the reſt, ſo that they are vnfit for any ſeruice whatſoeuer, heereby they haue now gotten footing (neuer knowne before) within that goodly and golden Kingdome, and by the aſſiſtance and courage of the Nauy Indians, (to whom the name of a Spaniard is more hatefull and odious then Hell) haue taken many ſtrong holds and places of retract and defence,The Hollanders go
                     ••
                   in footing in Peru this laſt yeare. from whence they are not eaſily to be vndermined, or remooued, their number and ſtrength dayly encreaſing, and they finding the commodity ſo great. For of all his Maieſties Kingdoms in Europe, Aſia, or America, Peru is the prime and Soueraigne, being aboue any other in the World, moſt abounding in gold, ſiluer, and pearle, where gold, and ſiluer is not as in other places, only with great labour, digged and ſought for, in deepe and rockey mines, but here Nature hath diſperſt and throwne it about in ſuch plenty, that it is ordinarily found in ſands by the ſea ſide, and vpon the common wayes, in wells, lakes, mariſhes, among ſtones in the earth, cleauing to the ground vnder the rootes of plants, and trees, plucked or digged vp, neither in ſcruples, or little and ſmall graines, but in lumpes, and ſolid maſhes, weighing two or three pound weight a peece.
            The like ſucceſſe (we are certainly informed) they had but this other day (replyed the D. of Cea,) in going to the Eaſt-Indies vnder their Admirall Eremits, by ſurprizing the ſtrong Caſtle of Delreio, which they yet hold and maintaine (hauing ſent backe againe vnto Holland for a ſecond Fleete to

their ſupply, which conſiſteth of 4000. marriners, whereof one ſhip (vnknowne to her fellowes) is fraught with handſome young wenches and boyes for plantation) theſe with the former making the number of fifty good ſhips, and for certaine it is reported that they are preparing for a third Nauie to follow the other two out of hand.
            I thinke (quoth L. De Velaſco) the Diuell intends to giues them all the kingdomes of the earth.
            
               Great preparation of the Spaniards againſt the Hollander, but all in vaine.But replied the D. of Braganza, If I am not deceiued, they were met withall by the way, and fell farre ſhort of their reckoning, to what end elſe ſhould his Maieſtie this laſt yeare prepare ſo mighty a Fleete, both in Spaine and Portugall, ſending for the ſhipping of Dunkerke, Winoxbergen and Ooſtend: beſides many merchant Ships arreſted and ſtayed of England, France, Lubeck, Hamborow and other places, to be ioyned with his Nauie. Or what effect wrought the conſultation at Madrid, and the dayly poſting with letters from thence to Bruxells.
            
            All came to iuſt nothing, quoth the D. of Seſa: for euen in the heate and threate of this great prepation, the Hollanders were ſo bold as to ſet vpon a goodly Ship of ours, whoſe lading was ſiluer, which they tooke and brought ſafely home to Horne: So that weighing all occurrences rightly, we ſhall finde it no time to thinke of an offenſiue warre with England, for which we are not in caſe, yet it is not amiſſe for vs to pretend like Lyons, and ſeeme terrible to the world, but neceſſitie doth admoniſh, notwithſtanding we muſt eeke and lengthen out our hides with Foxes tayle.
            
               Therefore in my opinion, it is beſt to make faire weather with England, in any caſe ſo long at the leſt, till wee haue tried the vttermoſt of our ſtrength againſt Holland which I hope his Catholicke Maieſty our Maiſter will doe this Summer, and as I am informed, all thoſe muſters and taking vp of Men which we heare are in Naples, Sicilie, the Dutchy of Millan, Spaine, Artois, Henalt, Luxenburge, and other places, are to that end. For the dore being but halfe ſhutte we had yet roome to enter, if we prolong the time we ſhall be ſo bard and bolted, that there will be no hope of entrance at all, except (quoth Don Lewes of Velaſco) as my Lord Duke of Seſa ſaith in this interſtitium or twi-light of Treatie, or ſuſpence betweene Warre and Peace, wee take to our ſelues ſome notable aduantage, and followe opportunity cloſe at the heels, we are like howſoeuer we flatter our ſelues with getting the game, to goe away the greateſt looſers: For we ſee whatſoeuer we entend, the Hollanders are ſtill in action, dayly getting ground of vs. Did they not in Auguſt laſt recouer Mogodor in Aethiopio from vs? did not ſhortly after Graue Earneſt take Embden (which Tilly ſuppoſed to be at his deuotion) bringing in to the defence of the ſame 
                  •
               8. peeces of Count Mansfields great Ordinance? hath not the Prince of Orenge with his great induſtry and care as Spinola on our parts (preſently after the death of Obham the chiefe Admirall of Holland, who dyed this laſt yeare at the Hage) taken view of all the Forts and Towers ſtanding along the Maſe Waell and the Rheine, put in ſtronger Garriſons into Rauenſtein and Gennop, and after this, made vp full the Armie of

               Brunſwick. Moreouer hath he not ſtrengthened and enabled to endure the longeſt ſiege Zutphen, Deuenter, Swoll, with the reſt of the Frontier Townes towards Frizeland, the paſſage we held euer to be our eaſieſt and redieſt for the ſubduing of the Netherlands? did not thoſe of the Garriſons of Emmericke ſurpriſe and take Holden, a wel fortified Towne hard by Dinxlaken, tooke all our Spaniards that lay there in Garriſon, and brought away the keyes of the Towne gate with them. On the other ſide, if we attempt any thing, it is either diſcouered (ſo vigilant are the States) ere it be acted, or faileth in the manner and meanes of the action. As the enterpriſe of ours vpon Iſendeke (notwithſtanding wee kept the gates of Antwerp ſhut for two dayes together, and no man ſuffered to go out) which we intended vpon the ſuddaine to ſurpriſe with our ſcaling-ladders, yet doe what wee could, they had notice of our intent, that when wee came before it we might (as they ſay) throw our caps at it, for euer winning or comming within it.
            And the like attempts (to no purpoſe) wee made this laſt winter vpon Bortagna by Groening, and vpon St. Andrewes Scorne, had not the Prince of Orenge, thinke we, knowledge of Count Henry Vanden Berges Iourney this laſt winter into Frizland? yes doubtleſſe, as the euent ſhewed. For hee vpon (my knowledge) was ſecretly informed that the Spaniſh Horſemen had cauſed in Antwerpe and other places all their horſe-ſhoes to be altered, and as many new to be made as would ſuffice for ſixe or eight thouſand horſe, all calked ſharpe and froſt-nayled of purpoſe

for trauaile ouer the Ice, whereby hee knewe (as hee is moſt circumſpect and prouident) that ſome enterpriſe was to be attempted vpon either Holland or Frizland: in that time of the great froſt,The expeditiō of Count Henry Vanden-Berge, into Freezeland.
                all Fennes, Riuers, and Mariſhes, being paſſible by reaſon of the thickneſſe of the Ice (for it froze continually) therefore he doubled the Garriſons within the Frontier Towne, ſent certaine Troopes of horſe, to obſerue and watch the moſt ſuſpected places for paſſage, and had ſhippes abroad to bring him tydings vpon the leaſt motion or occaſion. Laſtly, he ſent in waggons ſix thouſand Skippers, and Water men, to breake Ice in the moſt common and likely places of paſsage, in the Riuer of Rhine, Iſell, the Wael, and about the ditches of Townes, Mariſhes, and other places, neither did his prognoſtication ſaile him. For Count Henry Vandenberg preſently after our Conſultation at Madrill, had his Commiſſion at Bruſſells for eighteene thouſand horſe and foote: with which, and eleuen peeces of Ordinance, and a great multitude of Waggons, he paſſed by Emmerick, in exceeding bitter and could weather towards Frizland, but turning another way between Duisburgh and Bronkhorſt (a Caſtle belonging vnto the Graue of Stirumen which hee tooke and ſpoyled) hee came to the Iſell with 4. peeces of Ordinance, whereof one (the Ice breaking) ſunke, the reſt hee leſt at Bronkhorſt, hauing paſſed the Riuer, hee fortified his foote at Diterbuſch, with trees he filled vp the Riuer. The Eſtates beleeuing hee went directly for Arnhem, they ſent Marquet with troopes of horſe and certaine

foote Companies, but Vandenberge ſaluting the Towne with a volley of ſmall ſhot, and beſide, making a ſhot or two into the Towne with his great Ordinance departed, I heard great (quoth Pennatiore) outrages were by him committed in that Iournie, wherein he ſpared neither Age nor Sexe.
            Crueltie (replied Gonzales) is naturall and inhaerent to our Nation, for except our victories be drowned in blood we cannot taſt them. It is moſt true that he gaue way to his Souldiers in the depth and greateſt bitterneſſe of the froſt and ſnow this laſt winter, to turne men and women ſtarke naked out of their houſes, to ſhift for themſelues in the open fields, to rauiſh young Girles not aboue eight or ten yeares of age, wilfully to beate out the heads of their Wine and Beare Veſſels, that they might drinke onely water in that extremitie of could weather, that many Infants (their parents flying away for feare) at their returne, were found either ſtarued for foode, or frozen to death with the could, hauing neither fire, nor cloathing.
            What (quoth Don Pedro) ſlept the Prince of Oreng all this while? or was no manner of reueng taken by the Dutch?
            Yes, it ſeemed ſo (quoth Velaſco,) for the moſt part of our Spaniſh Souldiers were cut off, in their marching away and retreat, by the Garriſons of Duisburgh, Arnhem, Dauentrie, Campen, and Zutphen, beſide great numbers who periſhed with extremitie of cold, ſome hauing their noſes, ſome their hands frozen and rotted off, beſide thoſe that

were ſtarued for want of bread, ſo that wee cannot boaſt of this voyage, wee ſtaying in the Velue but ſeauen dayes, which a Spaniard had not ſeene in aboue thirtie yeares before.
            All this diſcourſe (quoth Count Gondomar) had on all ſides, I ſee tenderh to no other end, then to intimate our diſabillity and diſproportion of ſtrength, if wee ſhould vndertake a preſent Warre againſt the Netherlands, without either making our ſelues maiſters of great Brittaine a thing which his Maieſties Predeceſſors for this hundred yeares haue aimed at (and we may truely ſay and beleeue is a matter impoſſible) or by faire meanes intreate them, from the Cliffes of Douer, to be but onely Spectators, while wee wreſtle for the remnant of our right in the Low Countries, wherefore at the laſt, to end and ſhut vp this our Conſultation, I haue (with Aduiſe) drawne together certaine Heades and Concluſions, as Maximes of State, for the preſent and future ſecuring of our Countries and ſelues, which I humbly ſubmit to all your gratious and honorable cenſures.
            Herewith Gondomar kiſſing the paper, deliuered the ſame to the D. of Braganca, which the D. againe deliuered to a Secretary of Eſtate, commaunding him to reade them openly and diſtinctly before the whole houſe: the contents whereof were as followeth.
            1 Firſt aboue all thinges to maintaine and vphold the Catholique Religion, againſt Pagans, and Heretiques, and to doe our beſt to plant and propagate the ſame in all places of the world.
            
               2 To hold faſt, with both hands (if wee can) the friendſhip of his Maieſty of great Britraine, which ſetting and declining from vs, let vs labour to reaſsure and gaine by all meanes poſſible, vpon what pretence or condition ſoeuer, for hereupon depends the fortunate or ill ſucceſſe of all our affaires, either now for the preſent or hereafter, imitating herein good Enginers or Workmen, when they would build a Bridge, to keepe off, or turne the maine Channell another way.
            3 That being effected, otherwiſe let vs thinke neuer to take Weapons in hand. Let (St. Gonzales) Spinola, with your ſelfe, breake at an inſtant into Bra
                     •
                  ant, and trie your ſtrength vpon Breda, or Bergen op Zoome, giuing them an alarum in thoſe parts, while Count Henrie Vanden-Berge ioyned with Tillies Forces ſhall by Wezell or Rees, paſsing the Rhine, come like an inundation vpon them in Freezeland.
            
            4 That our Garriſons be doubled in Dunkerke, Oſtend, and other Townes of Flanders, and the hauens well guarded and defended.
            5 That the Emperour take a truce for ſixe yeares with his deadly enemie Bethlem Gabor, and that we hold good correſpondence with the D. of Savoy, and the Venetians.
            
            6 That all ſhipping be ſlayed, whether Engliſh, French, Scottiſh, Hamburgers, or of what Nation ſoeuer till our pleaſure be further knowne.
            7 That all our Magazins and ſtore-houſes be examined and furniſhed, with all manner of prouiſion, lead, powder, match, bullets, and cordage.
            
               8 That a certaine number of Ships be newly built and ſent into the Weſt Indies, as well to ſecure and guard our Nauy home, as to ſupplant thoſe Hollanders who haue gotten ſooting in our Kingdome of Peru.
            
            9 That all ſtrangers, of what Nation or Country ſoever, be baniſhed the Land.
            10 That wee take an order for the reliefe of ſuch Prieſts and Ieſuites as ſhall be baniſhed England and Ireland, and to encreaſe the number of our Intelligencers.
            11 That we barre the Engliſh, French, Dutch, Scottiſh, and other Nations whatſoeuer, from all acceſſe to the Indies, either to traffique or plant.
            12 That we ſet vp and maintaine the Inquiſition in all our Dominions, and to enhaunſe our Cuſtomes.
            13 That we make our ſelues able to encounter whoſoeuer ſhall oppoſe, or ſtop our paſſage on the narrowe Seas, and that we giue it out, (what ever our intent is) that our Fleets paſſe that way onely but for the chaſtiſing of the Hollander.
            
            14 That hereafter wee entertaine no Engliſh nor Scots, into our pay, but the Iriſh onely, to the intent after they haue gotten experience, and are able to commaund, they may ſtand vs in ſtead, in caſe we ſhould hereafter make any attempt vpon Ireland.
            
            15 That we call in as much of our gold and ſiluer as is poſſible.
            16 That you ſpeedily write to our Ambaſſadour in England, to giue notice to all our truſtie well beloued the Ieſuites, and ſecular Prieſts, with ſome of

the beſt minded Catholikes towards vs, that they labour as much as in them lyeth to take away all aſperſion, & whatſoeuer may tend to our diſhonuor, & for this cauſe to giue vs notice of all ſcandolous Bookes, Pictures, Inuectiues, Paſquills, &c. that ſhall be printed againſt vs in Holland, England, and other places.
            That they curiouſly ſearch into the proceedings of the Parliament, and ſend vs an abbreviate of all the paſſages thereof, with what forces, and how ſoone they reſolue to ſuccour the Low-Countries.
            Laſtly, that in the Name of their obedience to his Holineſſe, and obſeruation to his Catholique Majeſtie, they labour where euer they liue, to educate and inſtruct their freinds Children in the Catholike Religion, and timely to enable either their ſonnes for our Seminaries, or their Daughters for our Nunneries, ſo the houſes ſhall bee ſupplied ſtill with novices, our Treaſuries with money, and wee with freinds and inſtruments at all occations.
            Concerning theſe two laſt propoſitions, for a concluſion I will produce a Letter vnto me ſubſcribed with the handes of many of the chiefe among them, (whoſe pourtraitures with their names yee haue here inſerted) of the manner of their proceedings, and that you may know they ſpend not their time in vaine in England, For I muſt my LL. tell you I hold intelligence with the wiſeſt and beſt learned among them, and where euer they are tranſeo per medium illorum. Therefore I thought it not amiſſe by a draught to let you ſee them in their Conſultation, as they were wont to ſit at the houſe

of one L. a Goldſmith in Fetter lane by Holborne in London this L.
                  L. a Goldſmith; and one that furthereth the-Printing of Popiſh Book
                     •
                  , hath for many yeares cloſely kept a Printing houſe, to the great furtherance and increaſe of the Catholique Religion in that Land, for by his meanes thouſands & thouſands of good Bookes hath beene diſperſed over the Land, which, albeit they are ſold at an exceſſiue rate, and he hath beene a great gainer by them, yet are they printed and reprinted againe, and much money gotten by them though vttered at a third hand; but I will reade the Letter, it is not long: your Honors therefore daigne it the hearing.
            
               Illuſtrious and excellent Lords, it is now (wee all thinke) a long time ſince wee heard from your Honor, or recieued any inſtruction from you concerning the buſineſſe you wot of, we in England here are like ſhortly to groane vnder the heauie and vnſupportable burthen of perſecution, but wee ſhall (I hope) the better indure it, ſo long as our cauſe is warranted, and our conſtancy aſſiſted and increaſed by the prayers and ſuplications of the Church, we labour dayly in the Catholique Harueſt, and recover, (with wonderfull ſucceſſe) thouſands of ſoules from the Abyſſe of Perdition into the boſome of the Church, the onely difficulty is in con, cealing our ſelues and intendments, from that many headed Monſter Heriſie. Wee walke openly and haue our time alotted vs till the 14 day of Iune next, which is the vtmoſt period of our ſtay, in the meane time wee deſire to be adviſed by your Lordſhip, what afterward were fitteſt to be done of vs, for your Honours depth of Iudgement and all admired

pollicy, is the compaſſe by which we all Steere to eſcape preſent danger. Our Lord protect your Honour to all our Comforts; and our bleſſing be vpon you. From London this 3. of May.
            
            
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   haue here ſe
                     ••
                   the true portrature of the Ieſuits and priſt
                     •
                   as they vſe to ſitt at Counſell in England to further ye Catholicke Cauſe.
            
            
               
               D. Wright.
               
               D. Briſtow.
               
               F. Barlow.
               
               D. Biſhop.
               
               F. Fiſher.
               
               F. Pattiſon.
               
               F. Porter.
               
               D. Smith.
               
               F. Sweete.
               
               F. Ployden.
               
               F. Louett.
               
               F. Wothington.
               
               F. Heyham.
               
               F. Palmer.
               
               F. Townſend, &c.
            
            To this Letter I gaue them this anſwer as followeth.
            
               Holy Fathers, I receiued your Letters to my great comfort, but I confeſſe I am neerely touched with the ſo ſuddaine approach of your common calamitie, but as the greateſt ſore findeth his ſalue, ſo the greateſt affliction ſome conſolation or other in the middeſt of extremitie; For mine owne part know, that I will not be wanting to your comforts in any thing that lyeth in me, or that I can procure in your behalfes, either from his Holineſſe at Rome, or my Maſter his Catholique Maieſtie here. The times are dangerous, carrie your ſelues therefore wiſely with that peruerſe Nation, which ſcornes you, and hourely conſulteth, how to ſweepe you from the face of the earth, and even now haue they the broome in their hands, I meane the preſent Parliament, who will leaue no duſt, or Sluts corners behind them, favour you are to expect none, therefore with the Foxe (when hunted out of breath) you muſt relie vpon your Arts, and ſubtle ſleights. Of which nature may be theſe following. If your credits be ſo good with any great or eminent perſonage, make him your Inſtrument to ſow diſſention

betwixt the Prince & people, imitating herein Souldiers, when they would get an aduantage of flying or running away, they vſe to ſet fire on villages and their baggage, that they might eſcape vnſeene by the benifit of the ſmoake. Learne or deviſe new and the moſt difficult Characters for writing Letters, with all the ſleights and deviſes of privy conveyance; you may practice Phyſicke as Doctors of Padua, or ſet vp bills as Mountebankes, venting collor'd Oyles, Balſames, counterfeit Bezar, perfumed Lozenges, Receipts for the tooth-ach, with a thouſand the like: get the perfect and true receipt for any one diſeaſe or ach, it is enough to gaine credit to your practice, and make you paſse for currant. If you ſend any youths over to our Seminaries let them be the Sonnes of the richeſt and ableſt men, ſo ſhall you not want a place for retraict, and meanes to relieue you at an extremitie. Young Gentlewomen, you may convey over to Bruxells, or whether you pleaſe, by putting them in boyes apparell, theyr hayre being handſomely tyed vp with a Fillet, and a wrought cap worne over it with a great broad-brimmd Hat. If you would at any time convey over any Silver or Gold, the Searcher commonly may be couzened, if you ſend it over in Paſties baked, provided that you haue ſome of fleſh onely to eate or giue away, as a cullor for the reſt. For the venting of hallowed Oyle, Beades, Agnus-Deies, Maddalles, Pardons, Crucifixes, &c. You may doe it by ſome one poore yet truſtie Catholique or two, to goe vp and downe the Countrie in the habit and nature of Pedlers: this alſo is a

good way to hold intelligence with friends in many places. I haue knowne ſome vnder the cullour of ſelling Tobacco, haue carried Letters handſomely preuily in the balles or roules.
            Alſo wee adviſe you, if perſecutions come vpon you to flye into Scotland for a ſeaſon, and when you ſee your beſt time returne againe; for it ſeemeth by this Proclamation you ſent, that you are not banniſhed Scotland, therefore that may be a good ſhelter vnto you.
            Be ſure to haue going in the North or weſt part of England, two Printers preſſes at worke, which let be well ſtocked; alſo a ſmall rouling preſſe for litle pictures of Saints, Veronica's heads, Crucifixes; and the like, much money may be gained hereby.
            Haue a care whenſoeuer any Booke or Picture comes out to our preiudice, ſet ſome freinds to buy them all vp, though you burne them forthwith, except ſome few, which faile not ſtill but to ſend vs of every ſort three at the leaſt, for they will bee vnto vs of great vſe.
            Many moe directions (Holy Fathers) there are which are alike neceſſary to be thought vpon, but I referre them to your owne graue and pious conſiderations. So committing you to the tuition of our bleſſed Lady, and my ſelfe to your holy and deuout prayers, I reſt. From Siuill this 6. of May.
            
            Count Gondomar hauing made an end, they all with one voyce applauded and highly commended his directions and Counſell, not onely for his particular Letter, but for the wiſe carriage of himſelfe

heretofore in many and weightie affayres that concerned the Catholique Religion, the honour of his Maieſtie, and the generall good of the Eſtate, Eſteeming him worthily honored with the Title of a Grande at home in Spaine, and of his Maiſters Ambaſſadour abroad, hauing effected more by his wit and pollicy, then could haue beene wrought by the ſtrength of many Armies.
            And now when they were almoſt come to a period, and full concluſion of their Conſultation for that time, there came a Meſſenger in poſt, who brought Letters from the King, to Count Olivares his favorite, to call him to the Court vpon ſome ſpeciall imployment, what it was, could not bee certainly knowne, but as I heard, ſome complaint was lately come out of England, againſt the Ambaſſadours reſident there, & moreouer that a great fight had beene lately betweene nine great Spaniſh ſhips, & 5. men (or ſhips) of warre of Horne and Enchuiſen in Holland, wherein, the report went, the Hollanders had taken two, and ſunke one, whereupon, they all aroſe vp together in a great confuſion, euery one haſting to his horſe which ſtood ready in a faire baſe Court without, they tooke their way, ſome with Olivares to the Court, others to their owne houſes, where I leaue them, till wee heare further of their proceedings.
         
         
            
            TO THE ILLVSTRIOVS. MAGNIFIQVE AND GRAVE Aſſembly of the High Court of Parliament in England.
            
            HEre as in a little glaſse, may you (Moſt Honorable, Great, and Graue Senate) viewe the epitome, or rather the effect of a ſeauen yeares Treaty with Spaine, yee may plainly ſee the holde and aſſurance wee were euer like to haue had of that Nation, yea, euen when wee thought our ſelues ſureſt of them. Here wee may (to our warning of taking heede whom wee truſt) behold to the life the Haughty-Pride, Thirſty-Couetouſnes, and kind diſſimulation of the ſame Fox populi, Count Gondomar the For they ſay he is a Grande in Spaine.
                GREAT. Here may the Netherlands perceiue, the imminent danger that hung-ouer their heades, ſhortly without doubt to haue fallen vpon them, had not the Spaniſh ambuſhes beene timouſly diſcouered. Heere may that Illuſtrious King, and the moſt renowned and ſecond Queene Elizabeth (for her conſtancy and ſpirit) of Bohemia, and princes Pallatines of the Rhine, conſider how aſſuredly faithfully the ſurrendring of their Pallatinate ſhould haue beene performed. In a word, heere may wee all ſee the great Mercies of

God towards vs, whoſe providence it hath beene, that we ſhould cleare our ſelues from theſe Spaniſh Rockes, that all this while lay vnder water, and vnſeene, doubtleſſe to our ruine, had wee not I ſay by immediate helpe from heauen beene relieued. Let vs then, as wee are one people of the ſame Language, Religion, Lawes, Gouerned by the ſame Gracious and good King, embrace with that wiſe Lord, and graue Councellor (as in his Poeſie) Vuam cor, vnam viam, then neede not our Brittaine ſo famous of ould, for her triumphes and many victories over other Nations, nor care a ſtrawe for the vaine and windy threats of proude Spaine, nor the menaces of the moſt daring Aduerſarie whoſoeuer.
            
               
                  Your Humbleſt ſervant, who is, and euer ſhall be T. S.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   