
      
         
            
            
            THE
EXCELLENT
Hiſtory of the Merchant
of Venice. With the extreme cruelty of Shylocke
the Iew towards the ſaide Merchant, in cutting
a iust pound of his fleſh. And the obtaining
of Portia, by the choyſe of
three Caskets.
            Written by W. SHAKESPEARE.
            Printed by J. Roberts, 1600.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The Comical Hiſtory of the
Merchant of Venice.
            Enter Anthonio, Salaryno, and Salanio.
            
               
                  ANthonio.
               Inſooth I know not why I am ſo ſad,
               It wearies me, you ſay it wearies you;
               But how I caught it, found it, or came by it,
               What ſtuffe tis made off, whereof it is borne,
               I am to learne: & ſuch a want-wit ſadnes makes
of me,
               That I haue much adoe to know my ſelfe.
            
            
               Salarino.
               Your minde is toſſing on the Ocean,
               There where your Argoſies with portly ſayle,
               Like Signiors and rich Burgars on the flood,
               Or as it were the Pageants of the ſea,
               Doe ouer-peere the petty traffiquers
               That curſie to them, do them reuerence
               As they flie by them with their wouen wings.
            
            
               Salanio.
               Beleeue me ſir, had I ſuch venture foorth,
               The better part of my affections would
               Be with my hopes abroad, I ſhould be ſtill
               Plucking the graſſe, to know where ſits the winde,
               Piering in Maps, for Ports, for Peeres and Rodes;
               And euery obiect that might make me feare.
               Misfortune to my ventures, out of doubt
               Would make me ſad.
            
            
               
               Salar.
               My winde cooling my broth,
               Would blow me to an Ague, when I thought
               What harme a winde too great at ſea, might do.
               I ſhould not ſee the ſandy howre-glaſſe runne,
               But I ſhould thinke of ſhallowes, and of flats,
               And ſee my wealthy Andrew dockes in ſand,
               Veyling her high top lower then her ribs,
               To kiſſe her buriall. Should I go to Church,
               And ſee the holy edifice of ſtone,
               And not bethinke me ſtraight of dangerous rockes,
               Which touching but my gentle veſſels ſide,
               Would ſcatter all the ſpices on the ſtreame,
               Enrobe the roaring waters with my ſilkes;
               And in a word, but euen now worth this,
               And now worth nothing? Shall I haue the thought
               To thinke on this, and ſhall I lacke the thought,
               That ſuch a thing be-chanc'd would make me ſad it
               But tell not me, I know Anthonie
               
               Is ſad to thinke vpon his merchandize.
            
            
               Anth.
               Beleeue me no: I thanke my fortune for it,
               My ventures are not in one bottome truſted,
               Nor to one place; nor is my whole eſtate
               Vpon the fortune of this preſent yeare:
               Therefore my merchandize makes me not ſad.
            
            
               Salar.
               Then y'are in loue.
            
            
               Anth.
               Fie, fie.
            
            
               Salar.
               Not in loue neither? Then let vs ſay you are ſad,
               Becauſe you are not merry: and 'twere as eaſie
               For you to laugh and leape, and ſay you are merry,
               Becauſe you are not ſad. Now by two-headed Ianus,
               
               Nature hath fram'd ſtrange fellowes in her time:
               Some that will euermore peepe through their eies,
               And laugh like Parrats at a bag-piper.
               And other of ſuch vinegar aſpect,
               That they'l not ſhew their teeth in way of ſmile,
               Though Neſtor ſweare the leſt be laughable.
            
            
            Enter Baſſanio, Lorouſe, and Gratiano.
            
               Salan.
               Here comes Baſſanio your moſt noble kinſman,
               
                  Gratiano and Lorenſo: Faryewell,
               We leaue you now with better company.
            
            
               Salar.
               I would haue ſtaide till I had made you merry,
               If worthier friends had not preuented me.
            
            
               Anth.
               Your worth is very deere in my regard.
               I take it your owne buſineſſe cals on you,
               And you embrace the occaſion to depart.
            
            
               Salar.
               Good morrow my good Lords.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Good ſigniors both, when ſhall we laugh? ſay, when?
               You grow exceeding ſtrange: muſt it be ſo?
            
            
               Salar.
               Wee'l make our leyſures to attend on yours.
            
            Exeunt Salarino and Salania.
            
               Lor.
               My Lord Baſſanio, ſince you haue found Anthonio,
               
               we two will leaue you; but at dinner time
               I pray you haue in minde where we muſt meete.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               I will not faile you.
            
            Exit
            
               Grat.
               You looke not well ſignior Anthonio,
               
               You haue too much reſpect vpon the world:
               They looſe it that do buy it with much care,
               Beleeue me you are meruailouſly chang'd.
            
            
               Ant.
               I hold the world but as the world Gratiano,
               
               A ſtage, where euery one muſt play a part,
               And mine a ſad one.
            
            
               Gra.
               Let me play the foole,
               With mirth and laughter let old wrinkles come;
               And let my Liuer rather heate with wine,
               Then my heart coole with mortifying grones.
               Why ſhould a man whoſe blood is warme within,
               Sit like his Grandſire cut in Alablaſter?
               Sleepe when he wakes? and creepe into the Iaundies.
               By being peeuiſh? I tell thee what Anthonio,
               
               I loue thee, and tis my loue that ſpeakes.
               There are a ſort of men, whoſe viſages
               
                  
Doe dreame and mantle like a ſtanding pond,
               And do a wilfull ſtilneſſe entertaine,
               With purpoſe to be dreſt in an opinion
               Of wiſedome, grauity, profound conceit,
               As who ſhould ſay, I am ſir Oracle,
               And when I ope my lips, let no dog barke.
               O my Anthonio, I do know of thoſe
               That therefore onely are reputed wiſe
               For ſaying nothing; when I am very ſure
               If they ſhould ſpeake, would almoſt dam thoſe eares,
               Which hearing them would call their brothers fooles,
               Ile tell thee more of this another time.
               But fiſh not with this melancholy baite,
               For this foole gudgin, this opinion:
               Come good Lorenzo, farwell a while,
               Ile end my exhortation after dinner.
            
            
               Loren.
               Well, we will leaue you then till dinner time.
               I muſt be one of theſe ſame dumbe wiſe men,
               For Gratiano neuer lets me ſpeake.
            
            
               Gra.
               Well, keepe me company but two yeares moe,
               Thou ſhalt not know the ſound of thine owne tongue.
            
            
               An.
               Farwell, Ile grow a talker for this geare.
            
            
               Gra.
               Thanks ifaith, for ſilence is onely commendable
               In a neats tongue dried, and a maide not vendable.
            
            Exeunt.
            
               An.
               It is that any thing now.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               
                  Gratiano ſpeakes an infinite deale of nothing, more then
any man in all Venice, his reaſons are as two graines of wheate
hid in two buſhels of chaffe: you ſhall ſeeke all day ere you
finde them, and when you haue them, they are not worth the
ſearch.
            
            
               Ant.
               Well, tell me now what Lady is the ſame
               To whom you ſwore a ſecret pilgrimage,
               That you to day promiſd to tell me of.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Tis not vnknowne to you Anthonio,
               
               How much I haue diſabled mine eſtate,
               
                  
By ſomething ſhewing a more ſwelling port,
               Then my faint meanes would grant continuance▪
               
               Nor do I now make moane to be abridg'd
               From ſuch a noble rate, but my cheefe care
               Is to come fairely off from the great debts
               Wherein my time ſomething too prodigall
               Hath left me gag'd: to you Anthonio,
               
               I owe the moſt in money and in loue,
               And from your loue I haue a warranty
               To vnburthen all my plots and purpoſes
               How to get cleere of all the debts I owe.
            
            
               Antho.
               I pray you good Baſſanio, let me know it,
               And if it ſtand as you your ſelfe ſtill do,
               Within the eye of honour, be aſſured
               My purſe, my perſon, my extremeſt meanes
               Lie all vnlockt to your occaſions.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               In my ſchoole dayes▪ when I had loſt one ſhaft,
               I ſhot his fellow of the ſelfe-ſame flight
               The ſelfe-ſame way, with more aduiſed watch
               To finde the other foorth, and by aduentring both,
               I oft found both: I vrge this child-hood proofe,
               Becauſe what followes, is pure innocence.
               I owe you much, and like a wilfull youth,
               That which I owe is loſt, but if you pleaſe
               To ſhoote another arrow that ſelfe way
               Which you did ſhoote the firſt, I do not doubt,
               As I will watch the ayme or to finde both,
               Or bring your latter hazard backe againe,
               And thankfully reſt debter for the firſt.
            
            
               Ant.
               You know me well, and heerein ſpend but time.
               To winde about my loue with circumſtance,
               And out of doubt you do me now more wrong,
               In making queſtion of my vttermoſt,
               Then if you had made waſte of all I haue:
               Then do but ſay to me, what I ſhould do,
               That in your knowledge may by me be done,
               
                  
And I am preſt vnto it, therefore ſpeake.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               In Belmont is a Lady richly left,
               And ſhe is faire, and fairer then that word,
               Of wondrous vertues. Sometimes from her eyes
               I did receiue faire ſpeechleſſe meſſages:
               Her name is Portia; nothing vnder-valew'd
               To Catos daughter, Brutus Portia.
               
               Nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth,
               For the foure winds blow in from euery coaſt
               Renowned ſutors, and her ſunny lockes
               Hang on her temples like a golden fleece,
               which makes her ſeat of Belmont, Colchoe ſtrond,
               And many Iaſons comes in queſt of her.
               O my Anthonio, had I but the meanes
               To hold a riuall place with one of them,
               I haue a minde preſages me ſuch thrift,
               That I ſhould queſtionleſſe be fortunate.
            
            
               Ant.
               Thou knowſt that all my fortunes are atica,
               Neither haue I money, nor commodity,
               To raiſe a preſent ſumme. Therefore go forth,
               Try what my credit can in Venice do,
               That ſhall be rackt euen to the vttermoſt,
               To furniſh thee to Belmont to faire Portia.
               
               Go preſently enquire, and ſo will I
               where money is, and I no queſtion make,
               To haue it of my truſt, or for my ſake.
            
            Exeunt
            Enter Portia with her waiting Woman Nerriſſa.
            
               Portia.
               By my troth Nerriſſa, my little body is a wearie of
this great world.
            
            
               Ner.
               You would be ſweet Madam, if your miſeries were in the
ſame abundance as your good fortunes are: and yet for ought I
ſee, they are as ſick that ſurfet with too much, as they that ſtatue
with nothing; it is no meane happineſſe therefore to be ſeated
in the meane, ſuperfluity comes ſooner by white haires, but
competency liues, longer.
            
            
               
               Portia.
               Good ſentences, and well pronounced.
            
            
               Ner.
               They would be better, if well followed.
            
            
               Por.
               If to do, were as eaſie as to know what were good to
do, Chappels had beene Churches, and poore mens cottages,
Princes Pallaces; it is a good diuine that followes his owne inſtructions:
I can eaſier teach twenty what were good to bee
done, then to be one of the twenty to follow mine owne teaching:
the braine may deuiſe lawes for the blood, but a hot temper
leapes ore a colde decree, ſuch a hare is madneſſe the youth,
to skip ore the meſhes of good counſell the cripple; but this
reaſoning is not in the faſhion to chooſe me a husband; O me,
the word chooſe, I may neyther chooſe who I would, nor refuſe
who I diſlike, ſo is the will of a liuing daughter curbd by the
will of a dead father: is it not hard Neriſſa, that I cannot chooſe
one, nor refuſe none.
            
            
               Ner.
               Your father was euer vertuous, and holy men at their
death haue good inſpirations, therefore the lottry that he hath
deuiſed in theſe three cheſts of gold, ſiluer, and leade, whereof
who chooſes his meaning chooſes you, no doubt you wil neuer
be choſen by any rightly, but one who ſhall rightly loue: But
what warmth is there in your affection towards any of theſe
Princely ſuters that are already come?
            
            
               Por.
               I prethee ouer-name them, and as thou nameſt them, I
will deſcribe them, and according to my deſcription, leuell at
my affection.
            
            
               Ner.
               Firſt, there is the Neapolitane Prince.
            
            
               Por.
               I that's a colt indeed, for hee doth nothing but talke of
his horſe, and he makes it a great appropriation vnto his owne
good parts, that he can ſhoo himſelfe: I am much afeard my Lady
his Mother plaid falſe with a ſmith.
            
            
               Ner.
               Then there is the County Palatine.
            
            
               Por.
               He doth nothing but frowne (as who ſhould ſay, if you
will not haue me, chooſe; he heares merry tales and ſmiles not,
I feare he will prooue the weeping Philoſopher whē he growes
old, being ſo full of vnmannerly ſadneſſe in his youth.) I had rather
be married to a deaths head with a bone in his mouth, then

to eyther of theſe: God defend me from theſe two.
            
            
               Ner.
               How ſay you by the French Lord, Mounſier le Boune?
               
            
            
               Por.
               God made him, and therefore let him paſſe for a man, in
truth I know it is a ſinne to be a mocker, but he, why he hath a
horſe better then the Neapolitans, a better bad habite of frowning
then the Count Palatine, hee is euery man in no man, if a
Traſſell ſing, hee fals ſtraight a capting, hee will fence with his
owne ſhadow. If I ſhould marry him, I ſhould marry twenty
husbands: if he would deſpiſe me, I would forgiue him, for if
he loue me to madneſſe, I ſhall neuer requite him.
            
            
               Ner.
               What ſay you then to Fauconbridge, the young Baron of
England?
            
            
               Por.
               You know I ſay nothing to him, for he vnderſtands not
me, nor I him: he hath neither Latine, French, nor Italian, & you
will come into the Court and ſweare that I haue a poore penniworth
in the Engliſh: he is a proper mans picture, but alas who
can conuerſe with a dumbe ſhow? how odly he is ſuted, I think
he bought his doublet in Italy, his round hoſe in France, his
bonnet in Germany, and his behauiour euery where.
            
            
               Neriſſa.
               What thinke you of the Scottiſh Lord his Neighbour?
            
            
               Por.
               That he hath a neighbourly charity in him, for he borrowed
a boxe of the eare of the Engliſhman, and ſwore he wold
pay him againe when he was able: I thinke the Frenchman became
his ſurety, and ſcald vnder for another.
            
            
               Ner.
               How like you the young Germaine, the Duke of Saxouies
nephew?
            
            
               Por.
               Very vildely in the morning when he is ſober, and moſt
vilely in the afternoone when he is drunke: when he is beſt, hee
is a little worſe then a man, and when he is worſt he is little better
then a beaſt; and the worſt fall that euer fell, I hope I ſhall
make ſhift to go without him.
            
            
               Ner.
               If he ſhould offer to chooſe, and chooſe the right Caſket,
you ſhould refuſe to performe your fathers wil, if you ſhold
refuſe to accept him.
            
            
               Por.
               Therfore for feare of the worſt, I prethee ſet a deep glaſſe

of Reyniſh Wine on the contrary Casket, for if the diuell bee
within, and that temptation without, I know he will chooſe it.
I will do any thing Neriſſa, ere ile be married to a ſpunge.
            
            
               Ner.
               You need not feare Lady, the hauing any of theſe Lords,
they haue acquainted me with their determinations, which is
indeed to returne to their home, and to trouble you with no
more ſute, vnleſſe you may be won by ſome other ſort then your
fathers impoſition, depending on the Caskets.
            
            
               Por.
               If I liue to be as olde as Sibilla, I will die as chaſte as Diana,
vnleſſe I bee obtained by the manner of my fathers will: I
am glad this parcell of wooers are ſo reaſonable, for there is not
one among them but I dote on his very abſence; & I pray God
grant them a faire departure.
            
            
               Ner.
               Do you not remember Lady in your fathers time, a Venetian
Scholler and a Souldior that came hitherin company of
the Marqueſſe of Mountferrat?
               
            
            
               Portia.
               Yes, yes, it was Baſſanio, as I thinke he was ſo call'd.
            
            
               Ner.
               True Maddam, he of all the men that euer my fooliſh
eyes lookt vpon, was the beſt deſeruing a faire Lady.
            
            
               Por.
               I remember him well, and I remember him worthy of
thy praiſe.
               How now, what newes?
            
            Enter a ſeruingman.
            
               Ser.
               The foure ſtrangers ſeeke for you Madame, to take their
leaue; and there is a fore-runner come from a fift, the Prince of
Moroco, who brings word the Prince his Maſter will be heere to
night.
            
            
               Por.
               If I could bid the fift welcome, with ſo good a heart as I
can bid the other foure farwell, I ſhould be glad of his approch:
if he haue the condition of a Saint, and the complection of a diuell,
I had rather he ſhould ſhriue me then wiue me. Come Nerriſſa,
ſirra go before: whiles we ſhut the gates vpon one wooer,
another knocks at the doore.
            
            Exeunt.
            Enter Baſſanio, with Shylocke the lew.
            
               Shy.
               Three thouſand ducats, well.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               
                  I ſir, for three months.
            
            
               
               Shy.
               For three moneths, well.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               For the which as I told you,
Anthonio ſhall be bound.
            
            
               Shy.
               
                  Anthonio ſhall become bound, well.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               May you ſtead me? Will you pleaſure me!
               Shall I know your anſwere?
            
            
               Shy.
               Three thouſand ducats for three moneths,
and Anthonio bound.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Your anſwere to that.
            
            
               Shy.
               
                  Anthonio is a good man.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Haue you heard any imputation to the contrary?
            
            
               Shy.
               Ho no, no, no, no: my meaning in ſaying hee is a good
man, is to haue you vnderſtand me, that he is ſufficient, yet his
meanes are in ſuppoſition: he hath an Argoſie bound to Tripolis,
another to the Indies, I vnderſtand moreouer vpon the Ryalta,
he hath a third at Mexico, a fourth for England, & other ventures
he hath ſquandred abroad, but ſhips are but boards, Saylers
but men; there be land rats, and water rats, water theeues,
and land theeues, I meane Pyrats, and then there is the perill of
waters, windes, and rockes: the man is notwithſtanding ſufficient,
three thouſand ducats, I thinke I may take his bond.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Be aſſured you may.
            
            
               Shy.
               I will be aſſured I may: and that I may be aſſured, I will
bethinke me, may I ſpeake with Anthonio?
               
            
            
               Baſſ.
               If it pleaſe you to dine with vs.
            
            
               Shy.
               Yes, to ſmell porke, to eate of the habitation which your
Prophet the Nazarite coniured the diuell into: I will buy with
you, ſell with you, talke with you, walke with you, and ſo following:
but I will not eate with you, drinke with you, nor pray
with you. What newes on the Ryalto, who is he comes heere?
            
            Enter Anthonio.
            
               Baſſ.
               This is ſigniour Anthonio.
               
            
            
               Shy.
               How like a fawning Publican he lookes.
               I hate him for he is a Chriſtian:
               
                  
But more, for that in lowe ſimplicity
               He lends out mony gratis, and brings downe
               The rate of vſance heere with vs in Venice.
               
               If I can catch him once vpon the hip,
               I will feed fat the ancient grudge I beare him.
               He hates our ſacred Nation, and he rayles
               Euen there where Merchants moſt do congregate,
               On me, my bargaines, and my well-won thrift,
               Which he cals intereſt: Curſed be my Tribe
               If I forgiue him.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               
                  Shylocke, do you heare.
            
            
               Shy.
               I am debating of my preſent ſtore,
               And by the neere gueſſe of my memory,
               I cannot inſtantly raiſe vp the groſſe
               Of full three thouſand ducats: what of that?
               
                  Tuball, a wealthy Hebrew of my Tribe,
               Will furniſh me; but ſoft, how many months
               Doe you deſire? Reſt you faire good Signior,
               Your worſhip was the laſt man in our mouthes.
            
            
               Ant.
               
                  Shylocke, although I neither lend nor borrow,
               By taking nor by giuing of exceſſe,
               Yet to ſupply the ripe wants of my friend,
               Ile breake a cuſtome: are you reſolu'd,
               How much he would haue?
            
            
               Shy.
               I, I, three thouſand ducats.
            
            
               Ant.
               And for three moneths.
            
            
               Shy.
               I had forgot, three months, you told me ſo.
               Well then, your bond: and let me ſee, but heare you,
               Me-thought you ſaid, you neither lend nor borrow
               Vpon aduantage.
            
            
               Ant.
               I do neuer vſe it.
            
            
               Shy.
               When Iacob graz'd his Vnckle Labans ſheepe,
               This Iacob from our holy Abram was
               (As his wiſe Mother wrought in his behalfe)
               The third poſſeſſer; I, he was the third.
            
            
               Ant.
               And what of him, did he take intereſt?
            
            
               
               Shy.
               No, not take intereſt, not as you would ſay
               Directly intereſt, marke what Iacob did,
               When Laban and himſelfe were compremyzd,
               That all the canelings which were ſtreakt and pied,
               Should fall as Iacobs hier, the Ewes being rancke,
               In th'end of Autume turned to the Rams,
               And when the worke of generation was
               Betweene theſe woolly breeders in the acte,
               The skilfull ſhepheard pyld me certaine wands,
               And in the doing of the deed of kinde,
               He ſtucke them vp before the fulſome Ewes,
               Who then conceiuing, did in eaning time
               Fall party-coloured lambes, and thoſe were Iacobs.
               
               This was a way to thriue, and he was bleſt:
               And thrift is bleſſing if men ſteale it not.
            
            
               Ant.
               This was a venture ſir, that Iacob ſer'ud for,
               A thing not in his power to bring to paſſe,
               But ſwavd and faſhion'd by the hand of heauen.
               Was this inſerted to make intereſt good?
               Or is your gold and ſiluer, Ewes and Rams?
            
            
               Shy.
               I cannot tell, I make it breed as faſt,
               But note me ſignior.
            
            
               Ant.
               Marke you this Baſſanio,
               
               The diuell can cite Scripture for his purpoſe,
               An euill ſoule producing holy witneſſe,
               Is like a villaine with a ſmiling cheeke,
               A goodly apple rotten at the heart.
               O what a goodly outſide falſhood hath.
            
            
               Shy.
               Three thouſand ducats, tis a good round ſum.
               Three months from twelue, then let me ſee the rate.
            
            
               Ant.
               Well Shylocke, ſhall we be beholding to you?
            
            
               Shy.
               Signior Anthonio, many a time and oft
               In the Ryalto you haue rated me
               About my monies and my vſances:
               Still haue I borne it with a patient ſhrug,
               (For ſufferance is the badge of all our Tribe)
               
                  
You call me misbeleeuer, cut-throate dog,
               And ſpet vpon my Iewiſh gaberdine,
               And all for vſe of that which is mine owne.
               Well then, it now appeares you need my helpe:
               Goe to then, you come to me, and you ſay,
               
                  Shylocke, we would haue monies, you ſay ſo:
               You that did voyd your rume vpon my beard,
               And foote me as you ſpurne a ſtranger curre
               Ouer your threſhold, money is your ſute,
               What ſhould I ſay to you? Should I not ſay,
               Hath a dog money? is it poſſible
               A curre can lend three thouſand ducats? or
               Shall I bend low, and in a bond-mans key,
               With bated breath, and whiſpring humbleneſſe
               Say this: Faire ſir, you ſpet on me on wendſday laſt,
               You ſpurn'd me ſuch a day another time,
               You call'd me dog: and for theſe curteſies
               Ile lend you thus much monies.
            
            
               Ant.
               I am as like to call thee ſo againe,
               To ſpet on thee againe, to ſpurne thee to.
               If thou wilt lend this money, lend it not
               As to thy friends, for when did friendſhip take
               A breed for barren mettall of his friend?
               But lend it rather to thine enemy,
               Who if he breake, thou maiſt with better face
               Exact the penalty.
            
            
               Shy.
               Why looke you how you ſtorme,
               I would be friends with you, and haue your loue,
               Forget the ſhames that you haue ſtain'd me with,
               Supply your preſent wants, and take no doyte
               Of vſance for my monies, and you'l not heare me,
               This is kinde I offer.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               This were kindneſſe.
            
            
               Shy.
               This kindneſſe will I ſhow,
               Goe with me to a Notarie, ſeale me there
               Your ſingle bond, and in a merry ſport,
               
                  
If you repay me not on ſuch a day
               In ſuch a place, ſuch ſumme or ſummes as are
               Expreſt in the condition, let the forfeit
               Be nominated for an equall pound
               Of your faire fleſh, to be cut off and taken
               In what part of your body pleaſeth me.
            
            
               Ant.
               Content ifaith, ile ſeale to ſuch a bond,
               And ſay there is much kindneſſe in the Iew.
               
            
            
               Baſſ.
               You ſhall not ſeale to ſuch a bond for me,
               Ile rather dwell in my neceſſity.
            
            
               An.
               Why feare not man, I will not forfet it,
               Within theſe two months, that's a month before
               This bond expires, I do expect returne
               Of thrice three times the value of this bond.
            
            
               Shy.
               O father Abram, what theſe Chriſtians are,
               Whoſe owne hard dealings teaches them ſuſpect
               The thoughts of others: pray you tell me this,
               If he ſhould breake his day, what ſhould I gaine
               By the exaction of the forfeiture?
               A pound of mans fleſh taken from a man,
               Is not ſo eſtimable, profitable neyther
               As fleſh of Muttons, Beefes, or Goats, I ſay,
               To buy his fauour, I extend this friendſhip,
               If he will take it ſo, if not adiew,
               And for my loue, I pray you wrong me not.
            
            
               Ant.
               Yes Shylocke, I will ſeale vnto this bond.
            
            
               Shy.
               Then meete me forthwith at the Noteries,
               Giue him direction for this merry bond,
               And I will goe and purſe the ducats ſtraight,
               See to my houſe, left in the fearefull guard
               Of an vnthrifty knaue; and preſently
               Ile be with you.
            
            Exit.
            
               Ant.
               Hie thee gentle Iew: the Hebrew will turne Chriſtian,
he growes ſo kinde.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               I like not faire termes, and a villaines minde.
            
            
               Ant.
               Come on, in this there can be no diſmay.
               
                  
My ſhips come home a month before the day.
            
            Exeunt
            Enter Morochus a tawny Moore all in white, and three or
foure followers accordingly, with Portia,
Nerriſſa, & their traine.
            
               Moroc.
               Miſlike me not for my complexion,
               The ſhadowed liuery of the burniſht ſunne,
               To whom I am a neighbour, and neere bred.
               Bring the faireſt creature North-ward borne,
               VVhere Phoebus fire ſcarſe thawes the yſicles,
               And let vs make inciſion for your loue,
               To proue whoſe blood is reddeſt, his or mine.
               I tell thee Lady, this aſpect of mine
               Hath fear'd the valiant (by my Loue I ſweare)
               The beſt regarded virgins of our clime
               Hath lou'd it too: I would not change this hue,
               Except to ſteale your thoughts my gentle Queene.
            
            
               Por.
               In termes of choiſe I am not ſoly led
               By nice direction of a maydens eyes.
               Beſides, the Lottry of my deſtiny
               Barres me the right of voluntary chooſing:
               But if my father had not ſcanted me,
               And hedg'd me by his wit, to yeeld my ſelfe
               His wife, who winnes me by that meanes I told you,
               Your ſelfe (renowned Prince) than ſtood as faire
               As any commer I haue look'd on yet,
               For my affection.
            
            
               Mor.
               Euen for that I thanke you,
               Therefore I pray you leade me to the Caskets
               To try my fortune. By this Semitaur
               That ſlew the Sophy, and a Perſian Prince,
               That wonne three fields of Sultan Solyman,
               I would out-ſtare the ſterneſt eyes that looke:
               Out-braue the heart moſt daring on the earth:
               Plucke the yong ſucking Cubs from the ſhee-Beare,
               
                  
Yea, mocke the Lyon when he tores for prey,
               To win the Lady. But alas, the while
               If Hercules and Lychas play at dice
               Which is the better man, the greater throw
               May turne by fortune from the weaker hand:
               So is Alcides beaten by his rage,
               And ſo may I, blinde fortune leading mee,
               Miſſe that which one vnworthier may attaine,
               And dye with greeuing.
            
            
               Portia.
               You muſt take your chance,
               And either not attempt to chooſe at all,
               Or ſwear before you chooſe, if you chooſe wrong,
               Neuer to ſpeake to Lady afterward
               In way of marriage, therefore be aduiſde.
            
            
               Mor.
               Nor will not, come bring me to my chance
            
            
               Por.
               Firſt forward to the Temple, after dinner
               Your hazard ſhall be made.
            
            
               Mor.
               Good fortune then,
               To make me bleſt, or curſedſt among men.
            
            Exeunt.
            Enter the Clowne alone.
            
               Clowne.
               Certainly, my conſcience will ſerue me to run from
this Iew my maſter. The fiend is at mine elbow, and tempts me
ſaying to mee, Gobbo, Lancelet Gobbo, good Lancelet, or good
Gobbo, or good Lancelet Gobbo, vſe your legges, take the ſtarte,
runne away: My Conſcience ſayes no; take heed honeſt Lancelet,
take heede honeſt Gobbo, or as aforeſaide, honeſt Launcelet
Gobbo, do not runne, ſcorne running with thy heeles. Well, the
moſt couragious fiend bids me packe fia ſayes the fiend, away
ſayes the fiend, for the heauens rouſe vp a braue mind ſayes the
fiend, and runne. Well, my conſcience hanging about the neck
of my heart, ſayes very wiſely to me; My honeſt friend Lancelet,
being an honeſt mans ſonne, or rather an honeſt womans
ſonne, for indeede my Father did ſomething ſmack, ſomething
grow too, he had a kinde of taſte: well, my conſcience ſayes

bouge not; bouge ſaies the fiend; bouge not ſayes my Conſcience.
Conſcience ſay I you counſell well; Fiend ſay I you
counſell ill. To be rul'd by my Conſcience, I ſhould ſtay with
the Iew my maſter, who (God bleſſe the marke) is a kinde of
diuell; and to runne away from the Iew, I ſhould be rul'de by
the fiend, who (ſauing your reuerence) is the Diuell himſelfe.
Certainly the Iew is the very diuell incarnall, and in my conſcience,
my conſcience is but a kinde of hard conſcience, to offer
to counſell me to ſtay with the Iew. The fiende giues the more
friendly counſaile, I will run fiend, my heeles are at your command,
I will run.
            
            Enter old Gobbo with a Basket.
            
               Gobbo.
               Maſter yong man, you I pray you, which is the way
to Maſter Iewes?
            
            
               Lance.
               O heauens, this is my true begotten Father, who being
more then ſand blind, high grauell blinde, knowes me not,
I will try concluſions with him.
            
            
               Gobbo.
               Maſter yong Gentleman, I pray you which is the way
to maſter Iewes?
            
            
               Lance.
               Turne vp on your right hand at the next turning, but
at the next turning of all on your left; marry at the verie nexte
turning turne of no hand, but turne downe indirectly vnto the
Iewes houſe.
            
            
               Gobbo.
               Be Gods ſonties twill bee a hard way to hit, can you
tell me whither one Lancelet that dwels with him, dwell with
him, or no?
            
            
               Lancelet.
               Talke you of young maſter Lancelet? Marke mee
now, now will I raiſe the waters:
               Talke you of yong M. Lancelet?
               
            
            
               Gobbo.
               No maſter ſir, but a poore mans ſonne.
               His Father (though I ſay it)
               Is an honeſt exceeding poore man,
               And God be thanked, well to liue.
            
            
               Lancelet.
               Well, let his Father be what a will, we talk of yong

Maſter Launcelet.
               
            
            
               Gob.
               Your worſhips friend, and Lancelet ſir.
            
            
               Lan.
               But I pray you ergo olde man, ergo I beſeech you, talke
you of yong M. Lancelet.
               
            
            
               Gob,
               Of Lancelet an't pleaſe your maſterſhip.
            
            
               Lan.
               
                  Ergo maſter Lancelet, talke not of maiſter Lancelet Father;
for the yong Gentleman according to fates and deſtinies,
and ſuch odd ſayings, the ſiſters three, and ſuch braunches of
learning, is indeed deceaſed, or as you would ſay in plain terms,
gone to heauen.
            
            
               Gob.
               Marry God forbid, the boy was the verie ſtaffe of my
age, my very prop.
            
            
               Lance.
               Do I looke like a cudgell or a houell poſte, a ſtaffe,
or a prop: do you know me Father.
            
            
               Gob.
               A lacke the day, I know you not yong Gentleman, but
I pray you tell mee, is my boy (GOD reſt his ſoule) aliue or
dead.
            
            
               Lance.
               Do you not know me Father?
            
            
               Gob.
               Alacke ſir, I am ſand blinde, I know you not.
            
            
               Lan.
               Nay, in deede if you had your eyes you might faile of
the knowing me: it is a wiſe Father that knowes his own child.
Well, olde man, I will tell you newes of your ſonne, giue mee
your bleſſing; Trueth will come to light, Murther cannot be
hidde long, a mans ſonne may, but at the length trueth will
out.
            
            
               Gobbo.
               Pray you ſir ſtand vp, I am ſure you are not Launcelet
my boy.
            
            
               Lance.
               Pray you let's haue no more fooling about it, but
giue me your bleſſing; I am Lancelot your boy that was, your
ſon that is, your child that ſhall be.
            
            
               Gob.
               I cannot thinke you are my ſonne.
            
            
               Lance.
               I know not what I ſhall thinke of that, but I am Lancelet
the Iews man, and I am ſure Margery your wife is my mother.
            
            
               Gob.
               Her name is Margery indeede, ile be ſworne if thou bee
Lancelet, thou art mine owne fleſh and blood: Lord worſhipt

might he be, what a beard haſt thou got? thou haſt got more
haire on thy chin, then Dobbin my pilhorſe has on his tale.
            
            
               Lan.
               It ſhould ſeeme then that Dobbins taile growes backward.
I am ſure he had more haire of his tayle then I haue of my
face, when I laſt ſaw him.
            
            
               Gob.
               Lord how art thou chang'd: how doeſt thou and thy
Maſter agree? I haue brought him a preſent; how agree you
now?
            
            
               Lance.
               Well, well, but for mine owne part, as I haue ſet vp my
reſt to runne away, ſo I will not reſt till I haue run ſome ground;
My maſter's a very Iew, giue him a preſent, giue him a halter, I
am famiſht in his ſeruice. You may tell euery finger I haue with
my ribs: Father I am glad you are come, giue me your preſent
to one Maſter Baſſanio, who indeed giues rare new liueries, if I
ſerue not him, I will runne as farre as God has any ground. O
rare fortune, here comes the man, to him Father, for I am a Iew
if I ſerue the Iew any longer.
            
            Enter Baſſanio with a follower or two.
            
               Baſſ.
               You may doe ſo, but let it be ſo haſted that ſupper be
ready at the fartheſt by fiue of the clocke: ſee theſe Letters deliuered,
put the Lyueries to making, and deſire Gratiano to come
anon to my lodging.
            
            Exit one of his men.
            
               Lance.
               To him Father.
            
            
               Gob.
               God bleſſe your Worſhip.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Gramercy, wouldſt thou ought with me?
            
            
               Gob.
               Here's my ſonne ſir, a poore boy.
            
            
               Lance.
               Not a poore boy ſir, but the rich Iewes man that wold
ſir, as my father ſhall ſpecifie.
            
            
               Gob.
               He hath a great infection ſir, as one would ſay to ſerue.
            
            
               Lance.
               Indeed the ſhort and the long is, I ſerue the Iew, and
haue a deſire as my Father ſhall ſpecifie.
            
            
               Gob.
               His Maſter and he (ſauing your worſhips reuerence) are
ſcarſe catercoſins.
            
            
               
               Lan.
               To be briefe, the very truth is, that the Iew hauing don
me wrong, doth cauſe me as my Father, being I hope, an olde
man, ſhall frutifie vnto you.
            
            
               Gob.
               I haue heere a diſh of Doues that I would beſtow vpon
your worſhip: and my ſute is—
            
            
               Lan.
               In very briefe, the ſute is impertinent to my ſelfe, as
your worſhip ſhal know by this honeſt old man, and though I
ſay it, though old man, yet poore man my father.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               One ſpeake for both, what would you?
            
            
               Lan.
               Serue you ſir.
            
            
               Gob.
               That is the verie defect of the matter ſir.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               I know thee well, thou haſt obtain'd thy ſute,
               
                  Shylocke thy maſter ſpoke with me this day,
               And hath preferr'd thee, if it be preferment
               To leaue a rich Iewes ſeruice, to become
               The follower of ſo poore a Gentleman.
            
            
               Lan.
               The old Prouerbe is very well parted between my maſter
Shylock and you ſir, You haue the grace of God ſir, and hee
hath enough.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Thou ſpeakſt it well. Go Father with thy ſonne,
               Take leaue of thy old maſter, and enquire
               My Lodging out. Giue him a Liuery
               More garded then his fellowes, ſee it done.
            
            
               Lan.
               Father in, I cannot get a ſeruice, no, I ha nere a tongue
in my head. Well, if any man in Italy haue a fairer table which
doth offer to ſweare vppon a booke, I ſhall haue good fortune.
Go too, heere's a ſimple line of life, here's a ſmal trifle of wiues:
Alas, fifteene wiues is nothing, eleuen VViddowes and nine
maids, is a ſimple comming in for one man, and then to eſcape
drowning thrice, and to be in perill of my life with the edge of
a feather-bed, heere are ſimple ſcapes: well, if Fortune bee a
woman, ſhee's a good wench for this geere. Father, come, ile
take my leaue of the Iew in the twinkling of an eye.
            
            Exit Clowne.
            
               Baſſ.
               I pray thee good Leonardo thinke on this,
               Theſe things being bought, and orderly beſtow'd,
               
                  
Returne in haſt, for I do feaſt to night,
               My beſt eſteem'd acquaintance, hie thee, go.
            
            
               Leon.
               My beſt endeuors ſhall be done heerein.
            
            Exit
            Enter Gratiano.
            
               Gra.
               Where's your Maſter.
            
            
               Leon.
               Yonder ſir he walkes.
            
            
               Gra.
               Signior Baſſanio.
               
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Gratiano?
            
            
               Gra.
               I haue a ſute to you.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               You haue obtain'd it.
            
            
               Gra.
               You muſt not deny me, I muſt go with you to Belmont.
               
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Why then you muſt. But heare thee Gratiano,
               
               Thou art too wilde, too rude, and bold of voice,
               Parts that become thee happily enough,
               And in ſuch eies as ours appeare not faults,
               But where thou art not knowne. Why there they ſhew
               Something too lib'rall: prethee take paine
               To allay with ſome cold drops of modeſtie
               Thy skipping ſpirit, leſt through thy wilde behauiour
               I be miſconſtred in the place I go to,
               And loſe my hopes.
            
            
               Gra.
               Signior Baſſanio, heare me:
               If I do not put on a ſober habite,
               Talke with reſpect, and ſweare but now and than;
               Weare prayer bookes in my pocket, looke demurely,
               Nay more, while Grace is ſaying, hood mine eies
               Thus with my hat, and ſigh, and ſay Amen:
               Vſe all the obſeruance of ciuility,
               Like one well ſtudied in a ſad oſtent
               To pleaſe his Grandam, neuer truſt me more.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Well, we ſhall ſee your bearing.
            
            
               Gra.
               Nay but I barre to night, you ſhall not gage me
               By what we do to night.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               No that were pitty,
               
                  I would entreate you rather to put on
               
                  
Your boldeſt ſute of mirth, for we haue friends
               That purpoſe merriment: but faryewell,
               I haue ſome buſineſſe.
            
            
               Gra.
               And I muſt to Lorenzo and the reſt,
               But we will viſite you at ſupper time.
            
            Exeunt.
            Enter Ieſſica and the Clowne.
            
               Ieſſica.
               I am ſorry thou wilt leaue my Father ſo,
               Our houſe is hell, and thou a merry diuell
               Didſt rob it of ſome taſte of tediouſneſſe,
               But fare thee well, there is a ducat for thee,
               And Lancelet, ſoone at ſupper ſhalt thou ſee
               
                  Lorenzo, who is thy new Maſters gueſt,
               Giue him this Letter, do it ſecretly,
               And ſo farwell: I would not haue my Father
               See me in talke with thee.
            
            
               Lance.
               Adew, teares exhibite my tongue, moſt beautifull Pagan,
moſt ſweete Iew, if a Chriſtian doe not play the knaue and
get thee, I am much deceiued; but adew, theſe fooliſh drops do
ſomething drowne my manly ſpirit: adieu.
            
            Exit.
            
               Ieſſica.
               Farwell good Lancelet.
               
               Alacke, what heynous ſinne is it in me,
               To be aſham'd to be my fathers childe,
               But though I am a daughter to his blood,
               I am not to his manners: O Lorenzo,
               
               If thou keepe promiſe, I ſhall end this ſtrife,
               Become a Chriſtian, and thy louing wife.
            
            Exit.
            Enter Gratiano, Lorenzo, Salarino, and Salanio.
            
               Loren.
               Nay, we will ſlinke away in ſupper time,
               Diſguiſe vs at my lodging and returne all in an houre.
            
            
               Gra.
               We haue not made good preparation.
            
            
               Salar.
               We haue not ſpoke vs yet of Torch-bearers,
            
            
               Salanio.
               Tis vile, vnleſſe it may be quaintly ordered,
               And better in my minde not vndertooke.
            
            
               Loren.
               Tis now but foure a clocke, we haue two houres
               
               Enter Lancelet.
               To furniſh vs; friend Lancelet, what's the newes?
            
            
               Lan.
               If it pleaſe you to breake vp this, it ſhall ſeeme to ſignifie,
            
            
               Loren.
               I know the hand, in faith tis a faire hand,
               And whiter then the paper it writ on,
               Is the faire hand that writ.
            
            
               Grat.
               Loue newes, in faith.
            
            
               Lance.
               By your leaue ſir.
            
            
               Loren.
               Whither goeſt thou?
            
            
               Lance.
               Marry ſir, to bid my olde Maſter the Iew to ſup to night
with my new Maſter the Chriſtian.
            
            
               Loren.
               Hold here take this, tell gentle Ieſſica,
               
               I will not fayle her, ſpeake it priuately.
               Goe Gentlemen, will you prepare for this maske to night,
               I am prouided of a Torch-bearer.
            
            Exit Clowne.
            
               Salar.
               I marry, ile be gone about it ſtraight.
            
            
               Salan.
               And ſo will I.
            
            
               Loren.
               Meete me and Gratiano at Gratianos lodging,
               Some houre hence.
            
            
               Salar.
               Tis good we do ſo.
            
            Exit.
            
               Grat.
               Was not that Letter from faire Ieſſica?
               
            
            
               Loren.
               I muſt needs tell thee all, ſhe hath directed
               How I ſhall take her from her Fathers houſe,
               What gold and iewels ſhe is furniſht with,
               What Pages ſute ſhe hath in readineſſe,
               If ere the Iew her father come to heauen,
               It will be for his gentle daughters ſake,
               And neuer dare misfortune croſſe her foote,
               Vnleſſe ſhe do it vnder this excuſe,
               That ſhe is iſſue to a faithleſſe Iew:
               Come goe with me, peruſe this as thou goeſt,
               Faire Ieſſica ſhall be my Torch-bearer.
            
            Exits
            Enter the Iew and Lancelet.
            
               Shy.
               Well, thou ſhalt ſee, thy eyes ſhall be thy iudge,
               The diffrence of old Shylocke and Baſſanio;
               
               
                  
What Ieſſica, thou ſhalt not gourmandize
               As thou haſt done with me: what Ieſſica?
               
               And ſleepe, and ſnore, and rend apparrell out.
               Why Ieſſica I ſay.
            
            
               Clowne.
               Why Ieſſica.
               
            
            
               Shy.
               Who bids thee call? I do not bid thee call.
            
            
               Clo.
               Your worſhip was wont to tell me, that I could do nothing
without bidding.
            
            Enter Ieſſica.
            
               Ieſ.
               Call you? what is your will?
            
            
               Shy.
               I am bid forth to ſupper Ieſſica,
               
               There are my keyes; but wherefore ſhould I go?
               I am not bid for loue, they flatter me,
               But yet ile go in hate, to feede vpon
               The prodigall Chriſtian. Ieſſica my gyrle,
               Looke to my houſe. I am right loth to go,
               There is ſome ill a bruing towards my reſt,
               For I did dreame of money bagges to night.
            
            
               Clowne.
               I beſeech you ſir go,
               My yong Maſter doth expect your reproch.
            
            
               Shy.
               So do I his.
            
            
               Clown.
               And they haue conſpired together, I will not ſay you
ſhall ſee a Maske; but if you doe, then it was not for nothing
that my noſe fell a bleeding on black monday laſt, at ſix a clock
in the morning, falling out that yeare on Aſhwenſday was four
yeare in th' afternoone.
            
            
               Shy.
               What, are there maskes? Heare me Ieſſica:
               
               Locke vp my doores, and when you heare the drumme,
               And the vile ſqueaking of the wry-neckt Fife,
               Clamber not you vp to the Caſements then,
               Nor thruſt your head into the publike ſtreete,
               To gaze on Chriſtian fooles with varniſht faces:
               But ſtop my houſes eares, I meane my Caſements,
               Let not the ſound of ſhallow foppery enter
               My ſober houſe. By Iacobs ſtaffe I ſweare,
               I haue no minde of feaſting forth to night:
               
                  
But I will go. Go you before me ſirra,
               Say I will come.
            
            
               Clowne.
               I will go before ſir.
               Miſtreſſe looke out at a window for all this,
               There will come a Chriſtian by,
               Will be worth a Iewes eye.
            
            
               Shy.
               What ſayes that foole of Hagars off-ſpring? ha.
            
            
               Ieſ.
               His words were, Farewell miſtris, nothing elſe.
            
            
               Shy.
               The patch is kinde enough, but a huge feeder,
               Snaile-ſlow in profit, and he ſleepes by day
               More then the wilde Cat: Drones hiue not with me,
               Therefore I part with him, and part with him
               To one, that I would haue him helpe to waſte
               His borrowed purſe. Well Ieſſica goe in,
               Perhaps I will returne immediately,
               Do as I bid you, ſhut doores after you,
               Faſt binde, faſt finde,
               A Prouerbe neuer ſtale in thrifty minde.
            
            Exit
            
               Ieſ.
               Farewell, and if my fortune be not croſt,
               
                  I haue a Father, you a daughter loſt.
            
            Exit.
            Enter the maskers, Gratiano and Salarino.
            
               Gra.
               This is the pent-houſe vnder which
               
                  Lorenzo deſir'd vs to make ſtand.
            
            
               Sal.
               His houre is almoſt paſt.
            
            
               Gra.
               And it is meruaile he out-dwels his houre,
               For louers euer run before the clocke.
            
            
               Sal.
               O ten times faſter Venus pigeons flye
               To ſeale loues bonds new made, then they are wont
               To keepe obliged faith vnforfaited.
            
            
               Gra.
               That euer holds: who riſeth from a feaſt
               With that keene appetite that he ſits downe?
               Where is the horſe that doth vntreade againe
               His tedious meaſures, with the vnbated fire
               That he did pace them firſt? All things that are,
               Are with more ſpirit chaſed then enioy'd.
               
                  
How like a younger or a prodigall,
               The skarfed Barke puts from her natiue bay,
               Hugd and embraced by the ſtrumpet winde,
               How like the prodigall doth ſhe returne
               With ouer-wetherd ribs and ragged ſayles,
               Leane, rent, and beggerd by the ſtrumpet wind?
            
            Enter Lorenzo.
            
               Sal.
               Here comes Lorenzo, more of this hereafter.
            
            
               Lo.
               Sweet friends, your patience for my long abode
               Not I, but my affaires haue made you waite:
               When you ſhal pleaſe to play the theeues for wiues
               Ile watch as long for you then: approch,
               Here dwels my father Iew. Ho, whoſe within?
            
            Ieſſica aboue.
            
               Ieſſ.
               Who are you? tell me for more certainty,
               Albeit Ile ſweare that I do know your tongue.
            
            
               Lor.
               
                  Lorenzo and thy loue.
            
            
               Ieſſ.
               
                  Lorenzo certaine, and my loue indeed,
               For who loue I ſo much? and now who knowes
               But you Lorenzo, whether I am yours?
            
            
               Lo.
               Heauen & thy thoghts are witnes that thou art
            
            
               Ieſſ.
               Here, catch this Casket, tis worth the paines,
               I am glad tis night you do not looke on me,
               For I am much aſham'd of my exchange:
               But loue is blinde, and louers cannot ſee
               The pretty follies that themſelues commit,
               For if they could, Cupid himſelfe would bluſh
               To ſee me thus transformed to a boy.
            
            
               Lor.
               Deſcend, for you muſt be my torch-bearer.
            
            
               Ieſſ.
               What, muſt I hold a Candle to my ſhames,
               They in themſelues goodſooth are too too light.
               Why tis an office of diſcouery, Loue,
               And I ſhould be obſcur'd.
            
            
               Lor.
               So are you ſweete,
               Euen in the louely garniſh of a boy,
               But come at once, for the cloſe night
               
                  
Doth play the run-away,
               And we are ſtaid for at Baſſanios feaſt.
            
            
               Ieſſ.
               I will make faſt the doores, and guild my ſelfe
               With ſome mo ducats, and be with you ſtraight.
            
            
               Grat.
               Now by my hood, a Gentile and no Iew.
            
            
               Lor.
               Beſhrew me but I loue her hartily,
               For ſhe is wiſe, if I can iudge of her,
               And faire ſhe is, if that mine eyes be true,
               And true ſhe is, as ſhe hath proo'ud herſelfe,
               And therefore like herſelfe, wiſe, faire and true,
               Shall ſhe be placed in my conſtant ſoule.
            
            Enter Ieſſica.
            What, art thou come? on gentlemen, away,
            Our masking mates by this time for vs ſtay.
            Exit.
            Enter Anthonio.
            
               Ant.
               Who's there?
            
            
               Gra.
               Signior Anthonio.
               
            
            
               Ant.
               Fie, fie Gratiano, where are all the reſt?
               Tis nine a clocke, our friends all ſtay for you,
               No maske to night, the winde is come about,
               
                  Baſſanio preſently will goe aboard,
               I am glad on't, I deſire no more delight
               Then to be vnder ſayle, & gone to night.
            
            Exeunt.
            Enter Portia with Morrocho, and both their traines.
            
               Por.
               Goe, draw aſide the Curtaines, and diſcouer
               The ſeuerall Caskets to this noble Prince:
               Now make your choiſe.
            
            
               Mor.
               The firſt of gold, who this inſcription beares,
               Who chooſeth me, ſhall gaine what many men deſire.
               The ſecond ſiluer, which this promiſe carries,
               Who chooſeth me, ſhall get as much as he deſerues.
               This third dull lead, with warning all as blunt,
               Who chooſeth me, muſt giue and hazard all he hath.
               How ſhall I know if I do chooſe the right?
            
            
               
               Por.
               The one of them containes my picture Prince▪
               
               If you chooſe that, then I am yours withall.
            
            
               Mor.
               Some God direct my iudgement, let me ſee,
               I will ſuruay th'inſcriptions backe againe,
               What ſayes this leaden Casket?
               Who chooſeth me, muſt giue and hazard all he hath,
               Muſt giue, for what? for lead, hazard for lead?
               This Casket threatens men that hazard all,
               Doe it in hope of faire aduantages:
               A golden minde ſtoopes not to ſhowes of droſſe,
               Ile then nor giue nor hazard ought for lead.
               What ſayes the ſiluer with her virgine hue?
               Who chooſeth me, ſhall get as much as he deſerues.
               As much as he deſerues, pauſe there Morocho,
               
               And weigh thy value with an eeuen hand,
               If thou beeſt rated by thy eſtimation,
               Thou doſt deſerue enough, and yet enough
               May not extend ſo farre as to the Lady;
               And yet to be afeard of my deſeruing,
               Were but a weake diſabling of my ſelfe.
               As much as I deſerue, why that's the Lady,
               I do in birth deſerue her, and in fortunes,
               In graces, and in qualities of breeding:
               But more then theſe, in loue I do deſerue.
               What if I ſtraid no farther, but choſe here?
               Let's ſee once more this ſaying grau'd in gold:
               Who chooſeth me, ſhall gaine what many men deſire:
               Why that's the Lady, all the world deſires her.
               From the foure corners of the earth they come
               To kiſſe this ſhrine, this mortall breathing Saint.
               The Hircanion deſerts, and the vaſty wildes
               Of wide Arabia, are as through-fares now
               For Princes to come view faire Portia.
               
               The watry Kingdome, whoſe ambitious head
               Spets in the face of heauen, is no barre
               To ſtop the forraine ſpirits, but they come
               
                  
As ore a brooke to ſee faire Portia.
               
               One of theſe three containes her heauenly picture.
               It's like that leade containes her, t'were damnation
               To thinke ſo baſe a thought, it were too groſſe
               To rib her ſere-cloth in the obſcure graue,
               Or ſhall I thinke in ſiluer ſhee's immur'd,
               Being ten times vnder-valewed to tride gold,
               O ſinfull thought, neuer ſo rich a Iem
               Was ſet in worſe then gold. They haue in England
               A coyne that beares the figure of an Angell
               Stampt in gold, but that's inſculpt vpon:
               But heere an Angell in a golden bed
               Lies all within. Deliuer me the key:
               Heere do I chooſe, and thriue I as I may.
            
            
               Por.
               There take it Prince, and if my forme lie there,
               Then I am yours.
            
            
               Mor.
               O hell! what haue we heere, a carrion death?
               Within whoſe empty eye there is a written ſcroule,
               Ile reade the writing.
               
                  
                     All that gliſters is not gold,
                  
                  
                     Often haue you heard that told,
                  
                  
                     Many a man his life hath ſolde,
                  
                  
                     But my out ſide to behold,
                  
                  
                     Guilded timber do wormes infold:
                  
                  
                     Had you bene as wiſe as bold,
                  
                  
                     Young in limbes, in iudgement old,
                  
                  
                     Your anſwere had not beene inſcrolde,
                  
                  
                     Fare you well, your ſute is cold.
                  
               
            
            
               Mor.
               Cold indeed, and labour loſt,
               Then farwell heate, and welcome froſt:
               
                  Portia adiew, I haue too greeu'd a heart
               To take a tedious leaue; thus loſers part.
            
            Exit.
            
               Por.
               A gentle riddance, draw the curtaines, goe,
               Let all of his complection chooſe me ſo.
            
            Exeunt. Enter
            
            Enter Salarino and Salanio.
            
               Salar.
               Why man, I ſaw Baſſanio vnder ſayle,
               With him is Gratiano gone along;
               And in their ſhip lme ſure Lorenzo is not.
            
            
               Salan.
               The villaine Iew with outcries raiſde the Duke,
               Who went with him to ſearch Baſſanios ſhip.
            
            
               Salar.
               He came too late, the ſhip was vnder ſaile,
               But there the Duke was giuen to vnderſtand,
               That in a Gondylo were ſeene together
               
                  Lorenza and his armorous Ieſſica.
               
               Beſides Anthonio certified the Duke,
               They were not with Baſſanio in his ſhip.
            
            
               Salan.
               I neuer heard a paſſion ſo confuſed,
               So ſtrange, outragious, and ſo variable,
               As the Dog Iew did vtter in the ſtreetes,
               My daughter, O my ducats, O my daughter,
               Fled with a Chriſtian, O my chriſtian ducats.
               Iuſtice, the law, my ducats, and my daughter.
               A ſealed bag, two ſealed bags of ducats,
               Of double ducats, ſtolne from me by my daughter,
               And iewels, two ſtones, two rich & precious ſtones,
               Stolne by my daughter: iuſtice, finde the gyrle,
               She hath the ſtones vpon her, and the ducats.
            
            
               Salar.
               Why all the boyes in Venice follow him,
               Crying his ſtones, his daughter, and his ducats.
            
            
               Salan.
               Let good Anthonio looke he keep his day,
               Or he ſhall pay for this.
            
            
               Salar.
               Marry well remembred,
               I reaſon'd with a Frenchman yeſterday,
               Who told me, in the narrow ſeas that part
               The French and Engliſh, there miſcarried
               A veſſell of our country richly fraught:
               I thought vpon Anthonio when he told me,
               And wiſht in ſilence that it were not his.
            
            
               
               Salan.
               You were beſt to tell Anthonio what you heare,
               Yet do not ſodainely, for it may greeue him.
            
            
               Salar.
               A kinder Gentleman treades not the earth,
               I ſaw Baſſanio and Anthonio part:
               
                  Baſſanio told him he would make ſome ſpeede
               Of his returne: he anſwered, do not ſo,
               Slubber not buſineſſe for my ſake Baſſanio,
               
               But ſtay the very riping of the time,
               And for the Iewes bond which he hath of me,
               Let it not enter in your minde of loue:
               Be merry, and employ your cheefeſt thoughts
               To Courtſhip, and ſuch faire oſtents of loue,
               As ſhall conueniently become you there.
               And euen there his eye being bigge with teares,
               Turning his face, he put his hand behinde him;
               And with affection wondrous ſenſible,
               He wrung Baſſanios hand, and ſo they parted.
            
            
               Salan.
               I thinke he onely loues the world for him:
               I prethee let vs goe and finde him out,
               And quicken his embraced heauineſſe,
               With ſome delight or other.
            
            
               Salar.
               Do we ſo.
            
            Exeunt
            Enter Nerriſſa and a Seruitor.
            
               Ner.
               Quicke, quicke, I pray thee, draw the Curtain ſtraite,
               The Prince of Arragon hath tane his oath,
               And comes to his election preſently.
            
            Enter Arragon, his traine, and Portia.
            
               Por.
               Behold, there ſtand the Caskets Noble Prince,
               If you chooſe that wherein I am contain'd,
               Straight ſhall our nuptiall rights be ſolemniz'd:
               But if you faile, without more ſpeech my Lord,
               You muſt be gone from hence immediately.
            
            
               Arra.
               I am enioyn'd by oath to obſerue three things.
               Firſt, neuer to vnfold to any one
               
                  
Which Casket twas I choſe. Next, if I faile
               Of the right Casket, neuer in my life
               To woe a maide in way of marriage:
               Laſtly, if I do faile in fortune of my choiſe,
               Immediately to leaue you, and be gone.
            
            
               Por.
               To theſe iniunctions euery one doth ſweare,
               That comes to hazard for my worthleſſe ſelfe.
            
            
               Arr.
               And ſo haue I addreſt me, fortune now
               To my hearts hope: Gold, Siluer, and baſe Lead.
               Who chooſeth me, muſt giue and hazard all he hath.
               You ſhall looke fairer ere I giue or hazard.
               VVhat ſayes the golden Cheſt? ha, let me ſee,
               VVho chooſeth me, ſhall gaine what many men deſire.
               VVhat many men deſire, that many may be meant
               By the foole-multitude, that chuſe by ſhow:
               Not learning more then the fond eye doth teach,
               VVhich pries not to th'interiour; but like the Martlet,
               Builds in the weather on the outward wall,
               Euen in the force and rode of caſualty.
               I will not chuſe what many men deſire,
               Becauſe I will not iumpe with common ſpirits,
               And ranke me with the barbarous multitudes.
               VVhy then to thee thou Siluer treaſure houſe,
               Tell me once more what title thou doſt beare:
               Who chooſeth me ſhall get as much as he deſerues.
               And well ſaid too, for who ſhall go about
               To coſen Fortune, and be honourable
               VVithout the ſtampe of merit, let none preſume
               To weare an vndeſerued dignity:
               O that eſtates, degrees, and offices,
               VVere not deriu'd corruptly, and that cleare honor
               VVere purchac'd by the merit of the wearer,
               How many then ſhould couer, that ſtand bare?
               How many be commanded, that command?
               How much low pezantry would then be gleaned
               From the true ſeede of honor? And how much honor,
               
                  
Pickt from the chaffe and ruine of the times
               To be new verniſh'd? well, but to my choiſe,
               Who chooſeth me ſhall get as much as he deſerues.
               I will aſſume deſert. Giue me a key for this,
               And inſtantly vnlocke my fortunes heere.
            
            
               Por.
               Too long a pauſe for that which you finde there.
            
            
               Arrag.
               VVhat's heere, the portrait of a blinking Ideot,
               Preſenting me a ſedule? I will reade it.
               How much vnlike art thou to Portia?
               
               How much vnlike my hopes, and my deſeruings.
               Who chooſeth me ſhall haue as much as he deſerues.
               Did I deſerue no more then a fooles head?
               Is that my prize? Are my deſerts no better?
            
            
               Por.
               To offend and iudge are diſtinct offices,
               And of oppoſed Natures.
            
            
               Arrag.
               VVhat heere?
               Hee reads.
               
                  
                     The fire ſeuen times tried this:
                  
                  
                     Seuen times tried that iudgement is,
                  
                  
                     That did neuer chooſe amis.
                  
                  
                     Some there be that ſhadowes kis,
                  
                  
                     Such haue but a ſhadowes blis:
                  
                  
                     There be fooles aliue I wis,
                  
                  
                     Siluer'd o're, and ſo was this.
                  
                  
                     Take what wife you will to bed,
                  
                  
                     I will euer be your head:
                  
                  
                     So be gone, you are sped.
                  
               
               Still more foole I ſhall appeere,
               By the time I linger heere,
               VVith one fooles head I came to woe,
               But I go away vvith two.
               Sweet adieu, Ile keepe my oath,
               Patiently to beare my vvroath.
            
            
               Portia.
               Thus hath the candle ſing'd the Moth.
               O theſe deliberate fooles, vvhen they do chooſe,
               
                  
They haue their wiſedome, by their wit to looſe.
            
            
               Ner.
               The ancient ſaying is no hereſie,
               Hanging and wiuing goes by deſtiny.
            
            
               Por.
               Come draw the Curtaine Nerriſſa.
               
            
            Enter a Meſſenger.
            
               Meſſ.
               Where is my Lady?
            
            
               Por.
               Heere, what would my Lord?
            
            
               Meſſ.
               Madam, there is a-lighted at your gate
               A yong Venetian, one that comes before
               To ſignifie th'approching of his Lord,
               From whom he bringeth ſenſible regreets;
               To wit (beſides commends and courteous breath)
               Gifts of rich valew; yet I haue not ſeene
               So likely an Embaſſador of loue.
               A day in Aprill neuer came ſo ſweet,
               To ſhew how coſtly Summer was at hand,
               As this fore-ſpurrer comes before his Lord.
            
            
               Por.
               No more I pray thee, I am halfe a-fear'd
               Thou wilt ſay anon he is ſome kin to thee,
               Thou ſpendſt ſuch high day wit in praiſing him:
               Come, come Nerriſſa, for I long to ſee
               Quicke Cupids poſt that comes ſo mannerly.
            
            
               Ner.
               
                  Baſſanio Lord, loue if thy will it be.
            
            Exit.
            Enter Salanio and Salarino.
            
               Salan.
               Now, what newes on the Ryalto?
            
            
               Salar.
               Why yet it liues there vncheckt, that Anthonio hath a
ſhip of rich lading wrackt on the narrowe ſeas; the Goodwins
I thinke they call the place, a very dangerous flat, & fatal, wher
the carkaſſes of many a tall ſhippe lie buried, as they ſay, if my
goſſips report be an honeſt woman of her word.
            
            
               Salan.
               I would ſhee were as a lying goſſippe in that, as euer
knapt Ginger, or made her neighbors beleeue ſhe wept for the
death of a third husband: but it is true, without any ſlippes of
prolixity, or croſſing the plaine highway of talk, that the good

                  Anthonio, the honeſt Anthonio, O that I had a title good inough
to keepe his name company.
            
            
               Salar.
               Come, the full ſtop.
            
            
               Sal.
               Ha, what ſaiſt thou? why the end is, he hath loſt a ſhip.
            
            
               Salar.
               I would it might proue the end of his loſſes.
            
            
               Salan.
               Let me ſay Amen betimes, leaſt the deuill croſſe my
prayer, for heere he comes in the likeneſſe of a lew.
               Enter Shylocke.
               How now Shylocke, what newes among the Marchants?
            
            
               Shy.
               You know, none ſo well, none ſo well as you,
               Of my daughters flight.
            
            
               Salar.
               That's certaine, I for my part knew the Taylor
               That made the wings ſhe flew withall.
            
            
               Salan.
               And Shylocke for his owne part knew the Birde was
fledg'd, and then it is the complexion of them all to leaue the
Dam.
            
            
               Shy.
               She is damn'd for it.
            
            
               Salar.
               That's certaine, if the diuell may be her iudge.
            
            
               Shy.
               My owne fleſh and blood to rebell.
            
            
               Salan.
               Out vpon it old carrion, rebels it at theſe yeares.
            
            
               Shy.
               I ſay my daughter is my fleſh and blood.
            
            
               Salar.
               There is more difference betweene thy fleſh and hirs,
then betweene Iet and Iuory: more between your bloods, then
there is between red wine & renniſh: but tell vs, do you heare,
whether Anthonio haue had at loſſe a ſea or no?
            
            
               Shy.
               There I haue another bad match, a bankrout, a prodigal,
who dare ſcarſe ſhew his head on the Ryalto, a begger that was
vſd to come ſo ſmug vpon the Mart: let him looke to his bond:
he was wont to call me vſurer, let him looke to his bond; he was
wont to lend money for a Chriſtian curtſie, let him looke to his
bond.
            
            
               Salar.
               Why I am ſure if he forfet, thou wilt not take his fleſh,
what's that good for?
            
            
               Shyl.
               To baite fiſh withall; if it will feede nothing els it will
feed my reuenge: he hath diſgrac'd me, and hindred me halfe a
million, laught at my loſſes, mockt at my gaines, ſcorned my nation,

thwarted my bargaines, cooled my friendes, heated mine
enemies, and what's his reaſon, I am a Iewe. Hath nos a Iewe
eyes? hath not a Iew hands? organs, dimenſions, ſenſes, affections,
paſſions? fed with the ſame food? hurt with the ſame weapons?
ſubiect to the ſame diſeaſes? healed by the ſame meanes?
warmed and cooled by the ſame winter and ſummer, as a Chriſtian
is? If you pricke vs, do we not bleede? If you tickle vs, do
we not laugh? If you poyſon vs, do wee not dye? And if you
wrong vs, ſhall we not reuenge? If wee are like you in the reſt,
we will reſemble you in that. If a Iew wrong a Chriſtian, what
is his humility, Reuenge? If a Chriſtian wrong a Iewe, what
ſhould his ſufferance be by Chriſtian example, why Reuenge?
The villany you teach me I will execute, and it ſhall goe hard,
but I will better the inſtruction.
               Enter a man from Anthonio.
               Gentlemen, my maſter Anthonio is at his houſe, and deſires to
ſpeake with you both.
            
            
               Salar.
               We haue bene vp and downe to ſeeke him.
            
            Enter Tuball.
            
               Salan.
               Here comes another of the Tribe, a third cannot bee
matcht, vnleſſe the diuell himſelfe turne Iew.
            
            Exeunt Gentlemen.
            
               Shy.
               How now Tuball, what newes from Genowa? haſt thou
found my daughter?
            
            
               Tuball.
               I often came where I did heare of her, but cannot
finde her.
            
            
               Shy.
               Why there, there, there, there, a Diamond gone coſt
me two thouſand ducats in Frankford. The curſe neuer fell vpon
our Nation till now, I neuer felt it till now: two thouſande
ducats in that, and other precious precious iewels. I would my
daughter were dead at my foote, and the iewels in her eare: O
would ſhee were hearſt at my foote, and the ducats in her coffin.
No newes of them, why ſo: and I know not whats ſpent in
the ſearch: why thou loſſe vpon loſſe, the theefe gone vvith ſo

much, and ſo much to finde the Theefe, and no ſatisfaction, no
reuenge, nor no ill lucke ſtirring but what lights on my ſhoulders,
no ſighes but of my breathing, no teares but of my ſhedding.
            
            
               Tuball.
               Yes, other men haue ill luck too, Anthonio as I heard
in Genoway.
            
            
               Shy.
               What, what, what ill lucke, ill lucke?
            
            
               Tuball.
               Hath an Argoſie caſt away comming from Tripolis.
               
            
            
               Shy.
               I thanke God, I thanke God, iſt true? iſt true?
            
            
               Tuball.
               I ſpoke with ſome of the Saylers that eſcaped the
wracke.
            
            
               Shy.
               I thanke the good Tuball, good newes, good newes: ha
ha, heere in Genoway.
            
            
               Tuball.
               Your daughter ſpent in Genoway, as I heard, in one
night, foureſcore ducats.
            
            
               Shy.
               Thou ſtick'ſt a dagger in me, I ſhall neuer ſee my golde
againe; foureſcore ducates at a ſitting! Foureſcore ducats!
            
            
               Tuball.
               There came diuers of Anthonios Creditours in my
company vnto Venice, that ſweare that hee cannot chooſe but
breake.
            
            
               Shy.
               I am very glad of it, ile plague him, ile torture him, I
am glad on't.
            
            
               Tuball.
               One of them ſhewed me a ring that hee had of your
daughter for a Monkey.
            
            
               Shy.
               Out vpon her: thou tortur'ſt me Tuball, it was my Turkies,
I had it of Leah when I was a Batchellor. I would not haue
giuen it for a wilderneſſe of Monkies.
            
            
               Tuball.
               But Anthonio is certainly vndone.
            
            
               Shy.
               Nay, that's true, that's very true: go Tuball, fee mee an
Officer, beſpeake him a fortnight before, I will haue the heart
of him if he forfeit. For were he out of Venice I can make what
merchandize I will go: go Tuball, and meete me at our Synagogue,
go good Tuball, at our Synagogue Tuball.
               
            
            Exeunt
            Enter Baſſanio, Portia, Gratiano, and all
their Traines.
            
               
               Por.
               I pray you tarry, pauſe a day or two
               Before you hazard: for in chooſing wrong
               I looſe your company, therefore forbeare a while,
               There's ſomething tels me (but it is not loue)
               I would not loſe you, and you know your ſelfe,
               Hate counſels not in ſuch a quality.
               But leaſt you ſhould not vnderſtand me well,
               And yet a maiden hath no tongue, but thought,
               I would detaine you heere ſome moneth or two
               Before you venture for me. I could teach you
               How to chooſe right, but I am then forſworne,
               So will I neuer be, ſo may you miſſe me,
               But if you do, you'l make me wiſh a ſinne,
               That I had bene forſworne. Beſhrew your eyes,
               They haue ore lookt me, and diuided me,
               One halfe of me is yours, the other halfe yours,
               Mine owne I would ſay; but if mine then yours,
               And ſo all yours. O theſe naughty times
               Puts barres betweene the owners and their rights.
               And ſo though yours, not yours (proue it ſo)
               Let fortune go to hell for it, not I.
               I ſpeake too long, but tis to peize the time,
               To eck it, and to dravv out in length,
               To ſtay you from election.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Let me chooſe,
               For as I am, I liue vpon the racke.
            
            
               Por.
               Vpon the racke Baſſanio, then confeſſe
               What treaſon there is mingled vvith your loue.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               None but that vgly treaſon of miſtruſt,
               Which makes me feare th'inioying of my loue,
               There may as well be amity and life
               Tweene ſnow and fire, as treaſon and my loue.
            
            
               Por.
               I but I feare you ſpeake vpon the racke,
               Where men enforced do ſpeake any thing.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Promiſe me life, and ile confeſſe the truth,
            
            
               Por.
               Well then, confeſſe and liue.
            
            
               
               Baſſ.
               Confeſſe and loue,
               Had bene the very ſum of my confeſſion:
               O happy torment, when my torturer
               Doth teach me anſweres for deliuerance:
               But let me to my fortune and the Caskets.
            
            
               Portia.
               Away then, I am lockt in one of them,
               If you do loue me, you will finde me out.
               
                  Nerriſſa and the reſt, ſtand all aloofe,
               Let muſicke ſound while he doth make his choiſe,
               Then if he loſe, he makes a Swan-like end,
               Fading in muſicke. That the compariſon
               May ſtand more proper, my eye ſhall be the ſtreame
               And watry death-bed for him: he may win,
               And what is muſicke then? Then muſicke is
               Euen as the flouriſh, when true ſubiects bow
               To a new crownd Monarch: Such it is,
               As are thoſe dulcet ſounds in breake of day,
               That creepe into the dreaming Bridegroomes eare,
               And ſummon him to marriage. Now he goes
               With no leſſe preſence, but with much more loue
               Then young Alcides, when he did redeeme
               The virgin tribute, payd by howling Troy,
               
               To the ſea-monſter: I ſtand for ſacrifice,
               The reſt aloofe are the Dardanian wiues,
               With bleared viſages come foorth to view
               The iſſue of th'exploit: Goe Hercules,
               
               Liue thou, I liue with much more diſmay
               To view the fight, then thou that mak'ſt the fray.
            
            
               A ſong, the whilſt Baſſanio comments on the
Caskets to himſelfe.
               Tell me where is fancy bred,
               Or in the heart, or in the head?
               How begot, how nouriſhed?
               
                  Replis, reply. It is engendered in the eye,
               
                  
With gazing fed, and Fancie dies:
               In the cradle where it lyes,
               Let vs all ring Pancies knell.
               Ile begin it.
               Ding, dong, bell.
               
                  All. Ding, dong, bell.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               So may the outward ſhowes be leaſt thēſelues
               The world is ſtill deceiu'd with ornament.
               In Law, what plea ſo tainted and corrupt,
               But being ſeaſon'd with a gracious voice,
               Obſcures the ſhow of euill. In religion
               What damned error but ſome ſober brow
               Will bleſſe it, and approue it with a text,
               Hiding the groſenes with faire ornament:
               There is no voice ſo ſimple, but aſſumes
               Some of vertue on his outward parts;
               How many cowards whoſe hearts are all as falſe
               As ſtaiers of ſand, weare yet vpon their chins
               The beards of Hercules, and frowning Mars,
               
               Who inward ſearcht, haue lyuers white as milke,
               And theſe aſſume but valours excrement,
               To render them redoubted. Looke on beauty,
               And you ſhall ſee tis purchaſt by the weight,
               Which therein works a miracle in nature,
               Making them lighteſt that weare moſt of it:
               So are thoſe criſped ſnaky golden locks
               Which maketh ſuch wanton gambals with the wind,
               Vpon ſuppoſed faireneſſe, often knowne
               To be the dowry of a ſecond head,
               The skull that bred them in the Sepulcher.
               Thus ornament is but the guiled ſhore
               To a moſt dangerous ſea: the beautious ſcarſe
               Vailing an Indian beauty; In a word,
               The ſeeming truth which cunning times put on
               To intrap the wiſeſt. Therefore thou gaudy gold,
               
                  
Hard foole for Midas, I will none of thee,
               Nor none of thee, thou pale and common drudge
               Tweene man and man: but thou, thou meager lead,
               Which rather threatneſt then doſt promiſe ought,
               Thy paleneſſe moues me more then eloquence,
               And heere chooſe I, ioy be the conſequence.
            
            
               Por.
               How all the other paſſions fleet to ayre,
               As doubtfull thoughts, and raſh imbrac'd deſpaire:
               And ſhyddring feare, and greene-eyed iealouſie.
               O loue be moderate, allay thy extaſie,
               In meaſure range thy ioy, ſcant this exceſſe,
               I feele too much thy bleſſing, make it leſſe,
               For feare I ſurfet.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               What finde I heere?
               Faire Portias counterfeit. What demy God
               Hath come ſo neere creation? moue theſe eyes?
               Or whither riding on the ball's of mine
               Seeme they in motion? Heere are ſeuerd lips
               Parted with ſuger breath, ſo ſweet a barre
               Should ſunder ſuch ſweet friends: heere in her haires
               The painter playes the Spider, and hath wouen
               A golden meſh t'intrap the hearts of men
               Faſter then gnats in cobwebs, but her eyes,
               How could he ſee to do them? hauing made one,
               Me-thinks it ſhould haue power to ſteale both his,
               And leaue it ſelfe vnfurniſht: yet looke how farre
               The ſubſtance of my praiſe doth wrong this ſhadow
               In vnderprizing it, ſo farre this ſhadow
               Doth limpe behind the ſubſtance. Heer's the ſcroule,
               The continent and ſummary of my fortune.
               
                  
                     You that chooſe not by the view,
                  
                  
                     Chance as faire, and chooſe as true:
                  
                  
                     Since this fortune fals to you,
                  
                  
                     Be content, and ſeeke no new.
                  
                  
                     If you be well pleas'd with this,
                  
                  
                     
                     And hold your fortune for your bliſſe,
                  
                  
                     Turne you where your Lady is,
                  
                  
                     And claime her with a louing kiſſe.
                  
               
               A gentle ſcroule: Faire Lady, by your leaue,
               I come by note to giue, and to receiue;
               Like one of two contending in a prize,
               That thinks he hath done well in peoples eyes;
               Hearing applauſe and vniuerſall ſhout,
               Giddy in ſpirit, ſtill gazing in a doubt,
               Whether thoſe pearles of praiſe be his or no.
               So thrice faire Lady, ſtand I euen ſo,
               As doubtfull whether what I ſee be true,
               Vntill confirm'd, ſign'd, ratified by you.
            
            
               Por.
               You ſee me Lord Baſſanio where I ſtand,
               Such as I am; though for my ſelfe alone
               I would not be ambitious in my wiſh,
               To wiſh my ſelfe much better, yet for you,
               I would be trebled twenty times my ſelfe,
               A thouſand times more faire, ten thouſand times
               More rich, that onely to ſtand high in your account,
               I might in vertues, beauties, liuings, friends,
               Exceed account: but the full ſumme of me
               Is ſumme of ſomething; which to terme in groſſe,
               Is an vnleſſon'd gyrle, vnſchool'd, vnpractiſed,
               Happy in this, ſhe is not yet ſo old
               But ſhe may learne: happier then this,
               She is not bred ſo dull, but ſhe can learne;
               Happieſt of all, is that her gentle ſpirit
               Commits it ſelfe to yours, to be directed
               As from her Lord, her Gouernor, her King.
               My ſelfe, and what is mine, to you and yours
               Is now conuerted. But now I was the Lord
               Of this faire manſion, maſter of my ſeruants,
               Queene ore my ſelfe; and euen now, but now,
               This houſe, theſe ſeruants, and this ſame my ſelfe
               
                  
Are yours, my Lord, I giue them with this ring,
               Which when you part from, loſe, or giue away,
               Let it preſage the ruine of your loue,
               And be my vantage to exclaime on you.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Madame, you haue bereft me of all words,
               Onely my blood ſpeakes to you in my veines,
               And there is ſuch confuſion in my powers,
               As after ſome Oration fairely ſpoke
               By a beloued Prince, there doth appeare
               Among the buzzing pleaſed multitude.
               Where euery ſomething being blent together,
               Turnes to a wilde of nothing, ſaue of ioy
               Expreſt, and not expreſt: but when this ring
               Parts from this finger, then parts life from hence,
               O then be bold to ſay Baſſanio is dead.
            
            
               Ner.
               My Lord and Lady, it is now our time
               That haue ſtood by and ſeene our wiſhes proſper,
               To cry good ioy, good ioy my Lord and Lady.
            
            
               Gra.
               My Lord Baſſanio, and my gentle Lady,
               I wiſh you all the ioy that you can wiſh:
               For I am ſure you can wiſh none from me:
               And when your honours meane to ſolemnize
               The bargaine of your faith: I do beſeech you
               Euen at that time I may be married to.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               With all my heart, ſo thou canſt get a wife.
            
            
               Gra.
               I thanke your Lordſhip, you haue got me one,
               My eies my Lord, can looke as ſwift as yours;
               You ſaw the Miſtreſſe, I beheld the Maid;
               You lou'd, I lou'd for intermiſſion,
               No more pertaines to me my Lord then you,
               Your fortune flood vpon the Casket there,
               And ſo did mine too, as the matter fals:
               For wooing heere vntill I ſwet againe,
               And ſweating till my very roofe was dry,
               With oathes of Ioue, at laſt, it promiſe laſt
               I got a promiſe of this faire one here,
               
                  
To haue her loue: prouided that your fortune
               Atchieu'd her Miſtris.
            
            
               Por.
               Is this true, Nerriſſa?
               
            
            
               Ner.
               Maddam it is, ſo you ſtand pleas'd withall.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               And do you Gratiano meane good faith?
            
            
               Gra.
               Yes faith my Lord.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Our feaſt ſhall be much honoured in your marriage.
            
            
               Gra.
               Weel' play with them the firſt boy for a thouſand ducats
            
            
               Ner.
               What, and ſtake downe?
            
            
               Gra.
               No, we ſhall nere win at that ſport and ſtake downe.
               But who comes heere, Lorenzo and his infidell?
               What, and my olde venetian friend, Salerio?
               
            
            Enter Lorenzo, Ieſſica, and Salerio a meſſenger from Venice.
            
               Baſſ
               
                  Lorenzo and Salerio, welcome hither,
               If that the youth of my new intreſt heere
               Haue power to bid you welcome: by your leaue
               I bid my very friends and countrymen
               Sweete Portia welcome.
            
            
               Por.
               So do I my Lord, they are entirely welcome.
            
            
               Lor.
               I thanke your Honour, for my part my Lord,
               My purpoſe was not to haue ſeene you heere,
               But meeting with Salerio by the way,
               He did entreate me paſt all ſaying nay,
               To come with him along.
            
            
               Sal.
               I did my Lord,
               And I haue reaſon for it. Signior Anthonio
               
               Commends him to you.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Ere Iope his Letter,
               I pray you tell me how my good friend doth.
            
            
               Sal.
               Not ſicke my Lord, vnleſſe it be in minde,
               Nor well, vnleſſe in minde: his Letter there
               Will ſhew you his eſtate.
            
            He opens the Letter.
            
               Gra.
               
                  Nerriſſa, cheere you ſtranger, bid her welcome,
               Your hand Salerio, what's the newes from Venice?
               
                  
How doth that royall Merchant, good Anthonio?
               
               I know he will be glad of our ſucceſſe,
               We are the Iaſons, we haue won the fleece.
            
            
               Sal.
               I would you had won the fleece that he hath loſt.
            
            
               Por.
               There are ſome ſhrewd contents in yon ſame paper,
               That ſteales the colour from Baſſanios cheeke,
               Some deare friend dead, elſe nothing in the world
               Could turne ſo much the conſtitution
               Of any conſtant man: what worſe and worſe?
               With leaue Baſſanio, I am halfe your ſelfe,
               And I muſt freely haue the halfe of any thing
               That this ſame paper brings you.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               O ſweete Portia,
               
               Heere are a few of the vnpleaſantſt words
               That euer blotted paper. Gentle Lady,
               When I did firſt impart my loue to you,
               I freely told you all the wealth I had
               Ran in my veines, I was a Gentleman,
               And then I told you true: and yet deere Lady,
               Rating my ſelfe at nothing, you ſhall ſee
               How much I was a Braggart, when I told you
               My ſtate was nothing, I ſhould then haue told you
               That I was worſe then nothing; for indeed
               I haue ingag'd my ſelfe to a deere friend,
               Ingag'd my friend to his meere enemy
               To feed my meanes. Heer's a Letter Lady,
               The paper as the body of my friend,
               And euery word in it a gaping wound,
               Iſſuing life blood. But is it true Salerio?
               
               Hath all his ventures faild? what, not one hit,
               From Tripolis, from Mexico, and England,
               
               From Lisbon, Barbary, and India,
               
               And not one veſſell ſcape the dreadfull touch
               Of Merchant-marring rocks?
            
            
               Sal.
               Not one my Lord.
               Beſides, it ſhould appeare, that if he had
               
                  
The preſent money to diſcharge the Iew,
               He would not take it: neuer did I know
               A creature that did beare the ſhape of man,
               So keene and greedy to confound a man.
               He plies the Duke at morning and at night,
               And doth impeach the freedome of the ſtate
               If they deny him iuſtice. Twenty Merchants,
               The Duke himſelfe, and the Magnificoes
               Of greateſt port haue all perſwaded with him,
               But none can driue him from the enuious plea
               Of forfeyture, of iuſtice, and his bond.
            
            
               Ieſſica.
               When I was with him, I haue heard him ſweare
               To Tuball and to Chus, his Country-men,
               That he would rather haue Anthonios fleſh,
               Then twenty times the value of the ſumme
               That he did owe him: and I know my Lord,
               If law, authority, and power deny not,
               It will go hard with poore Anthonio.
               
            
            
               Por.
               Is it your deare friend that is thus in trouble?
            
            
               Baſſ.
               The deereſt friend to me, the kindeſt man,
               The beſt condition'd and vnwearied ſpirit
               In doing courteſies: and one in whom
               The ancient Romane honour more appeares,
               Then any that drawes breath in Italy.
               
            
            
               Por.
               What ſumme owes he the Iew?
            
            
               Baſſ.
               For me three thouſand Ducats.
            
            
               Por.
               What no more, pay him ſix thouſand & deface the bond,
               Double ſixe thouſand, and then treble that,
               Before a friend of this deſcription
               Shall loſe a haire through Baſſanios fault.
               Firſt go with me to Church, and call me wife,
               And then away to Venice to your friend;
               For neuer ſhall you lye by Portias ſide
               With an vnquiet ſoule. You ſhall haue gold
               To pay the petty debt twenty times ouer.
               When it is paid, bring your true friend along;
               
                  
My maide Nerriſſa, and my ſelfe meane time
               Will liue as maides and widdowes; come away,
               For you ſhall hence vpon your wedding day.
               Bid your friends welcome, ſhew a merry cheere,
               Since you are deere bought, I will loue you deere.
               But let me heare the letter of your friend.
               Sweet Baſſanio, My ſhips haue all miſcarried, my Creditors grow
cruell, my eſtate is very low: my bond to the Iew is forfet, and ſince in
paying it, it is impoſſible I ſhould liue, all debts are cleered betweene
you and I if I might but ſee you at my death. Notwithſtanding, vſe
your pleaſure; if your loue doe not perſwade you to come, let not my
Letter.
               O Loue! diſpatch all buſineſſe, and be gone.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Since I haue your good leaue to go away,
               I will make haſt. But till I come againe,
               No bed ſhall ere be guilty of my ſtay,
               No reſt be interpoſer twixt vs twaine.
            
            Exeunt.
            Enter the Iew, and Salarino, and Anthonio,
and the Iaylor.
            
               Iew
               Iaylor, looke to him, tell not me of mercy,
               This is the foole that lent out money gratis.
               Iaylor, looke to him.
            
            
               An.
               Heare me yet good Shylocke.
               
            
            
               Iew.
               Ile haue my bond, ſpeake not againſt my bond:
               I haue ſworne an oath, that I will haue my bond.
               Thou cald'ſt me dogge before thou hadſt a cauſe,
               But ſince I am a dogge, beware my fangs.
               The Duke ſhall grant me iuſtice: I do wonder
               Thou naughty Iaylor that thou art ſo fond
               To come abroad with him at his requeſt.
            
            
               An.
               I prethee heare me ſpeake.
            
            
               Iew.
               Ile haue my bond; I will not heare thee ſpeake;
               Ile haue my bond, and therefore ſpeake no more.
               
                  
Ile not be made a ſoft and dull ey'd foole,
               To ſhake the head, relent, and ſigh, and yeeld
               To Chriſtian interceſſors: follow not,
               Ile haue no ſpeaking, I will haue my bond.
            
            Exit Iew.
            
               Sol.
               It is the moſt impenetrable curre
               That euer kept with men.
            
            
               Ant.
               Let him alone,
               Ile follow him no more with bootleſſe prayers.
               He ſeekes my life, his reaſon well I know:
               I oft deliuer'd from his forfeitures
               Many that haue at times made mone to mee,
               Therefore he hates me.
            
            
               Sal.
               I am ſure the Duke will neuer grant
               This forfeyture to hold.
            
            
               An.
               The Duke cannot deny the courſe of Law:
               For the commodity that ſtrangers haue
               With vs in Venice, if it be denied,
               Will much impeach the iuſtice of his ſtate,
               Since that the trade and profit of the City
               Conſiſteth of all Nations. Therefore goe,
               Theſe greefes and loſſes haue ſo bated me,
               That I ſhall hardly ſpare a pound of fleſh
               To morrow, to my bloody Creditor.
               VVell Iaylor on, pray God Baſſanio come
               To ſee me pay his debt, and then I care not.
            
            Exeunt.
            Enter Portia, Nerriſſa, Lorenzo, Ieſſica, and a
man of Portias.
            
               Lor.
               Madam, although I ſpeake it in your preſence,
               You haue a noble and a true conceite
               Of God-like amity, which appeares moſt ſtrongly,
               In bearing thus the abſence of your Lord.
               But if you knew to whom you ſhew this honour,
               How true a Gentleman you ſend releefe,
               
                  
How deere a louer of my Lord your husband,
               I know you would be prouder of the worke,
               Then cuſtomary bounty can enforce you.
            
            
               Por.
               I neuer did repent for doing good,
               Nor ſhall not now: for in companions
               That do conuerſe and waſte the time together,
               Whoſe ſoules do beare an equall yoke of loue,
               There muſt be needs a like proportion
               Of lineaments, of manners, and of ſpirit:
               Which makes me thinke, that this Anthonio
               
               (Being the boſome-louer of my Lord) 
                     •
                  t
               Muſt needs be like my Lord, If it be ſo,
               How little is the coſt I haue beſtowed
               In purchaſing the ſemblance of my ſoule,
               From out the ſtate of helliſh miſery.
               This comes too neere the praiſing of my ſelfe,
               Therefore no more of it: heere other things
               
                  Lorenzo I commit into your hands,
               The husbandry and manage of my houſe,
               Vntill my Lords returne. For mine owne part,
               I haue toward heauen breath'd a ſecret vow,
               To liue in prayer and contemplation,
               Onely attended by Nerriſſa heere,
               Vntill her husband, and my Lords returne.
               There is a Monaſtery two miles off,
               And there will we abide. I do deſire you,
               Not to deny this impoſition,
               The which my loue, and ſome neceſſity
               Now layes vpon you.
            
            
               Lor.
               Madame, with all my heart,
               I ſhall obey you in all faire commands.
            
            
               Por.
               My people do already know my mind,
               And will acknowledge you and Ieſſica,
               
               In place of Lord Baſſanio and my ſelfe.
               And ſo farewell till we ſhall meete againe.
            
            
               Lor.
               Faire thoughts & happy hours attend on you.
            
            
               
               Ieſ.
               I wiſh your Lady-ſhip all hearts content.
            
            
               Por.
               I thanke you for your wiſh, and am well pleaſd
               To wiſh it backe on you: farewell Ieſſica.
               
               Exeunt.
               Now Balthaſer, as I haue euer found thee honeſt true,
               So let me finde thee ſtill: Take this ſame Letter,
               And vſe thou all th'indeuour of a man
               In ſpeede to Mantua; ſee thou render this
               Into my Coſins hands, Doctor Belario,
               
               And looke what notes and garments he doth giue thee,
               Bring them I pray thee with imagin'd ſpeede
               Vnto the Tranect, to the common Ferry
               Which trades to Venice: waſte no time in words,
               But get thee gone, I ſhall be there before thee.
            
            
               Bai.
               Madam, I go with all conuenient ſpeede.
            
            Exit.
            
               Por.
               Come on Nerriſſa, I haue worke in hand
               That you yet know not of. Wee'l ſee our husbands
               Before they thinke of vs.
            
            
               Ner.
               Shall they ſee vs?
            
            
               Por.
               They ſhall Nerriſſa: but in ſuch a habite,
               That they ſhall thinke we are accompliſhed
               With that we lacke. Ile hold thee any wager,
               When we are both apparreld like yong men,
               Ile proue the prettier fellow of the two,
               And weare my dagger with the brauer grace,
               And ſpeake betweene the change of man and boy,
               With a reede voice, and turne two mincing ſteps
               Into a manly ſtride; and ſpeake of frayes
               Like a fine bragging youth; and tell quaint lyes,
               How honourable Ladies ſought my loue,
               Which I denying, they fell ſicke and dyed:
               I could not doe withall. Then ile repent,
               And wiſh for all that, that I had not kill'd them;
               And twenty of theſe punie lies ile tell,
               That men ſhall ſware I haue diſcontinued ſchoole
               Aboue a twelue-month. I haue within my minde
               A thouſand raw trickes of theſe bragging iackes,
               
                  
VVhich I will practiſe.
            
            
               Ner.
               VVhy, ſhall we turne to men?
            
            
               Por.
               Fie, what a queſtion's that,
               If thou wert nere a lewd interpreter:
               But come, ile tell thee all my whole deuice
               VVhen I am in my Coach, which ſtayes for vs
               At the Parke gate; and therefore haſt away,
               For we muſt meaſure twenty miles to day.
            
            Exeunt
            Enter Clowne and Ieſſica.
            
               Clo.
               Yes truly, for looke you, the ſinnes of the Father are to
be laid vpon the children, therefore I promiſe ye I ſeare you, I
was alwayes plaine with you, and ſo now I ſpeake my agitation
of the matter: therefore be a good cheere, for truly I think you
are damn'd, ther is but one hope in it that can do you any good,
and that is but a kind of baſtard hope neither.
            
            
               Ieſ.
               And what hope is that I pray thee?
            
            
               Clo.
               Marry you may partly hope that your Father got you
not, that you are not the Iewes daughter.
            
            
               Ieſſi.
               That were a kind of baſtard hope indeede, ſo the ſins of
my mother ſhould be viſited vpon me.
            
            
               Clo.
               Truely then I feare you are damn'd both by Father and
Mother: thus when I ſhun Scilla your father, I fal into Charibdie
your mother; well, you are gone both wayes.
            
            
               Ieſ.
               I ſhall be ſau'd by my husband, he hath made me a chriſtian.
            
            
               Clo.
               Truly the more to blame he; we were Chriſtians enow
before, e'ne as many as could well liue one by another: this making
of Chriſtians will raiſe the price of hogs, if we grow all to
be Porke-eaters, we ſhall not ſhortly haue a raſher on the coles
for money.
            
            Enter Lorenzo.
            
               Ieſ.
               Ile tel my husband Lancelet what you ſay, here he comes.
            
            
               Lor.
               I ſhall grow iealous of you ſhortly Lancelet, if you thus

get my wife into corners.
            
            
               Ieſ.
               Nay, you neede not feare vs Lorenzo, Launcelet and I are
out; he tels me flatly, there's no mercy for me in heauen, beecauſe
I am a lewes daughter: and he ſayes you are no good mē
                  ber
of the Common-wealth, for in conuerting Iewes to Chriſtians,
you raiſe the price of Porke.
            
            
               Lor.
               I ſhall anſwere that better to the Common-wealth than
you can the getting vp of the Negros belly; the Moore's with
childe by you Lancelet?
               
            
            
               Clowne.
               It is much that the Moore ſhould be more then reaſon:
but if ſhe be leſſe then an honeſt woman, ſhee is indeede
more then I tooke her for.
            
            
               Lor.
               How euery foole can play vpon the word, I thinke the
beſt grace of wit will ſhortly turne into ſilence, and diſcourſe
grow commendable in none onely but Parrats. Go in ſirra, bid
them prepare for dinner?
            
            
               Clow.
               That is done ſir, they haue all ſtomackes.
            
            
               Lor.
               Goodly Lord what a wit-ſnapper are you: then bid thē
prepare dinner.
            
            
               Clo.
               That's done to ſir, onely couer is the word.
            
            
               Lor.
               Will you couer than ſir?
            
            
               Clo.
               Not ſo ſir neither, I know my duty.
            
            
               Lor.
               Yet more quarrelling with occaſion, wilt thou ſhewe
the whole wealth of thy witte in an inſtant? I pray thee vnderſtand
a plaine man in his plaine meaning: Goe to thy Fellowes,
bid them couer the table, ſerue in the meate, and we will come
in to dinner.
            
            
               Clo.
               For the table ſir, it ſhall be ſeru'd in, for the meate ſir it
ſhall be couered, for your comming in to dinner ſir, why let it
be as humors and conceits ſhall gouerne.
            
            Exit Clowne.
            
               Lor.
               O deere diſcretion, how his words are ſuted,
               The foole hath planted in his memory
               An army of good words, and I do know
               A many fooles that ſtand in better place,
               Garniſh'd like him, that for a trickfie word
               Defie the matter: how far'ſt thou Ieſſica?
               
               
                  
And now good ſweet ſay thy opinion,
               How doſt thou like the Lord Baſſanios wife?
            
            
               Ieſ.
               Paſt all expreſſing, it is very meete
               The Lord Baſſanio liue an vpright life,
               For hauing ſuch a bleſſing in his Lady.
               He findes the ioyes of heauen heere on earth,
               And if on earth he doe not meane it, then
               In reaſon he ſhould neuer come to heauen.
               Why, if two Gods ſhould play ſome heauenly match,
               And on the wager lay two earthly women,
               And Portia one: there muſt be ſomething elſe
               Pawn'd with the other; for the poore rude world
               Hath not her fellow.
            
            
               Lor.
               Euen ſuch a husband haſt thou of me,
               As ſhe if for wife.
            
            
               Ieſ.
               Nay, but aske my opinion to of that.
            
            
               Lor.
               I will anon, firſt let vs go to dinner.
            
            
               Ieſ.
               Nay, let me praiſe you while I haue a ſtomacke.
            
            
               Lor.
               No prethee, let it ſerue for table talke,
               Then howſoere thou ſpeakſt mong other things,
               I ſhall diſgeſt it.
            
            
               Ieſ.
               Well, ile ſet you forth.
            
            Exit.
            Enter the Duke, the Magnificos, Anthonio, Baſſanio,
and Gratiano.
            
               Duke.
               What, is Anthonio heere?
            
            
               An.
               Ready, ſo pleaſe your Grace.
            
            
               Duke.
               I am ſorry for thee, thou art come to anſwer
               A ſtony aduerſary, an inhumane wretch,
               Vncapeable of pitty, voide and empty
               From any dram of mercy.
            
            
               An.
               I haue heard,
               Your Grace hath tane great paines
               To qualifie his rigorous courſe:
               But ſince he ſtands obdurate,
               
                  
And that no lawfull meanes can carrie mee
               Out of his enuies reach, I do oppoſe
               My patience to his furie, and am arm'd
               To ſuffer with a quietneſſe of ſpirit,
               The verie tiranny and rage of his.
            
            
               Duke.
               Go one and call the Iew into the Court.
            
            
               Sal.
               He is ready at the doore, he comes my Lord.
            
            Enter Shylocke.
            
               Du.
               Make roome, and let him ſtand before our face.
               
                  Shylocke the world thinkes, and I thinke ſo to,
               That thou but leadeſt this faſhion of thy malice
               To the laſt houre of act, and then tis thought
               Thou'lt ſhew thy mercie and remorſe more ſtrange,
               Then is thy ſtrange apparant cruelty:
               And where thou now exacts the penalty,
               (VVhich is a pound of this poore Merchants fleſh)
               Thou wilt not onely looſe the forfeiture,
               But touch'd with humane gentleneſſe and loue,
               Forgiue a moity of the principall;
               Glancing an eie of pittie on his loſſes,
               That haue of late ſo hudled on his backe,
               Enow to preſſe a royall Merchant downe,
               And plucke commiſſeration of his ſtate
               From braſſie boſomes, and rough hearts of flint,
               From ſtubborne Turkes, and Tartars neuer train'd
               To offices of tender curteſie;
               VVe all expect a gentle anſwer Iew.
            
            
               Iew.
               
                  I haue poſſeſt your Grace of what I purpoſe,
               And by our holy Sabbath haue I ſworne
               To haue the due and forfet of my bond.
               If you deny it, let the danger light
               Vpon your Charter, and your Citties freedome.
               You'l aske me why I rather chooſe to haue
               A weight of carrion fleſh, then to receiue
               
                  
Three thouſand Ducats? Ile not anſwer that,
               But ſay it is my humor, is it anſwered?
               What if my houſe be troubled with a Rat,
               And I be pleas'd to giue ten thouſand ducats
               To haue it baind? what, are you anſwered yet?
               Some men there are loue not a gaping pig:
               Some that are mad if they behold a Cat:
               And others when the Bagpipe ſings i'th noſe,
               Cannot containe their vrine for affection.
               Maſters of paſſion ſwayes it to the mood
               Of what it likes or loathes: now for your anſwere.
               As there is no firme reaſon to be rendred,
               Why he cannot abide a gaping pig?
               Why he a harmleſſe neceſſary Cat?
               Why he a woollen Bagpipe; but of force
               Muſt yeeld to ſuch ineuitable ſhame,
               As to offend, himſelfe being offended:
               So can I giue no reaſon, nor I will not,
               More then a lodged hate▪ and a certaine loathing
               I beare Anthonio, that I follow thus
               A loſing ſute againſt him are you anſwered?
            
            
               Baſſ.
               This is no anſwer, thou vnfeeling man,
               To excuſe the currant of thy cruelty.
            
            
               Shy.
               I am not bound to pleaſe thee with my anſwere.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Do all men kill the things they do not loue?
            
            
               Shy.
               Hates any man the thing he would not kill?
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Euery offence is not a hate at firſt.
            
            
               Shy.
               What wouldſt thou haue a ſerpent ſting thee twice?
            
            
               Ant.
               I pray you thinke you queſtion with the Iew,
               You may as well go ſtand vpon the Beach,
               And bid the maine flood bate his vſuall height,
               You may as well vſe queſtion with the Wolfe,
               Why he hath made the Ewe bleake for the Lambe:
               You may as well forbid the mountaine of Pines
               To wag their high tops, and to make no noiſe
               When they are fretten with the guſts of heauen:
               
                  
You may as well do any thing moſt hard,
               As ſeeke to ſoften that, then which what's harder:
               His Iewiſh heart? therefore I do beſeech you
               Make no moe offers, vſe no farther meanes,
               But with all briefe and plaine conueniency
               Let me haue iudgement, and the Iew his will.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               For thy three thouſand ducats here is ſixe.
            
            
               Iew.
               If euery ducat in ſix thouſand ducats
               Were in ſixe parts, and euery part a ducat,
               I would not draw them, I would haue my bond.
            
            
               Du.
               How ſhalt thou hope for mercy, tendring none?
            
            
               Iew.
               What iudgment ſhall I dread, doing no wrong?
               You haue among you many a purchaſt ſlaue,
               Which like your Aſſes, and your Dogs and Mules,
               You vſe in abiect and in ſlauiſh parts,
               Becauſe you bought them, ſhall I ſay to you,
               Let them be free, marry them to your heires?
               Why ſweat they vnder burthens, let their beds
               Be made as ſoft as yours, and let their pallats
               Be ſeaſon'd with ſuch viands; you will anſwer,
               The ſlaues are ours, ſo do I anſwer you;
               The pound of fleſh which I demand of him,
               Is deerely bought, tis mine and I will haue it:
               If you deny me, fie vpon your Law,
               There is no force in the decrees of Venice:
               I ſtand for iudgement, anſwer, ſhall I haue it?
            
            
               Duke.
               Vpon my power I may diſmiſſe this Court,
               Vnleſſe Bellario a learned Doctor,
               Whom I haue ſent for to determine this,
               Come heere to day.
            
            
               Saler.
               My Lord, heere ſtayes without,
               A meſſenger with letters from the Doctor,
               New come from Padua.
               
            
            
               Duke.
               Bring vs the Letters, call the Meſſenger.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Good cheere Anthonio, what man, courage yet:
               The Iew ſhall haue my fleſh, blood, bones and all,
               
                  
Ere thou ſhalt loſe for me one drop of blood.
            
            
               Antho.
               I am a tainted weather of the flocke,
               Meeteſt for death, the weakeſt kinde of fruite
               Drops earlieſt to the ground, and ſo let me;
               You cannot better be imployd Baſſanio,
               
               Then to liue ſtill and write mine Epitaph.
            
            Enter Nerriſſa.
            
               Duke.
               Came you from Padua from Bellario?
               
            
            
               Ner.
               From both, my L. Bellario greetes your grace.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Why doſt thou whet thy knife ſo earneſtly?
            
            
               Iew.
               To cut the forfeiture from that bankrout there
            
            
               Gra.
               Not on thy ſoule: but on thy ſoule harſh Iew
               
               Thou mak'ſt thy knife keene: but no mettall can,
               No, not the hangmans axe beare halfe the keeneneſſe
               Of thy ſharpe enuy: can no prayers pierce thee?
            
            
               Iew.
               No, none that thou haſt wit enough to make.
            
            
               Gra.
               O be thou damn'd, inexecrable dog,
               And for thy life let iuſtice be accuſde;
               Thou almoſt mak'ſt me wauer in my faith,
               To hold opinion with Pythagoras,
               
               That ſoules of Animals infuſe themſelues
               Into the trunks of men: Thy curriſh ſpirit
               Gouern'd a Wolfe, who hang'd for humane ſlaughter,
               Euen from the gallowes did his fell ſoule fleete,
               And whilſt thou layeſt in thy vnhallowed dam,
               Infuſde it ſelfe in thee: for thy deſires
               Are woluiſh, bloody, ſtaru'd and rauenous.
            
            
               Iew.
               Till thou canſt raile the ſeale from off my bond,
               Thou but offendſt thy lungs to ſpeake ſo loud:
               Repaire thy wit, good youth, or it will fall
               To cureleſſe ruine. I ſtand heere for law.
            
            
               Duke.
               This letter from Bellario doth commend
               A young and learned Doctor to our Court:
               Where is he?
            
            
               Ner.
               He attendeth heere hard by,
               
                  
To know your anſwere, whether you'l admit him.
            
            
               Duke.
               With all my heart; ſome three or foure of you
               Goe giue him courteous conduct to this place,
               Meane time the Court ſhall heare Bellarios Letter.
               
                  
                     Your Grace ſhall vnderſtand, that at the receite of your Letter I am
very ſicke; but in the inſtant that your Meſſenger came, in louing viſitation
was with me a young Doctor of Rome, his name is Balthazer:
I acquainted him with the cauſe in controuerſie betweene the Iew and
Anthonio the Merchant; we turned ore many Bookes together, hee is
furniſhed with my opinion, which bettred with his owne learning, the
greatneſſe whereof I cannot enough commend, comes with him at my
importunity, to fill vp your Graces requeſt in my ſtead. I beſeech you,
let his lacke of years be no impediment to let him lacke a reuerend eſtimation,
for I neuer knew ſo young a body with ſo olde ahead: I leaue
him to your gracious acceptance, whoſe triall ſhall better publiſh his
commendation.
                  
               
            
            Enter Portia for Balthazer.
            
               Duke.
               You heare the learn'd Bellario what he writes,
               And heere I take it is the Doctor come.
               Giue me your hand, come you from old Bellario?
               
            
            
               Por.
               I did my Lord.
            
            
               Duke.
               You are welcome, take your place:
               Are you acquainted with the difference
               That holds this preſent queſtion in the Court.
            
            
               Por.
               I am enformed throughly of the cauſe:
               Which is the Merchant heere? and which the Iew?
            
            
               Duke.
               
                  Anthonio and olde Shylocke, both ſtand foorth.
            
            
               Por.
               Is your name Shylocke?
               
            
            
               Iew.
               
                  Shylocke is my name.
            
            
               Por.
               Of a ſtrange nature is the ſute you follow,
               Yet in ſuch rule, that the Venetian law
               Cannot impunge you as you do proceed.
               You ſtand within his danger, doe ye not?
            
            
               Ant.
               I ſo he ſayes.
            
            
               
               Por.
               Do you confeſſe the bond?
            
            
               Ant.
               I do.
            
            
               Por.
               Then muſt the Iew be mercifull.
            
            
               Shy.
               On what compulſion muſt I, tell me that.
            
            
               Por.
               The quality of mercy is not ſtrain'd,
               It droppeth as the gentle raine from heauen
               Vpon the place beneath: it is twice bleſt,
               It bleſſeth him that giues, and him that takes,
               Tis mightieſt in the mightieſt, it becomes
               The throned Monarch better then his crowne.
               His ſcepter ſhewes the force of temporall power,
               The attribute to awe and maieſty,
               Wherein doth ſit the dread and feare of Kings
               But mercy is aboue this ſceptred ſway,
               It is enthroned in the hearts of Kings,
               It is an attribute to God himſelfe;
               And earthly power doth then ſhew lik'ſt Gods,
               When mercy ſeaſons iuſtice: therefore Iew,
               
               Though iuſtice be thy plea, conſider this,
               That in the courſe of iuſtice, none of vs
               Should ſee ſaluation: we do pray for mercy,
               And that ſame prayer, doth teach vs all to render
               The deeds of mercy. I haue ſpoke thus much
               To mitigate the iuſtice of thy plea,
               Which if thou follow, this ſtrict Court of Venice
               Muſt needs giue ſentence gainſt the Merchant there,
            
            
               Shy.
               My deeds vpon my head, I craue the law,
               The penalty and forfeit of my bond.
            
            
               Por.
               Is he not able to diſcharge the money?
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Yes, heere I tender it for him in the Court,
               Yea twice the ſumme, if that will not ſuffice,
               I will be bound to pay it ten times ore,
               On forfeit of my hands, my head, my heart:
               If this will not ſuffize, it muſt appeare
               That malice beares downe truth. And I beſeech you
               Wreſt once the Law to your authority,
               
                  
To do a great tight, do a little wrong,
               And curbs this cruell diuell of his will.
            
            
               Por.
               It muſt not be, there is no power in Venice
               Can alter a Decree eſtabliſhed:
               Twill be recorded for a precedent,
               And many an errour by the ſame example,
               Will ruſh into the ſtate, it cannot be.
            
            
               Shy.
               A Daniel come to iudgement: yea a Daniel.
               
               O wiſe young Iudge, how I do honour thee.
            
            
               Por.
               I pray you let me looke vpon the bond.
            
            
               Shy.
               Heere tis moſt reuerend Doctor, here it is.
            
            
               Por.
               
                  Shylocke, ther's thrice thy money offred thee.
            
            
               Shy.
               And oath, an oath, I haue an oath in heauen,
               Shall I lay periury vpon my ſoule?
               No, not for Venice.
            
            
               Por.
               Why this bond is forfeit,
               And lawfully by this the Iew may claime
               A pound of fleſh, to be by him cut off
               Neereſt the Merchants heart; be mercifull,
               Take thrice thy money, bid me teare the bond.
            
            
               Shy.
               When it is paid, according to the tenour,
               It doth appeare you are a worthy Iudge,
               You know the Law, your expoſition
               Hath bene moſt ſound: I charge you by the Law,
               Whereof you are a well deſeruing Pillar,
               Proceed to iudgement: by my ſoule I ſweare,
               There is no power in the tongue of man
               To alter me, I ſtay heere on my bond.
            
            
               Ant.
               Moſt heartily I do beſeech the Court
               To giue the iudgement.
            
            
               Por.
               Why then thus it is,
               You muſt prepare your boſome for his knife.
            
            
               Shy.
               O noble iudge, O excellent young man.
            
            
               Por.
               For the intent and purpoſe of the Law,
               Hath full relation to the penalty.
               Which heere appeareth due vpon the bond.
            
            
               
               Shy.
               Tis very true: O wiſe and vpright iudge,
               How much more elder art thou then thy lookes.
            
            
               Por.
               Therefore lay bare your boſome.
            
            
               Shy.
               I, his breaſt,
               So ſayes the bond, doth it not noble Iudge?
               Neereſt his heart, thoſe are the very words.
            
            
               Por.
               It is ſo, are there ballance here to weigh the fleſh?
            
            
               Shy.
               I haue them ready.
            
            
               Por.
               Haue by ſome Surgeon Shylocke on your charge,
               To ſtop his wounds, leaſt he do bleed to death.
            
            
               Shy.
               Is it ſo nominated in the bond?
            
            
               Por.
               It is not ſo expreſt, but what of that?
               Twere good you do ſo much for charity.
            
            
               Shy.
               I cannot finde it, tis not in the bond.
            
            
               Por.
               You Merchant, haue you any thing to ſay?
            
            
               Ant.
               But little; I am arm'd and well prepar'd,
               Giue me your hand Baſſanio, far you well,
               Greeue not that I am falne to this for you:
               For heerein Fortune ſhewes her ſelfe more kinde
               Then is her cuſtome: it is ſtill her vſe
               To let the wretched man out-liue his wealth,
               To view with hollow eye and wrinckled brow,
               An age of pouerty: from which lingring pennance
               Of ſuch miſery doth ſhe cut me off.
               Commend me to your honourable wife,
               Tell her the proceſſe of Anthonios ende,
               Say how I lou'd you, ſpeake me faire in death▪
               
               And when the tale is told, bid her be iudge,
               Whether Baſſanio had not once a loue:
               Repent but you that you ſhall loſe your friend,
               And he repents not that he payes your debt.
               For if the Iew do cut but deepe enough,
               Ile pay it preſently with all my heart.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               
                  Anthonio, I am married to a wife,
               Which is as deare to me as life it ſelfe,
               But life it ſelfe, my wife, and all the world,
               
                  
Are not with me eſteem'd aboue thy life.
               I would loſe all, I ſacrifize them all
               Heere to this diuell, to deliuer you.
            
            
               Por.
               Your wife would giue you little thanks for that
               If ſhe were by to heare you make the offer.
            
            
               Gra.
               I haue a wife, who I proteſt I loue,
               I would ſhe were in heauen, ſo ſhe could
               Entreate ſome power to change this curriſh Iew,
               
            
            
               Ner.
               Tis well you offer it behinde her backe,
               The wiſh would make elſe an vnquiet houſe.
            
            
               Iew.
               Theſe be the chriſtian husbands, I haue a daughter,
               Would any of the ſtocke of Barrabas
               
               Had bene her husband, rather then a Chriſtian.
               We trifle time, I pray thee purſue ſentence.
            
            
               Por.
               A pound of that ſame Merchants fleſh is thine,
               The Court awards it, and the law doth giue it.
            
            
               Iew.
               Moſt rightfull Iudge.
            
            
               Por.
               And you muſt cut this fleſh from off his breaſt,
               The Law allowes it, and the Court awards it.
            
            
               Iew.
               Moſt learned Iudge, a ſentence, come prepare.
            
            
               Por.
               Tarry a little, there is ſomething elſe,
               This bond doth giue thee here no iote of blood,
               The words expreſly are a pound of fleſh:
               Take then thy bond, take thou thy pound of fleſh,
               But in the cutting it, if thou doſt ſhed
               One drop of Chriſtian blood, thy lands and goods
               Are by the lawes of Venice, confiſcate
               Vnto the State of Venice.
            
            
               Gra.
               O vpright Iudge,
               Marke Iew▪
                   O learned Iudge.
            
            
               Shy.
               Is that the Law?
            
            
               Por.
               Thy ſelfe ſhalt ſee the Act:
               For as the
                     •
                   vrgeſt iuſtice, be aſſur'd
               Thou ſhalt haue iuſtice, more then thou deſireſt.
            
            
               Gra.
               O learned Iudge, marke Iew, a learned Iudge.
            
            
               Iew.
               
                  I take this offer then, pay the bond thrice,
               
                  
And let the Chriſtian go.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Heere is the money.
            
            
               Por.
               Soft, the Iew ſhall haue all iuſtice, ſoft no haſt
               He ſhall haue nothing but the penalty.
            
            
               Gra.
               O Iew, an vpright iudge, a learned iudge.
            
            
               Por.
               Therefore prepare thee to cut off the fleſh,
               Shed thou no blood, nor cut thou leſſe nor more,
               But iuſt a pound of fleſh: if thou cutſt more
               Or leſſe then a iuſt pound, be it but ſo much
               As makes it light or heauy in the ſubſtance,
               Or the diuiſion of the twentith part
               Of one poore ſcruple; nay, if the ſcale do turne
               But in the eſtimation of a haire,
               Thou dyeſt, and all thy goods are confiſcate.
            
            
               Gra.
               A ſecond Daniel, a Daniel Iew,
               Now infidell I haue you on the hip.
            
            
               Por.
               Why doth the Iew pauſe, take thy forfeyture.
            
            
               Shy.
               Giue me my principall, and let me go.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               I haue it ready for thee, heere it is.
            
            
               Por.
               He hath refuſd it in the open Court,
               And ſhall haue meerely iuſtice and his bond.
            
            
               Gra.
               A Daniel ſtill ſay I, a ſecond Daniel,
               I thanke thee Iew for teaching me that word.
            
            
               Shy.
               Shall I not haue barely my principall?
            
            
               Por.
               Thou ſhalt haue nothing but the forfeyture,
               To be ſo taken at thy perill Iew.
            
            
               Shy.
               Why then the deuill giue him good of it:
               Ile ſtay no longer heere in queſtion.
            
            
               Por.
               Tarry Iew,
               The Law hath yet another hold on you.
               It is enacted in the lawes of Venice,
               If it be proued againſt any alien,
               That by direct, or indirect attempts,
               He ſeeke the life of any Citizen,
               The party gainſt the which he doth contriue,
               Shall ſeize on halfe his goods; the other halfe
               
                  
Comes to the priuy coſter of the State,
               And the offenders life lies in the mercy
               Of the Duke onely, gainſt all other voyce,
               In which predicament I ſay, thou ſtandſt:
               For it appeares by manifeſt proceeding.
               That indirectly, and directly to
               Thou haſt contriued gainſt the very life
               Of the defendant: and thou haſt incurd
               The danger formerly by me rehearſt.
               Downe therefore, and beg mercy of the Duke.
            
            
               Gra.
               Beg that thou maiſt haue leaue to hang thy ſelf,
               And yet thy wealth being forfeit to the ſtate,
               Thou haſt not left the value of a cord,
               Therefore thou muſt be hangd at the States charge.
            
            
               Duke.
               That thou ſhalt ſee the diffrence of our ſpirits,
               I pardon thee thy life before thou aske it:
               For halfe thy wealth, it is Anthonios,
               
               The other halfe comes to the generall State,
               Which humbleneſſe may driue vnto a fine.
            
            
               Por.
               I for the ſtate, not for Anthonio.
               
            
            
               Shy.
               Nay, take my life and all, pardon not that,
               You take my houſe, when you do take the prop
               That doth ſuſtaine my houſe: you take my life
               When you do take the meanes wherby I liue.
            
            
               Por.
               What mercy can you render him, Anthonio?
               
            
            
               Gra.
               A halter gratis, nothing elſe for Gods ſake.
            
            
               An.
               So pleaſe my Lord the Duke, & all the Court,
               To quit the fine for one halfe of his goods,
               I am content; ſo he will let me haue
               The other halfe in vſe, to render it
               Vpon his death vnto the Gentleman
               That lately ſtole his daughter.
               Two things prouided more, that for this fauour
               He preſently become a Chriſtian:
               To other, that he do record a gift
               Heere in the Court, of all he dies poſſeſt
               
                  
Vnto his ſonne Lorenzo and his daughter.
            
            
               Duke.
               He ſhall do this, or elſe I do recant
               The pardon that I late pronounced heere.
            
            
               Por.
               Art thou contented Iew? what doſt thou ſay?
            
            
               Shy.
               I am content.
            
            
               Por.
               Clearke, draw a deed of gift.
            
            
               Shy.
               I pray you giue me leaue to go from hence,
               I am not well, ſend the deed after me,
               And I will ſigne it.
            
            
               Duke.
               Get thee gone, but do it.
            
            
               Gra.
               In chriſtning ſhalt thou haue two Godfathers,
               Had I bene iudge, thou ſhouldſt haue had ten more,
               To bring thee to the gallowes, not the Font.
            
            Exit.
            
               Duke.
               Sir, I intreate you home with me dinner.
            
            
               Por.
               I humbly deſire your Grace of pardon,
               I muſt away this night toward Padua,
               
               And it is meete I preſently ſet forth.
            
            
               Duke.
               I am ſorry that your leyſure ſerues you not.
               
                  Anthonio, gratifie this gentleman,
               For in my minde you are much bound to him.
            
            Exit Duke and his traine.
            
               Baſſ.
               Moſt worthy gentleman, I and my friend
               Haue by your wiſedome bene this day acquited
               Of greeuous penalties, in lew whereof,
               Three thouſand ducats due vnto the Iew,
               We freely cope your courteous paines withall.
            
            
               Ant.
               And ſtand indebted ouer and aboue
               In loue and ſeruice to you euermore.
            
            
               Por.
               He is well paid, that is well ſatisfied,
               And I deliuering you, am ſatisfied,
               And therein do account my ſelfe well paid,
               My minde was neuer yet more mercinary.
               I pray you know me when we meete againe,
               I wiſh you well, and ſo I take my leaue.
            
            
               
               Baſſ.
               Deere ſir, of force I muſt attempt you further,
               Take ſome remembrance of vs as a tribute,
               Not as a fee: grant me two things I pray you,
               Not to deny me, and to pardon me.
            
            
               Por.
               You preſſe me farre, and therefore I will yeeld,
               Giue me your gloues, ile weare them for your ſake,
               And for your loue, ile take this ring from you.
               Do not draw backe your hand, ile take no more,
               And you in loue ſhall not deny me this.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               This Ring good ſir, alas it is a trifle,
               I will not ſhame my ſelfe to giue you this.
            
            
               Por.
               I will haue nothing elſe but onely this,
               And now methinkes I haue a minde to it.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               There's more then this depends vpon the valew:
               The deareſt Ring in Venice I will giue you,
               And finde it out by Proclamation,
               Onely for this I pray you pardon mee?
            
            
               Por.
               I ſee ſir you are liberall in offers,
               You taught me firſt to begge, and now me thinkes
               You teach me how a begger ſhould be anſwer'd.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Good ſir, this Ring was giuen me by my wife,
               And when ſhe put it on, ſhe made me vow,
               That I ſhould neither ſell, nor giue, nor looſe it.
            
            
               Por.
               That ſcuſe ſerues many men to ſaue their giftes,
               And if your wife be not a mad woman,
               And know how well I haue deſeru'd the Ring,
               She would not hold out enemy for euer,
               For giuing it to me: well, peace bee with you.
            
            Exeunt
            
               An.
               My Lord Baſſanio, let him haue the Ring,
               Let his deſeruings and my loue withall,
               Be valew'd gainſt your wiues commandement.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Go Gratiano, tunne and ouertake him,
               Giue him the Ring, and bring him if thou canſt
               Vnto Anthonios houſe, away, make haſt.
            
            Exeunt Gratiano.
            
               
Come you and I will thither preſently,
            And in the morning early will we both
            Fly toward Belmont, come Anthonio.
            
            Exeunt.
            Enter Nerriſſa.
            
               Por.
               Enquire the Iewes houſe out, giue him this deede,
               And let him ſigne it, wee'l away to night,
               And be a day before our husbands home:
               This deede will be well welcome to Lorenzo.
            
            Enter Gratiano.
            
               Gra.
               Faire ſir, you are well ore-tane,
               My Lord Baſſanio vpon more aduice,
               Hath ſent you heere this Ring, and doth intreate
               Your company at dinner.
            
            
               Por.
               That cannot be,
               This Ring I do accept moſt thankefully,
               And ſo I pray you tell him. Furthermore,
               I pray you ſhew my youth old Shylockes houſe.
            
            
               Gra.
               That will I do.
            
            
               Ner.
               Sir, I would ſpeake with you.
               Ile ſee if I can get my husbands Ring,
               Which I did make him ſweare to keepe for euer.
            
            
               Por.
               Thou maiſt I warrant, we ſhall haue old ſwearing
               That they did giue the Rings away to men,
               But weele out-face them, and out-ſweare them too,
               Away, make haſt, thou know'ſt where I will tarry.
            
            
               Ner.
               Come good ſir, will you ſhew me to this houſe?
            
            Enter Lorenzo and Ieſſica.
            
               Lor.
               The Moone ſhines bright.
               In ſuch a night as this,
               When the ſweet winde did gently kiſſe the Trees,
               
                  
And they did make no noyſe, in ſuch a night,
               
                  Troylus me-thinks mounted the Troyan wals,
               And ſigh'd his ſoule toward the Grecian Tents
               Where Creſſada lay that night.
            
            
               Ieſſica.
               In ſuch a night
               Did Thisbie fearefully ore-trip the dew▪
               
               And ſaw the Lyons ſhadow ere himſelfe,
               And ranne diſmayed away.
            
            
               Loren.
               In ſuch a night.
               Stood Dido with a willow in her hand
               Vpon the wilde ſea banks, and waft her Loue
               To come againe to Carthage.
               
            
            
               Ieſſica.
               In ſuch a night,
               
                  Medea gathered the inchanted hearbs
               That did renew old Fſon.
               
            
            
               Loren.
               In ſuch a night
               Did Ieſſica ſteale from the wealthy Iew,
               And with an vnthrift loue did runne from Venice,
               As farre as Belmont.
            
            
               Ieſſica.
               In ſuch a night
               Did young Lorenzo ſweare he loued her well,
               Stealing her ſoule with many vowes of faith,
               And nere a true one.
            
            
               Loren.
               In ſuch a night
               Did pretty Ieſſica (like a little ſhrew)
               Slander her Loue, and he forgaue it her.
            
            
               Ieſſica.
               I would out-night you did nobody come:
               But hearke, I heare the footing of a man.
            
            Enter a Meſſenger.
            
               Loren.
               Who comes ſo faſt in ſilence of the night?
            
            
               Meſſen.
               A friend.
            
            
               Loren.
               A friend, what friend, your name I pray you friend.
            
            
               Meſſen.
               
                  Stephano is my name, and I bring word
My miſtris will before the breake of day
               
                  
Be heere at Belmont, ſhe doth ſtray about
               By holy croſſes where ſhe kneeles and prayes
               For happy wedlockes houres.
            
            
               Loren.
               Who comes with her?
            
            
               Meſſen.
               None but a holy Hermit and her maid:
               I pray you is my Maſter yet return'd?
            
            
               Loren.
               He is not, nor we haue not heard from him,
               But goe we in I pray thee Ieſſica,
               
               And ceremoniouſly let vs prepare
               Some welcome for the Miſtris of the houſe.
            
            Enter Clowne.
            
               Clowne.
               Sola, ſola: wo ha, ho ſola, ſola.
            
            
               Loren.
               Who calles?
            
            
               Clown.
               Sola, did you ſee M. Lorenzo, M. Lorenzo, ſola, ſola.
            
            
               Loren.
               Leaue hollowing man, heere.
            
            
               Clown.
               Sola, where, where?
            
            
               Loren.
               Heere.
            
            
               Clown.
               Tell him there's a Poſt come from my Maſter, with
his horne full of good newes, my Maſter will be heere ere morning,
ſweete ſoule.
            
            
               Loren.
               Let's in, and there expect their comming,
               And yet no matter; why ſhould we go in?
               My friend Stephano, ſignifie I pray you▪
               
               Within the houſe, your miſtris is at hand,
               And bring your muſicke foorth into the ayre.
               How ſweete the Moone-light ſleepes vpon this banke,
               Heere will we ſit, and let the ſounds of muſicke
               Creepe in our eares ſoft ſtilneſſe, and the night
               Become the tutches of ſweete harmony:
               Sit Ieſſica, looke how the floore of heauen
               Is thicke inlayed with pattents of bright gold,
               There's not the ſmalleſt orbe which thou beholdſt,
               But in his motion like an Angell ſings,
               Still quiring to the young eide Cherubins;
               
                  
Such harmony is in immortall ſoules,
               But whilſt this muddy veſture of decay
               Doth groſſely cloſe in it, we cannot heare it.
               Come hoe, and wake Diana with him a hymne,
               With ſweeteſt touches pierce your miſtris eare,
               And draw her home with Muſicke.
            
            Muſicke playes.
            
               Ieſ.
               I am neuer merry, when I heare ſweete Muſick.
            
            
               Lor.
               The reaſon is, your ſpirits are attentiue:
               For, do but note a wilde and wanton heard,
               Or race of youthfull and vnhandled Colts,
               Fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing lowd,
               Which is the hot condition of their blood,
               If they perchance but heare a Trumpet ſound,
               Or any aire of muſicke touch their eares,
               You ſhall perceiue them make a mutuall ſtand,
               Their ſauage eies turn'd to a modeſt gaze,
               By the ſweete power of muſicke. Therefore the Poet
               Did faine that Orpheus drew trees, ſtones, and floods.
               Since nought ſo ſtockiſh hard and full of rage,
               But muſicke for the time doth change his nature:
               The man that hath no muſicke in himſelfe,
               Nor is not moou'd with concord of ſweete ſounds,
               Is fit for treaſons, ſtratagems, and ſpoyles,
               The motions of his ſpirit are dull as night,
               and his affections darke as Terebus:
               
               Let no ſuch man be truſted. Marke the Muſicke.
            
            Enter Nerriſſa and Portia.
            
               Por.
               That light we ſee is burning in my hall:
               How farre that little candle throwes his beames,
               So ſhines a good deede in a naughty world.
            
            
               Ner.
               When the Moone ſhone we did not ſee the candle.
            
            
               Por.
               So doth the greater glory dim the leſſe.
               A ſubſtitute ſhines brightly as a King.
               
                  
Vntill a King be by, and then his ſtate
               Empties it ſelfe, as doth an in-land brooke
               Into the maine of waters: Muſicke, harke.
            
            
               Ner.
               It is your muſicke Madam of the houſe.
            
            
               Por.
               Nothing is good I ſee without reſpect,
               Methinkes it ſounds much ſweeter then by day.
            
            
               Ner.
               Silence beſtowes that vertue on it Madam.
            
            
               Por.
               The Crow doth ſing as ſweetly as the Larke,
               When neither is attended: and I thinke
               The Nightingale if ſhe ſhould ſing by day
               When euery Gooſe is cackling, would be thought
               No better a Muſitian then the Wren.
               How many things by ſeaſon, ſeaſon'd are
               To their right praiſe, and true perfection.
               Peace, how the Moone ſleepes with Endimion,
               And would not be awak'd.
            
            
               Lor.
               That is the voice,
               Or I am much deceiu'd of Portia.
               
            
            
               Por.
               He knowes me as the blinde man knowes
               The Cucko, by the bad voyce.
            
            
               Lor.
               Deere Lady, welcome home.
            
            
               Por.
               We haue bin praying for our husband health,
               Which ſpeed we hope the better for our words.
               Are they return'd?
            
            
               Loren.
               Madam, they are not yet:
               But there is come a Meſſenger before,
               To ſignifie their comming.
            
            
               Por.
               Go in Nerriſſa,
               
               Giue order to my ſeruants, that they take
               No note at all of our being abſent hence,
               Nor you Lorenzo, Ieſſica nor you.
            
            
               Lor.
               Your husband is at hand, I heare his Trumpet,
               We are no tell-tales Madame, feare you not.
            
            
               Por.
               This night me thinkes is but the day light ſicke,
               It lookes a little paler, tis a day,
               Such as the day is when the Sunne is hid.
            
            
            Enter Baſſanio, Anthonio, Gratiano, and their
followers.
            
               Baſſ.
               We ſhould hold day with the Antipodes,
               If you would walke in abſence of the ſunne.
            
            
               Por.
               Let me giue light, but let me not be light,
               For a light wife doth make a heauy husband,
               And neuer be Baſſanio ſo for me,
               But God ſort all: y'are welcome home my Lord.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               I thanke you Madame, giue welcome to my friend,
               This is the man, this is Anthonio,
               
               To whom I am ſo infinitely bound.
            
            
               Por.
               You ſhould in all ſence be much bound to him,
               For as I heare, he was much bound for you.
            
            
               Ant.
               No more then I am well acquitted of.
            
            
               Por.
               Sir, you are very welcome to our houſe,
               It muſt appeare in other wayes then words,
               Therefore I ſcant this breathing curteſie.
            
            
               Gra.
               By yonder Moone I ſweare you do me wrong,
               Infaith I gaue it to the Iudges Clarke,
               Would he were gelt that had it for my part,
               Since you do take it (Loue) ſo much at hart.
            
            
               Por.
               A quarrell hoe already, what's the matter?
            
            
               Gra.
               About a hoope of gold, a paltry ring
               That ſhe did giue me, whoſe poeſie was
               For all the world like Cutlers poetry
               Vpon a knife, Loue me, and leaue me not.
               
            
            
               Ner.
               What talke you of the poeſie or the value;
               You ſwore to me when I did giue it you,
               That you would weare it till your houre of death,
               And that it ſhould lye with you in your graue,
               Though not for me, yet for your vehement oathes,
               You ſhould haue beene reſpectiue, and haue kept it.
               Gaue it a Iudges Clarke; no God's my Iudge,
               The Clarke will nere weare haire on's face that had it.
            
            
               
               Gra.
               He will, and if he liue to be a man.
            
            
               Ner.
               I, if a woman liue to be a man.
            
            
               Gra.
               Now by this hand I gaue it to a youth,
               A kinde of boy, a little ſcrubbed boy,
               No higher then thy ſelfe, the Iudges Clarke,
               A prating boy that begd it as a fee,
               I could not for my heart deny it him.
            
            
               Por.
               You were too blame, I muſt be plaine with you,
               To part ſo ſlightly with your wiues firſt gift,
               A thing ſtucke on with oaths vpon your finger,
               And ſo riueted with faith vnto your fleſh.
               I gaue my Loue a ring, and made him ſweare
               Neuer to part with it, and heere he ſtands;
               I dare be ſworne for him he would not leaue it,
               Nor plucke it from his finger, for the wealth
               That the world maſters. Now in faith Gratiano,
               
               You giue your wife too vnkinde a cauſe of greefe,
               And twere to me I ſhould be mad at it.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Why I were beſt to cut my left hand off,
               And ſweare I loſt the Ring defending it.
            
            
               Gra.
               My Lord Baſſanio gaue his ring away
               Vnto the Iudge that begd it, and indeed
               Deſeru'd it to: and then the boy his Clarke
               That tooke ſome paines in writing, he begd mine,
               And neither man nor maſter would take ought
               But the two rings.
            
            
               Por.
               What ring gaue you my Lord?
               Not that I hope which you rceiu'd of me.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               If I could adde a lye vnto a fault,
               I would deny it: but you ſee my finger
               Hath not the ring vpon it, it is gone.
            
            
               Por.
               Euen ſo void is your falſe heart of truth.
               By heauen I will nere come in your bed,
               Vntill I ſee the ring.
            
            
               Ner.
               Nor I in yours,
               Till I againe ſee mine.
            
            
               
               Baſſ.
               Sweet Portia,
               
               If you did know to whome I gaue the Ring,
               If you did know for whom I gaue the Ring,
               And would conceiue for what I gaue the Ring,
               And how vnwillingly I left the Ring,
               When nought would be accepted but the Ring,
               You would abate the ſtrength of your diſpleaſure.
            
            
               Por.
               If you had knowne the vertue of the Ring,
               Of halfe her worthineſſe that gaue the Ring,
               Or your owne honor to containe the Ring,
               You would not then haue parted with the Ring.
               What man is there ſo much vnreaſonable,
               If you had pleaſd to haue defended it
               With any termes of zeale, wanted the modeſty
               To vrge the thing held as a ceremony?
               
                  Nerriſſa teaches me what to beleeue,
               Ile die for't, but ſome woman had the Ring.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               No by my honor Madam, by my ſoule
               No woman had it, but a ciuill Doctor,
               Which did refuſe three thouſand Ducates of me,
               And begd the Ring, the which I did deny him,
               And ſuffer'd him to go away diſpleaſd,
               Euen he that did vphold the very life
               Of my deere friend. What ſhould I ſay ſweet Lady?
               I was enforc'd to ſend it after him:
               I was beſet with ſhame and courteſie,
               My honour would not let ingratitude
               So much beſmeare it. Pardon me good Lady,
               For by theſe bleſſed Candles of the night,
               Had you bene there, I thinke you would haue begd
               The Ring of me, to giue the worthy Doctor.
            
            
               Por.
               Let not that Doctor ere come neere my houſe,
               Since he hath got the iewell that I loued,
               And that which you did ſweare to keepe for me,
               I will become as liberall as you,
               Ile not deny him any thing I haue,
               
                  
No, not my bodie, nor my husbands bed:
               Know him I ſhall, I am well ſure of it.
               Lye not a night from home: watch me like Argos,
               If you do not, if I be left alone,
               Now by mine honor, which is yet mine owne,
               Ile haue that Doctor for my bed-fellow.
            
            
               Ner.
               And I his Clarke: therefore be well aduiſd
               How you do leaue me to mine owne protection.
            
            
               Gra.
               Well do you ſo: let not me take him then,
               For if I do, Ile marre the yong Clarkes pen.
            
            
               An.
               I am th'vnhappy ſubiect of theſe quarrels.
            
            
               Por.
               Sir, greeue not you, you are welcome notwithſtanding.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               
                  Portia, forgiue me this enforced wrong,
               And in the hearing of theſe many friends
               I ſweare to thee, euen by thine owne faire eyes,
               Wherein I ſee my ſelfe.
            
            
               Por.
               Marke you but that.
               In both my eyes he doubly ſees himſelfe:
               In each eye one, ſweare by your double ſelfe,
               And there's an oath of credite.
            
            
               Baſ.
               Nay, but heare me,
               Pardon this fault, and by my ſoule I ſweare,
               I neuer more will breake an oath with thee.
            
            
               An.
               I once did lend my body for his wealth,
               Which but for him that had your husband Ring,
               Had quite miſcarried. I dare be bound againe,
               My ſoule vpon the forfet, that your Lord
               Will neuer more breake faith aduiſedly.
            
            
               Por.
               Then you ſhall be his ſurety; giue him this,
               And bid him keepe it better then the other.
            
            
               An.
               Heere Lord Baſſanio, ſweare to keepe this Ring.
            
            
               Baſ.
               By heauen it is the ſame I gaue the Doctor.
            
            
               Por.
               I had it of him; pardon me Baſſanio,
               
               For by this ring the Doctor lay with me.
            
            
               Ner.
               And pardon me my gentle Gratiano,
               
               For that ſame ſcrubbed boy the Doctors Clarke,
               
                  
In lieu of this, laſt night did lie with me.
            
            
               Gra.
               Why this is like the mending of high wayes
               In ſummer, where the wayes are faire enough.
               What, are we Cuckolds ere we haue deſeru'd it?
            
            
               Por.
               Speake not ſo groſſely, you are all amaz'd;
               Heere is a Letter, reade it at your leiſure,
               It comes from Padua from Bellario,
               
               There you ſhall finde that Portia was the Doctor,
               
                  Nerriſſa there her Clarke, Lorenzo heere
               Shall witneſſe I ſet foorth as ſoone as you,
               And euen but now return'd; I haue not yet
               Entred my houſe. Anthonio, you are welcome,
               And I haue better newes in ſtore for you
               Then you expect; vnſeale this letter ſoone,
               There you ſhall finde three of your Argoſies
               Are richly come to harbour ſodainly.
               You ſhall not know by what ſtrange accident
               I chanced on this Letter.
            
            
               Ant.
               I am dumbe.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               Were you the Doctor, and I knew you not?
            
            
               Gra.
               Were you the Clarke that is to make me Cuckold?
            
            
               Ner.
               I, but the Clarke that neuer meanes to do it,
               Vnleſſe he liue vntill he be a man.
            
            
               Baſſ.
               (Sweete Doctor) you ſhall be my bed-fellow,
               When I am abſent, then lie with my wife.
            
            
               An.
               Sweet Lady, you haue giuen me life and liuing;
               For heere I reade for certaine, that my Ships
               Are ſafely come to Rode.
            
            
               Por.
               How now Lorenzo,
               
               My Clarke hath ſome good comforts too for you.
            
            
               Ner.
               I, and ile giue them him without a fee,
               There do I giue to you and Ieſſica
               
               From the rich Iew, a ſpeciall deed of gift
               After his death, of all he dies poſſeſt off.
            
            
               Loren.
               Faire Ladies, you drop Manna in the way
               Of ſtarued people.
            
            
               
               Por.
               It is almoſt morning,
               And yet Ime ſure you are not ſatisfied
               Of theſe euents at full. Let's go in,
               And charge vs there vpon intergotories,
               And we will anſwer all things faithfully.
            
            
               Gra.
               Let it be ſo, the firſt intergotory
               That my Nerriſſa ſhall be ſworne on, is,
               Whether till the next night ſhe had rather ſtay,
               Or go to bed now, being two houres to day:
               But were the day come, I ſhould wiſh it darke,
               That I were couching with the Clarke.
               Well, while I liue, ile feare no other thing
               So ſore, as keeping ſafe Nerriſſas Ring.
            
            Exeunt.
            FINIS.
         
      
   