
      
         
            
            
            
               A DISCOVRSE OF HIS OWNE, OF THE MEANES AND SVFFICIENCIE OF ENGLAND, for to haue abundance of fine ſilke, by feeding of Silke-wormes within the ſame; as by apparent proofes by him made and continued appeareth. For the generall vſe and vniuerſall benefit of all thoſe his Countrie-men which embrace it.
            
            
               
                  printer's or publisher's device
                  Pro patria pario.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  blazon or coat of arms
               
            
         
         
            
            TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTIE PRINCE IAMES, BY THE Grace of God, King of Great Britaine, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c.
            
               MY deſire to aunſwere most dread Soueraigne) the care and ſtudie of my parents, ſo to breed mee, as that I might bee made fit for ſome ſeruiceable imploymēt in the Common-wealth, and the remēbrance of that matter, whereunto mine earthly part muſt returne, being nothing elſe but food for wormes, hath theſe 7. yeeres entertained ſome part of my life, with an earneſt or rather burning deſire, not only to learn and find out the readieſt and aſſuredſt way, how to reare vp, nouriſh, & feed Silk-worms, the moſt admirable & beautifulleſt cloathing creatures of this world: but alſo the exacteſt & beſt means to preſerue and ſuſteine thē, with no leſſe affectiō to make good & profitable vſe of both. Whereunto hauing in ſome ſmall meaſure attained, am willing for the publike benefit of ſo many of my coūtrey-men, as ſhall as thankfully embrace it, as I louingly & freely offer it, to frame my labors as motiues & means for thē: to draw frō their proper lāds the ineſtimable treaſure of Silke (there til

now incloſed & locked vp,) euer ſince the firſt Chaos. And to the end, that theſe mine endeauours might purchaſe the better credit & allowāce with your Maiestie: haue Engliſhed a moſt worthy & ſelect treatiſe of this ſubiect, writtē in French by D'oliuier de Serres L▪ of Pradel, with an annexed diſcourſe of my owne cōtinued proofes in England, & the ſufficiency therof, for the yeelding of abundant ſtore of pure Silke. Wiſhing that after this my publiſhing of thē, the thing it ſelf may fructify & encreaſe in ſuch ample meaſure and proportiō here, as it did there, whē mine Author had once brought his to view. Which vndoubtedly wil be done, if your Highnes wil be graciouſly pleaſed to giue life & ſtrēgth to this my ſlēder & weake firſtborne Impe, that thereby it may grow & ſpread like the flouriſhing Cedar-tree of Libanus, to the perpetual, & vniuerſall good of all that ſhall imitate mine example: & the granting thereof likewiſe by your Maiestie, wil not only more earneſtly ſtir thē therin; but alſo incourage & egge me on to perfect this work by longer & more continued practiſe & experience; (if perhaps my through want of further knowledge) of the natures of theſe excellent creatures, haue left any part thereof defectiue or vnpoliſhed. All I aime at is to do your Highnes, & my Countrey ſeruice, where in I will perpetually ſtriue with vnreſiſtable perſeuerāce to mine vttermoſt, & will euer pray to God for your Maiesties long and moſt happie raigne ouer all your Kingdomes and Dominions.
            
               Your Maiesties most loyall and dutifull ſubiect, borne and bound to do you ſeruice:
NICH. GEFFE.
            
         
         
            
            TO MASTER NICHOLAS GEFFE.
            
               AS thou deare friend with they industrious hand
               Reacheſt this rich inualuable Clue;
               So once Columbus offred to this land
               That from which Spaine her now-hie courage drue.
            
            
               And had not ſhe prouok'd by his deſignes,
               Traueld to find what hidden was before,
               Ne're had her Argo's from the Indian mines
               Powr'd their full panches, on th' Iberian ſhore.
            
            
               From ſmall beginnings how braue noble things
               Haue gathered vigor and themſelues haue rear'd
               To be the ſtrength and maintenance of Kings
               That at the first but friuolous appear'd:
            
            
               So may thy Silk-wormes happily increaſe
               From ſea to ſea to propagate their ſeed
               That plant ſtill, nouriſh'd by our glorious peace
               Whoſe leafe alone, the labouring Worme doth feed.
            
            
               And may thy fame perpetually aduance
               Rich when by thee, thy countrey ſhall be made
               
                  
Naples, Granado, Portugale, and France,
               All to ſit idle, wondring at our trade.
            
            
               The tree acquainting with the Brittiſh ſoyle
               And the true vſe vnto our people taught
               Shall trebble ten times recompence the toile
               (From forraine parts) of him it hither brought,
            
            
               In ſpight of them would rob thee of thy due,
               Yet not depriue vs of thy noble skill,
               Still let faire vertue to her ſelfe be true,
               Although the times ingratefull be and ill.
               
                  MICHAEL DRAYTON.
               
            
         
         
            
            TO MA
                  ••
               ER NICHOLAS Geffe, my eſteemed friend.
            
               NEuer was yet the ſubiect in this land
               H'as brought to light, like hope as thou hast done,
               Nor ſet his braines to worke; nor mou'd his hand
               More purpoſely, then what thou hast begun.
            
            
               Whilſt greater heads were poring vpon toyes
               Thine hath been fraught this Iland to aduance
               With ſtudious care, and intermixt annoyes
               And times expence; (ſull ſeuen ye'res perfectance)
            
            
               Hath made vs free-men, of thy rich found trade,
               And freely haſt imparted vnto all;
               The arte, skill, meanes, and way haſt open laid
               For to enrich the great ones and the ſmall.
            
            
               Spaine ſhall hence forward keep her ſilks at home,
               And Italy diſperſe hers where ſhe may;
               The Merchant ſhall not need ſo farre to rome,
               Since thou haſt ſhewen a ſhort and cheaper way
            
            
               By ſilly wormes, which euer heeretofore
               The vſe to keep with vs hath bin vnknowne,
               To draw that great abundant fleece of ſtore
               From them, (by thy diſcouery amplie ſhowen)
            
            
               The ſilken fleece to England thou haſt brought
               There to endure till Doomes day cut her clue,
               And when thy bones, the wormes haue eate to naught,
               Yet ſhall the wormes thy fame ſtill freſh renue,
               And ere thy name, thy houſe, thy ſtocke, thy line,
               Be highly honored by this great deſigne.
               
                  GEO: CARR.
               
            
         
         
            
            TO HIS OWNE, WORTHY MASTER GEFFE.
            
               LEt me (of thoſe ſo many of our Clime,
               Who ſtand to thee (ſweet friend) in honor bound,
               For thy deare paines confer'd vpon the time,
               Who haſt for vs, fame, pleaſure, profit, found:)
               Render thee thankes, that cannot ſpeake thy praiſe,
               Wiſhing all condigne honor to thy daies.
            
            
               Henceforth the greedy priſon ſhall not eate
               Poore wretches, wofull mappes of miſery,
               Since in thy worke all may ſome liuing get,
               By vſe of much, or little induſtrie,
               Wherein the fineſt wittes their power may ſtraine,
               The groſſer, exerciſe their bodies paine.
            
            
               Our populous land is free from forraigne broile,
               Theſe iron times but little buſineſs giue,
               Yet now the diſcontent his head may toyle,
               And learne a quiet vertuous life to liue.
               A bleſſed med'cine faire Imployment is,
               Cu'ring ſicke minds that elſe would do amiſſe.
            
            
               Among'ſt thoſe lands which ſing the memory
               Of their deare Children, who with pious care
               Haue them ennobled, by th'vtility
               Of Artes, that long vnto them hidden were:
               Faire England boaſt's thy birth in happy houre,
               Who to her garlond ad'ſt ſo rich a flower.
               
                  ROBERT GOODVVIN.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE PERFECT VSE OF SILKE-WORMES AND THEIR BENEFIT.
            
               IF the Silke-worme had been knowne by the auncient Authors and writers of Agriculture and husbandry, we need not doubt, but the praiſe of ſo rich & worthy a creature had been ſung by them, as they haue done that of Bees: but by ſuch default, it hath remained without name many ages. Virgil diſcourſes▪ as by paſſing, of the rich fleece that the Forreſts of Ethiopia, & Setes brought forth, without mentioning the quality or meanes to gather it See in theſe words.
            
               
                  Virg. Georg. 11.
                   Quid nemora Aethiop
                     ••
                  m molli canentia lana?
               Vellera
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   vt folijs depectant tenuia Seres?
            
            
               The firſt notice of ſilke at Rome. From whence ſome, as Solin and Sernius, haue thought this to be Silke and that to proceed directly of the trees▪ Such hath been the firſt notice of the Silke giuen in Italie, which was in the raigne of the Emperour Octauius Auguſtus confirmed by Plinie
               
more then ſeuenty yeeres after, (for hee liued in the time of Veſpatian) he ther to addeth, that in the Ile of Coos, there growe, Cypres trees, Turpentine trees, Aſhes, and Okes; of the leaues of which trees, fallen to the ground in maturity, through humiditie of the ſame, breede wormes bringing forth ſilke. That in Aſſyria the Silke-worme called by the Greekes and Latines, Bombyx, makes his neaſt vpon the earth, which he faſtens to the ſtones, where it hardneth very much, remaining there conferued all the yeere, that makes webs after the faſhion of Spiders. Ariſtotle alſo ſaith, that in the Ile of Coos, Pamphyllia daughter of L
                     •
                  tous, was the firſt inuentris of ſpinning and weauing ſilke, by the which intricate and folded▪ vp diſcourſes, compared to the practick of theſe times, appeareth how far off the ancients were from the true knowledge of the Silke-worme, hauing not knowne from whence they came, nor how they are nouriſhed, ſo by their ſilence they witneſſe, in holding their peace, of the egges, and the leaues of the Mulberries for their food.
            
               V
                     •
                  piſcus witneſſeth, that in the time of the Emperour Aurelian (two hundred yeeres after Veſpatian and more) ſilke was ſold for the weight of gold, for which dearnes, but eſpecially for modeſty, he would neuer weare to be all of ſilke, but mingled with other matter; although Heliogabalus his predeceſſor was not ſo ſparing, as ſaith Lampridius. Like modeſtie is noted of King Henry the ſecond, which would neuer weare ſilke ſtockings, although that in his time the vſe of them was then receiued in France. Many others in divers times, haue ſpoken of the ſilke, as Solin,
               
               Marcelin, and S
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  in
                     •
                  , which name the Silke-worme Zir, from whence comes the Latin wood, Siricam, that is to ſay, Silke, as witneſſeth Pauſanias in his deſcription of Greece, Martial alſo makes mention of the ſilke by theſe verſes.
            
               Nec vaga tam tenui diſc
                     •
                  rſ
                     •
                  t aranea tela,
               Tam leue nec Bombyx pendulus vrget opus.
            
            And of the work of Silk-wormes Propertius ſaith,

                  Nec ſi qua Arabia lucet Bombyce puella.
               
            
            
               Vlpian an auncient Lawyer, ſpeaketh of the ſilke in the title De Auro & Argento Legato, in this ſort, veſtimentorum ſunt omnia lanea, linea
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   vel ſerica bombycina &c. It is a thing receiued of al, that the inhabitants The beginning of the ſilke.of the country of Seres, firſt of al manifeſted the ſilke, hauing brought the ſeed from the Ile Taprobane, otherwiſe Sumata, ſituate vnder the Aequinoctiall, in longitude from them of forty ſixe, to forty eight degrees of latitude. The country of Seres, ſo called of a citie of the Prouince, is that which at this day is named, Cattay and Cambalis, in Eaſt Aſia, adioyning on the Weſt to Scytia Aſiatick; and of the South to the Indies, gouerned by the great Cham of Tartary. At the lēgth theſe things came to light, by two Monks, which brought from Sera a citie of the country of Cattay the graine of Silke-wormes to Iuſtinian to Conſtantinople, (the raigne of which Emperour began the yeere of Chriſt 526.) from whence the knowledge of rearing and bringing vp this creature, is diſperſed throughout all Europe. So Procopius hath written after many other. From the citie of Panorme 
               Where firſt of all the ſilke was wrought in Europ, and finallyin Scicile is come the manner to vſe the ſilke, where firſt of all it was ſhewed by the meanes of certaine

workmen in this arte, brought thither priſoners by 
                  
                     ••
                  ger King of the for
                  •
               ſaid Ile of Scicile, in the time of the Emperor Conrade. Laſtly theſe excellent ſciences haue takē footing in certain Prouinces of this realm, but by tract of time and diſtances, not all at once▪
            
            For as God hath accuſtomed to diſtribute his benefits by little and little, ſo much the better to make vs reliſh his graces: ſo the knowledge of the Mulberry tree hath firſt been giuen vnto vs, after that the vſe of it, to the end to make prouiſion of food, before we charge our ſelues with the creature.
            
               In what time, and in what Prouince of this kingdom. I will not here reckon the cauſes and times of their more forward bringing in into this Realme, but in the raigne of Charles the 8. in the voyage that this King made to the kingdome of Naples, the yeere a thouſand, foure hundred, foureſcore and foureteene, ſome Gentlemen of his traine, hauing noted the richnes of the ſilke, at their returne home did affect to prouide their houſes of ſuch commoditie. Afterwardes the warres of Italy ending, they ſent to Naples, to fetch plāts of Mulberries, which they placed in Prouence, by reaſon of the little diſtance of climates of each countrey, making the enterpriſe eaſie. Some ſay it was in the borders of ſuch a prouince, ioyned with that of Dauphine, where the Mulberries firſt grew, marking alſo Alan, neere to Montellimar, which was then planted by the meanes of his Lord, which accōpanied the King in his voyage: As the old great white Mulberries yet at this day to be ſeene, giue ſome aſſurance. But be it there, or elſewhere, it is certaine that in diuers places of Prouence, Langredoc, Dauphine, the principalitie of

               Crenge, and aboue all the Countie of Veneſſaine and the Arſhbiſh opricke of Auignon, (for the great commerce that they haue with the Italians) the Mulberries and their ſeruice are at this preſent verie well knowne, there alſo the handling of the ſilke appeareth in great beautie; where continually increaſeth an earneſt deſire to plant Mulberries, for the experimented commoditie which comes of them. In ſūme, there the Mulberry is held for the moſt aſſured pennie falling into the purſe. At Toures this buſines is already receiued with great profit and applauſe; and certaine yeeres ſince hath begun to manifeſt it ſelfe at Caen in low Normandy; yet vnknowne to the Silk wil come faire & good throughout al this Realme, a few places excepted.reſt of this kingdome, through the careleſſe retchleſneſſe of the inhabitants, and to the great ſhame, almoſt of all theſe prouinces, ſeeing that in them the Mulberrie, and Silk-worme may liue and profit. For the affection I beare to the publike, I haue in the beginning of the yeere a thouſand fiue hundred eightie nine cauſed to bee printed a particular Treatiſe of this foode and norture, intituled, The gathering of the Silke, and addreſſed it to thoſe of the common Counſell of the citie of Paris, to the end that thereby their people might be ſufficiently ſtirred vp, to draw from the entrailes and bowels of their landes, the rich treaſure of ſilke therein hidden. By this meanes, bringing to light the millions of gold incloſed and locked vp: and by ſuch riches to finiſh the honor of their city, with this laſt of her ornaments, abounding aboue the reſt in all ſorts of riches. Amongſt the pleaſant places of the void fields of Paris, I haue marked Madril, and Vicenes wood,

royall manſions, and very capable to receiue and noriſh three hundred thouſand Mulberries, for the largenes and qualitie of their grounds, and facultie of the aire, the leaues of ſuch trees in their times, may bee happily and profitablie employed; The apparence of which is great, to draw from thence abundance of ſilke, for the publike commodity, and particular profit of the citie of Paris, when by dreſſing of the ſilke, it ſhall nouriſh infinite numbers of people of her proper inhabitants, and poore and miſerable folkes, which flocke thither from all the Prouinces of the Realme.
            
               What places it deſireth. Where the Vine groweth, there alſo will come the ſilke, an apparent demonſtration, ſufficiently verified by reiterated experiences, in diuers countries diſcordant of climats. Nay going farther, where the Mulberry only liues, without ſpeaking of the Vine, the Silk-worme will not chuſe but profit; as is knowne not long ſince, within the citie of Leiden in Holland, in the yeers a thouſand fiue hundred ninety three, nintie foure and ninty fiue; where the Noble Ducheſſe of Aſcot cauſed to be nouriſhed Silk-worms with good ſucceſſe, and of the ſilke which came of them, was made apparell, which her gentlewomen wore, with great wonder of thoſe which ſaw it, becauſe of the coldnes of the countrie. Hiſtories record that in the time of the auncient Gaules, France brought forth no wine: behold now at this day abundantly prouided of ſo exquiſite a drinke, by dexterity of thoſe which haue opportunly imploied their profitable curioſity. Many beaſts and ſtrange plants, cōſent to liue amongſt vs with requiſite care,

(which former times held impoſſible) the which euery one notes almoſt euery where, without comming to examples. I will not heere reckon vp the Orenge trees, Lymon trees, Pouncitron trees, and other precious trees, which are nouriſhed in all aires and countries, though neuer ſo cold, ſeeing that in ſuch curioſitie 
                  •
               unnes out great expence.
            The care of gathering the ſilke is not alike, the end of that is profit, not only particular delectation. For there is no heede at all to be taken for the Mulberries which as in the open field, it is onely for the little cattle that feares the cold, which would bee preſerued from it. And what thing is eaſier to do then that, how cold ſoeuer the countrie bee, ſeeing the Silk-wormes are lodged in houſes, and not abroad, and alſo in a ſeaſon, not altogether cold but in the ſpring time, and part of the ſommer? All the hindrance that can be here alleaged, is, that the gathering the ſilke will bee more late then in a ſouth countrie: what importeth that, ſo one hath abundance of good and fine ſilke, if one reapes not in the north parts in May and Iune, as they doe in Languedoc and Prouence, if they doe it in Iuly and Auguſt? In like manner, wee want no ſtore of good wine in France, though our vintage be not ſo ſoone as in hotter countries. The Mulberries haue foregone the knowledge of nouriſhing the Wormes, as I haue ſaide, in attending the which, many vpon heareſaie, were conſtrained in vaine to nouriſh Silk-wormes, & haue diſcredited ſuch husbandry, eſteeming this cattell can profit but in places where they hauebeen of long time naturalizde, whereby, with

impatience haue extirped and puld vp the Mulberries as vnprofitable trees, which before, and at the firſt report of their worth, they had planted with great affection. But thoſe which conſtantly haue attended the ſeaſons, are proued better husbands, and abundantly prouided of Mulberry leaues, then, when the knowledge to guide and conduct this creature is knowne: an example which is marked at Niſmes, & in many other places of Languedoc, ſeruing for inſtruction of thoſe which at this day wil delight in ſo profitable an husbandry: the which to their contētment they ſhal find in theſe diſcourſes, aſſembled the Sciēces, both to dreſſe the trees, and nouriſh the creatures: whereby they ſhall be deliuered from the trouble of a languiſhing attempt, and the hazard of ill feeding the Wormes.
            
               Silke brought firſt into the heart of Frāce by the King. The King right well knowing theſe things, by the diſcourſe which he commanded me to make for him on this ſubiect, the yeere a thouſand fiue hundred ninety eight, reſolued to haue white Mulberrie trees brought vp in all the gardens of his houſes. And for this effect, in the yeere following that his Maieſty went the voyage of Sauoy, ſēt into Prouence, Languedoc, and Viuares▪ Monſieur de Burdeaux, Baron of Colences, generall Surueyor of the gardens of France, a Lord accompliſht with all rare vertues▪ and by this ſame way the King honored mee to write vnto me, to imploy me for recouery of the foreſaid plants; to which I gaue ſuch diligence, that by the beginning of the yeere 1601, there was brought to Paris to the number betweene fifteene and twentie thouſand. The which were planted in diuers places

in the gardens of Tuilleries, where they are happily ſprung vp. And his Maieſtie not willing that ſuch treaſures ſhould remaine any longer thruſt together in certaine corners of his realme, but that his people ſhould vniuerſally reliſh them, adding to the riches of the peace, which by his meanes and the celeſtiall fauour, all France moſt quietly enioyeth, hath ordayned by the Commiſſioners already deputed by his Maieſtie for the generall commerce, ſhould aduiſe for the moſt eaſieſt diſpatches that might bee poſſible, to furniſh his kingdome with Mulberries, to the end to gather ſilke from them; and in going on to eſtabliſh the handiworke. Vpon which, and following his Maieſties will, after good and mature deliberation, contracts were paſſed with the merchants vpon this ſubiect, at Paris the fourteenth of October and the third of December a thouſand ſixe hundreth and two, confirmed authoriſed, and ratified by Letters Patents of his Maieſtie, contayning the furniſhing of the ſaid Mulberries in the foure generalities of Paris, Orleans, Toures, and Lion. Alſo of a certaine quantity of ſeede or graine of the ſaid trees, to be diſperſed by the elections of the ſaid Generalities. And for ſo much more to accelerate and aduance the ſaid enterpriſe, and to make knowne and diuulge the facilitie of this worke, his Maieſtie cauſed expreſſely to be builded a great houſe at the end of his garden of Tuilleries at Paris, furniſhed with all neceſſaries, as wel for feeding the Wormes, as for the firſt works of the ſilke: enioyning furthermore, that all the leaues that mought be found, as well of white, as black Mulberries, already planted in diuers

places of the ſaid generalities, ſhould be taken by the experteſts for this deputed, and employed to the nouriſhing of the Wormes the ſaid yeere, to the end to giue generall notice that the temperature of the aire, and franckneſſe of the ſoyle are more then ſufficient to bring forth ſilke, in like or better force, luſtre, and goodneſſe than that which we haue accuſtomed to receiue with great expence, from prouinces the moſt fartheſt off. All which things haue ſo eaſily ſprung out through the grace of God, and the good ſucceſſe of our Prince, for whom theheauens haue reſerued all the moſt excellent inuentions of our age, that wee muſt no more doubt, but within ſhort ſpace, by the cōtinuation of his thrice excellent beginnings, France ſhall ſee it ſelfe redeemed from the value of more then foure millions of gold, that euery yeere goeth out for furniture of ſtuffes compounded of this ſubſtance, or of the matter it ſelfe, to the end to worke it in this kingdome. Behold the beginning of the introduction of ſilke into the heart of France, where the example of his Maieſtie hath been ioyned to his commaundements with great efficacie, for the good of his people.
            
               Into Germany by the Duke of Wittenberge. And as by commendable emulation, worthie Sciences neuer reſt in one only place, but paſſe euer forwarder in the ſpirits of vertuous perſonages, it is come to paſſe not long ſince, that Frederick Duke of Witenberg, a Prince meriting all praiſe, hath eſtabliſhed in his territories, both the feeding of the Silk-wormes, and the handling of ſuch matter. The ſucceſſe whereof hath been ſo fortunate in the beginnings, that thoſe haue been conſtrained to confeſſe

the enterpriſe to bee profitable, which before condemned the counſell of it, builded vpon the coldnes of the countrey of Germanie.
            
            
               The Worme brings forth Silke. But ſeeing that the ſilke comes directly from the Worme, which vomits forth all the ſilke; and the Worme proceeds from the graine, the which is kept ten moneths of the yeere, as a dead thing, taking life againe in his ſeaſon. The worme is nouriſhed of the leafe of the Mulberrie, the onely victuall of this creature, which liuing no longer then ſixe, ſeuen, or eight weekes, more or leſſe, according to the countrey and conſtitution of the yeere (the heate ſhortning his life, and on the contrarie the cold lengthening it) within this little while, by the ſilke which he leaues vs▪ he paieth largely the expēce of his feeding. As the nations are ſundrie which keepe him, ſo is he named diuerſly. The Greekes and Latins haue called him Bombyx: and at this day in Italy, Caualieri, and Bachi; and in Spaine, Glauor: in France, Vers-a-ſoye; in Languedoc, Prouence and there abouts, Magniaux.
            
            What earth and what manuring the Mulberrie deſireth, what ſeede of wormes is to be choſen, what lodging, and what handling the beaſt requireth, which comes of thoſe, what is his bearing and vſe, ſhall bee ſhewed hereafter. By which diſcourſes, ſhall cleerely appeare the riches of this foode: and that the land imployed to ſuch husbandrie, brings more mony in leſſe time, than by other fruits which may bee planted on it, at leaſt, whereof one may make any account. An audit of the expence, and the comming in of this feeding.
            
            Commonly, a thouſand pounds of the leaues of Mulberries being ten hundred waight, is ſufficient

to ſatisfie and feede an ounce of the ſeede of Silk-wormes; and the ounce of graine, makes fiue, or ſixe pounds of ſilke; euery pound being worth two or three crownes, and more; wherefore ten or twelue crownes come of ten hundred waite of leaues: the which quantitie twentie, or fiue and twentie trees of a meane ſiſe will alwaies bring forth; yea a much leſſe number wil ſuffice them, if they be old trees and great, as there are in many places, as neere Auignon, being ſo ample and abundant in armes and branches, that one tree will furniſh with ſufficient leaues to feede an ounce of ſeede. But becauſe ſuch trees ſo qualified are very rare, there is no certain account to be made. For the coſt of the affaire, the fourth of the totall is taken: ſo there remaines three parts of liquid reuenew, which makes ſeuen crownes and a halfe, or nine crownes, that twentie, or fiue and twentie Mulberries will bring euery yeere. I confeſſe that alwaies an ounce of ſeede doth not make fiue or ſixe pound of ſilke, for ſometimes it makes almoſt nothing; when by the infelicitie and vnluckineſſe of the ſeaſon the leafe being ill qualified, by vnholſome nouriſhment, cauſeth diuers maladies in the Wormes, when the peſt is rife amongſt this cattell; or when their ſtages are not made verie firme where the Wormes are lodged, falling vpō them are ſurely killed, or when by other accidents they die. But likewiſe it is a thing confeſſed of all thoſe which exerciſe themſelues to this foode, that ſuch a yeere happens, when an ounce of feede will ariſe to make ten pound of ſilke and more: and that is then when the race of the creature, his

lodging, his foode, the time, the hand of the gouernour, doe acccord and agreee for the good of this houſehold. And who knowes not that corne, wine, fruits of trees, and cattell, of ten times faile by tempeſts, drowthes, humidities, & other exceſſes of the yeere? And who would deſiſt from tilling and ſowing the ground, or who would ſtub vp his Vines and trees, or caſſhier the food of this little beaſt, for their fayling in ſome yeer? There is none to be foūd ſo brainleſſe and ill aduiſed. It ſhall appeare hereafter that by the gouernment of this creature there can be nothing raiſed without curioſitie, diligence, and expence: For the which things many deſpiſe this houſhold, as fantaſtique, painefull, and chargeable. But they deceiue themſelues, becauſe they conſider not, that for moderate hire, one ſhall finde people 
                  •
               now ſufficient exactly vnderſtanding this art, which will vndergoe the charge of all that which depends vpon it.
            
               Of gathering the leaues. And for to particulariſe the expences, I may ſay, that an hundreth or ſixskore gatherers, whereof three quarters, are women, or boyes▪ are ſufficient to gather all the leaues neceſſarie to feed ten ounces of the ſeed of the Wormes, and to bring them into the place of the cattell, the Mulberries being not farre diſtant from the houſe as is requiſit. To the payment of which worke for the qualitie of the perſons, ariſeth not to much mony. For it is in victuals that the moſt is conſumed. But if the feeding of the leafegatherers trouble you; for money only you may be ſupplied with their ſeruice by the day, or by the

gathering, according to the order of many cities where ſuch traffique is vſed.
            
               The wages of the Gouernour. Touching the gouernour, his wages are cōmonly two, three, or foure crowns a moneth, beſides his diet: and his charge is to gouerne the Wormes, and to hatch them from their ſeede euen till their ſilke bee made; that is to ſay, to render it wound vp▪ One only man will gouerne ſo many Wormes as you wil, prouided hee bee aſſiſted: the which will be done with folke of little price, ſeeing all ſorts of perſons, men and women are capable of it.
            
               Touching the ſeed. As for the feed of the Wormes, you are not to recken vp that which they haue coſt you, becauſe they will reſtore you enough euery yeere in renuing thē, for the conſeruation of the graine. But here will lie ſuch expence in the rancke of that made in the buying of bords and tables, for the skaffolds, as alſo for the making fit the lodging: theſe things are to be ordained for the ground-worke of this reuenue being durable, & without conſuming, at the leaſt but very little. And although it is requiſit to haue euery yeere ſome ſmall quantity of new ſeed, to continue a good race, as ſhall be ſaid, yet is there for that no more expence, ſeeing that of the ſale of the ſeed, which you ſhall reſerue, you may buy of another for your purpoſe.
            Vpon which diſcourſes making your account, you ſhall find that much better cheape you ſhall keep the Wormes comming of ten ounces of grain, then fiue and twenty or thirty ſheepe: for the which, yea for leſſe number, you muſt keepe a ſhepheard all

the yeere▪ which are three hundred ſixtie fiue daies. So by that you euidently ſee how much the expences of one cattell differs from the other: And by this reckoning, which of the two makes more reuenue, though that by vniuerſall iudgement the yeelding of ſheepe is very profitable. And doubt not, but that Cato in his anſweres touching feeding, for to become rich, had meant it of the Silke-worme, if This feeding hindereth no worke of the ground.hee had had the knowledge of it. The feeding of Silke-wormes is likewiſe very commendable, becauſe they hinder not any worke of the fields; comming in the moneths of Aprill and May, when they haue no other occupation to call them from it. Giuing ſuch backwardnes, a meane for the maſter eaſily to find ſufficient people to ſerue this turne: the which in this time hauing no other buſines, are very eaſie to be had, to get their liuing, and ſome piece of money, to come forth out of the backe ſeaſon of the yeere; wherby the nouriſhing of this cattell is made more eaſie, by them only contemned, which know not how much the ell is worth: But for the reſt, the licoriſhneſſe of the coyne, that they drawe from it (without loſſe of their other husbandrie, but as caſuall accompts) affects them continually, to plant new Mulberrie trees, with augmentation of the number, in like ſort to augment their reuenue.
            
               Of the Mulberrie trees. The Mulberry trees being the chiefeſt foundation of this reue
                  〈…〉
               e, that ſhall be the firſt whereat you ſhall leuell, for to plant ſo great a quantitie, and ſo ſoone, that in a ſhort time they may giue you contentment. The which you cannot hope of a ſmall number while they are young, for the little leafe-age

which they render, till they are come to a meane growth. But to attend while the Mulberries haue reacht their perfect greatnes, and not till then to diſleaue them, to ſerue in this purpoſe, would bee to paſſe your time without taſting the ſweetnes of this reuenue. Wherfore it is neceſſary to haue abūdance of theſe trees, to the end that of many little ones, you may draw as many leaues, as from a few great ones. So without much tarrying after their planting, you ſhall reape pleaſure and profit within a few yeeres. Such a great quantitie of Mulberries may be limited to two or three thouſand trees; a leſſe number, I thinke the maſter of the worke ought not to enterpriſe this buſines withall: becauſe here is a queſtion of the profit, which cannot grow but of a ſufficient number of trees. For the particular nature of the worke, it is neceſſary here to employ it in a great volume, otherwiſe the play wil not be worthy the candle; that being for women, which for pleaſure nouriſh ſome few of this creature. Yet the maſter of the worke ſhall not ſtay heere in ſo faire a way, but ſhall augment alwaies his Mulberrie yard, therto adding euery yeere certaine hundreds of Mulberrie trees, for that at the length, plentiouſly abounding in leaues, he may haue wherwith to nouriſh great quā
               titie of Wormes; and the reſt alſo for the ſuccour of his trees, whereof a part ſhall reſt, as ſhall be demonſtrated in theſe diſcourſes following.
            
               The 7. booke, 7. chapter of Husbandrie. Of the order requiſite to plant, and bring vp the Mulberries, is not heere a queſtion to ſpeake of, elſewhere the Science being ſhewed: but very well to repreſent the obſeruations neceſſary for their ſcituation

and entertainement; that the trees may be conueniently lodged and gouerned, to endure long in ſeruice. For not taking good heed, within a little time they wil faile, as waxing old in their firſt youth. Theſe trees are ſo eaſie to take roote, that whereſoeuer it pleaſe you, you may bring them vp: but with much more aduancement, they will grow in a fatte and moyſt ground, then in a leane and dry. For the quantitie of the leaues, it is to be deſired, to plant the trees in a good ſoile, but not for the quality; becauſe that the leafe neuer comes forth ſo fruitfully out of the fat earth as out of the leane (hauing that of common with the Vines) whereof the moſt exquiſite grow in a light molde, ſo that that land there brings a groſſe and fulſome leafe, and this here a delicate and ſauorous; likewiſe of the nurture of this latter leafe, the Wormes commonly make a good end; the which happens very rarely of the other, yet that The fifth place for good and wholeſome leaues.is by the meeting of a kindly ſeaſon. The leaues of Mulberries will be well qualified as appertaineth, if you plant them in a leane place, & far from ſprings of water, prouided that they he expoſed to the Sun, for with the Vines, the Mulberries hate a watriſh and ſhadowie ſituation: in ſome there will bee the moſt aſſured foode, where thevines grow beſt. And though that the Vine, & the Mulberries, to compare them together, brings forth more in a ſtrong ground then in a feeble; yet ſo it is that the little of their bearing being delicate, is more to bee prized then the abundance of that which is groſſe. Adding, that touching this cattell here, one cannot abuſe nor deceiue him in giuing him meate, contrary

to his nature, for either he will refuſe to eate it, or eating of it will neuer doe well. And this his delicateneſſe, turnes to the profit of his maſter, which imployes his leane grounds in Mulberries, and by conſequent occupies not his fertill plow-lands, which remaine to him francke, and not charged with theſe trees: of which the importunitie is very great oppreſſing by the rootes and branches, almoſt all ſorts of ſeede which can be ſowed neere them. But to thinke alſo to plant Mulberries in a baſe and infertill ground, that ſhould be a falling into extremitie, groſſely deceiuing ones ſelfe, for the little growth they will make although they take there; their tarditie giuing you cauſe enough to repent you of this Where to plantthe Mulberrie.counſell. Theſe ſhall be then the places where you ſhall edifie your Mulberries, which you ſhall iudge proper for the vine; that is to wit, in a ſoyle of a meane goodnes rather drie then moyſt, light then heauie, ſandy then clayie. Such a ground will beare leaues to your deſire, and in a meane quantitie whereby you ſhall haue ſufficient, by the way of numbers of trees, amplifying them as hath been ſaid.
            
               How to diſpoſe the Mulberries for woodes in ranckes. Frō foure to foure fathoms, or frō fiue to fiue, in al pathes to the line, you ſhall plante the Mulberries if you wil make forreſts of them & deſiring to diſpoſe thē by ranks at the borders of your plough lands, or about the ſides of other poſſeſſions; they may be plā
               ted ſomewhat neerer together without reſtraining thē too much: the which cannot be done without great loſſe to the trees: one may very well amplifie the diſtance, as much as one will, for the Mulberries

cānot be ſet too far a ſunder, ſeeing the apparēt profit that the aire, the Sun, & the amplitude of the groūds, aides to the growing great of the trees, and goodneſſe of the leaues. But for that, the onely ſides and By allies.borders of arable lands, Vineyardes & other parts of a demeanes moderately large, doe not ſuffice to receiue a great number of Mulberries requiſit for abundance of food: and that elſewhere, the leaues of the trees which are within the thickets, is not ſo good as thoſe about, becauſe they neither haue ſun nor windes at libertie. A meane between theſe two extreames hath been found, conueniently to plant the Mulberries, for the profit of their leaues, and without hindering the tillage of good lands; that is, to plant the Mulberries amongſt the lands, in double racks equally diſtant two fathomes and a halfe, being of like meaſure eſpaced one tree from an other, the two rancks making one alley, and to diſpoſe the allees in length and croſſe the field, intercroſſing one another, leauing great ſquare plots emptie, euery one cōteyning an acre, or more if one wil, there to ſow corne, which will bee reaped without being trowden downe by the gatherers of the leaues: But theſe will be the allies, which onely will ſuffer the treading downe, where for their ſmall occupation of ground, the loſſe of the corne will not be great. It will likewiſe be neceſſarie to plant the trees in ſuch ſort, that they be not one right againſt the other, to the end not to enterpreſſe, rather that he of one ranke be ſet againſt the emptie place of the other, by that they will haue aire enough to grow flouriſhngly by the aide of the Sun, which will remaine

free for them on the ſides of the great ſquares. In the which, not onely may bee commodiouſly ſowne corne, but alſo planted vines where they will profit; being not there too much cloyed with the ſhaddow of the trees, yea ſpread with paſtures, hauing but giuen to the trees 4 or 5 yeres, for to roote. For by the manner of the parted land, of the allies, well tilled, and ſometimes dunged the Mulberries will profit enough. For the hard turfe of the paſture cannot much hurt them, ſeeing it ioyneth but on one ſide. So ſhall the Mulberrie-yard bee directed, with much profit for the good of the leaues, and without any thing hindring the demeanes; which ſo furniſhed with Mulberries will remaine moſt pleaſant to behold, ſo will they ſpread and amplifie, ſo much the better, the more often the maſter ſhall viſit his land, as to that he ſhall bee ſtirred vp by the eaſie walks in theſe faire allies, in which, if it ſeemeth him good, he ſhal ſowe ſome graines, as oats or field peaſe, which will alwaies pay for tillage of the ground.
            
               The ſorts of the Mulberries. There are two races of Mulberries diſcerned by theſe words, blacke and white, diſcordant in wood, leafe and fruite: hauing neuertheleſſe that in common to ſpring late, the dangers of the coldes being paſt, and of their leaues to nouriſh the Silk-worme. One ſees but one ſort of the blacke Mulberries the woode whereof is ſolid and ſtrong, the leafe large and rude in the handling, the fruit blacke, great, and Three colors of fruit of white Mulberries.good to eate. But of the white, there is manifeſtly knowne three ſpecies, or ſorts, diſtinguiſhed by the onely colour of the fruit, which is white, blacke, and

red, ſo ſeparately brought forth by diuers trees, bearing all neuertheleſſe the name of white. This fruit is little diſagreeable of taſte, for his flaſhie ſweetnes, whereby it is not edable by others then by women which haue loſt their reliſh, children, and poore people in time of famine. For the reſt they reſemble all three one another, diſcording nothing by themſelues; neither in leaues which they bring forth of a meane greatnes and a ſmooth feeling: nor in wood, being yellow within, as that of the blacke Mulberry, and almoſt as firme, by reaſon whereof all theſe Mulberries are proper and fit for Ioyners worke. The leafe comming of the blacke Mulberries, The ſilke takes his quality of the leafe.makes the ſilke groſſe, ſtrong, and heauie: on the contrarie that of the white, fine, weake, and light: ſo different through diuerſitie of the nature of the leaues, wherwith the Wormes are nouriſhed, which they yeeld of their worke. For which many deſiring to compound theſe things in hope of profite, feed the Wormes with two ſorts of meates, by diſtinction of times; that is to ſay at the beginning, with white leaues, to haue the ſilke fine; and in the ende with blacke to fortifie it, and make it weigh. In which alwaies they meete not: ſometimes the changing of the meate, as of the delicate, into groſſe, being not agreeable to the Wormes which are importuned and cloyed with it. Nor ſhall it be to purpoſe for the groſſe founding which one would giue to the ſilke, holding a contrarie way, to begin by the blacke leafe and ende by the white. So ſuch mingling of meates is not receiued in the great feedings of the Silke-wormes, but only where

the leafe of the white Mulberrie is rare, inuented for neceſſitie. For the moſt aſſured, it ſhall be all of one victell, wherewith we will nouriſh our Wormes, and that of the moſt profitable, which yeeldes to ſilke; the which how much the more fine it is, ſo much the more prized, and in the enſuing ſo much more money it giueth, the end & period of this buſines. And yet though that the white leafe makes the ſilke feeble and light, you muſt not for that ſet it behind the blacke: ſeeing the ſame diſcords not ſo much in his qualities from that comming of the blacke leafe, but that there remaines force enough for the moſt exquiſite workes, and weight ſufficient to bring in reaſonable ſummes. This is in compariſon of that ſilke there, that this is held light and weake: ſuch being the difference betweene groſſe and ſubtill things. Neuertheleſſe one muſt not be ſo ſcrupulous, as vtterly to reiect the blacke Mulberries for the ſilke, but only for the mingling of the food, it being not permitted in the nouriſhing of them, but by conſtraint, as I haue ſaide. Touching that which remaines, there are countries where they are very profitable for this buſines: as in diuers places of Lumbardie, and hitherwards in Anduze, and Alez, and in other places towards the Seuenes of Languedoc, where great profit is made of the ſilke which comes of the blacke Mulberries. And although that ſuch ſorts of ſilke for the groſenes, be but of little price, in reſpect of the other, yet leaueth it not for that, but to bring in a good reuenue, conſidering the quantitie. Iointly that for the ſale, it is found neceſſary, though it be courſe, in many works in which it is imployed.
            
               
               The white Mulberries grow faſter thē the black. If your land be already planted with blacke Mulberries, keep you there without affecting your ſelfe to accompany them with white, for the reaſon alleaged: but being a queſtion to begin the husbandrie, hauing not any Mulberries, of one ſort, nor other, preferring the better before the good; you ſhall alwaies chuſe the white for your Mulberrie-yard. In which it ſeemes that nature her ſelfe incites vs by the fore growing, that ſhe hath giuen to the white Mulberrie beyond the blacke: it being an aſſured thing that the white Mulberries do more eaſilie take, and grow then the black, aduancing more in two yeeres, then the other in ſixe. Beſides which commoditie, the branches which by that ſpeedy ſhoot they bring forth, is cut at times, as wood, augmenting the reuenue of ſuch trees.
            
               How to chuſe the beſt kind of Mulberries. Amōgſt the white Mulberries yet there is choiſe: By the ſearching out of ſome, it hath been found that the leaues comming of the white Mulberrie, bearing the blacke berries are better then any other. Of which curioſitie making vſe, we will furniſh our Mulberrie-yard, if it bee poſſible, only with the Mulberries of ſuch ſort, to the intent that in our nurture, nothing be wanting. Neuertheleſſe as the humors of men are diuers, ſome hold that the leaues of the trees bearing the white Mulberries, are the beſt: prouing their opinion by the poullen and ſwine, which neuer delite in the fruite of the Mulberrie trees bearing red and blacke berries, but through want of others, by that deeming them moſt delicate. Aboue all be ſure to baniſh from your Mulberrie-yard the leaues too much indented, for beſides

that, it is an apparent ſigne of ſmall ſubſtance, it abounds not ſo much in food, as that which hath To graft thoſe Mulberries which haue need.leſſe nickes. Wherefore the remedie is to inoculate ſuch trees in the budde or ſcutchion hauing need of ſuch freedome, whence the profit which comes of it is great for this food; ſeeing that by this meanes, the little of the naughty and wretched leaues, may bee conuerted into abundance of ſubſtantiall and good, with as much aduantage, to change in orchards, by like arte the ſauage and wilde fruits, into manured and good, a notable article and point for this huſbandrie. This infrāchiſing may be practiſed to your wiſh in Mulberries of all ages, young and old, in thoſe here, on their new ſhoots of the precedent yeere, the trees hauing bin then poled (or without ſo much delaying, to haue diſſheaded them in the moneth of March, & Iune following to graft them) and in thoſe there vpon the ſmalleſt trees of the nurſerie. To graft theſe trees in their tender youth is much to be prized, for the aduātage to be had in making the Mulberry ground entirely affranchiſed. For prouiding that certain hūdreds of trees may be grafted, it ſufficeth once for all, without conſtraint to returne backe againe; ſo that the nurſery be alwaies kept full; the which is done by planting the branches comming frō the grafts, of the which ſo many trees wil grow vp, as there are braunches couched in the ground, and of thoſe afterwards others comming forth, are of the ſame planted infinitely; from which, the trees comming of them for euer are furniſht with excellent leaues, ſweet and great: and by conſequent exempt from all wildneſſe; exquiſite

and abundant in nouriſhment. See what places and trees you are to chuſe for your Mulberry yardes, to the end to haue abundance of good ſilke.
            
               To gather the leaues for to be giuen to the Wormes. For the order which one is to hold in gathering the mulberry leaues, for the victuales of theſe creatures, conſiſteth the ſecond article of this work, for to make the trees of a perpetuall ſeruice. It is to be noted, that to plucke off the leaues bringes great damage to al trees, oftentimes euen cauſing them to dye: but ſeeing that the Mulberry is deſtined to that, it naturally ſupporteth ſuch tempeſt better then any other plant: yet neuertheleſſe you muſt goe to it very retentiuely, for to diſleaue the Mulberrie inconſideratlie is the way to ſcorch them, for euer, to cauſe them miſerably to die in languiſhment. Euery one confeſſeth that to gather the leaues with both hands, leafe after leafe, without touching the ſhoote, is the moſt aſſured way for conſeruation of the trees; but yet the moſt expenſiue, becauſe of the great number of neceſſarie perſons for ſuch worke. For to ſpare coſt, the vulgar proceedes in an other ſort, which is in ſtripping of the leaues by handfuls, the which cannot be done but that often the branches are barked and ſliued, whereby at the length the trees periſh. And alſo this gathering corrupts and ſoyles the leaues, to the detriment of the Wormes, when in taking them after the faſhion, as they vſe to milke kine, one cruſhes them, as though one would make the ioyce come forth: and moſt oftentimes with vncleane handes, cauſing them to haue an ill ſmell and ſauour.
            Theſe loſſes may be preuented, if after the vſes of

               In cutting them off with ſheeres. certaine places in Spaine, the leaues be gathered, by ſhearing of them from the trees with great taylers ſheeres: the which cutting many ſtalkes at once, and that falling vpon ſheetes ſpreed vnder the treee, the expence being moderate, as by being directly carried to the little beaſts, without any ſorting, as neceſſarily it behoueth to do before to imploy them, in ſeparating that which is ſpoyled, from the good, and the young ſprings with it, which for their tenderneſſe are hurtfull to the Wormes, ſeeing that in vſing the ſheeres one ſpares the toppes of the trees, taking none but the well qualified leaues. Of this inuention one cannot indifferently be furniſhed euery where, but only where the ſituation of the trees fauours the worke, fitly to ſpread the ſheetes, receptacles of the leaues, nor likewiſe in windy nor rayny times; the which is committed to the diſcretion of the worke-maſter, for to imploy it finding the commoditie. For want of which clipping one may draw the leaues the moſt gently that one can, and with the ſmalleſt detrimēt of the trees that may It behoueth their hands be waſhed before they gather the leaves.be poſſible; the gatherers of the leaues ſhall waſh their hands before they touch them, and ſhall repoſe them in very cleane ſackes, to the ende they may be preſerued from all ſoyle.
            The trees ſuffer leſſe when one clipes them, than The danger of the leaues which are not wel gouernedwhē one diſleaues them otherwiſe: neuertheleſſe although one goes to it very vigilātly, it is alwaies with their loſſe, whereby at laſt they periſh, pulling euery yeere the value of their leaues vnmeaſurably, that their vigor decayes. The which is the principall cauſe that the keeping of the Wormes is not alwaies

of like yeelding, the one as others, ſeeing other then good leaues cannot ſuccesfully nouriſh theſe creatures. For that cannot bee good which comes of a tree ill gouerned in taking of the leaues, but only that tree which hauing been well handled during the precedent yeeres, remaineth vigorous. For ſo thoſe deceiue themſelues, which without taking neere heede to this, ſinke themſelues in this buſines. From thence proceedes the moſt frequent defaults of this foode, and not of the nature of the worke as ſcrupulouſlie, nay ſuperſtitiouſlie and fantaſtiquely many of the vulgar ignorants hold, that they cannot meete well two yeeres together for ſome hidden imperfection, that they hold to bee in this creature, that ſome giues without any reaſon, taking for their lodging no heede to the things It ſhal be good to diſleaue the trees but once in two yeeres.aforeſaid. To the end therefore to aſſure this buſines, for one which ought to haue preeminence, you ſhall aduiſe touching the Mulberries, in placing and gouerning them as I haue ſaid. And going on farther, to haue ſo great a quantitie of theſe trees, if it be poſſible, that the only halfe may ſuffice for your foode, which ſhall bee diſleaued while the other will make ready for the next yeere following. After the imitation of arable landes, enter changing euery yeere, the Mulberrie-yard diuided in two parts ſhall ſerue, and reſt; whereby the trees will bee maintained in perfect ſtate, abundantly to furniſh with good leaues for many generations, as well for the trees not to be ſo much tormented in their branches as by this reſting, there rootes will haue to bee tilled without expence, for that the coſt of plowing

will ariſe from the corne which one ſowes in that part of the reſting ground (remayning from the annoyance of the Mulberries) the which onely one ſhall ſow with corne, leauing the other vnſowen the yere of diſleauing your Mulberries, ſo much the more eaſie to gather the leaues of the trees, without laying the corne; as without ſuch order one ſhould doe in treading it downe, by this meanes drawing the worthie yeelding both of the trees and ground. 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   which comes of it.Ouer and beſides this notable commoditie there is ioyned, that then when by luckie foode the leaues ordained for the Wormes, want, as ſome times that happens with great diſpleaſure and ſorrow to ſee them periſh through famine, the Wormes are happily ſuccoured with the leaues which one takes of the trees that reſt, here & there, in many trees and in diuers places, without damaging them in ſuch quantity as is requiſit for the perfection of the enterpriſe: and alſo that vnder the Mulberries all ſort of ſeedes can hardly thriue, for the hinderance of the rootes and branches of theſe trees, as hath been ſaid; yet ſo it is that the loſſe will bee leſſe, the leſſe the corne being there is troden downe; as freed from ſuch tempeſt, it will remaine which there ſhall be ſowne in the manner aforeſaid, the yeelding of which, although it be but little, will defray the tillage, whereby in this place you ſhall do that which you deſire, that is, you ſhall keepe in good temper the rootes of your trees.
            
               What ſeed to ſow vnder the Mulberries with ſmalleſt loſſe. Of all graines thoſe which moſt conſtantly endure the detriment of the Mulberries, are, oates and field peaſe, although one be conſtrained to tread

them down, for the gathering of the leaues, yet cannot one doe them great hurt, by reaſon that the blades of theſe graines wil be then backwards, when the trees ſhall be diſleaued, hauing not yet much growne, which alſo ſomewhat helps them, hauing preſſed them to the earth; a thing which cannot be donne to wheate, rie, nor barley, by reaſon whereof one cannot ſow them cōueniently in the Mulberryyard but by conſtraint. But to ſow nothing at all in the Mulberrie-yard, and yet leſſe, not to till the grounde, for the good of the Mulberries, would bee too expenſiue; which will bee ſpared by the way aforeſaid. To ſoyle theſe trees is likewiſe requiſit; it is To ſoyle the Mulberries.to be vnderſtood of thoſe which by the leanneſſe of the ground remaine in languiſhment, the which by ſuch handling, are helped to continue their ſeruice, the want of doing the which will cauſe them to faile The leaues of the old Mulberries are very good.before their time. Experience ſhewes that the leaues of the old Mulberries, are more profitable & healthfull for the Wormes, than thoſe of the young ones; prouided that they be not fallē into extreame decay, but retayning their ancient vigour, hauing yet ſome remainders of ſtrength; communicating ſuch qualitie with the Vine, which brings better wine, old, When the leaues of the young ones are good.then young. And as the Vine begins to beare good wine after the ſeauen or eight firſt yeeres of his planting; ſo likewiſe the Mulberries in the ſame age▪ open the gate to their aſſured reuenew, ſo that from thence euer after, one ſhall not faile to draw from them their hoped-for ſeruice. Many neuertheleſſe at this day do not tarry till this terme; vſing without delay all ſorts of leaues, euen of the youngeſt Mulberries,

being yet in the nurſerie, before their replanting. But it is with more vncertainty of a good iſſue than of that growing on trees already growen to perfection, according to the more common vſage.
            
               When and how to prune the trees. So ſoone after you ſhall haue bared the trees, of their leaues, you ſhall cauſe them to bee pruned, in cutting off all that ſhall bee found broken and writhed with tempeſt of diſleauing, to the end they may put foorth to ſhoote afreſh, the which without that, they will neuer doe well, but languiſhingly. The laſt gatherers of the leaues ſhall bee then followed foote by foote, with a couple of men that ſhall ſo dreſſe the Mulberries, the which ſhall cut the dead wood, the disbarked branches writhed and ſhiuered: likewiſe the tops of all the others, in what part of the tree ſoeuer they be, aboue, or on the ſides; for to conſtraine the trees to cloath themſelues afreſh, and of this new ſhoote to bring forth for the next yeere after abundance of leaues, tender and delicate. And whether it be in gathering the leaues, or in pruning the trees, it behoueth you to be carefull to bare them entirely, without leauing them any leaues: for feare to turne back their liberall new ſpring an obſeruation; that practiſe hath taught a little while ſince, againſt the cuſtome, which was, not to touch the ſhoote, thinking by that to giue growth to the trees; but the effect is ſeene cleane contrary. Vſing ſuch order, they will not tarry to ſpring out moſt vigorouſly, ſo that they will leafe againe in ſuch ſort, that within one moneth after, one will ſay there hath not been a leafe touched, and this ſhall bee done equally, that they may new

apparrell themſelues againe without any deformity, that neuer agreeing with the old leaues. But with much more efficacie if the groūds be watered in this time then, for tempering the heate of the ſeaſon with water to releeue the trees, and giue them new force, whereby it happens, that of their ſpringing againe of leaues, neerly compared to their after crop, one may make a ſecond nouriſhment of the Wormes with ſucceſſe, as ſome fortunately haue attempted; the which neuertheleſſe is not approued, not ſo much for to be very incertaine, ſuch food happening in the greateſt heates of the ſommer, contrary to this creature; as for the aſſured loſſe of the trees, being not able to ſuffer double diſleauing in one ſeaſon. For beſides that our Wormes are neuer well diſpoſed, fed with leaues growing in a wateriſh place, as I haue related, a diſtinction ſhall be made of the times of watering the Mulberries; to the end not to make them drinke, but after they are diſleaued, not before; wherby, without doubt of naughtineſſe, the leaues will yeeld themſelues well qualified. Vnder ſuch conſideration you ſhall employ the benefit of the water during ſommer, by that cauſing ſo much ſuccour to your trees, after their great trauaile, as in the drought all ſorts of plants finde comfortable the opportune watering, a particular obſeruation for the South countries, not for others which neuer almoſt water.
            
               The meanes to gather the leaues, the raine falling on 
                     •
                  hem or threatn
                     •
                  ng. The raines happening on the courſe of this food, ſtrangely hinder the Wormes, as if they chance towards the end of their life, then when they are in the greateſt force of deuouring: for that the wette leaues do breed them dangerous diſeaſes. The moſt

common remedie for that, is to make prouiſion of leaues for two or three daies, perceiuing the time to be giuent to rayne, for it is as well kept good, prouided that one laies it in a neate place, freſh ayred, and for to preſerue it from getting of heates, oftentimes a day turning it vpſide downe. And although that the rayne preſſe not, yet what faire weather euer be, one ought neuer to remaine without leaues: not ſo much for feare to haue need, as for the quality of the victual, in ſo much that it is better being a little kept, as twelue or fifteene houres before it bee giuen to the creature, cōming directly from the trees. If the rayne preſſing driues you backe from gathering ſo many leaues as you neede, make recourſe to this ſhort way, which is, to cut the branches of the Mulberries that you deſtine to bee diſſheaded the next yeere: the which with all their boughes, you ſhall make to be carried into the houſe, where hanged as raiſons vnder the bearers, planchers or other couertures in an ayrie place, as in barnes and haylofts, being then almoſt emptie, their leaues will drie well and quickly; yea in the one and the other you ſhall find much more perfection, then by any other way whatſoeuer. For neither to winnow them with cloathes, nor to drie them at the fire, are not of ſuch efficacie as is this meanes: by the which, beſides that it winnes much time, becauſe there needs nothing but certaine ſtrokes with a hatchet, for to take all the leaues of a tree. Do not doubt that that will diſcourage the Mulberries, but that on the contrary doth reioyce them, ſo quickly putting them to ſhoote forth more ſtrongly, whereby they winne time; for

the enſuing yeere, ſuch haſtie cutting cauſing their great encreaſe of branches. In the which, although it ſeemeth that the hot ſeaſon is cōtrary for ſuch work, yet ſo it is, that experience manifeſts daily the nature of the Mulberries, yea of many other trees, to endure to be cut in the ſommer. For the which commodity ioyned the ſauing in this buſines, reſolue you not to cauſe to be gathered the leaues of your Mulberries in any other faſhion that you ſhall deliberate to pole the firſt, keeping them for the raynie daies, as hath been ſaid, or the time remaining faire, for the end of the food. The ſame reaſon hath place for the trees which you are reſolued to prune, thē disbranching their ſuperfluous boughes, when you ſhall ſee there is need of leaues, the time being raynie or not, as one does to diſhead them. A thing which you ſhall find to come to good purpoſe, for the great ſpoyle of leaues that the Wormes make in that time, being then their greateſt deuouring, attending that with moderate labour, and much facilitie, abundance of victual is furniſht for them. The winning of time is adioyned to this buſines, becauſe that the morning beſtowed to this diſleauing, (otherwiſe loſt by reaſon of the dewes, during the which, it is forbidden to touch the leaues,) for that the branches of the Mulberries cut with their boughes, being the afternoone before carried into the houſe, are diſleaued very earely the morning following, the which one beſtowes in the worke, and that is done in tarrying till that by the Sun, or windes, the dewes be cleared from off the trees. To diſhead the Mulberries.
            
            All the iniurie that one can do to the Mulberries,

in diſleauing them, is holpen by the cutting off their branches, (a remedie ſeruing almoſt for all the maladies In the 7. book 27. of husbandrie.of the trees, as is ſaid of the fruit trees) that is to be vnderſtood, taking from them all vniuerſally, pouling them or cutting off their heads, as one does willowes, wherby in ſmall time they renew againe: for their branches grow great and ſtrong, to ſerue as afore. Wherfore it is at the end of a certain time, that one lops the Mulberries, which is then when one ſees them to conſume by too much trauaile. The terme is not reſtrained to certaine yeeres, the only facultie of the earth ordaining theſe things, making them to put out, and bring forth againe more wood in one place than in another. Neuertheleſſe one may ſay that almoſt euery where, from ten to ten, or from twelue to twelue yeeres, that wil be reaſonable to practiſe, for the good of this affaire: and by this meanes, to loppe the Mulberrie-yard euery yeere of the tenth, or twelfth part of his trees. In diſhedding the Mulberries, one ſhall leaue them long ſnagges, ouer-growing certaine feete of the forkednes of the trees, or otherwiſe, as it ſhall beſt accord with their capacitie: ſeruing themſelues in this place with very ſharpe inſtruments, to the ende not to disbarke nor ſhatter the trees, and to make the cut very right, which ſhall bee aſlope to caſt off the annoyance of the raine. The time of this buſines is euen as the lopping of other trees, that is, the winter to be paſſed, the ſap beginning to enter (not before for the reaſons alleadged elſewhere.) In a faire day, not in a windie, miſtie, nor rainy; for the Mulberries ſhooting in like manner as other trees, yea ſo vigorouſlie

as any other plant haue commonly the ſeaſon of felling.
            
               When to lay the bill to them. But becauſe in the Mulberries is conſiderable the leaſe, the chiefeſt of their reuenue, it is requiſit to be vigilant to loſe nothing, if it bee poſſible, the which one ſhall come vnto in delaying to cut them vntill May, or in the beginning of Iune, then when it behoueth to imploy the leaues: By this meanes, one hath ſeruice of the leaues the ſame yeere of the cutting of the trees: the which one cannot doe without this backwardneſſe. And although that for the disbranching of them in ſuch ſeaſon, the trees bring not forth that ſame yeere ſo great branches, as if one lopped them in the moneths of February or March, the time being a little ſhortned of their growing, it inportes not, ſeeing there is as much gotten for the yeere after: in the which ſuch branches though they be but little, yet hauing won the aduantage, grow great merueilouſlie, whereby the trees in a ſmall time are amplie ſpread againe: yet that againſt the precepts of arte, conſtrained by neceſſitie, that one cuttes the trees in rainie weather and without regarding the Moone, as is fit, they are of ſo free and good a diſpoſition.
            
               What time of the Moone is to be obſerued. Touching the age of the moone it is handled diuerſely according to the diuerſitie of the groundes that gouernes ſuch actions. By the heauenly influence the Mulberries pouled in the encreaſe of the moone, bringes forth their younge ſhootes long without ſpreading branches, and in the waine, ſhort; with many little branches croſſing the principalles. For to compoſe the things, (hauing election of the

time without conſtraint) we will diſhead thoſe of our Mulberries, being in a leane ground in the new Moone, and in the laſt quarter, planted in a fat ground. So thoſe there will be furniſhed with new ſhootes, as long as the feeblenes of the groundes will permit them; and theſe here, through the force of the grounds, will conueniently regaine that, which to purpoſe they would not cut in the encreaſe, by reaſon that their ſpirie branches being not kept back by the little ſhoots, will lengthen too much, whereby bending downe they will deforme the trees; thoſe remaining emptie in the midſt after the maner of palme trees, that being not to bee feared in the reſt by reaſon of the leaneneſſe of the groundes, which neuer cauſeth thē to ſhoot out too abundantly. By this meanes they will put themſelues in wood againe, neuertheleſſe ſome more then others, according to the goodnes of the ſoile: but not any ſo ſlowlie, but that at the tenth yeere they will be capable to begin againe their accuſtomed ſeruice; prouided It behooueth to plow the ground of the Mulberries.the grounds be tilled as appertaines. For in vaine one ſhould trauaile exactly to entertaine the Mulberries by their branches if one makes not account of their rootes, whereby at the length they faile; as in ſuch error thoſe fall, which to ſpare the tillage, plante their Mulberries in meadowes, where they impaire. In which they deceiue themſelues, becauſe they conſider not that the Mulberries left in vntilled grounds, cannot bring ſo many nor ſo good ieaues as thoſe which are tilled. And although there are ſeene many faire Mulberrie trees in meadowes, the anſwer is, that the earth is fat, & in enſuing, if not

contrary, yet at the leaſt, not at all good for the Wormes: or being leane, the trees will not dure long through lacke of tilling. The aſſured meanes In the vi. chapter the xxvii. booke of husbandrie.that there is to dreſſe a Mulberrie-yard, thick ſpread with boughes, and to keepe it without expence, vntill a reaſonable greatnes to ſerue well, is repreſented hereafter in the diſcourſe of the fruite trees; that is in planting the Mulberries in rankes by line and leuel, from foure to foure, or from fiue to fiue fathams; and in the ſame rankes to plant Vines amongſt them, low, or propped according to the vſage of the countrey: the which by labour will bring their fruit without alteration, fifteene, or twentie yeeres; when being oppreſſed vnder the ſhaddow of the trees, they wil fal vnder the burthē: then one ſhal pul them vp, to leaue the place free for the trees, which will onely occupie it; and ſo one ſhall find to haue brought them vp for nothing. The which ſhall be to finiſh the diſcourſe of the victuall of our little beaſt, for to make them their lodging.
            
               The lodging of the Silkwormes. It behoueth alſo to dreſſe a lodging for our Wormes with ſuch commoditie, that they may eaſily▪ doe their worke, for to yeeld vs abundance of good ſilke. The which one ſhould hope in vaine, lodging them in a place vnproper and contrarie to their nature: for as they cannot be deceiued in their foode, without manifeſt loſſe; no more can they ſuffer an ill habitation. And as one muſt not enterpriſe to plant the vine, if he bee not forthwith prouided of cellers and veſſels for the wine: ſo this would bee to no purpoſe, if one ſhould plant the Mulberrieyard, without afterward, to giue quarter and place

to the Wormes. All ſuch like habitation deſire they, as men, that is, ſpacious, pleaſant, wholeſome, far from ill ſents, dampes and humidities, warme in the cold time, and freſh in the hot; neere the foundation, nor vnder the lathings of the couerings neere the tyles, one muſt not lodge the Silke-worme, becauſe of the intemperatenes of theſe two cōtrarie ſituations, whereby the one may be too moyſt, & the other too windie: too hot, & too cold, according to the ſeaſons. Neuertheleſſe that is to be borne withal, ſo that one can erect the lodging of the Wormes on one only ſtage neere the ground, prouided that the plot-forme be erected three or foure feete, for to auoid dampes, and ouer that that there bee boords cloſe ioyned, to the end the creatures may be kept aloofe from the tyles, the approch and neereneſſe of which is alwaies hurtful vnto them, becauſe that the windes and colds pierce through them, & the heate of the Sunne is there inſupportable, when it lights The reckoning vp of the fitnes of the lodging for the Wormes.vpon them in his force. If for the capacity of your houſe, you can commodiouſly be fitted for roome to feede them in, it will be great eaſe to you, and you ſhall ſpare the coſt to build new lodgings expreſſely for this: making your account that the Worms comming of ten ounces of ſeede, will be nouriſht at eaſe, within a haule of ſeuen fadomesin length, three in breadth & two in height; vpō which aduice you may groūd, for to diſpoſe your houſe to ſuch vſe; or being to build it new, you may amplifie your edifice with ſome members: the which by this meanes will bee very wel repreſented, and wil be ſo much more conuenient, as for the little beaſts you ſhall haue more

augemented it: when after hauing occupied it ſome ſmall time, it will remaine free to you the reſt of the yeere, to entertaine and receiue company. Their diſpoſitions.
            
            But let it bee within or without the houſe of the maſter, which deſireth to nouriſh theſe creatures in, it is very requiſite their chambers and haules be to be opened on both ſides, opopſite one againſt another, of the Eaſt to the Weſt, or of the North to the South: to the intent, that the ayre and winds hauing free paſſage through them, may refreſh the Worms, that then being ready to perfect their worke are vpon point to ſtifle, through the ſilke wherewith they are filled, and the great heate of the ſeaſon. Taking heede neuertheleſſe, that the windowes bee ſo well glaſed, or papered, that one may ſhut them in any other time, ſo properly and ſo well, that the coldes cannot enter, being as preiudiciall to the Wormes in their beginning, as the heates in their ending. Theſe creatures alſo deſiring to be in a light place, willingly not ſuffering the darke, from which they creep away ſeeking the light, the inner part of their lodging ſhall be pargeted and entirely whited, that the Rats may not eate through the ſlippery walles, leauing not there any chinckes, creueſſes, nor holes, for Miſe, Rats, Creckets nor other vermine, enemies to our Silk-wormes. The haules or chambers ſhall be Their moueables.proportioned with tables neceſſary to reſt on theſe creatures, the which one ſhall make of all ſorts of wood; the beſt whereof is the moſt light, for his eaſie handling. Some preferre before boordes of any wood whatſoeuer, the tables made of reedes or canes, cleft or whole: not only for the eaſe of their

lightneſſe, but alſo for the health of the cattel, which are fed vpon theſe canes, or hurdles made of them, ſo that there is a certain aire piercing through them, keeping them cheerefully and without offenſiue heate. Vpon which it behoueth to diſtinguiſh prudently, ſuch ayre being not alwaies proper to the Wormes, but onely to be choſen at the end of their life for refreſhing them. To that purpoſe alſo the wilde reedes and bulriſhes of mariſh places and pooles may ſerue, yea rie ſtraw, which is got for a How to ſet vp the skaffold to hold the Wormes.ſmall price. In like manner, linnen, ſtretched with little tackes vpon light wood, is vſed with eaſe in this ſteed. Many pillers of carpenters work, directly ſquared ſhal be perpendicularly erected frō the ground to the ſeeling to ſupport the tables, bearers of our Wormes, the which ſhall bee ſet vpon little ioyſts croſſing the pillers, planted of equall diſtance on theſe pillers ſixteene or eighteene inches one from another. The tables being ſo ranked in ſuch meaſure, the Wormes wil be fitly ſerued. But the boords ſhall not bee of equall breadth, but one ſhall exceed the other foure fingers; the loweſt next the floore, being the moſt largeſt; and the higheſt approaching the ſeeling, the moſt narroweſt, whereby the skaffold which ſhall bee compoſed of all together will bee made in the faſhion of a pyramidis, to the great aduantage of the wormes, the which by ſuch diſpoſition ſhall bee preſerued from ruine, when wandering by the edges of the tables, from one end of the skaffolds to the other, ſeeking a fit place to vomit their ſilke, they fall from aboue, downe vpon the floore, where they ſquat in peeces.

A loſſe which one neede not feare, the tables being in ſuch ſorte ſitted, for each to reoeiue the Wormes, falling from his higher next to it, the which are not offēded at all through the little diſtance of one table to another. The breadth of the moſt loweſt table, ſhall be limited euen to this proportion, that eaſily of one ſide a man with his hand may reach to the middle, for to tend the Wormes. As for the others, their deminiſhing will make eaſie the ſeruing them, by meaſure as one ſhall goe vp on high, and ſhall approach neer the ſeeling. Many of ſuch skaffolds ſhall be erected in euery part, hall or chamber, after his capacitie, and in ſuch manner, that any touch not the walles, for feare of rats: and likewiſe for to be able of all ſides to giue victuals commodiouſlie to the creatures: betweene the which skaffolds one ſhall leaue way large enough, eaſily there to paſſe and repaſſe. One ſhall alſo take carefull heed, to make verie firme the skaffolds; to the ende that the Wormes growing great doe not cauſe ſome part to fall, (as heretofore that hath chaunced me with loſſe,) and that they doe not ſhake by the weight of the ladders which are ſet againſt them, going to viſit the creatures, but ſhall remaine aſſuredly firme vnto the end, for that cauſe ſparing neither wood nor Iron. There are diuers ſorts of ladders which are made for this ſeruice according to fanſie. Some make boords about the skaffoldes, vpon the which one goes as by galleries, for to tend the Wormes, making them round about: one goes vp to them by little ſtaires, appropriated to this. Others make high formes and long of light wood, ſo much the more eaſie to bee

remoued, as neede ſhall require. Others doe not vſe any other touching this, but a common ladder. But what ladders, or mountings ſo euer they be, all are good; prouided, that they ſerue to this buſineſſe, ſo that without too much paine, by them one may fitly goe to feede and viſit the creatures.
            
               The graine of Silk-wormes. The end of theſe prouiſions, is the ſilke, the which ſo much the better, and more abundant you ſhall haue, as the ſeede ſhall be better choſen. A common conſideration with all ſorts of ſowings for the difference that there is of ſeede, to ſeede. For what ought you to expect of baſtard graine, but baſtard ſilke, what good leaues ſoeuer that you haue, each thing bringing forth his like? With great curioſitie thē let vs ſearch the moſt profitable graine, reiecting that, the worth whereof is ſuſpected; In the proofe conſiſteth the moſt ſure knowledge of this ſeede, though there bee many directions to diſcerne the good, from the il. Amongſt al the ſeeds of Wormes, whereof wee haue knowledge, till now, wee haue held that of Spaine, for the beſt, fructifying very well, through all the prouinces of this Realme, where they make a trade of this feeding. That of Calabria, ſince certaine yeeres, hath woon the repute, not ſo much for the goodneſſe of the ſilke that it brings forth, as for the abundance that comes of the cod which is great, in reſpect of that of Spaine. And although they both be hard, an aſſured ſigne of abundance of matter, and by ſuch reaſon one is to bee preferred before the other: the qualitie winning the prize, the ſeede of Spaine ſhall be held in the firſt rancke, in expecting that by reiterated proofes, wee

cannot reaſonably ſet it behind any other. As for the graine which of long time is naturalized in the prouinces of Languedoc, and thoſe neighbouring parts, one muſt make no great account of it, neither for the finenes nor for the quantity of ſilke that it makes: for how exquiſit ſoeuer the ſeede of ſilke Wormes is, tranſported from far in to ſuch quarters, it doth not continue long in goodneſſe, but degenerates at the end of certaine yeeres: the graine which is directlie brought from Spaine, the firſt yeere it doth not ſo well, as the three or foure yeeres following: the which being paſſed, it beginneth to decline in his goodneſſe. In the graine it ſelfe, is alſo knowne of the changing by the time, and in his body, and in his colour. For comming directly from Spaine, it is little, of a darke tawny colour; and kept, waxeth great, and growes bright, till then, that at the terme of certaine yeeres, it becomes gray, as gray cloth. The graine of Silk-wormes of they Seuenes of Languedoc is ſo qualified, the which as well for their proper natures, as for being feed with the leaues of blacke Mulberries, brings forth cods or bottoms great, and ſoft, by conſequent ſmally furniſht with ſilke, of an orenge colour, or gold yellow, manifeſting the groſſeneſſe of the ſilke from the difference of the fine comming of the Spaniſh ſeede, the Wormes of which haue been nouriſhed with the leaues of white Mulberries, and the moſt part of bottoms are white, incarnadines, of the colour of fleſh. Behold the iudgement, that one can make of the knowledge of the goodneſſe, of the ſeede of Spaine: the beſt of which will bee the

ſmalleſt and moſt darke of colour; prouided it be aliue and not child with cold: the which is proued on the naile, in all ſeedes of the Silk-wormes: accoumpting for good, that which breaks in cracking, caſting forth humor and moiſture. The littleneſſe of the graine of Spaine makes the number of Wormes, the which ioyned with the hardneſſe of the bottoms cannot chuſe but make abundance of ſilke, which for his finenes is of great requeſt. Indifferently all ſeede comming directly from Spaine is not ſuch as you ſhall deſire, there being countries in that kingdome better for this, ſome then other: and that the more honeſtly to make it vp, there go rather truſty, then deceitfull perſons. Of the which particularities you ſhall take heede, to the end ſo much the more profitably to ende your feeding, as with Euery foure yeeres to change the ſeede.more art you ſhall haue begun it. Wherefore this article is notable, that after the imitation of good husbandmen, it is neceſſarie to change the ſeede euery foure yeeres, or from other terme to other, according to the reaſon of experienes. And for to doe that with leſſe hazard, it ſhall bee fit to haue euery yeere, ſome ounces of new ſeed of Spaine, the which ſet apart, you ſhall conſerue carefully, and ſo long as you ſhall finde, for the proouing, his worth to merit. By which reſolution your feeding will keepe a good courſe, and without confuſion, maintained alwaies in good order and eſtate. You muſt not furniſh your ſelfe with old ſeede for his infertilitie, that being of no worth which paſſes one yeere. And though that the keeping of the ſeede, of this creature be difficult, becauſe that naturally of it ſelfe it hatcheth

in his ſeaſon, yet ſo it is, that auarice hath ſo much gottē, that by deceitful inuentiō certaine impoſtures forcing nature, conſerue the ſeed a long time without hatching: when they cannot ſell it in time they keep thē in little bottels of glaſſe, in a coole place, as within deepe wells, hung downe with cordes neere the water, during the great heates, ſo keeping them more then a yeere, to the loſſe of thoſe which by it.
            Some before they put to hatch the graine of Silk-wormes, ſteepe them in the moſt exquiſite wine To imbibe the ſeed in wine before you put them to hatch.they can get, Malmſie or other, finding by ſuch proofe, that the good, as the moſt heauy, goes tothe bottome, and the naughtie for his lightneſſe ſwimes aboue, by reaſon whereof it is reiected. After the good is taken out of the wine, it is ſet to drie in the ſunne, or before the fire, laid vpon very cleane paper, couered with white linnen, or ſmooth paper, to the end that too much heate hurt it not; after it is put to hatch. And not only ſerues ſuch ſteeping to diſtinguiſh the good graine from the naughtie, but alſo to legitimate and fortifie the good, to make the Wormes come forth free and ſtrong, and for to cauſe them to hatch almoſt all at once; according to the practiſe of hens egges, which for the ſame cauſe are plunged in water a little before that one puts them to hatch. A commoditie which one cannot hope for of the light graine, but to hatch late (or not at all) whereby the Wormes continue ſlow to all their workes, to hatch, to feede, to ſpin: yea ſubiect to diſeaſes, being not able to ſuffer any accident; but almoſt alwaies languiſhing, not onely dye they by little occaſion, but infect the beſt qualified

of their next neighbors. To which daunger he expoſeth himſelfe, that without diſtinctions mingles together the good ſeede with the ill.
            
               How to hatch the graine. To hatch this graine vnder the arme-pits, or betweene womens paps, is not a profitable thing; not ſo much for feare of their floures as ſome thinke, as for the ſhaking it to and fro: which they cannot do withall, carrying the ſeed about them, but that they tumble and mingle it; happening at euery minute that the Wormes willing to come foorth of their egges, are miſturned by one paſe or ſtep of them which carry the ſeed about them, ouerwhelming all one vpon another, to the loſſe of the creatures which are ſtifled in the throng, though but with their like. Setting this article the fartheſt off, it is moſt requiſite to keepe curiouſly the ſeed during all the yeere, preparing in good time, eaſily to hatch them in the ſeaſon. Hauing recouered them, either of your own, or elſewhere, you ſhall lodge them within boxes of wood well ioyned, garniſhed within with paper on the creaſts, to the end that through them no ſeed go out; nor any duſt, vermine, nor other offenſiue thing enter in the box; but that the graine may remaine there neately. You ſhall put theſe boxes within cheſts, or elſewhere amongſt cloathes, except linnen, which becauſe of the moyſtnes of ſuch matter, is hurtfull to theſe, there to remaine vntill the ſeaſon for to imploy them; and to the end that they feele not any moleſting dampe, nor cold during ſuch remaining, it is requiſite continuing winter, to make fire in the chamber where theſe cheſts ſhall be: for being more hot then cold, the graine is there prepared

afore-hād, as you deſire; which it would not do, if after the order of ſome, one ſhould keep it within viols of glaſſe, the coldneſſe of which ſubſtance makes them to hatch late. Theſe neceſſary obſeruations haue learned vs neuer to expoſe the ſeed of theſe Wormes (no more then the Wormes themſelues) to the mercy of the colds: but to reſerue it ſo together as one can from the humidity and froſts. For to do this effectually chancing to ſend for it into Spaine, or elſewhere, it ſhall be done during ſummer: by this meanes, ſhunning the incommodities of Autumne and winter, it wil come to you wel qualified, and very good if it be brought by land; by ſea the thing being not without hazard, becauſe of the foggie dampes, and other ill qualities that it hath, contrary for ſuch ſeed, ſo as the loſſe of many, (with reaſon) makes vs to feare ſuch danger. The long keeping of the ſeed with you, helpes to naturalize it in your ayre, whereby it hatcheth better and rather then hauing not at all abid with you: wherefore it is requiſite to furniſh your ſelfe of ſeede immediately after the gathering of the ſilke, if it may bee done, to doe it without any delaying; you muſt abſtaine from viſiting too often the graine of Wormes, eſpecially the ſpring approaching, for feare that by ſuch curioſity, one treades not awrie to his loſſe. The time to put to hatch this graine cannot bee directly aſcertaind, for that the ſeaſon being forward or backward, entirely gouerns the worke; cauſing the ſhooting forth, or ſtay of the Mulberries, the only victual of theſe creatures. This In what time.ſhall be then the true point, that then when the Mulberries

begin to budde, not before, to the end the little cattle at their hatching may find meat readie to liue on, and of their owne age, (as the child of the milke of his mother) and not to be troubled through want of Mulberrie leaues; fearing to let them die for famine you ſhall feede them with the buddes of nettles, with young lettice, or with the leaues of roſes, & like druggeries. But being fallen into ſuch neceſſitie, the beſt ſhal be to ſerue them with the leaues of Elme, ſomewhat edable by the Wormes, by which they receiue ſuccour, for ſome ſympathy that it hath with that of the Mulberrie. Foreſeeing which trouble afarre off, it ſhall be requiſit to plant a certaine ſmall number of Mulberries in the hotteſt place of a garden againſt ſome ſunny bancke, and there by good dreſſing, dunging, and watering, to haſt them to budde quickly, by ſuch artificialneſſe haſtening his ſlow nature. And this ſhall bee for to ſhunne the loſſe of the little beaſts, when being newly hatched, the leaues of the Mulberries are vniuerſally ſpoyled by froſtes or miſtes happening vnawares (as that was ſeene in Languedoc, Prouence, and in thoſe bordering places, theſe yeeres paſt) if one keepes ſuch Mulberrie trees, purpoſely to this particular ſeruice, ſheltred againſt the peruerſe time, after the maner that the prudent gardner keepes his precious plants: the which Mulberrie trees preſerued from ſuch tempeſts will feede the ſmall cattell, in attending while the others haue ſprung forth.
            
               The danger of too haſty or ſlow hatching the egges. And as by too much haſting one falles into this danger and in conſequence by famine in perill to loſe the little beaſts in their beginning, likewiſe to

delay the hatching of the Wormes, puts them to hazard of death in their ending, when by ſuch backwardneſſe their climing happens in a very hot time, contrarie to their nature, becauſe that being then heated, through the ſilke wherwith they are filled, they deſire nothing but refreſhing, eaſily to end their taske. Such difficulties are prouided for by the meanes of the haſtened Mulberries, aboue mentioned, the which furniſhing timely leaues you ſhall in like maner haſten to hatch the Wormes, which they repay at the ende of their life, whereby they will remaine ſo much more aſſured, as you ſhall leſſe feare their comming in the time of the great heates. The remaining colds of the winter being not ſo vnſeaſonable at the beginning of the life of theſe Wormes, as the heates at the end of the ſame: for that in the coldes there is ſome remedy for the ſuccoring of the Wormes, which is in keeping them in a very cloſe place and warmed with embres, during the ſiniſter times of cold; but againſt the heats other is not found than the fitneſſe of the lodging, the onely meanes to ſafegard theſe creatures from ſuch annoyance.
            
               What time of the moone is proper for it. The courſe of the moone is alſo obſerueable in this action; the Wormes deſire to hatch & ſpin their ſilke during the increaſe of the Moone; for that they find themſelues more able; than in her waine. But that cannot accord euery where nor in euery time, for the diuerſities of regions, and ſeaſons, hotter or colder, ſome then others, lengthening or abridging the life of theſe creatures. If you are in a place where the Wormes are eight weekes ere they worke, as

commonly they do in a place more cold then hot, or in a time extraordinarie chill, the thing will ſo fall out, that in like time of the Moone as they hatch, they will alſo ſpinne. Wherefore comming at the firſt quarter, they will be then ſpinning: but where through the benefit of the climat, their nouriſhmēt is more forwarded, as towards Auignon, & throughout all her neighboring partes, being not farther remote then fortie, or fiue and fortie daies: it is impoſſible ſo to diſpoſe this affaire, for the inequalitie of the daies. Wherefore leauing the ſucceſſe of the end in the hand of God, their nouriſhing ſhall begin in the encreaſe of the Moone (if neuertheleſſe the leaues of the Mulberries will permit it, which laies the foundation of this buſines) for that the Wormes fortified in their beginning, by the influence of ſuch a Planet, forthwith goe cheerefully on in augmenting it, ma king them to come fromthe ſecond or third, vntill the fift or ſixt day of the new Moone, the cluing of theſe creatures according to the laſt computation will happen towards the beginning of the waine of the Moone, certaine daies after her ful, which hauing then force enough, communicates it ſufficiently to the Wormes.
            
               To prepare the boxes before to hatch the Wormes. For to hatch the graine at the time named, you muſt remoue them from their firſt veſſell, into boxes of wood, lined within with cotton or with fine tow paſted to them; after that the ſaid cotton ſhall be couered with a white paper, to the end to conteine the ſeede warmely and without loſſe: on the top of the ſeede one ſhall put a little bed of tow, and ouer that a paper thick pierced as a ſieue, with little holes, euerie

one capable for a graine of millet onely to paſſe through. Through the tow, and the pierced paper the Wormes comming forth of their egges ſhal goe, afterwards hauing left the ſhels vnder the tow, they go to faſten at the leaues of the Mulberry, ſet to this purpoſe ouer the pierced paper, from whence being taken they are tranſported and lodged elſewhere as ſhall be demonſtrated. To keepe the boxes warme with the ſeed in them, and to viſit them often to withdraw the hatched Worms.
            
            And to the end that that come ſo to paſſe as appertayneth, it ſhall behoue you to helpe the Wormes to hatch in adding to their naturall heate this deuice of arte. One ſhall keepe continually the boxes within a bed, the curtaines cloſe drawne betweene two featherbeds, moderately heated with a warming pan euery two houres, without ſparing the night, one ſhall viſit them, for to withdraw the Wormes, by quantitie as they come. Such frequent viſiting is neceſſarie, as well for that cauſe, as alſo to renue the heate of the bed, in warming it oftentimes, to the end To lodge thē in ſieues and to keepe them warmely.to keepe the ſeed equally hot, for feare that by ſlothfulnes, leauing thē there too chill, they ſhould catch cold, to the ruine of the Wormes. From the boxes one ſhall take the new Wormes, for to ranke them in ſieues, with paper at the bottoms, or other veſſels appropriated to receiue them in their beginning, and for feare to hurt thē in remouing, asto that their tenderneſſe ſubiects them, one ſhall touch nothing but the leafe to which the Wormes being faſtened They ſhall be vſed to the ayre by little and little.with that they ſhall be lifted vp & lodged in veſſels. There they ſhall be held during certaine daies, whileſt which you ſhall by little and little accuſtome them to the aire, to the ende the violence of the

chaunge cauſe them not to periſh. As on the contrarie they will by too much heate, if one aduiſes not to temper them by reaſon, going from degree to degree, keeping them leſſe warme one day then another, by meaſure as they aduance in time, without retrograding, that is to ſay, not to bring them neerer to the heate, hauing begun to keepe them aloofe, for feare to parch or ſtifle them, vntill that age diſcharge They ſhal reſt vpon beds, the curtaines being cloſe drawne for certain daies.their gouernor of ſuch paine. The ſieues, great boxes or other receptacles, couered with linnen, garniſht at the bottoms with paper, ſhall bee put to reſt vpon beds, with the curtaines drawne, for to ſhield theſe little creatures from the windes and coldes, till the foure or fiue firſt daies of their tender youth, from thence forward they ſhall be tranſported into a little chamber, hot and very cloſe, out of the force of the winde, vpon perfect clean and neate tables couered Afterwards taken forth of the ſieues in a warme chamber laid vpon tables.with paper, there for to begin to hold their ranke. One ſhal lodge thē very neere one to another, to the end that ſo preſſed with vnitie, they may conſerue their naturall heate: that which they could not do, being a farre off in their beginning, vntill that, when they ſhall grow great, more ample lodging be giuen them. But it ſhall be vnder this neceſſarie obſeruation, Without confuſion of age or kind.not to mingle confuſedly the wormes. It rather behooueth to diſtinguiſh them, by the times of their ages, for the importance of this foode, touching the eaſe, and the ſparing. For if from the beginning this point hath been prouided with curioſitie, aſſembling the Wormes by the dayes of their comming, without entermingling them together, one ſhall ſee them without diſorder to agree together,

during their liues in all their workes: in eating, in ſleeping, in ſpinning, with much pleaſure, accompanied with profit, for the abundance of ſilke which wil come of them, the aymeof this buſines. Through want of which ſingularitie there will happen confuſion to your foode, the old Wormes neuer ſorting with the young; the one deſiring to ſleepe while the other eate, and to eate when it is a queſtion to ſpin: but with the aforeſaid diſpoſition the worke comes to a good iſſue. By ſuch diſtinction the races are ſeparatly preſcrued, as is moſt requiſit; to furniſh ones ſelfe with the ſorts of this cattell, according to the opinion, one ſhall take of their worth by the effect of their worke. In ſteed of ſieues and great boxes, The Spaniſh Garbillos.which we vſe in this turne, the Spaniards fits themſelues with veſſels which they call Garbillos, made of ſtraw, oſiers, ruſhes, or other light matter, which they plaſter within with oxe dung, wherewith they make pargeting: which dried in the Sunne makes the veſſelles to ſmell of a ſauour agreeable to the Wormes, and ſufficiently warme. The which qualities ioyned with the capacity of the veſſels, makes them ſerue thē long enough. For that is till their third change, that they keep the Wormes there; framing theſe Garbillos ſo great, and furniſhing themſelues with ſuch abundant number, that it ſuffiſeth to ſatisfie their purpoſe.
            
               A very fit lodging for the Wormes in their firſt beginning. For more eaſe, a lodging for the Wormes ſhall be expreſly erected for to keep them ioynde together, neuertheleſſe by diſtinct ſeparations, vntill their ſecond or third change, if one will: where they will be conſerued warmely, & out of danger of Mice, Rats, duſt and other iniuries, with more aſſurance than any where elſe. That is, after the manner of a great

preſſe or cubbord made with many ſtages diſtant one from another foure fingers, or halfe a foote, on which the little cattle ſhall be put, without any whit bruiſing them. Theſe ſtages ſhall be as it were little planchers, compoſed either of light firre boords, or of ſome other proper for this, or of cleft reeds, or lōg ſtraw, and ſet ſo fitly that one may ſeparately draw them out and in at pleaſure, in ſliding them as tilles eaſily to viſite & tend the ſmall beaſts. And they ſhal be paſted with oxe-dunge after the Spaniſh faſhion, if one ſo deſires it; ſeeing ſuch curioſity hath been found profitable, to the end that nothing bee wanting in the rearing vp of our Wormes. The lodging ſhall be compaſſed about with linnen cloath tackt to the doores, as paper windowes opening and ſhutting of three ſides; and before the formoſt doore a little window to giue vent ſhall be added; in ſhutting of it at need to keep them ſo much the warmer, or in opening of it to giue them ayre as one will. So with much commodity the Wormes ſhal be lodged in their firſt time, which is then when they haue moſt need of it, paſſing in aſſurāce theſe gliding paſes of their tender age, where many periſh through want of good habitation: for being fortified with time, they ſhall be taken from thence, and remoued into more ſpacious lodging, as ſhall be ſhewed.
            
               To cauſe them to come within few daies is neceſſary. It is to be deſired that the Wormes come forth all within foure or fiue daies diſtance from the firſt hatching vntill the laſt▪ thoſe neuer lightly making good end which tarry longer, but miſerable and ſluggiſh end their life in languiſh oftentimes without profit. Wherefore it is, for that that one prouokes

the ſeed, warming it with curious diligence, as hath been ſhewed: vſing which order, little ſeed remaines vnhatched. You ſhall not then make any account of the graine which ſhal be remaining in the ſaid boxes after the ſaid terme, nor of the Wormes likewiſe that ſhall be ſo backward: but rather reiect all that as vnprofitable. Such hatching of a company is one of the moſt notableſt points of this buſines, whereby finally with ſauing, the profit iſſues according to the proiect, becauſe that theſe creatures taking life almoſt in the ſame day, are more eaſily handled than if they were of diuers ages. I haue alſo ſaid that they ſuffer This creature feares the cold and the heate.much by the colds, and by the heats in all their ages: for in their youth, the cold troubles them ſtrangely, hauing great power ouer them, being the moſt weak and delicate cattell which is fed: and in age the heat killes them. When in their greateſt force, you finde them bigge and vnwealdy, through the ſilke wherewith they are filled, which conſtraines them to ſeeke freſh ayre. By contrary remedies one prouides for The remedies.theſe things: but with leſſe difficultie one dreſſes the Wormes in the cold, than in the heate, that is, in hol
                  •
               ing them ſtraightly in the beginning, and largely at the end, by little and little according to their age inlarging them; finally to put them for altogether at their eaſe on the skaffolds. In the meane while imploying to purpoſe according to accidents, the warmings by the ayde of the fire, and the refreſhings by opening of the windowes of the houſe.
            
               They haue foure naturall
                     •
                   and ordinary diſeaſes. The Silk-wormes during their life change foure times their skins, (as Serpēts do once a yeere) which

cauſeth them ſo many maladies; during which, they eate not at all, but vnmoueable they do nothing but ſleepe, paſſing ſo their ill. Theſe diſeaſes, (for theſe reaſons called of the Spaniards Dormilles,) are comparable to theſe of young children, as ſmall pockes, meaſles, ſhingles, & other that in neceſſity they haue in their youth, of which they are helped being well looked to. So by good gouerning our Wormes are ſaued from theſe neceſſary miſchiefes, ſhunning the danger of death: neuertheleſſe with more difficultie in the latter, then in the firſt, through age in being more oppreſſed old then young, as it happens to men, which hauing not had in ſeaſon the diſeaſes of youth, being ſtrucken more late, more dangerous is They haue alſo accidentall diſeaſes.alſo the iſſue. Beſides theſe ordinary diſeaſes, the Wormes haue accidentall diſeaſes comming of the time, the meat, the lodging, and of the gouernment: the which one helpes vſing particular remedies, as ſhall bee ſhewed. In the care of the ordinary ones there is no point of skill, you muſt only abſtaine from giuing them to eate, when they refuſe their meate, and to giue them moderately, their appetite being come againe; alwaies to feed them with good leaues, and to keepe them neately. The firſt maladie, (being diuerſly called) as a change, a drowſines, or a benumming, happens at the eighth or tenth day of their comming forth: the eight or ten daies following them one after another, more or leſſe, according to the climat & quality of the ſeaſon, of which the heate ſhortens the diſtance of theſe termes. To which alſo ſerues the goodneſſe of victuals, and diligent care; for ſo much more as one giues to theſe

creatures of leaues well quallified (if ſo be they will eate them,) ſo much more ſhorter will their life be.
            
               How to know their diſeaſes. The ſicknes of theſe wormes is knowne firſt of all by the head, which ſwelles then, when they will chaunge, inſomuch that in that part their skinne begins to peele, but more apparantly in their laſt benummings then in thoſe that follow, not being able almoſt in the firſt to diſcerne what it is for the littleneſſe of the creature. While their drouſineſſe hath ſeaſed them you muſt refraine to giue them meate, (for that would bee but loſt labour) onely one ſhall caſt them ſome pittance to ſuſtaine thoſe amongſt the drowſie ones, which wake; the which by this meanes diſcerned ſhal be ſeparated from the others, for to be aſſembled with thoſe which are of equall age. Each diſeaſe holdes them two daies, at the third beginning to get their health againe: the which one knowes by their feeding which comes to them with much appetite; then one ſhall giue them victuals againe, but ſparingly, to the ende not to fill them to quickly, augmenting their ordinary day by day as one ſhall find them affectioned to eat.
            
               Their diet limited. Twice a day, morning and euening, at certaine houres one ſhall ſerue the Wormes with meat, from their hatching, till their ſecond change or drouſines, ſo limiting their repaſt. Frō the ſecond to the fourth and laſt, thrice a day: & from that till the end of their life, foure, fiue, or ſixe times a day: (and in ſome,) ſo much as you pleaſe, and that you ſhall ſee the creatures can eate. For then you muſt ſpare no foode, but rather cloying them, to fill and ſatiate their appetite, haſting them by much eating to perfect their

taske. And as the veſſell wil neuer run ouer, except it be ful; ſo theſe Wormes will neuer vomit their ſilke, till their bodies be ſatisfied: the which engendring of the leafe of the Mulberrie, all is as ſoone found ready to be ſponne, as the quantitie of the leaues deſtinde by nature to ſuch worke, ſhall be diſſolued. By ſuch carefulnes there is no more leaues waſted, then if one diſtributed thē skarſelie: for that within eight daies, the Wormes will eate neere as much, by little and little, as within foure giuen them liberally. Then this is without occaſion that one ſhould feare the expence, ſeeing that on the contrarie by ſuch liberalitie (beſides all well compted, it expendes nothing more) comes this ſparing, which winning The qualities of the leaues very conſiderable.time, the coſt of the feeding falles out leſſe. Afterwardes one ſhall marke very curiouſly the qualities of the leaues, as an article bearing ſway in this foode. For all leaues are not proper for this, though they be producted by Mulberries without fault: happening ſometimes, that by extremitie of drought, or moyſture, meldew, heate droppes, and other intemperatures of the time, all the leaues, or moſt part of the trees become yelowiſh, ſpotted, or ſpeckled, a ſigne of vnholſome and perniciouſe foode. Of ſuch one muſt make no account, no more, then of that growing out of the Sunne, within the the interior parts of thicke treees, or in ſhadow vallies, nor of that which is wet, by raines or dewes; but rather it behoueth to reiect them, as infected, not vſing them at al, for feare of killing the Wormes. The leaues of the ſecond ſpring, one ſhall put in the ſame predicament, that is to ſay, thoſe which ſhoote

afreſh, on the trees alreadie diſleaued, which the ignorāt imploy for want of other: but with too much hazard, becauſe of their maligne ſubſtance, contrarie to the creatures, happening through the ineguallitie of their ages. For there needes but one repaſte to be giuen them, to make them all periſh of the flix, that ſuch new leaues, will bring them; becauſe that by their tenderneſſe the little beaſts, eates them with ſo auidous and greedy an affection, that they fill themſelues till they burſt. Wherefore this ſhall be for a maxime, that the Silk-wormes ſhall be alwaies A notable maxime.fedde with leaues of their owne age, to the end that by good correſpondencie, the leaues be as tender, and hard, as the creatures ſhall be feeble, and ſtrong, according to the time of their ordinarie commings. The faulte of the wet leaues, is corrected by patience; for one muſt but tarrie till the raines be paſt and the dewes dried vp, to gather the leaues, going to worke after the Sunne ſhall haue ſhonne certaine houres on the trees; neuer before. But for the others which are ill qualified there is no meanes to correct them, from which, as pernicious food, you ſhall abſtaine. One ſhall not neede to take care for the expence of theſe precious creatures, during the firſt three weekes, becauſe of their youth, and littleneſſe of bodies which makes them bee contented with a little, & yet that little taken in the loſt parts of the trees, as of the body, of the ſuccers amongſt the good branches, and elſewhere, from whence for the profit of the trees, alſo one ſhould cut them. At the beginning, one muſt goe to the leaues with handkerchers, afterwards with little baskets, then with

great ones, and finally one employes, for this victualing both maunds and fackes, encreaſing their food, by meaſure as the grow in age.
            
               
                  The gouernour of the Wormes ſhall keep himſelfe neately.
                  Shall drinke wine before to come neere his flocke.
                I haue ſhewne how neceſſarie it is for the leaues to be handled with cleane hands, for the danger of fouleneſſe▪ Of this point the gouernour of theſe magnificent creatures ſhall beware, for himſelfe to be an example of neateneſſe, to all thoſe which hee hath vnder his charge, to the end that any of them, approch not otherwiſe, then apperteineth. The gouernour ſhall not forget to drinke a little wine earlie in the morning before he goes to worke, for that in communicating the ſmell of ſuch licour to the Wormes, it preſerues them from all ſtench, ſpecially from the naughtie breath of folkes (more ſtrong being faſting, then after eating) which theſe admirable The Wormes ſhall not be viſited with many folke.beaſts feare much. Wherefore the entring of their lodging is not to be indifferētly permitted to al ſorts of perſons, by that ſhunning the harme that too free frequenting brings to the creatures; which the ſuperſticious vulgar, ſottiſhly attribute to the eye, beleeuing that there are people with by their lookes brings ill lucke to the Wormes; but it rather is, nay, aſſuredly, the breathing of the ill breath which cauſeth Their lodging ſhall be kept neatly, it ſhall be perfumed ſometimes.them, indiſpoſitions. For which conſiderations, the lodging ſhall be ſwept euery day, and to keepe them ſweet you ſhal often ſprinckle the floore with vineger, after to ſtrew it with ſome herbes of a good ſmell, as with lauander, ſpike, roſmarie, time, ſauorie, pennie royall, and ſuch like: adding ſome times, perfumes, made with frankencenſe, beniewin, ſtorax, & other odoriferous drougues, which ſhall be

burnt on coales in the halles and chambers. The tables The tables often made cleane.in like manner, of the Wormes, ſhall bee often made cleane not ſuffring the cattell to reſt long vpon the litter, the which one ſhall take away euery third day, or euery fourth, after the ſecond chaunge, or benumming, for to keepe them eſpecially ſweet and cleane, then when as the ſoultrie heats approach, whereby they are peſtered: vntill that time, being not requiſit to goe to it ſo curiouſly, for the litter during the coldes, is rather profitable then any waies hurtfull to the Wormes, keeping them warme amongſt it; foreſeeing alſo, that one deceiues not himſelfe with ſuch ſluggiſhnes, in leauing there to much.
            
               Remedies againſt vnexpected coldes. Vnawares ſomtimes violent blaſts of after ſtormes returnes, againſt the attempt, and courſe of the ſeaſon, very offenſiue to our Wormes. Theſe accidents are remidied, by keeping curiouſly ſhut all the open partes of the lodging dores and windowes euen to the leaſt: and in warming it within, with whot coles in diu
                  ••
               ſe places. The ſlouth of the gouernour hath laid this taxation on our Wormes, that they are eſteemed ſtincking, wherefore many abhorres them; Thoſe are the caſting of their skinnes, and their dead carcaſſes, intermingled with the litter, made with the reſidue of the leaues which the Wormes ſmelles of, from whence proceeds al the ſtincke which one findes in the chambers: not of theſe noble creatures, the which of themſelues ſmels nothing at all, no not their very dung, no more then ſand, hauing naturally in as great deteſtation filth & infectiō, as they loue ſweete and good ſmelles, vſing the order afore mentioned,

one ſhall not onely gouerne theſe delectable cattell with profit, but their habitation made pleaſant, and ſweete ſmelling as the ſhop of a perfumer ſhall be found a place agreeable for good conditioned folkes. So will it be for Ladies and Gentlemen, for whom theſe excellent creatures trauaill.
            
               Neceſſarie maximes. That then the gouernour of our Wormes ſtriue to be diligent in his charge; that he ſuffer not inconſiderately his cattell to bee viſited of all commers, with too much libertie, for feare that by fraud, ſome miſchance happen them: that he keepe the lodging cleane; that he ſpare not perfumes, for to beſtow them fitly; that he be ſcrupulous of the leaues, not to diſtribute them to the Wormes, but ſuch as bee perfectly good; for this cauſe that hee giue commande to the gatherers neuer to goe to worke before they haue waſhed their handes, and that he haue an eye vnto it: that he ſuffers, rather his little beaſts to be a hungerd, then by impatience, to feede them with leaues ill qualified.
            
               The requiſite order to remoue the cattell. In taking away the litter all at once, the 
                  ••
               ttell is remoued from one place to another, to their great contentment. For to do that commodiouſly, at one end of each skaffold ſhall be left an emptie place for to put the Wormes on, that one ſhall take adioyning to that; in as much of the breadth of the table, the which by this meanes being emptie, will receiue the Wormes of the neighbouring part, and ſo of thoſe that follow, wherby all the continuance, in the skaffold wil be vncouered, and couerd againe, courſe after courſe by portions; after the manner of drying hay in meddowes, ouerturning it; the full part filling

the emptie. So without carrying the cattell far, they ſhall be gently put neere their lying; and this will be without touching them at all, for feare to offend thē, becauſe of their delicatenes; if at the inſtant that one would change them, from one place to another, one giues them meat; for it behoueth not but to take the leaues, at which ſo ſoone as euer the Wormes ſhall be faſtened, to lift them vp, & without reſting them in any place, to lodge them all at once where one deſireth. It will be needfull to diſpoſe the tables in ſuch a faſhion, that without ſhaking by ſeperated pieces, one may eaſily take them all out, and put them on the skaffolds againe, to make them eaſilie cleane. For by this meanes, pulled out of the skaffolds as drawing tilles one after another, one ſhall ſtrike them againſt the floure, to the end to diſcharge them of filth: afterwards one ſhall ſweepe and bruſh them perfectly well.
            
               So much the more longer that the Wormes liue, ſo much the more ſpace it behoues to giue them, and to rub the tables with wine &c. In meaſure that by age the Wormes increaſe and grow great, they go frō day to day occupying more place; wherefore it is neceſſary to keepe ready freſh tables, to the end to receiue thoſe, which you ſhall ſeperate from the throng, and to put them all at their eaſe, for to fructifie very well together. For it is a thing well experimented, that a few Wormes fedde at large, makes more ſilke then a great number at a ſtraite. You ſhall cauſe the tables to be rubbed with vineger, or with wine before they bee put on, and with ſweet herbes to encourage them. As alſo they are delighted with the ſmell of leekes, garlicke, or onyons, if you accuſtome them to it in their youth; againſt the opinion of thoſe which hold that theſe

ſtrong ſmels hurt, hauing not wel experimented thē, this doubt being ſufficiently cleared by proofe; and you ſhall not only reioyce your Wormes by agreeable ſmelles; but you ſhall ſuccor them in the moſt part of their malladies. Touching which wee will The cauſes of the maladies of the Worms and their remedies.ſpeake of their diſeaſes, and of their remedies.
            The extremities of the colds and heates, the too much or too little feeding; and the feeding them with naughty leaues, are the principall cauſes of the extraordinary malladies of theſe creatures. If they be annoyed by reaſon of cold, one ſhall ſuccor them by warmeth in ſhutting the lodging, as before in perfuming it with frankincenſe and other ſweete matters: to the which perfume ſome addes lard and ſauſages cut in little ſlices, the ſmell alſo of good wine, ſtronge vineger, and Aqua-uitae comfort theſe creatures hauing caught cold. If on the contrarie they are ouercharged with heate, you ſhall recouer them with freſh breath in opening the doores and windowes, for to giue entrance to the ayre and windes, paſſing through the chambers and halles, breathing the inward parts to the great contentment of the Wormes, ſetting them in good liking by this only and little remedie. The lodging being not ſo well diſpoſed as is neceſſary, the Wormes ſhall be caried by tables forth into the ayre, to make them gather breath, halfe an houre before Sunne riſing. The diet is the true means to heale thoſe, which by too much feeding are become diſeaſed; one ſhall giue them nothing for two daies together, the which being paſt, they ſhall be fed very moderately, and a little at once: As alſo little and often it behoueth to giue thē
               
meate, which through famine are become languiſhed, for to reſtore and ſatisfie them, without ouergorging A very dangerous diſeaſe, andthem. The diſeaſe is much more difficult to cure, of thoſe which haue bin fed with ill leaues, as with yellow, ſpotted, or too young. For oftētimes of this, as firſt hath bin ſaid, there happens the flixe, and of the latter the plague moſt aſſuredly. Of this diſeaſe the Wormes becomes all yellow and ſpotted with blacke bruſings; which you perceiuing neuer ſo little, faile not to remoue them diligently into another chamber and ſeparated tables, for to aſſay to ſaue them by good handling, or at the leaſt to ſhunne the contagion from the reſt of the flocke. But hold for This heere incurable.deſperate the healing of thoſe which with the markes aforeſaid, you ſhall ſee to be bathed on the belly, by a certaine humor flowing in that part of their bodies, which you ſhall take from the reſt, as meate for poultry. As perfumes helpe to cure all the maladies of theſe creatures, ſo to remoue them from one chamber to another, is generally healthfull for them, by ſuch change being reſtored to wonted vigor. The Wormes will not fall into any or few of The profit of curious diligence.theſe diſeaſes, if their gouernour handles them with skill and diligence aforeſaid; in which beſides the hazard of loſing all, is ſpared the trouble: being much more eaſie to preuent theſe maladies by foreſight, then to cure them by medicines. At which one ſhall firſt leuell, to the end that by negligence, one be not depriued of the hoped-for benefit of this food. Carefulnes being moſt requiſite in the managing of theſe notable cattell, which conſtraineth them that haue them in charge, not only to be neere them all

the day, but to beſtow a good part of the night, to ſuccour them at all occaſions, the which curiouſlie To driue away Rats, the deſtroyers of our Wormes.one ſhall endeuour. The Mice, Rats and Cats, doe great ſpoile to the troope of our Wormes, when they can come by them, eating them with great appetite as moſt exquiſite delicates. Againſt ſuch tempeſts, for a ſingular remedie, one keepes lights during the night about the Wormes, whereby the inner part of the lodging being lightned, the rattes and cattes goe not but with feare. And are at the laſt chaſed and feared away, by the ſound of little bells, which one rings there. Both with the one and the other one ſhal be fitted, diſpoſing the lampes in the places requiſit, in diuers partes: alſo the bells and other engins making noiſe, put in a place eaſie to remoue them. But all that is but in vaine if often times in the night one goes not round about the cattell; to which purpoſe the lights will ſerue, which lightning the roome, will be a meanes to goe and come eaſily through all. In the meane time, you That no oyle touch the Wormes.ſhal beware that any oyle fal not vpon the Wormes. For there needes but a drop, to offend them much, through the maladies that the oyle engenders them. Preuenting the which, one ſhall not vſe any oyle to watch with, but in lampes faſtned againſt the walles: and for portable light to tend the creatures, tallow, or waxe candels, or of other ſubſtance according to the countries.
            
               To make ready the matter, for to ſpinne on their ſilke. By ſuch managing, both of the foode, and hand, within ſeuen or eight daies following, after the laſt caſting their skinnes, or drowſines, your Wormes will diſpoſe themſelues to pay the expence of their

diet. The which foreſeeing in fit time, you ſhal cauſe to be prepared neceſſarie rods, for the climing vp of the Wormes, to vomit their ſilke, faſtning their webs vnto thē. To aſſemble the Worms (ſo called in ſuch worke) many things are good, but not any greene bowes, for danger to offend the cattell, they waxing freſh, placed in the worke, as they will doe, the time being giuen to raine. The moſt proper matters, are Roſemary, Kneeholme, cuttings of Vines, Broome, ſhoots of Cheſtnut trees, of Okes, Oſiers, Salowes, Elmes, Aſhes; & in ſumme, of all other trees or flexible ſhrubs, hauing not ill ſmelles. In application of the rods, one goes to work diuerſly, according to the ſundrie aduiſes of men. After hauing euened the foot of the rods or branches, to the end ſo much the leſſe to trouble the place, one ſhal ranke them directly, as rankes of columnes equally diſtant a foote and a quarter, little more or leſſe, croſſing the tables from one ſide to other. The feet of the twigs ſhal ioyne to the tables beneath, and the heades ſhall meete the tables aboue, vnder which, their length ſhall bee bended, wherby wil be faſhioned the arches. By ſuch diſpoſition, the ſtages will reſemble, like galleries made of arches, with many ſtages ſurpaſſing one another, as Amphitheaters a thing very pleaſant to behold. The emptie place, betweene the two arches ioyning to the table aboue, ſhall bee filled with the ſprigs of lauender, ſpike, thyme, and the like ſweete ſmelling ſhrubbes; according to the commoditie of the countrie, for to ſerue doubly. For in this intermixing of twigges, the Wormes ſhall haue choiſe of place, firmely to faſten their rich matter, as to that

they are very difficult, going to it fantaſtickly, and there they are as it were perfumed by the agreeable ſent of the ſhrubbes, whereby they trauaile freely in ſuch place to the profit of the worke.
            At the ſeuenth or eight day then, that your Wormes ſhall bee come forth of their laſt change or diſeaſe (ſuch a diſeaſe being verie properlie called a chaunge, through the great ſicknes they then endure, more vehemently then in any other, oftentimes to die) you ſhall remoue them to the tables, ſo furniſhed with twigges without looking to ſhift their places or litter any more. There you ſhall feed them as accuſtomedly, that is to ſay, with all abundance, without denibiting them till then, that you ſhal ſee the moſt luſtieſt Wormes to enter the roods, which is when they take their courſe to get vp; which perceiued by their extraordinarie countenance wandring through the troope, in skattering, without making account of the meate, and a little after you ſhall ſee them to clime by the feete of the twigges, forſaking their foode, going to vomit, or rather to ſpinne their ſilke. From that time you ſhall begin to diminiſh their ordinary, day by day, in the end for to giue them nothing at all; when they ſhall haue vnited and grafted with the twigges, all the troope will haue forſaken the table, or few will faile, none remaining behind but the latter and idle ones. In this time is knowne thoſe which were long a hatching, by climing vp the laſt: being a neceſſary cōſequence, that the firſt comming forth, are the firſt ſpinning. And as there is no great reckoning to bee made of the hatching later; no more behoues it to

make account of the idle Wormes that clime not. Wherefore at the ende of three or foure daies, that the firſt ſhall haue taken the twigges, you ſhall take To gather the idle ones together.away the reſt from al the tables, for to aſſemble them in one, and ſo to nouriſh them till their end. So the forward and the backward Wormes will ſpinne their ſilke: the which they cannot doe fitly when without ſuch diſtinction the latter ſhould caſt themſelues on the worke of the formoſt, with great loſſe, and this apparent daunger, that before theſe had ended their work, the Butterflies of the formoſt by ſuch How long time they beſtow to ſpinne their ſilke.longneſſe, alreadie formed in the codde, ſhould not come forth to the detriment of the enterpriſe. Two or three dayes the Wormes haue to perfect their coddes, bladders, or bottoms, (diuerſly named according to the places) at the end of which they are vtterly finiſhed, as one ſhal know in curiouſly approching neere thē with the eare; For as theſe creatures make ſome little and pleaſing noyſe in feeding, ſo likewiſe doe they make a ſound in faſhioning their coddes; the which noiſe they giue ouer, ending their worke.
            Behold the ſilke made, this is not for all that the end of the labour of the Wormes; for it is by the graine that they end to worke and to liue, finiſhing their life by their deere ſeede which they leaue vs, for to renue themſelues by euery yeere, and by this meanes to conſerue for vs the poſſeſſion of the ſilke as to their heires. Miracle of nature, A Worme to be ſhut vp in his bottom of ſilke, is there transformed into a Butterflie! He imployes ten dayes to that, at the end of other ten dayes he comes forth through a

hole for this effect pierſing the cod, from whēce diſimpriſoning himſelf, he returnes to the view of mē, but that is in his new figure of a Butterflie: males and females accouple themſelues ioynt together, the femall layes her egges or graine; ending ſo their labour with their liues. And that which augments the wonder, is the long abſtinence of this creature, liuing twentie three daies without taking any ſuſtenance, alſo depriued of the light, for the time which hee remaines within his bladder, as in a cloſe priſon.
            
               An admirable creature. But to enter into diſcourſes on the qualities of this animall, to the which are manifeſtly wanting, fleſh, blood, bones, veines, arteries, ſinewes, bowells, teeth, eies, eares, skailes, back bones, prickes, feathers, haires, except on the feete a little fine thrum, reſembling downe, and other things common almoſt to euery earthly, waterie, & airie creature: it would be too much to philoſophiſe, ſuch contemplation rauiſhing humane vnderſtanding, euen in this, that this Worme one of the abiects creatures of the world is ordeined of God to clothe Kings and Princes: in which is found, ſufficient argument to humble themſelues. And this ſame one particularitie is to be marked, that ſhee yeelds the rich ſilke all ſpun, readie to be wounded off, vomiting quite made, the thread; whereof ſhee compoſeth her bottom, with extreame care and affenctionate labour. The which is not communicated neither to wooll, cotten, hempe, nor flax, wherewith men apparrell themſelues; but with skill they muſt prepare them for to bring them to the point to be ſpunne.
            
               
               A ſtrange meane to be provided of Silk-wormes without ſeede. Heere it is to purpoſe to ſhew the ſubtill arte that man hath inuēted, for to repaire the defect of graine and ſeed of Silk-wormes, happening that it ſhould be loſt. A thing drawne from the ſecrets of nature, and found out with great curioſitie, like to the production of Bees; whereof the Auncients haue written (as heretofore I haue ſaid.) In the ſpring-time a young calfe is ſhut vp in a little darke ſtable, & there fed only with the leaues of Mulberries twenty daies, without drinking at all, or eating any other thing during this time; at the end of which, it is killed, and put in a tub there to rot. Of the corruptiō of his body comes forth abundāce of Silk-worms, which one takes with the leaues of Mulberries, they faſtening vno them: the which fed, and handled according to arte and common faſhion, bring forth in their times, both ſilke and ſeed as others do. Some making ſhort the expence and the way of ſuch an inuention, haue drawne this heere. Of the legge of a ſucking calfe, a ſlice waying ſeuen or eight pounds, and laid to putrifie in a freſh celler, within a veſſell of wood, amongſt the leaues of Mulberries, to which the Silke-wormes comming forth of this fleſh, take hold on: from whence being taken, they are handled as a foreſaid. I offer you theſe things vnder the credit of another, in attending that the proofe giues me matter to aſſure you that which it is: Complayning my ſelf in this place of our predeceſſors, with Pliny, as he did of his, in this which they ſaid, that a veſſell of Iuy could not containe wine, and not one of them had experienced it. I repreſent you theſe things, I ſay, for that ſuch creation of Silk-wormes happening to be

true, and thereby finding the aduantage we may be freed from the trouble to ſend to ſeeke the ſeede in Spaine and elſewhere, renuing the care to prouide it euery yeere. If there be queſtion to diſcourſe thereupon, I ſhall ſay that ſuch engendering of Silke-Wormes is not incredible, ſeeing that all corruption is the beginning of generation. We ſee daily, that of putrified things iſſue diuers vermines, according to the diuers qualities of the matters. Of the Bull, and, according to writing, of the Lion, is engendred the Bee: of the Horſe, Hornets: and of humane fleſh, the Serpent. The Auncients hold, that two ſundrie ſorts of Waſpes are engendred of the Horſe and of the Mule; through the diuerſitie of theſe two creatures, as I haue ſaid in the precedent chapter, and of Aſſes, Drones. And whether they be meats, cloathes, houſhold ſtuffes, euen vnto woods, euery where in the land, in the water, and in the ayre, in moiſt places and drie, one findes that nature creates little beaſtes, wormes, and gnats, with ſo much admiration, as the Creator is admirable.
            
               The knowledge of the maturity of the Wormes. Some few daies before the Wormes begin to clime the twigges, to vomit the ſilke, they manifeſt their purpoſe by the brightnes of their bodies, which becomes ſhining and tranſlucent, as grapes waxing Of what colour the ſilke ſhall be. The diſtinction of the ſex of this creature.ripe: by which point one knowes ſomewhat after the colour of their bodies, the colour of the ſilke, which they wil make. Then one marks the Wormes to be diuerſly coloured, neuertheleſſe diſtinctly, with yellow, orange, carnation, white and greene, which are the fiue colours of the ſilke. Likewiſe one diſcernes the males from the females; the pretended

eyes of the Wormes will ſatisfie to ſuch curioſitie: for the colouring of thoſe of the males, is more apparent to black, than that of the females, the which in that part haue but very ſmall markes, & fine ſtreakes. As for the colour of their bodies, according to the The Wormes are of diuers colours.climats one is to be preferred before another. The moſt part of the ſeede of Spaine brings forth white Wormes: and ſuch graine being more worthy than any other in theſe climates, we priſe alſo the whiteſt more then the blacke, or gray, or any other.
            
               To withdraw the ſilke from the twigges and when. After, with the ſame diligence whereby we haue managed our ſilke; finally we muſt reape, ſeeing that this laſt action cannot ſuffer delay without notable loſſe, no more thē any other harueſt of the yeere. The refuſe ſilke is the firſt matter which the Worms vomit, of which they make the foundation of their building. They faſten it firmely with much art betweene the roddes, which loden with theſe rich coddes reſemble exquiſit trees, garniſht with Apricockes, ſommer Paires, and other precious fruites. There one takes the bottoms in perfect ripenes, which is marked by the directions already giuen. To tarry longer then ſeuen or eight daies, to pull them from the twigges, would bee to put them to hazard, to conuert the ſilke into ſleaue, for the leaſure that one ſhould giue the Butterflie to pierce his codde, to the end to go about his ſeed. Wherefore the moſt aſſured ſhall be, to begin within the ſixt day after the climing vp of the Wormes. One ſhall take them off gently, without cruſhing the creature which is within, by that preuenting the ſpots of the bottomes, which happen by their broken bodies,

cōuerting thē into ſo gluie a humor, that afterwards it is impoſſible to diuide and winde off all the ſilke.
            
               The graine for ſeed. Prouiding for the time to come, one ſhall aduiſe to furniſh himſelf with ſeed for the conſeruation of the brood. I haue ſhewen the ſcope of this Worme to be, after hauing weaued the ſilke, to goe to laye her egges, to perpetualize her ſelfe amongſt vs. For which it behoueth, to limit & bound his natural affection, for feare that leauing it to do at pleaſure, inſteed of ſilke, which wee haue of this buſines, wee ſhould haue nothing but ſleaue. Becauſe that the Worme being conuerted into a Butterflie to laye the egges, as I haue ſaid, comes forth of the bottom, andwhich for ſuch cauſe he pierſeth. Being thus bored the threeds of the ſilke are found broken, by conſequent indeuidable, and not to be wonde off, wherby one is conſtrained to carde ſuch matter as wooll, afterwards for to ſpinne it: which by this meanes loſing his gloſſe wherein conſiſteth the chiefeſt bewtie of the ſilke, wanting the ſame is turned into ſleaue. For to preuent the which loſſe, and alſo not to haue need of ſo much ſeede, as the nature of the The ſignes of the worth of the bottoms.Wormes would furniſh vs withall; of one part of the coddes or bottoms, we will ſerue our turnes for graine or ſeede, leauing the other for the winding of the ſilke, as hereafter ſhall bee ſhowne: As for to haue faire corne one chuſeth the beſt eares to ſow; ſo we will chuſe for ſeede, the beſt qualified coddes, without fearing ſo much the preſent loſſe of piercing the bottoms, as to deſire the enſuing profit. For ſuch cauſe let vs ſelect, of the clues or bottoms, the chiefeſt, the greateſt, the hardeſt, the

weightieſt, the ſharpeſt pointed: of carnation or fleſh colour, tokens of value. In ſuch quantitie as one ſhall deſire, according to this reckoning, that an ounce of ſeede commonly iſſues from a hundred females, ſeldome more, by the accoupling of the like number of males. By curious finding out ſome hold that euery femall laies a hundred egges or graines; and therefore an ounce of ſeede to conteine tenne thouſand graines: but for the inequalitie of the ſeedes and waights, that cannot euery where agree, nor in euery ſort of grain. Some for ſparing, put two femals to one male, beleeuing that it ſufficeth: but becauſe of the incertentie of the ſucceſſe, and the great carefulneſſe requiſit in this place, for to couple them together, from time to time, the beſt ſhall be to reſt vpon that which experience hath authoriſed for good, that is, in putting to ſo many males, as females. Of their ſex.The coddes incloſing the male Butterflies, are ſlender, and long; thoſe whereout the females come, are thicke and great in the midſt: and both of them more ſharpe in one place then in the other, agreeing to the figure of an egge. The moſſie ones at both endes, hauing not any point, or very little, are not to be deſired; but rather the race to periſh, for the difficultie that one findes to wind off the ſilke, it being not poſſible, how one ſhould handle them, to wind all the ſilke out of the cawthern, by reaſon of certain ſnarlings which happens in the bottoms which are of this ſhape, (not in others) hindring them to diuide, a thing very conſiderable, both for the quantitie of the ſilke, and qualitie: for neither ſo much ſilke, nor ſo faire will it yeeld, being mingled with

ſuch bottoms as if it came only of the pointed ones.
            
               The meane to gather the ſeed. The coddes ſo choſen, ſhall bee thredded, not in pierſing thē a croſſe, for feare to let them take wind, and conſequētly to make thē vnprofitable, but onelie in paſſing the needle, through the firſt downe, called ſleaue; of which ſhal be made little chaines, each compoſed of ſo many males as femals: One ſhall hang them on wodden pinnes, in a chamber, more coole then hot, neuertheleſſe drie, for the Butterflies at their eaſe to come forth of their coddes, to engender together males and females, and there in dying for company, to lay their egges; ſo ending their liues. It is neceſſarie to helpe a little to the furtherance of theſe Wormes, being then vpon the period of their age, to the end to manage the ſeede well, otherwiſe much of it would be loſt. By quantitie that one ſhall ſee the Butterflies come forth of the bottomes, one ſhall accouple them, male and femall, if already they bee not of themſelues, to which they ſhew themſelues very diligent; and being ioyned together, they ſhall for the laſt time, be ſet to reſt on Wal-nut leaues, readie ſpread vpon a table vnder the coddes, there for to end their worke, the femall laying her egges or grain, on the leaues of Wal-nuts: frō whence afterwardes, although they bee firmely annexed vnto them, yet are they eaſily taken off; for that the leaues being well dried, are eaſily betweene the handes rubbed to powder, and that blowne away with the wind, the ſeede remaines cleane as one deſires. Some with great reaſon, ſpread not Wal-nut leaues vpon a table; but make little bundles, which they hang adioyning to the chaines of coddes; ſeeing

that the femals lay their ſeede more eaſie being hanged ouer the males, then laine flat vpon a table. For to make the Butterflies empty their graine vpon paper according to the vſage of ſome, is not the profit of the work, becauſe one cānot take off the graine but in ſcraping it with a knife, whereby much of it is broken. But yet alſo thoſe goe more ill to worke, which put their Butterflies vpon linnen; for ſo much, that the ſeed faſtening it ſelfe to it very firmely, cannot be taken away, but with loſſe; which for to ſhunne, one is conſtrained to keepe ſuch linnen, til the ſpring time, & then in warming it to make the graine to hatch, and from that ſame to take the Wormes. By ſuch order one cannot vſe the proofe, of wine, nor peiſe the egges to know what quantitie of Wormes you will charge your ſelfe with; by which, confuſion may happen in the feeding them. Neither the leaues of Wal-nut, nor paper, nor linnen, are not ſo proper to receiue the graine comming from the creature, as chamblet, or burato, for that, that vpon ſtuffes, (the graine is aſſuredlie faſtned) ſo is it in like ſort taken away without any violence or loſſe: for it is only done in rubbing gentlie the chamblet, or burato, betweene the handes, by which meanes it is eaſily taken off.
            
               Sleaue. The bottoms which ſhall haue ſerued for ſeede, cannot afterwardes be vſed, but in ſleaue; not becauſe of the ſubſtance which alwaies remaines one; but for the breaking of the thred which hath been cut by the Worme, in making there a hole, to haue paſſage out of the priſon, as hath been ſaid. Of which the Spaniards taking heede ſparing the beſt qualified

coddes, for to be wonde off, employ for ſeede the double, and triple ones, without great loſſe of ſilke, if otherwiſe they bee of good marke. So can they not very well wind them off, becauſe of the multiplicitie of creatures; the which ſpinning their ſilke in common, make the worke very confuſed; whereby they are put in the ranke of the pierced ones for ſleaue. The double and triple ones.The being double or triple is not the fault of the Worme, but rather of luſtineſſe, and ſuppleneſſe. Sometimes alſo it happens by default of the place, which being too much thronged, conſtraines theſe creatures, in vomiting their ſilke to heape it one vpon an other, confuſedly aſſembling two or three Wormes, and more, in one bottome without diſtinction of male or femall; though that ignorantlie ſome ſay, that a double cod cānot cōteine two creatures of a diuers ſex. The negligence of the gouernour cauſeth oftentimes ſuch diſorder, when taking not neere heede at the beginning of the climing of the Wormes, he leaues them to wander where they wil: to which he ſhal looke to, in guiding thē conueniently; The ſhort and idle Wormes.and likewiſe ſhall relieue them which fall to the ground: he ſhall put the ſhort and idle ones into little cornets or coffines of paper, thereby to facilitate their work, guiding them to perfect their bottom: without which diligent curioſitie, many Wormes are loſt, bee it in ſmothering, or in vomiting their ſilke to ill purpoſe, amongſt their litter. Of euery double, or triple bottome, comes forth but one Butterflie, though it haue many within, inſomuch that being not able to bee all ripe at once, the firſt, which comes forth in piercing the cod by

his iſſue, giues vent to the other Butterflies; by which catching colde, they remaine imperfect and die, or when that by their meeting together, their common ripeneſſe and iſſue happens in the ſame point and moment, the which is not ſeene but very rarely.
            
               The winding of the ſilke would not be delayed. For the abundance and goodneſſe of the ſilke, it is to be deſired, that the bottoms bee caſt into the baſon, for to winde them immediately hauing pulled them from the roddes, without any ſtay, ſeeing that ſo freſhly taken, all the ſilke comes off eaſily, & without violēce or any loſſe; the which one cannot hope for of the bottoms kept ſome time, becauſe that the gumme wherewith the Worme faſtens her threeds one againſt another, being dried doth ſo harden the bottome, that one cannot winde it but with great difficultie and loſſe, whereby ſome portion of the ſilke reſts in the baſon, and neuer remaines ſo faire And wherfor
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               as that which is newly and eaſily wonde vp. Beſides by ſuch feſtination, is ſpared the feare that the Butterflies ſhould ſpoile the worke, there being not giuen them the leaſure to bore the coddes for to come forth. But becauſe that within ſeuen or eight daies, one can very hardly winde off all the ſilke of a reaſonable feeding, for the great number of worke men that for that one ſhould employ, one ſhall keep both the one and the other of theſe two waies, that is, in ſetting themſelues a work to winde off the bottomes, ſo ſoone as euer one ſhall perceiue to bee a number of perfect ones, caſting them directly from the twigges into the baſen, hauing firſt pilled and bared them of their ſleaue, without other delay. And

to kill the Butterflies of the reſt which one is conſtrained to keepe, to the intent that the creatures being dead within, the coddes remaine exempt from feare to bee bored, and by conſequent reſerued for good ſilke, may attēd the leaſure of the winder. That The means to kill the Butterflies in the coddes.is done in expoſing and laying the coddes in the ſunne, the heate of which ſtifles the creature in his proper worke: but you muſt vſe a meane, for feare of burning the ſilke. Three or foure times in ſundrie daies the coddes ſhal be ſet in the ſun, & at each time they ſhall remaine two houres before noone, and as much after, to the end that the great heate of that part of the day may readily ſtifle the Wormes, before they be metaphoriſed or changed into Butterflies: which will come to paſſe in ſpreading the bottoms vpon ſheetes, and oftentimes remouing them to make them all feele it, without excepting any from the heate of the ſunne: neuertheleſſe to take heed to the charge, that by too rude handling one bruiſes not the Wormes within the coddes, for feare of ſtayning the ſilke with the matter of their bodies; the which (as hath been ſaid) doth ſo glue together the ſilke, that it is impoſſible afterwards to winde it off. Therefore very ſoftly oftentimes a day one ſhall remoue them from one ſide to another, afterwards they ſhal be heaped warmely together, and wrapped vp in the ſheets, and ſo carried into a freſh chamber, not into a danke celler, as to il purpoſe ſome do. The ſunne failing (as often times it comes to paſſe, that the skie is clouded) you ſhall vſe an ouen moderately heated, as it ſhall be two houres after the drawing of bread; within the which by ſackfuls, one ſhall

put the coddes, which ſhall be laid vpon boords, for feare that the ſtones of the ouens bottom ſhould burne them. There they ſhall remaine an houre, or an houre and a halfe, in reiterating the manner, till that you ſhall know the creatures to bee certainely dead, the which you ſhall be reſolued without great loſſe, in rēding one of the moſt ſuſpectedſt bottoms, for to ſee the inner part. In the meane time you ſhall take heed, not to burne your ſilke by too vehement heate, foreſeeing which, the moſt ſure way ſhall bee to heate the ouen a little at once, and to returne ſo much the oftener, then too much, and ſo haſting loſe all the worke. This ſmothering of the Wormes, or Butterflies already formed, is of great import, for going to it either ignorantly, or retchleſſely, not taking heed whether that the Butterflies ſhould come forth of the coddes, according to their nature, or not being able at all to take the ayre, ſhould remaine in the way, after to be forced to paſſe further, nibbling the inner part of the coddes: of the which little ſilke can come afterwards, and that yet not very wel qualified. Ill comparable to that of the Rats in this point differing, that the Rats gnaw the exterior of the cods, for to eate vp the creature which is there incloſed; and the Butterflies the interior to free themſelues. The bottoms ſo prepared ſhall attend the leaſure of the winder. But this ſhall be no longer then that without delay you may conſerue the ſilke in his naturall beautie, without loſſe of waight: in the one and in the other, being ſo much the more defrauded of it, as more longer the coddes ſhall bee kept. For that euery day the hardnes of the bottoms augmenting.

In like manner is augmented the difficultie of winding it off; wherby the ſilke breaks with diminiſhing the quantitie: and by long keeping, the qualitie is empaired. To theſe loſſes, diligence remedies, ſo that there be not giuen too much time to the bottoms to ouer-harden, the ſilke wil be wonde off well enough: the winding whereof ſhall be continued, without diuerting to other vſes, vntill the laſt bottome. So ſhall you entirely gather from this food both ſilkes and ſleaues, without any loſſe.
            
               To ſort curiouſly the cods, for to winde off the ſilke. This done, the bottoms ſhall be ſorted, ſetting apart the pierced and ſpotted ones, on one ſide, for to make faire ſleaue, as being of the moſt fine ſubſtance: and of the other ſide, the entire, ſimple, and cleane ones to wind off the moſt faire and pure ſilke; of all the which, for a foregoing, one ſhall draw off all the downe in pulling off the out-ſide of the bottoms, of which one ſhall make courſe ſleaue, for that this is the reffuſe and skumme, which the creature vomits at the beginning of his worke.
            
               Of tooles and engines for winding off, and other obſeruations. Of the faſhion of the furnaces, baſens, wheeles or Rices, named at Paris deuidors; & at Tours, windersvp: but how one ought to turne them, if it ſhall bee by the hand, by the foot, or by the water, for the winding off, there is no need to ſpeake of in this place: the work-men almoſt neuer agreeing together, euery one hauing his particular practiſe. Only I will ſay, that the baſens of lead makes the ſilke more pure, than thoſe of copper; becauſe of the ruſt that this mettall is ſubiect vnto, though water remaines in it but a little while, from which the lead is vtterly exempt. That the wheeles ought to bee great for the

forwarding of the worke, the which ſhall be made to winde off two skeanes at once. That the fire of the furnace be of char-coales, or at the leaſt of very drie wood; to the end that the fire bee without ſmoake, as well for the commodity of the winder, as for the bewty of the ſilke, the which through his delicatenes is eaſily blacked in the ſmoak. So is it in the libertie of the work-man, to winde diuerſlie the ſilke according to the workes wherein one will vſe it. But in ſo much that the maſter of the worke principally deſires it, for to ſell and conuert it into money, the beſt ſhall be to do it the faireſt that one can, hauing regard to the facultie of the matter, and the deſire of the buyers.
            
               The taske of the winder. Of the bottoms come of Wormes of a good race, and fed with the leaues of white Mulberries, it ſhall ſuffice that the work-man winds off a pound and a halfe by day Paris weight, little leſſe, for by ſuch limit it will be ſmall enough to be appropriated to all vſes, and for that more vendable, than being groſſer. This ſame ſhall be wonde of the ſingle and beſt bottoms, according to the ſorting aforeſaid, reſeruing the double and ſpotted ones (if one will not mingle thē with the pierced ones, for ſleaue,) to make certaine ſeparated skeanes, that the Merchants take at the ſame price as they do the fine ſilke, ſuch courſe ſtuffe To diſtinguiſh the ſilkes.being profitable to them in ſome workes. But this would bee to intermingle all the ſilke, and by conſequent to debaſe the price, if without diſtinction one ſhould wind off al the bottoms together. The which the Merchants fearing, at the ſight of the groſſe skeanes, buy willingly all the ſilke, by that aſſuring

themſelues not to be any intermixed confuſion, nor fraudulent mingling, in the winding vp. The double and ſoyled ones, are very hard to wind vp, and yet howſoeuer one takes them, they yeeld but courſe ſilke: the tufted ones being alſo in the ſame predicament, as hath bin ſaid, which by reaſon of that you may mingle together. The difficulty of their winding vp ſhall be aſſwaged by ſope, put in the baſon of water with the bottoms; ſope alſo helpes to wind off the old coddes, hardened by time, in mollifying the natural gumme, which holds glued together the threeds of ſilke, the which by this remedy are eaſie enough to manage. The work-man ſhall make two skeanes of ſilke by day, or foure, if to that his wheele and his other skill be appropriated; for that the ſilke ſhewes fairer in little skeans, or skarfes, than in great ones; as that by beſtowing more faſtenings thā they do breakings of the ſilke, but in one only skeane: by this meanes they ſell it for as much as the other; ſeeing that it is the commodity of the Merchāts, which put it in worke, being more proper to be giuen to be wonde in a little, than in a great volume.
            The remainder of the winding which cannot be wonde with the skeanes, as the breakings off of the ſilke, and that which will not bee got off, reſting in the baſon, ſhall be husbanded for to be wrought in tapiſtries, for Carpets, Chaires, Beds, and ſuch like moueables of the houſe; intermingling theſe matters with wooll, hempe, flaxe, cotton &c. As alſo of good ſleaues, with fine ſilke, ſhall bee made ſtuffes, faire and profitable to ſerue for the vſe of the houſe.
            This is the manner to gather the ſilke, vnknowne

of our Aunceſtors, through want of enquiring it out: hauing of long time beleeued, as from the father to the ſonne, that this creature could not liue elſewhere, but in the countries of his originall. But time, the maſter of Arts, hath ſhewen how much the reaſonable ſeeking of honeſt things is worth: frō ſuch curioſitie, being growen the true ſcience to gouerne this cattel, which at this day are managed with as little hazard, as the grounds are ſowed, and Vines plāted, for to haue corne and wine. So often times it comes to paſſe, to finde that which one ſeekes; God bleſſing the labour and trauaile of thoſe which emploie their wits, not only for themſelues, but alſo for the publike benefit.
            Such is the beginning of the Silk-worme, ſuch his gouernment, ſuch the effect and iſſue of his feeding, a creature moſt admirable for many cauſes, whereby not a little is giuen to the conſeruation of his race; when with no expence and ſmall care it is kept during the yeere, as a dead thing, in his ſeaſon for to take againe a new life.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
         
            
            THE PREPARATION OF THE BARKE OF THE White Mulberrie, for to make linnen cloath on, and other workes.
            
            
               THe reuenue of the white Mulberrie, conſiſts not only in the leafe for to haue ſilke, but alſo in the bark, for to make ropes, courſe cloaths, mean, fine, and thinne, as they will, preparing the barke ſo, as ſhall be ſhewen hereafter; by which commodities the white Mulberrie manifeſts it ſelfe, to be the richeſt plant, and of moſt exquiſite vſe, whereof we yet haue had knowledge. Of the leafe of the white Mulberrie, of his profit, of his handling, & the manner of gathering the ſilke, hath been heretofore diſcourſed at large. Heere ſhall be preſented the barke of the branches of ſuch a tree, whereby I will repreſent you the facultie, ſince it hath pleaſed the King to command me to giue to the publique, the inuention to conuert it into cords and linnen, according to the proofes which I haue ſhewen his Maieſtie. And although we be not conſtrained to beg cloaths of our neighbours, (as till now we haue done ſilke) in hauing enough for our prouiſion, yet for that the

maſter ſhall not leaue to imploy this benefit, which God ſo liberally offers him, the ſame being in the Prouinces of this kingdome, where Flax & Hempe are ſo rare, as of ſuch there is more than of the other, it will be found ſo much the more commodious, as the conſtraint will be leſſe to disburſt money, for the buying of ſo neceſſary furniſhments.
            Many exquiſite and rare knowledges are come to light by accident. The Lute an excellent inſtrument of Muſicke, is come of the curioſity of a Phyſition, which making the Anatomy of a Tortoiſe, for to ſee the interior, and placing of his parts, handling of it dried, touched vnawares ſome ſinewes ſtretched within it, the which making an agreeable ſound, by meanes of the hollownes of the ſhell, reſolued by that occaſion to make a new inſtrument, ſince called in Latin Testudo, of the name of the creature. The almoſt miraculous ſcience to graft fruit trees, is proceeded of a ſhepheard, when ſetting vp his bower, he thruſt without thinking of it, a little liue braunch of a tree within the body of another freſhly cut neere the ground, where it taking ſhewed the admirable marriage of theſe two diuers plants afterwards ſo ſought for, and refined by new additions. So it happened to me touching the knowledge of the facultie of the barke of the white Mulberrie. For by the eaſie ſeparation frō his wood, being in ſappe, in hauing cauſed to be made cords▪ (after the imitation of thoſe of the rinde of Tillet, which they make in France, euen at the Louure in Paris) and put to drie at the top of my houſe, were by the windes throwne into the ditch, afterwards were taken forth of the

muddie water, hauing remained there foure daies, and waſhed in faire water, and then vntwiſted, and dried, I ſaw appeare the downe or thrum, the matter of linnen, like to ſilke or fine flax. I made theſe barkes to bee beaten with mallets, to ſeparate the ſheds, which going to duſt, left the gentle and ſoft ſubſtance remaining: the which barke, hetcheld and combde after the manner of hempe and flaxe, was made proper to ſpinne; and in enſuing, hath been wouen and reduced into cloath. More then thirtie yeers afore I employed the barke of the tēder ſhoots of whit Mulberries, to bind graffes in the skutchion, in ſteede of hempe, which they commonly vſe in ſuch delectable buſines.
            Behold the firſt proofe of the value of the barke of the white Mulberrie: the which accident, brought into art, is not to be doubted, but to draw good ſeruice from ſuch inuentiō, the white Mulberrie being repleat with ſo many cōmodities, to the great profit of his poſſeſſor. The barke of Tillet beſides that it ſerues to make ropes, as hath been ſaid, is ſomewhat tractable to be made in clothes: but that is in very groſſe work, as for to ſerue in wind-mill ſayles, and ſuch like things. The nettle yeelds an exquiſit matter, wherof is made fine & delicate cloths: but there is ſo little of it that they cannot make other reckoning of it then for curioſitie. There are alſo certaine other herbes and ſhrubbes yelding thrum or downe, but ſome ſo weake, others in ſo ſmall a quantitie, ſome ſo groſſe, and with ſo great difficultie to bee drawne off, that it is not poſſible to vſe them to any profit, or to very little. It is not ſo of the white Mulberrie,

whereby the abundance of branching, the facilitie of disbarking, the goodnes of Thrumme or Downe proceeding from that, makes this buſineſſe moſt aſſured: yea verily with very ſmall expence the maſter ſhall draw infinit commodities from this rich tree. The worth whereof vnknowne to our anceſtors hath remained interred & buried vntil now, as by the eyes of vnderſtanding it ſhall be knowne, yet better by experiences. But to the end that they may make this buſines durable, that is to ſay, to draw off the barke of the Mulberrie, without offending it, this here ſhall be noted; that for the good of the ſilke, it is neceſſarie to prune, to cut, and diſhead the Mulberries, immediatly after hauing gathered the leaues for the foode of the Wormes; neuertheleſſe according to requiſit diſtinction, as I haue demonſtrated; whence the branches comming of ſuch cuttings, ſhall ſerue for our intention: for that, that being then in ſap (as in other time you muſt neuer put the bil to the trees) they will very eaſily disbark: and this ſhall bee to make profit of a loſt thing, for elſe they ſhould be caſt into the fire. Likewiſe the ſame cuttings cannot but ſerue well; if they loue them no better, for the firſt, to vſe them in fenſings of gardens, Vines &c. where ſuch branches are very proper, for their hard ſnagges, being drie and of long ſeruice, through which durableneſſe they rot not in a great time; from whence finally taken, for their laſt profit ſhall be burnt in the kitchen.
            And becauſe that the diuers qualities of the branches diuerſifie the value of their barkes, whence the moſt fine proceeds frō the tender tops of the trees, the groſſe ones from the great braunches alreadie

hardned, the meane ones from thoſe which are betweene both. Then when they ſhall cut the trees, be it in pruning them, disbranching or diſheading them, the branches ſhall bee ſorted, ſetting apart in bundels euery ſort, to the end that without confuſed mingling all the barks may be drawne off, and handled according to their particular properties. Without delay the ſaid rindes ſhall be ſeparated from the branches vſing the fauour of the ſap, which paſſeth quickly, without which they cannot worke in this buſines. And hauing bundled vp the barkes, of all the three ſortes a ſunder, they ſhall be laide in cleane or foule water, as ſhal be fit three or foure daies more or leſſe according to their qualities and places where they are, the trials whereof ſhall limit the terme, but in what part ſoeuer they bee, the tender and ſmall would be leſſe ſteeped, than the big and great ones; being taken forth of the water, at the approch of euening they ſhall bee ſpread vpon the graſſe in a meadow, if conueniently you may, or elſewhere, expoſed to the the aire, hauing vntide their fardels, for to remaine there all the night, to the end to drink vp the dewes of the morning; then before the Sunne lightes vpon them, they ſhall be heapte together, till the returne of the euening; then put againe in the dew, and taken from thence at Sun riſing, as afore, continuing that ten or twelue daies, after the maner of flaxe, (and in ſum) vntil then, that you ſhall know all the ſtuffe to be ſufficiently watered, by the proofe that you ſhal make in drying, and beating a handfull of each of the three ſorts of the barks, laying thoſe againe in the dew which ſhall not be ready enough,

and withdrawing the reſt, as you ſhal find by the eie.
            It hath been recited here before, that for to haue profit of feeding the Silk-wormes, with leſſe then two or three thouſand trees, the Mulberrie-yarde ought not to be enterpriſed; and that well for to gouerne them, to the purpoſe to haue long ſeruice of them, it is requiſit, that there be lopped euery yeere, the tenth or twelfth part, ſo by that there may be diſheaded, euery yeere, from two hundred and fiftie, to three hundred Mulberries, which will alwaies yeeld betweene three or foure hundred burthens of wood & more. To which quātity, adding that which they take off from the trees immediatly after their diſleauing in pruning & topping them, there will be abundance of braunches, and by conſequent abundance of barke euery yeere, frō which wil ariſe much worke of diuers ſorts, according to requiſit ſortings.
            But yet the maſter of our worke ſhall not reſt here but ſhall plant woodes of white Mulberries, to cut low the moitie of them euery yeere; for ſuch purpoſe diuiding them into two partes, from whence he ſhall haue braunches delicat and young, the barke whereof will bee proper to make fine and exquiſit linnen. And the ſaid woodes will not be onely profitable to furniſh euery yeere, abundance of new barke, but alſo faggoting to burne; and poles for arbors in gardens, and to make hoopes for tubbes and barrels, chuſing for this the greateſt branches. Alſo to giue the leaues for to feede Silk-wormes, gathering them in the beſt aired and ſunnieſt parts of the trees. And for the augmenting of good husbandrie, The 12. chapter in the book of Husbandry.to feede an infinit number of connies, prouided

that the woodes bee incloſed for a warren after the manner before deſcribed. So there will be foure notable commodities, which the maſter ſhall reape from theſe woodes: which for the ſpoyle that the connies may do in disbarking the feet of the trees in winter, as they doe all ſorts of plants, a few excepted, he ſhal not leaue himſelfe vnfurniſht of ſo profitable a beaſt. Wherefore ſomewhat to amend ſuch a fault, helping the connies to meate, it behoueth not but to ſowe oates in certaine places and great allies, which for ſuch purpoſe ſhall bee left emptie in the woods, where the connies may feede during the coldes, by ſo much ſparing the Mulberries: for the ſuccoring of which, beſides, you ſhall cauſe to bee throwne to the connies, the outcaſts of your garden, hay, cuttings of Vines, and other druggeries in winter, then when the ſnowes conſtraines theſe cattell to goe to the trees, for want of other foode. Yet for the fifth commoditie, I will adde here, that the leaues of Mulberries, in what place ſoeuer they bee planted, falling of themſelues to the ground in the end of ſummer, put together in ſome ſeparated loft, taken from thence day by day, and giuen boyled to ſwine, keepes them in good ſtate, beginning to put them into fleſh: the which comes to them, when in enſuing, there fals a good maſt, whereby they grow to the ſuperlatiue degree of fatneſſe.
            I would couch here for the ſixth commodity the Mulberries fruite of theſe trees, ſo much loued of poultrie, for their exceeding ſweetneſſe, if the gathering of the Mulberrie leafe for the Wormes, were not the meanes for vs to make profit: the which

puld from the trees with the leaues, yet greene, long before their maturitie, remaine nothing worth, whereby no certaine account can be made.
            All the which things, bringes to light the worth of the Mulberrie, a tree filled with the bleſſing of God, which in this only plant giues to all ſortes of men, and eſtates, theſe excellent matters, for to furniſh and apparrell thē, according to their affections. The ſoyle proper for the Mulberrie to beare agreeable foode for the Wormes, is that ſame which the Vine deſireth. Wine is healthfull for the Wormes, fortifying, preſeruing and curing their diſeaſes. And as the Vine beginnes to bring forth good wine, in his fifth or ſixt yeere, ſo in like age the Mulberrie begins to beare leaues, very good to nouriſh the creature, an obſeruation heretofore alreadie marked. Hauing made theſe two excellent plants here to march in companie, it ſhall not be to ill purpoſe in continuing to repreſent their ſympathies, to ſay, that the ſpirit of wine, by diſtillation, is conuerted into water of life: So the quint-eſſence of the Mulberrie yeelded in the leafe, is from thence extracted by the Worme, which turnes it into ſilke, the earthly matter remaining in the wood, of the which, yet the moſt digeſted part, yeeldes in the bark, from whence it is taken, as hath been ſeene. But to enter further into the conſideration of ſuch ſecrets of nature, that would bee to ſurpaſſe the limits of my deliberation, which is not to treate in this place but of the barke of the white Mulberrie, for to gather the riches which therein is hidden. So my diſcourſes not diuing to the Center, ſhall reſt themſelues at the Superficiall.
            
               
               
                  By this figure is ſhewed the order, to ranke the tables on the skaffolds, for to lay the leaues on, to feed the Wormes there.
               
               
                  
                  By this figure is ſhewed the manner to place the rods between the tables, for the Wormes to clime vp and ſpinne their ſilke.
               
            
            
               
TO wind off the Silke from the cods you ſhal proceed in this faſhion, that is, to ſet a cawthern in a furnace filled with faire water, the neateſt & cleereſt is beſt, which ſhal be heated til ſuch a degree, that the water becomes bubbled, as though there were ſmal pearles in the middle, caſting vp a little white skum, which it wil do when it is ready to ſeeth; & then you ſhall caſt in your cods or bottoms, which you ſhal remoue and ſtir vp and downe with a little broome, or ſmall buſhes; & if they will not wind eaſily, you ſhall augment your fire, and being begun to wind, if you ſee that they wind eaſily, you ſhall ſlacken it.
            The bottoms winding, the threeds wil catch hold at the ſaid broome, or buſhes, which you ſhall draw out with your fingers the length of halfe a yard and more, till that all the groſſeneſſe of the cods bee wond off, which you ſhal cut off & lay aſide, holding alwaies with one hand all the threeds of your bottoms ioyned, & vnited to one threed, & then according to the ſilke that you deſire to make, you ſhal take of the threeds of the bottoms; that is, if you wil make Organcin, you ſhal take the threeds of ſix bottoms, or if you will make Verone, you ſhall take twelue or fifteene cods, & hauing ioyned & vnited them in one threed, you ſhal put it firſt of all through a wyer ring, appointed for to rank the threeds, which muſt be faſtened againſt the fore-part of a peece of wood, ſet directly vpon the forme, before the round or circle which wee call a bobbin, for that in the top of that peece of wood in a little ſpace that there is, are faſtened two bobbins diſtant one from another two fingers; from the ſaid ring you ſhall draw your threed,

and ſhall croſſe it vpon the ſaid bobbins, which are faſtened there, to no other end, but to twiſt the ſilke, and from the bobbins you ſhall put thorough the ſaid threed aboue in a ring, which is faſtened in the middeſt of a ſtaffe, which goes to & fro as the Turne goes, called a lincet, ſet a croſſe beneath the wheele, and from that ring you ſhall draw and faſten the ſaid threed vpon the wheele, which you ſhal alwaies turne till your skeane of ſilke be wonde vp. It is repreſented in this next figure.
            You muſt note alſo that according to the number of threeds of bottoms, which you haue taken to compoſe your threed, you ſhall continue the ſaid quantitie of cods for your threed, and ſhall alwaies furniſh the like number, when any one ſhall be quite wonde off, or their threed broken, which you ſhall perceiue by the mouing of the bottoms, when the full number ſtirs not, and you ſhal continue that vntill your skeane be made.
            You ſhall alſo be curious to cut the knots which wil be at your bottoms, or threed, to make your ſilke more pure and ſtronge.
            In the winding of the ſilke, ſome put Gumme Arabick in the water, where they caſt the cods to winde off the ſilke, (which they ſay) they doe to the end to make it more pure and gloſſie; but it is for meere deceit, of purpoſe to make it weigh.
            
               
               
                  By this figure is ſhewed the faſhion of the Engine, how to wind off the ſilke from the cods, with the furnaces and cawtherns for that purpoſe.
               
               
                  
                  By this figure is ſhewed the portraits of the cods, and the Butterflies comne forth of them, to engender and lay their egs vpon black Serge, Chamblet, Tammey or ſuch like ſtuffes as hath been ſaid.
               
            
         
      
   