
      
         
            
            
            A true reporte of the laste voyage into the West and Northwest regions, &c. 1577. worthily atchieued by Capteine Frobisher of the sayde voyage the first finder and Generall.
            With a description of the people there inhabiting, and other circumstances notable.
            Written by Dionyse Settle, one of the companie in the sayde voyage, and seruant to the Right Honourable the Earle of Cumberland.
            
            Nil mortalibus arduum est.
            ¶Imprinted at London by Henrie Middleton. Anno. 1577.
         
         
            
            ¶ A RYTHME DECASYLLABIcall, vpon this last luckie voyage of worthie Capteine Frobisher. 1577.
            
               THrough sundrie foming fretes, and storming streightes,
               That ventrous knight of Ithac' soyle did saile:
               Against the force of Syrens baulmed beightes,
               His noble skill and courage did preuaile.
               His hap was hard, his hope yet nothing fraile.
               Not ragged Rockes, not sinking Syrtes or sands
               His stoutnesse staide, from viewing forreigne lands.
            
            
               That Poets penne and paines was well employd,
               His braines bedeawd with dropps of Parnasse spring:
               Whereby renowne deserued he enioyd.
               Yea, nowe (though dead) the Muses sweetly sing,
               Melodiously by note, and tuned string,
               They sound in th'eares of people farre and neere,
               Th'exceeding praise of that approued Peere.
            
            
               A right Heroicall heart of Britanne blood,
               Vlysses match in skill and Martiall might:
               For Princes fame, and countries speciall good,
               Through brackish seas (where Neptune reignes by right)
               Hath safely saild, in perils great despight:
               The Golden fleece (like Iason) hath he got,
               And rich returnd, saunce losse or lucklesse lot.
            
            
               O that I had old Homers worthy witt,
               O that I had, this present houre, his head:
               With penne in hand, then musing would I sitt,
               And our Vlysses valiant venture spread
               In vaunting verse, that when his corps is dead,
               (Which long may liue) his true renowne may rest,
               As one whome God aboundantly hath blest.
            
            
               Abraham Fleming.
            
         
         
            
            ¶To the Right honourable and my singular good Lord, George Earle of Cumberland, Baron Clifford, Lord of Skipton and Vesscie: his humble seruaunt Dionyse Settle, wisheth the fulnesse of all perfect felicitie.
            
               IT both is, and hath beene, (Right Honourable) the bountie of a noble mynde, not to expect remuneration or satisfaction for liberalitie frankly bestowed. It both is, and also hath beene accounted a great vice, to seeme vnthankfull, or at the least not somthing carefull, of whom, when, and how, we should receiue liberalitie. I am not obliuious, neither carelesse, when, and how, your Honour (aboue my expectation) nobly satisfied the request of me your humble seruant. I am most assured, that the vertue of your noble heart expecteth nothing of me, but that your goodnesse might abound to my profite: vppon which occasion, and bicause I would not be accounted ingratefull, I haue both boldly passed the limittes of my duetie, and also vnlearnedly taken vpon me to set foorth some thing worthie notice, in this last voyage of our Capteine and Generall, Maister Martine Frobisher, your Honours worthie Countrie man: vnder whome (as your Honours vnworthie seruant) I was one in the said voyage. By his great diligence, the voyage is worthily finished: whereby



I am persuaded, that he will refell the rehearsall of those opprobrious wordes, namely, that, All euill cōmeth from or hath originall in the North: not onely he, but many worthie subiectes more.
            I haue published this scantling, vnder the noble title of your Honor, to whom I offer the same in dedication: which, though it be not decorated with good learning, apte for the setting foorth of so notable a matter: yet, the same is beautified with good will and trueth. Wherein your Honour, (if it shall so please you) for recreation sake, may vnderstand, what people, countries, and other commodities we haue found out, since our departure from England, which haue not ben knowne before. Thus, presuming vpon hope and assuraunce of your Honours pardon for my bolde attempt herein, I rest humbly at your Lordships commaundement: wishing your time so spent in this world, that you may inioy the felicitie in the worlde to come. Amen.
            
               Your Lordships most humble seruaunt to commaund, Dionyse Settle.
            
         
         
            
            To the Christian Reader.
            
               SVch countries and people, (good Christian Reader) which almost from the deluge, or at the least, so long as anye humane creature hath had habitation on the earth, haue of late yeres, by ye industrie of diligent searchers ben explored: it hath likewise pleased God, yt they should be found out by those people, which for the temperature of their habitatiō, are most apt to atchiue the same. As for example, the Spaniards, the West Indies. Spaine is situated much more neere ye Tropike of Cancer, then other Christian countries be: wherby, the Spaniards are better able to tolerate Phoebus burning beames, then others whiche are more Septentrional thē they. Wherfore, I suppose them the most apte men for the inioying of the habitation of the West Indies: and especially so much, as is vexed with continual heate, or that is agreeable to their temperature, God hath



ben pleased that they, as the most apt people, should both explore & inioy ye same. Semblably, ye Portugals, whose temperature is correspondent to ye Spaniards, God is also contented, that they haue explored Africa, euen through the burning Zone, both the West and South coast, with al ye coast of Asia, vnto the Oriental cape therof, and the Islands adiacent to them bothe wherefore, both for their habitation, and temperature, I account them ye most apt people to atchiue ye same, and to reape the benefite, where about they haue taken no small paines and labor. In like maner, the French men, where ye Spaniards thought ye place not apt for their temperature, discouered Noua Francia, and other places in America: wherfore, I iudge them worthie the commoditie thereof, as people most apt to inioy and possesse the same. Lastly, it hath plesed God, at this present, by the great diligence & care of our worthie Countrieman, Master Martine Frobisher, in the 18. and 19. yeare of oure Queenes Maiesties reigne, to discouer,



for the vtilitie of his Prince and Countrie, other regions more Septentrional, then those before rehearsed: which, from the beginning, as vnknowne till nowe, haue bene concealed and hidden. Which discouerie, I iudge most apt for vs English men, and more agreeing to our temperature, then others aboue rehearsed. I leaue the famous discouerie of Moscouie, and other countries on those partes, (whiche of late yeares haue bene explored by the industrie of other our worthie countrimen) to the diligent Reader: whereby he may consider, that this our countrie, hath fostered vp men of no lesse value and excellencie, then those, which are intituled, The second, thirde, and fourth Neptune. And doubtlesse, hee, by whose endeuour this last discouerie of the world is explored, may bee celebrated as well with the title of Aeolus, as also of Neptune. By whose singular knowledge and cunning, God hath preserued vs in this voyage, from bothe their cruell daungers.
            Thus (Christiā Reader) thou maist perceiue,



that the worlde, of late yeares, hath beene discouered by sundrie regions of this our Europe: which God hath so diuided in the exploring of the same, that it seemeth apt and agreeable to the discouerer, more then to any other, to inioy all such commodities as they yealde and affoorde. Consider also, that Christians haue discouered these countries and people, which so long haue lyen vnknowne, and they not vs: which plainely may argue, that it is Gods good will and pleasure, that they should be instructed in his diuine seruice and religion, whiche from the beginning, haue beene nouzeled and nourished in Atheisme, grosse ignorance, and barbarous behauiour. Wherefore, this is my iudgement, (in conclusion) that who so euer can winne them from their infidelitie, to the perfect knowledge of his diuine institutions and seruice, hee or they are worthie to receiue the greatest rewarde at Gods hands, and the greater benefites from those countries, which he hath discouered. Fare well.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶A true report of Capteine Frobisher his last voyage into the West and Northwest regions, this present yere 1577. With a description of the people there inhabiting.
            
               ON Whitsunday last past, being the 26. of May, in this present yeare of our Lorde God 1577. Capteine Frobisher departed from Blacke Wall
               ▪ with one of the Quéenes Maiesties shippes, called The Aide, of nine score tunne, or there aboutes: and two other little Barkes likewise, the one called The Gabriel, whereof Maister Fenton a Gentlemā of my Lord of Warwicks was Capteine: and the other, The Michael, whereof Maister Yorke a Gentleman of my Lorde Admerals was Captein, accompanied with seuen score gentlemen, souldiers and saylers, well furnished



with victuals, and other prouisiō necessarie for one halfe yere, on this his seconde voyage, for the further discouering of the passage to Cata
                     •
                  a, and other countries therevnto adiacent, by West and Northwest Nauigations: whiche passage, or way, is supposed to be on the North and Northwest partes of America: and the sayd America to be an Islande inuironed with the sea, wherethrough our Merchaunts might haue course and recourse with their merchandize, from these our Northernmost parts of Europe, to those oriental coasts of Asia, in much shorter time, and with greater benefit then any others, to their no little commoditie and profite that doe traffique the same. Oure sayde Capteine and Generall of this present voyage and companie, hauing the yere before, with two little Pinnisies, to his great daunger and no small commendations, giuen a worthy attempt towardes the performaunce thereof, is also prest (when occasion shall be ministred, to the benefite of his Prince and natiue countrie) to aduenture him selfe



further therein. As for this second voyage, it séemeth sufficient, that he hath better explored and searched the commodities of those people and countries, with sufficient commoditie vnto the aduenturers, which in his first voyage the yeare before he had found out.
            Upon which considerations, the day and yeare before expressed, we departed from Blacke Wall to Harwiche, where making an accomplishment of thinges necessarie, the last of Maye we hoysed vp sailes, and with a mery winde the 7. therof we arriued at the Islands called Orchades, or vulgarly Orkney,
               
                  The Islandes Orchades, or Orkney.
                being in number 30. subiect and adiacent to Scotland, where we made prouision of freshe water: in the doing whereof, our Generall licenced the Gentlemen and Souldiers, for their recreation, to go on shoare. At our landing,
                  The Orchadians vpon smal occasion flee their home.
                the people fled from their poore cotages, with shrikes and alarums, to warne their neighbors of enimies: but by gentle persuasions we reclaimed them to their houses. It séemeth they are often frighted with Pirates, or some other enimies, that moueth



them to such souden feare. Their houses are very simplie builded with pibble stone,
                  Simple houses in Orkney.
                without any chimneys, the fire being made in the middest thereof. The good man, wife, children, and other of their familie, eate and sléepe on the one side of the house, and their cattell on the other, very beastly and rudely, in respect of ciuilitie. They are destitute of wood,
                  No wood in Orkney.
                their fire is turffes and Cowe shardes. They haue corne, bigge, and oates, with whiche they paye their Kinges rente, to the maintenance of his house. They take great quantitie of fishe, which they drie in the winde and Sunne. They dresse their meate very filthily, and eate it without salt. Their apparell is after the rudest sort of Scotland. Their money is all base. Their churche and religion is reformed according to the Scots. The fisher men of England,
               
                  Fisher men of England haue daily trafique to Orkney.
                can better declare the dispositions of those people than I: wherfore, I remit other their vsages to their reportes, as yearely repairers thither, in their course to and from Island for fish.
            
               Wée departed herehence, the 8. of Iune,
                  In Iune and Iulie, no night in those West and Northwest regions.
                and followed our course betwéene West and Northwest, vntill the 4. of Iulie: all which time, we had no night, but that easily, and without any impediment, we had when we were so disposed, the fruition of our bookes, and other pleasures to passe awaye the time: a thinge of no small moment, to such as wander in vnknowen seas and longe Nauigations, especially, when both the winds, and raging surges, do passe their common and wonted course. This benefite endureth in those partes not sixe wéekes, whilest the Sunne is néere the Tropike of Cancer: but where the Pole is raised to 70. or 80. degrées, it continueth the longer.
            All along these seas, after we were 6. dayes sayling from Orkney, we met floting in the sea, great Firre trées, which as wee iudged, were with the furie of great floudes rooted vp, and so driuen into the sea. Island hath almost no other wood nor fewel, but such as they take vp vpon their coastes. It séemeth, that these



trées are driuen from some parte of the New found land, with the Current that setteth from the West to the East.
            The 4. of Iulie, we came within the making of Freeseland.
               
                  Freesland.
                From this shoare 10. or 12. leagues, we met great Islands of yce,
                  Islandes of yce.
                of halfe a mile, some more, some lesse in compasse, shewing aboue the sea 30. or 40. fathomes, and as we supposed, fast on ground, where, with oure leade wée could scarse sound the bottome for deapth.
            Here, in place of odoriferous and fragrant smelles of swéete gummes, and pleasant notes of musicall birdes, which other Countries in more temperate Zone do yéeld, we tasted the most boisterous Boreall blasts, mixt with snow and haile,
                  Yce, snowe, and haile in Iune and Iulie.
                in the moneth of Iune and Iulie, nothing inferiour to oure vntemperate Winter: a soudeine alteration, and especially in a place or Paralele, where the Pole is not eleuate aboue 61. degrées: at which height other countries more to the North, yea, vnto 70. degrées, shewe thēselues more temperat than this doth.
            
               All along this coast yce lyeth,
                  Yce defendeth Freesland.
                as a continuall bullworke, and so defendeth the countrie, that those whiche would land there incurre great daunger. Our Generall thrée dayes together, attempted with the shippboate to haue gone on shoare, whiche, for that without great daunger he could not accomplishe, he deferred it vntil a more conuenient time. All along the coast lye very highe mounteines couered with snowe,
                  The shoare of Freesland highe mounteines.
                excepte in such places, where, through the stéepenesse of the mounteines, of force it must néedes fall.
            Foure dayes coastinge along this Land, we found no signe of habitation. Little birdes,
                  Freesland subiect to foggs.
                whiche we iudged to haue lost ye shoare, by reason of thicke fogges, which that countrie is much subiect vnto, came fléeing to oure shippes,
                  Little birdes a signe and token of habitation.
                whiche causeth vs to suppose, that the countrie is both more tollerable, and also habitable within, then the outward shoare maketh shewe or signification.
            From hence we departed the eight of Iulie: and the 16. of the same, we came



within the making of land, whiche land our Generall, the yeare before, had named The Queenes foreland,
               
                  The Queenes Foreland.
                béeing an Island, as we iudge, lying néere the supposed continent with America: & on the other side, opposite to ye same, one other Island called Halles Isle, after the name of the Maister of our shippe,
                  Halles Isle.
                néere adiacent to the firme land, supposed continent with Asia. Betwéene the which two Islandes, there is a large entrance or streight,
                  Frobishers streight.
                called Frobishers streight, after the name of oure Generall, the first finder thereof. This said streight, is supposed to haue passage into the Sea of Sur, which I leaue vnknowne as yet.
            It séemeth, that either here, or not farre hence, the Sea should haue more large entraunce, than in other partes, within the frosen or vntemperate Zone: and that some contrarie tide, either from the East or West, with maine force casteth out that great quantitie of yce, which commeth floating from this coast, euen vnto Freesland, causing that countrie to séeme more vntemperate than others,



muche more Northerly than they are.
            I cannot iudge, that any temperature vnder the Pole, béeing the time of the Sunnes Northerne declination, halfe a yeare together and one whole day, (considering, that the Sunnes eleuation surmounteth not 23. degrées and 30. minutes,) can haue power to dissolue such monstruous and huge yce,
                  Islands of yce comparable to mounteines.
                comparable to great mounteines, excepte by some other force, as by swift Currents and tydes, with the helpe of the said day of halfe a yeare.
            Before we came within the making of these Landes, we tasted cold stormes, insomuch that it séemed, we had chaunged Summer with winter, if the length of the dayes had not remoued vs from that opinion.
            At our first comming, the streightes séemed to be shutt vp with a long mure of yce, whiche gaue no little cause of discomfort vnto vs all: but our Generall, (to whose diligence, imminent daungers,
                  Capteine Frobisher his speciall care an
                        •
                     
                  
                and difficult attemptes séemed nothing,



in respect of his willing mind, for the commoditie of his Prince and countrie,) with two little Pinnises prepared of purpose, passed twise thoroughe them to the East shoare, and the Islands therevnto adiacent: and the shippe, with the two barks, lay off and on something further into the sea, from the daunger of the yce.
            Whilest he was searching the countrie néere the shoare,
                  The order of the people appearing on shoare.
                some of the people of the countrie shewed themselues, leaping and dauncing, with straunge shrikes and cryes, whiche gaue no little admiration to our men. Our Generall desirous to allure them vnto him by faire meanes, caused kniues, & other thinges, to be proferred vnto them, whiche they would not take at our handes: but béeing layd on the ground, & the partie going away, they came and tooke vp, leauing something of theirs to counteruaile ye same. At the length, two of them leauing their weapons, came downe to our Generall and Maister, who did the like to them, commaunding the companie



to stay, and went vnto them: who, after certeine dumbe signes and mute congratulations, began to lay handes vpon them, but they deliuerly escaped, and ranne to their bowes and arrowes,
                  Fierce and bould people.
                and came fiercely vppon them, (not respecting the rest of our companie, which were readie for their defence) but with their arrowes hurt diuerse of them: we tooke the one, and the other escaped.
                  One taken.
               
            
            Whilest our Generall was busied in searching the countrie and those Islands adiacent on the East shoare, the ship and barckes hauing great care, not to put farre into the sea from him, for that he had small store of victuals, were forced to abide in a cruell tempest, chancing in the night, amongst and in the thickest of the yce, which was so monstruous, that euen the least of a thousand had béene of force sufficient, to haue shiuered oure shippe and barkes into small portions, if God (who in all necessities, hath care vpon the infirmitie of man) had not prouided for this our extremitie a sufficient remedie, through the light of the night,



whereby we might well discerne to flée from such imminent daungers, whiche wée auoyded with 14. Bourdes in one watch the space of 4. houres. If we had not incurred this danger amongst these monstrous Islandes of yce, wée should haue lost our Generall and Maister, and the most of our best sailers, which were on the shoare destitute of victualls: but by the valure of our Maister Gunner,
                  Richard Coxe Maister Gunner.
                being expert both in Nauigation and other good qualities, we were all content to incurre the dangers afore rehearsed, before we would, with oure owne safetie, runne into the Seas, to the destruction of oure said Generall and his companie.
            The day following, being the 19. of Iulie, oure Capteine returned to the shippe, with good newes of great riches, which shewed it selfe in the bowelles of those barren mounteines, wherewith we were all satisfied. A souden mutation. The one parte of vs being almost swallowed vp the night before, wt cruell Neptunes force, and the rest on shoare,



taking thought for their gréedie paunches, how to find the way to New found land:
                  New found land.
                at one moment we were all rapt with ioye, forgetting, both where we were, and what we had suffred. Behold the glorie of man, to night contemning riches, and rather looking for death than otherwise: and to morrowe deuising howe to satisfie his gréedie appetite with Golde.
            Within foure days after we had ben at the entraunce of the Streightes, the Northwest and West windes dispersed the yce into the Sea, and made vs a large entrance into the Streights, that without any impediment, on the 19. of Iulie, we entred them, and the 20. therof oure Generall and Maister, with great diligence, sought out and sounded the West shoare, and found out a fayre Harborough for the ship and barkes to ride in, and named it after our Maisters mate, Iackmans sound,
               
                  Iackmans sound.
                and brought the ship, barkes, and all their companie to safe anchor, except one man, whiche dyed by Gods visitation.
            
               Who so maketh Nauigations to these contries, hath not only extreme winds, and furious Seas,
                  Yce needefull to be regarded of seafaring men.
                to encounter withall, but also many monstrous and great Islandes of yce: a thing both rare, wonderfull, and greatly to be regarded.
            We were forced, sundrie times, while the ship did ride here at anchor, to haue continuall watch,
                  Great watche with men and boates for yce indaungering the ship at anchor.
                with boates and men readie with Halsers, to knit fast vnto such yce, which with the ebbe and floud were tossed to and fro in the Harboroughe, and with force of oares to hale them away, for indaungering the ship.
            Our Generall, certeine dayes searched this supposed continent with America, and not finding the commoditie to aunswere his expectation, after he had made tryall thereof, he departed thence with two little barkes, and men sufficient, to the East shoare, being the supposed continent of Asia, & left the ship with most of the Gentlemen, Souldiers, and Saylers, vntill such time as he, eyther thought good to send, or come for them.
            The stones of this supposed continent



with America,
               
                  Stones glister with sparckles like Golde.
                be altogether sparkled, and glister in the Sunne like Gold: so likewise doth the sande in the bright water,
                  A common Prouerbe.
                yet they verifie the olde Prouerbe: All is not golde that glistereth
                     •
                  .
            
            On this West shoare we found a dead fishe floating, whiche had in his nose a horne streight & torquet, of lengthe two yardes lacking two ynches, being broken in the top, where we might perceiue it hollowe, into which some of our Saylers putting Spiders, they presently dyed. I sawe not the tryall hereof, but it was reported vnto me of a trueth: by the vertue whereof,
                  The Sea Vnicorne.
                we supposed it to be the sea Unicorne.
            After our Generall had founde out good harborough for the Ship and Barkes to anchor in: and also suche store of Golde oare as he thought him selfe satisfied withall, he sent backe oure Maister with one of the Barkes, to conducte the great Ship vnto him, who coasting along the West shoare, perceiued a faire harborough, and willing to sound the same, at the enterance thereof they



espyed two tentes of Seale skinnes.
            At the sight of oure men, the people fled into the mounteines: neuerthelesse, our sayde Maister went to their tents, and left some of our trifles, as Kniues, Bels, and Glasses, and departed, not taking any thing of theirs, excepte one Dogge to our Shippe.
            On the same day, after consultation had, we determined to sée, if by fayre meanes we could eyther allure them to familiaritie, or otherwise take some of them, and so atteine to some knowlege of those men, whome our Generall lost the yeare before.
            At our comming backe againe, to the place where their tentes were before,
                  A craftie people.
                they had remoued their tentes further into the said Bay or Sound, where they might, if they were driuen from the land, flee with their boates into the sea. Wee parting our selues into two companies, and compassing a mounteine, came soudeinly vppon them by land, who espying vs, without any tarying fled to their boates, leauing the most



part of their oares behind them for hast, and rowed downe the Bay, where our two Pinisses met them, & droue them to shoare: but, if they had had all their oares, so swift are they in rowing, it had bene lost time to haue chased them.
            When they were landed,
                  A fierce assault of a few.
                they fiercely assaulted oure men with their bowes and arrowes, who wounded three of them with our arrowes: and perceyuing them selues thus hurt,
                  Desperate people.
                they desperately leapt off the Rocks into the Sea, and drowned them selues: which if they had not done, but had submitted them selues: or if by any meanes we could haue taken them aliue, (being their enimies as they iudged) we would both haue saued them, and also haue sought remedie to cure their woundes receiued at our handes. But they, altogether voyde of humanitie,
                  Ignoraunt what mercie meaneth.
                and ignorant what mercy meaneth, in extremities looke for no other then death: and perceiuing they should fall into our hands, thus miserably by drowning rather desired death, then otherwise to be saued by vs:



the rest, perceiuing their fellowes in this distresse, fled into the highe mounteines.
                  Two women taken and a childe.
                Two women, not being so apt to escape as the men were, the one for her age, and the other being incombred with a yong childe,
                  An olde woman a supposed Diuell or, Witch.
                we tooke. The olde wretch, whome diuers of oure Saylers supposed to be eyther a Diuell, or a Witche, plucked off her buskins, to sée, if she were clouen footed, and for her ougly hewe and deformitie, we let her goe: the young woman and the childe, we brought away. We named the place where they were slayne, Bloudie point: and the Bay or Harborough,
                  Bloudie Point. Yorks sound.
                
               Yorkes sound, after the name of one of the Capteines of the two Barkes.
            Hauing this knowledge, both of their fiercenesse and crueltie, and perceiuing that fayre meanes,
                  Faire meanes not able to allure them to familiaritie.
                as yet, is not able to allure them to familiaritie, we disposed our selues, contrarie to our inclination, something to be cruel, returned to their tentes, and made a spoyle of the same. Their riches are neyther Gold, Siluer, or precious Draperie, but their sayde



tentes and boates,
                  Boates of skinnes.
                made of the skinnes of red Deare and Seale skinnes: also, Dogges like vnto Woolues, but for the most part black, with other trifles, more to be wondred at for their strangenesse, then for any other commoditie néedeful for our vs
                  •
               .
            Thus returning to our Ship,
                  Oure departure from the West shoare.
                the 3, of August, we departed from the West shoare, supposed firme with America, after we had anchored there 13. dayes: and so, the 4. thereof, we came to our Generall on the East shoare, and anchored in a fayre Harborough named Anne Warrwickes sound, vnto whiche is annexed an Islande both named after the Countesse of Warrwicke,
                  The countesse of Warwicks sound & Isle.
                
               Anne Warrwickes sound and Isle.
            
            In this Isle, our Generall thought good, for this voyage,
                  Oure fraight surmounteth the charges o
                        •
                      the first and second voyage, with sufficient interest to the ve
                        ••
                     turers.
                to frayght both the Ship and Barkes, with suche Stone or Gold minerall, as he iudged to counteruaile the charges of his first, and this his second Nauigation to these contries, wt sufficient interest to ye venturers, wherby they might bothe be satisfied for this



time, and also in time to come, (if it please God and our Prince,
                  Riches long concealed presently discouered by capteine Frobisher.
               ) to exspect a much more large benefite, out of the bowells of those Septentrionall Paralels, which long time hath concealed it self, til at this present, through the wonderfull diligence, & great danger of our Generall and others, God is contented with the reuealing thereof. It riseth so aboundantly, that from the beginning of August, to the 22. thereof, (euery man following the diligence of our General) we raysed aboue grounde 200. tunne,
                  By Capteine Frobishers diligence other men incouraged to labor.
                whiche we iudged a reasonable fraight for the Shippe and two Barkes, in the sayde Anne Warrwicks Isle.
            
            In the time of our abode here, some of the countrie people,
                  The countrie people shewe them selues vnto vs.
                came to shewe them selues vnto vs, sundrie times on ye maine shoare, néere adiacent to the sayd Isle. Our Generall, desirous to haue some newes of his men,
                  The care which our General had to heare of his men that were lost.
                whome he lost the yeare before, with some companie with him repayred with the Ship boat, to common, or signe with them for familiaritie, wherevnto he is persuaded



to bring them. They, at the first shewe, made tokens,
                  Signes for penne, yncke, and paper.
                that thrée of his fiue men were aliue, and desired penne, ynck, and paper, and that within thrée or foure dayes, they would returne, and (as we iudged) bring those of our men, whiche were liuing, with them.
            They also made signes or tokens of their King, whom they called Cacough,
               
                  Cacough their King.
                and how he was carried on mens shoulders, and a man farre surmounting any of our companie, in bignesse and stature.
            With these tokens and signes of writing, penne, yncke, 
                  •
               nd paper was deliuered them, which they woulde not take at our handes: but being layde vpon the shoare, and the partie gone away, they tooke vp: which likewise they doe, when they desire any thing for chaunge of theirs,
                  Their vsage in traffique or exchange.
                laying for that which is left, so much as they think wil coūteruaile the same, and not comming neare together. It séemeth they haue bene vsed to this trade or traffique, with some other people adioyning, or not farre distant



from their Countrie.
            
               
                  The people shewe them selues againe on firme land.
               After 4. dayes, some of them shewed themselues vpon the firme land, but not where they were before. Our General, very glad thereof, supposing to heare of our men, went from the Islande, with the boate, and sufficient companie with him. They séemed very glad, and allured him,
                  Their craft to betray some of vs.
                about a certeine point of the land: behind which they might perceiue a companie of the craftie villains to lye lurking, whome our Generall woulde not deale withall, for that he knewe not what companie they were, and so with fewe signes dismissed them, and returned to his companie.
            
               
                  The people sh
                        •
                     we them selues the third time.
               An other time, as our said Generall was coasting the contrie, with two litle Pinisses, whereby at oure returne hée might make the better relation thereof, thrée of the craftie villains, with a white skin allured vs to them. Once againe, our Generall, for yt he hoped to heare of his men, went towardes them: at oure comming neere the shoare, wheron they were,
                  A number of t
                        •
                     em hidden behind stones to betray vs.
                we might perceiue a number of



them lie hidden behinde great stones, & those thrée in sight labouring by al meanes possible, that some woulde come on land: & perceyuing wée made no hast by words nor friendly signes, which they vsed by clapping of their handes,
                  Their firste meanes to allure vs to shoare.
                and béeing without weapon, and but thrée in sighte, they sought further meanes to prouoke vs therevnto. One alone layd flesh on the shoare,
                  Their seconde meanes.
                whiche we tooke vpp with the Boate hooke, as necessarie victualls for the relieuing of the man, woman, & child, whom we had taken: for yt as yet, they could not digest oure meate: whereby they perceiued themselues deceiued of their expectation, for all their craftie allurements. Yet once againe, to make (as it were) a full shewe of their craftie natures, and subtile sleightes,
                  Their thirde and craftiest allurement.
                to the intent thereby to haue intrapped and taken some of our men, one of them counterfeyted himselfe impotent and lame of his legges, who seemed to descend to the water side, with great difficultie: and to couer his crafte the more, one of his fellowes came downe with



him, and in such places, where he séemed vnable to passe, hée tooke him on his shoulders, set him by the water side▪ and departed from him, leauing him (as it should séeme) all alone,
                  A craftie counterfet villaine.
                who playing his counterfeite pageant very well, thought thereby to prouoke some of vs to come on shoare, not fearing, but that any one of vs might make oure partie good with a lame man.
            Our Generall, hauing compassion of his impotencie,
                  Compassion to cure a craftie lame man.
                thought good (if it were possible) to cure him therof: wherfore, hée caused a souldiour to shoote at him with his Caleeuer, which grased before his face. The counterfeite villeine deliuerly fled, without any impediment at all, and gott him to his bowe and arrowes, and the rest from their lurking holes, with their weapons, bowes, arrowes, slings, and dartes. Our Generall caused some Caléeuers to be shot off at them,
                  Some hurt with our shot.
                whereby some being hurt, they mighte hereafter stand in more feare of vs.
            This was all the aunswere, for this



time, wée could haue of our men, or of our Generalls letter.
                  By these craftie trickes the rest of their life is easy to be iudged.
                Their craftie dealing, at these thrée seuerall times, being thus manifest vnto vs, maye plainely shewe, their disposition in other thinges to be correspondent. We iudged, that they vsed these stratagemmes, thereby to haue caught some of vs, for the deliuering of the man, woman, & child whome we haue taken.
            They are men of a large corporature, and good proportion:
                  Their stature and making.
                their colour is not much vnlike the Sunne burnte Countrie man, who laboureth daily in the Sunne for his liuing.
            They weare their haire somethinge long, and cut before,
                  Their apparel as wel women as men.
                either with stone or knife, very disorderly. Their women weare their haire long, and knit vp with two loupes, shewing forth on either side of their faces, and the rest foltred vp on a knot. Also, some of their women race their faces proportionally, as chinne, chéekes, and forehead, and the wristes of their handes, wherevpon they lay a colour, which continueth darke azurine.
            
               They eate their meate all rawe, both fleshe,
                  Their meate, drinke, and other necessaries.
                fishe, and foule, or something perboyled with bloud & a little water, whiche they drinke. For lacke of water, they wil eate yce, that is hard frosen, as pleasantly as we will doe Sugar Candie, or other Sugar.
            If they, for necessities sake, stand in néede of the premisses,
                  They eate the grasse whiche groweth in that countrie.
                such grasse as the countrie yéeldeth they plucke vppe, and eate, not deintily, or salletwise, to allure their stomaches to appetite: but for necessities sake, without either salt, oyles, or washing, like brutish beasts deuoure the same.
                  Barbarous behauiour.
                They neither vse table, stoole, or table cloth for comelinesse: but when they are imbrued with bloud, knuckle déepe, and their kniues in like sort, they vse their tongues as apt instruments to licke them cleane: in doeing whereof, they are assured to loose none of their victuals.
            They franck or kéep certeine doggs, not much vnlike Wolues,
                  Dogges like vnto wolues,
                whiche they yoke together, as we do oxen and horses, to a sled or traile: and so carrie their necessaries



ouer the yce and snowe, from place to place: as the captiue, whom we haue, made perfecte signes. And when those Dogges are not apt for the same vse:
                  They eate dogges flesh.
                or when with hunger they are constreyned, for lacke of other victuals, they eate them: so that they are as néedefull for them, in respect of their bignesse, as our oxen are for vs.
            They apparell themselues in the skinnes of such beastes as they kill, sewed together with the sinewes of them.
                  Sinewes of beasts seruing them in place of thread.
                All the fowle which they kill, they skin, and make thereof one kinde of garment or other, to defend them from the cold.
            They make their apparell with hoods and tailes, which tailes they giue,
                  Hoodes and tailes to their apparell.
                when they thinke to gratifie any friendshippe shewed vnto them: a great signe of friendshippe with them. The men haue them not so syde as the women.
            The men and women weare their hose close to their legges,
                  Their hose, and how they are worne.
                from the wast to the knée, without any open before, as well the one kinde as the other. Uppon their legges, they weare hose of lether,



with the furre side inward, two or thrée paire on at once, and especially the women. In those hose, they put their kniues, néedles, and other thinges néedefull to beare about.
                  Their gartering.
                They put a bone within their hose, whiche reacheth from the foote to the knée, wherevpon they drawe their said hose, and so in place of garters, they are holden from falling downe about their féete.
            They dresse their skinnes very softe and souple with the haire on. In cold weather or Winter, they weare ye furre side inward: and in Summer outward. Other apparell they haue none, but the said skinnes.
            Those beastes, flesh, fishes, and fowles,
                  Their chiefe riches.
                which they kil, they are both meate, drinke, apparel, houses, bedding, hose, shooes, thred, saile for their boates, with many other necessaries, whereof they stande in néede, and almost all their riches.
            Their houses are tentes, made of Seale skinns,
                  Their houses of Seale skinnes and Firre.
                pitched with foure Firre quarters, foure square, méeting at the



toppe, and the skinnes sewed together with sinowes, and layd therevppon: so pitched they are, that the entraunce into them, is alwayes South, or against the Sunne.
            They haue other sortes of houses, whiche wée found, not to be inhabited, which are raised with stones and What bones, and a skinne layd ouer them, to withstand the raine, or other weather: the entraunce of them béeing not much vnlike an Quens mouth, whereto, I thincke, they resort for a time, to fishe, hunt, and fowle, and so leaue them for the next time they come thether againe.
            Their weapons are Bowes,
                  Their weapons of defence.
                Arrowes, Dartes, and Slinges. Their Bowes are of a yard long of wood, sinewed on the back with strong veines, not glued too, but fast girded and tyed on. Their Bowe stringes are likewise sinewes. Their arrowes are thrée péeces, nocked with bone, and ended with bone, with those two ends, and the wood in the middst, they passe not in lengthe halfe a yard or little more. They are f
                  •
               
               thered



with two fethers, the penne end being cutte away, and the fethers layd vppon the arrowe with the broad side to the woode: in somuch that they séeme, when they are tyed on, to haue foure fethers.
                  Three sortes of heades to their arrowes.
                They haue likewise thrée sortes of heades to those arrowes: one sort of stone or yron, proportioned like to a heart: the second sort of bone, much like vnto a stopte head, with a hooke on the same: the thirde sort of bone likewise, made sharpe at both sides, and sharpe pointed. They are not made very fast, but lightly tyed to, or else set in a nocke, that vppon small occasion, the arrowe leaueth these heades behinde them: and they are of small force, except they be very néere, when they shoote.
            
               
                  Two sortes of dartes.
               Their Darts are made of two sorts: the one with many forkes of bone in the fore ende, and likewise in the middest: their proportions are not muche vnlike our toasting yrons, but longer: these they cast out of an instrument of wood, very readily. The other sorte is greater then the first aforesayde, with a



long bone made sharp on both sides, not much vnlike a Rapier, which I take to be their most hurtfull weapon.
            They haue two sorts of boates,
                  Two sortes of Boates made of Leather.
                made of Lether, set out on the inner side with quarters of wood, artificially tyed together with thongs of the same: the greater sort are not much vnlike our Wherries, wherein sixtéene or twentie men may fitte: they haue for a sayle, drest the guttes of such beastes as they kyll, very fine and thinne, which they sewe together: the other boate is but for one man to sitte and rowe in, with one oare.
            Their order of fishing, hunting, and fowling, are with these sayde weapons:
                  They vse to fowle, fish, & hunt.
                but in what sort, or how they vse them, we haue no perfect knowledge as yet.
            I can not suppose their abode or habitation to be here,
                  It is to be supposed that their inhabiting is elsewhere.
                for that neither their houses, or apparell, are of no such force to withstand the extremitie of colde, that the countrie séemeth to be infected with all: neyther doe I sée any signe likely to performe the same.
            Those houses, or rather dennes,



which stand there, haue no signe of footway, or any thing else troden, whiche is one of the chiefest tokens of habitation. And those tents, which they bring with them,
                  Their tentes are moueable from place to place.
                when they haue sufficiently hunted and fished, they remoue to other places: and when they haue sufficiently stored them of suche victuals, as the countrie yeldeth, or bringeth foorth, they returne to their Winter stations or habitations. This coniecture do I make, for the infertilitie, whiche I perceiue to be in that countrie.
            They haue some yron, whereof they make arrowe heades,
                  Their vse of yron.
                kniues, and other little instrumentes, to woorke their boates, bowes, arrowes, and dartes withal, whiche are very vnapt to doe any thing withall, but with great labour.
            It seemeth, that they haue conuersation with some other people, of whome, for exchaunge, they should receiue the same. They are greatly delighted with any thinge that is brighte,
                  VVherin they delight.
                or giueth a sound.
            What knowledge they haue of God,



or what Idol they adore, wée haue no perfect intelligence. I thincke them rather Anthropophagi,
               
                  Anthropophagi.
                or deuourers of mans fleshe, then otherwise: for that there is no flesh or fishe, which they finde dead,
                  A filthie feeding.
                (smell it neuer so filthily) but they will eate it, as they finde it, without any other dressing. A loathsome spectacle, either to the beholders, or hearers.
                  A loathsome spectacle.
               
            
            There is no maner of créeping beast hurtful, except some Spiders (which, as many affirme,
                  Signes of gold aure.
                are signes of great store of Golde:) and also certeine stinging Gnattes, which bite so fiercely, that the place where they bite,
                  Stinging Gnattes.
                shortly after swelleth, and itcheth very sore.
            They make signes of certeine people,
                  Signes of gold from other people.
                that weare bright plates of Gold in their forheads, and other places of their bodies.
            The Countries,
                  Description of the countries.
                on both sides the streightes, lye very highe with roughe stonie mounteynes, and great quantitie of snowe thereon. There is very little plaine ground, and no grasse,
                  No grasse, bu
                        •
                      like mosse.
                except a litle, whiche is much like vnto mosse that



groweth on soft ground, such as we gett Turfes in.
                  A Countrie that yeeldeth nothing with roote, fitt for the vse of Man.
                There is no wood at all. To be briefe, there is nothing fitte, or profitable for ye vse of man, which that Countrie with roote yéeldeth, or bringeth forth: Howbeit, there is great quantitie of Deere, whose skinnes are like vnto Asses,
                  Deere with skinnes like Asses▪
                  
                their heads or hornes doe farre exceed, as wel in length as also in breadth, any in these oure partes or Countrie: their féete likewise, are as great as oure oxens, whiche we measured to be seuen or eight ynches in breadth. There are also Hares,
                  Hares, Wolues, & fishing Beares.
                Wolues, fishing Beares, and Sea foule of sundrie sortes.
            As the Countrie is barren and vnfertile, so are they rude and of no capacitie to culture the same, to any perfection: but are contented by their hunting, fishing, and fowling, with rawe flesh and warme bloud, to satisfie their gréedie panches, whiche is their onely glorie.
            There is great likelyhood of Earthquakes,
                  A signe of Earthquakes or thunder.
                or thunder: for that huge and monstruous mounteynes, whose greatest



substaunce are stones, and those stones so shaken with some extraordinarie meanes, that one is separated from another, whiche is discordant from all other Quarries.
            There are no riuers,
                  No riuers, but such as the Sunne doeth cause to come of snowe.
                or running springes, but such, as through the heate of the Sunne, with such water as descendeth from the mounteines and hills, whereon great driftes of snowe doe lie, are ingendred.
            It argueth also, that there should be none: for that the earth,
                  A probabilitie, that there should be neither spring or riuers in the ground.
                which with the extremitie of the Winter, is so frosen within, that that water, whiche should haue recourse within the same, to mainteine Springes, hath not his motion, whereof great waters haue their originall,
                  Springes the original of great waters.
                as by experience is seene otherwhere. Such valleies, as are capable to receiue the water, that in the Summer time, by the operation of the Sunne, descendeth from great abundance of snow, whiche continually lyeth on the mounteines, and hath no passage, sinketh into the earth, and so vanisheth awaye, without



any runnell aboue the earth, by which occasion, or continual standing of the said water, the earth is opened, and the great frost yeldeth to the force thereof, whiche in other places, foure or fiue fathoms within the ground,
                  The stones frosen within the earth 4. or 5. fathoms.
                for lacke of the said moysture, (the earth, euen in the very Summer time,) is frosen, and so combineth the stones together, that scarcely instruments, with great force, can vnknitte them.
            Also, where the water in those vallies can haue no such passage away, by the continuaunce of time, in such order as is before rehearsed, the yearely descent from the mounteines, filleth them ful, that at the lowest banck of the same, they fall into the next vallie, and so continue, as fishing Pondes or Stagnes in the Summer time full of water, and in the Winter hard frosen: as by skarres that remaine thereof in Summer,
                  The heate in Summer not comparable to the cold in Winter.
                may easily be perceiued: so that, the heate of Summer, is nothing comparable, or of force, to dissolue the extremitie of colde, that commeth in Winter.
            
               Neuerthelesse, I am assured,
                  Springes vnder the force of the frost within the earth.
                that belowe the force of the frost, within the earth, the waters haue recourse, and emptie themselues out of sighte into the sea, which through the extremitie of the frost, are constreyned to doe the same,
                  The earth by occasion of frost kept the warmer.
                by which occasion, the earth within is kept the warmer, and springes haue their recourse, which is the onely nutriment of Gold and Minerals within the same.
                  Springs nourish gold.
               
            
            There is much to be said of the commodities of these Countries, which are couched within the bowels of the earth, which I let passe till more perfect triall be made thereof.
            Thus coniecturing, till time,
                  An end of cō
                     iecturing till further trueth and triall.
                with the earnest industrie of our Generall and others (who by al diligence remaine prest to explore. the truth of that which is vnexplored, as he hath to his euerlasting praise found out that whiche is like to yéelde an innumerable benefite to his Prince & countrie:) offer further triall, I conclude.
            The 23. of August,
                  Shippes satisfied with burthen, but mens mindes not contented.
                after wée had satisfied our mindes with frayght sufficient,



for oure vessels, though not our couetous desires, with such knowledge of the countrie people and other commodities as are before rehearsed, the 24. therof wée departed therehence:
                  Our departure from these Countries.
                the 17. of September we fell with ye lands end of England, and so to Milford hauen, from whence our General rode to the Court, for order, to what port or hauen to conduct the shippe.
            We lost our two Barkes in the way homeward,
                  Howe, and when, we lost our 2. Barks, which God neuerthelesse 
                        •
                     estored.
                the one, the 29. of August, the other, the 31. of the same moneth, by occasion of great tempest and fogge. Howbeit, God restored the one to Bristowe, and ye other making his course by Scotland to Yermouth. In this voyage wée lost two men, one in the waye by Gods visitation, and the other homewarde cast ouer borde with a surge of the sea.
            
               J Could declare vnto your Honour, the Latitude and Longitude of such places and regions,
                  The conclusion.
                as wée haue béene at, but not altogether so perfect as our maisters and others, with many circumstances



of tempests and other accidents incident to sea faring men, which séeme not altogether straunge, I let passe to their reportes as men most apte to sett forth and declare the same. I haue also left the names of the countries on both the shoares vntouched, for lacke of vnderstanding the Peoples language: as also for sundrie respectes, not néedfull as yet to be declared.
            Countries new explored, where commoditie is to be loked for, doe better accord with a new name giuen by the explorers, then an vncerteine name by a doubtfull Authour.
            Our General named sundrie Islands, Mounteines, Capes, and Harboroughs after the names of diuers Noble men, and other gentlemen his friends, as wel on the one shoare, as also on the other: not forgetting amongest the reste your Lordship: whiche hereafter (when occasion serueth) are to be declared in his own Mapps or Charts.
            FINIS.
         
      
   