
      
         
            
            
            The woorke of the excellent
Philosopher Lucius
Annaeus Seneca concerning
Benefyting, that is too
say the dooing, receyuing,
and requyting of good
Turstes.
            Translated out of Latin
by Arthur Golding.
            ¶Imprinted at London by
Iohn Day, dwelling
ouer Aldersgate.
1578.
         
         
            
            
            ¶To the right honorable Sir Christopher
Hatton Knight, Capiteine of the Queenes Maiesties
Gard, Uicechamberlaine too her highnesse,
and one of her Maiesties moste honourable
priuie Counsell, Arthur Golding wissheth
health and prosperitie with increase
in honour.
            
               VNder hope of your honorable
fauor & good likyng, I pr
                  •
               ace
now intoo the Court ageine
after long discontinewaunce,
attendyng as an interpreter
vpon the worthy Phlosopher
Seneca, sometyme a Courtyer,
and also a Counseller of the
greatest state in the worlde. The matter whiche
he is too speake of, is the true maner of benefityng
or doyng of good turnes; a thing of all others most
profitable for mans life, and whiche maketh men
like vntoo God. In the declaration whereof, he
sheweth what a Benefite is; why, how, when, too
what ende, and on whom it is too bee bestowed;
what reward is too bee looked for in the dooing
of it, and what frute it yeeldeth again. Likewise at
whose hande, with what mynde, and when a benefite
is too bee receiued: how and when wee should
requite it, or remaine still detters for it; and by
what meanes a man maie bee either beneficiall or

thankfull, euen without cost or peine. His principles
and preceptes are, in substaunce, Diuine; in
forme, Philosophicall; in effect, frutefull. His sentences
are short, quick, and full of matter; his wordes,
sharpe, piththie, and vnaffected; his whole order
of writyng graue, deepe, and seuere; fitted altogether
to the reforming of mennes myndes, and
not too the delyghting of their eares. But great
is the libertie of truthe emong wise menne, and yet
greater is the prerogatiue therof emōg good men.
For wise men knowe that the wholsemost meates
are not alwaies best in tast, nor the moste souerein
medcines alwaies pleasauntest. And good menne
being desirous too haue their faultes rather cured
than couered, doo finde as well in infirmities of
mynde, as of bodie, that the first step to helth is too
discerne the diseaze, and the next is too receiue the
right Medicine for it: Onely too the vnwise and
wicked sorte, truthe is troublesome and odious;
because they cannot abyde the bryghtnesse of her
countenance, nor the power and maiestie of her
presence. I haue therefore thought this woorke
not vnmeete too bee put intoo our Moothertung,
that the mo myght take benefyte by it; nor yet vnexpedient
too comme in Courtyers handes, who
shalbe so muche the greater Ornament too themselues,
and too the place whereof they take their
name, as their Courtesies and Benefytes bee mo
and greater towardes others. And how woorthie
it is too bee embrased of Counsellers; I referre
mee too the iudgement of suche as shall voutsafe

too read it. Of this I am fully perswaded, that you
will thinke it a verie fit present for mee too offer
vnto you in respect of the place wherintoo you are
called; and a sufficient Argument and Witnesse of
my duetyfull good will towards you. And thus
recommending this my trauell too your
good and honourable protection, I
humbly take my leaue. Written
at my House in the
Parish of all Hallowes
in the
Wall
in London the .xvii. day
of Marche.
1577.
            
               Most humbly at your
commaundement.
Arthur Golding.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The firste booke of Lucius Annaeus
Seneca, concerning Benefyting, or the dooing
of Good turnes, written too his
freend EBVTIVS LIBERALIS.
            
               ¶The first Chapiter.
               
                  MY deere freend Liberalis, among the
many and sundrie errours of our vndiscreete
and vnaduised lyfe: I may
well saie, there is in a maner nothyng
more hurtfull, than that wee
knowe not, either how too bestow, or
how too take good turnes. For it foloweth
of consequēce, that the good
turnes which are ill bestowed should
bée i
                     •
                   owed. And therefore if thei bée not requited, it is too late
for vs too complayn, forasmucheas thei were lost in the verie
bestowing of them. And it is no maruell that among so many
and so greate vyces, there is none more ryfe than vnthankfulnesse.
I see many causes thereof.
               The first is, that wee choose not worthie persones too bestowe
vpon. But if wee mynde too put out money too interest,
wée make diligent inquirie of the landes and substaunce of our
detter. Wee cast no seede intoo hūgrie and barreine soile. But
as for our benefites (without any choycemaking) wee rather
throwe them away, than bes
                     •
                  owe them. And I can not easely
say, whether it bée more shame too deny a man a benefite, or too
claime it ageine. For this is suche a kynde of credit, as a man
must receiue no more of it, that is frankly offered hym. Wherof
too mislike, truely it is the foulest shame that cā bee, euen in
this respect, that too the discharge of this 
                     ••
                  edit, there neede
                     •
                  h
not welth, but will. For he requiteth a good turne, that oweth
it willingly. But whereas those are too blame, that cānot find
in their hart so▪ muche as too acknowledge it: there is a faulte
in vs also. Wée fynde many vnthākfull▪ but wée make mo. For
one whyle wee bee bitter in vpbraiding and chalenging: an other

whyle wee bee 
                     ••
                  ckle, and suche as anon after repent vs of
our weldooing: and other whyles through our waywardnesse
and fynding fault at euery trifle, wee vtterly disgrace all courtesie,
not onely after wee haue doon good turnes, but also euen
in the verie dooing of them. For whiche of vs is cōtented with
lyght intreataunce, or with once intreataunce? What is he,
whiche suspecting that somewhat should bee requested of him,
hath not knit the browes, turned awaie his face, feyned buzinesse,
with long and endlesse bytalke purposely cut of occasion
of sute, and by sundrie deuises dalied out the necessitie that required
speede? Or if he were taken at aduauntage, either he
hath made delaies, or flatly saied nay too it. Or if he graunted,
it was hardly, it was with a sowre looke, it was with murmuryng
wordes scarce vttered from the lippes. But no man will
gladly bee in ones daunger, for that whiche he getteth by importunatenesse,
and not by gentlenesse. Can any manne bee beholden
too suche a 
                     •
                  ne, as either fastened a good turne vppon
hym for a glorie, or forced it vppon hym in a furie, or did it too
bee rid of trouble, because he was weerie of hym? He mistakes
his markes, whiche thinkes that partie bounde vnto hym,
whom he hath weeried with long delaye, or tormented with
long lingeryng. Looke with what mynde a good turne is doon
with the same it is due ageine. And therefore it must not bee
doon vnaduisedly: (for a man oweth no thanke for the thing
whiche he hath gotten at suche a ones hande, as wiste not
what he did) Nor 
                     ••
                  owely: (for sith the estimation of all tourtisie
dependeth chéefly vpon the will of the dooer: he that is 
                     •
                  low
in dooing, may seme too haue bin vnwilling) No, nor yet disdeinfully:
for inasmucheas Nature hath so framed vs, that
shrewd turnes sin
                     •
                  ke deeper in our stomackes than good turnes,
so as the good bee soone forgotten, but the other sticke fast
in remembraunce: what can he looke for, whiche displeaseth
euen in pleasuryng? A manne is thankfull enough towardes
suche a one, if he doo but beare with his vnkyndely courtesie.
But there is no cause why the multitude of thanklesse persones
should make vs the 
                     •
                  lower too doo men good. For first (as

I saied) wee our selues increace th
                     •
                   number of them. Ageine,
the Gods immortall are not driuen from their néedefull lauishnesse,
though menne bee wicked and without regarde of them.
They vse their owne Nature, and beare with the wicked: yea,
and they doo good euen too those that abuse their giftes. Lette
vs then followe thē for our guydes, so muche as mannes fra
                     ••
                  
                  tie
auoordeth. Let vs giue our good turnes, and not put them
out too Usurie. Worthie is he to bee deceiued, whiche mynded
receiuing ageine, when he gaue.
               But he hath had ill successe.
               Bothe children and wiues deceiue our expectation: and yet
wee bring vp children, and Marrie wyues still. And wee bee so
headstrong against experience, that being vanquished wee go
ageine too the warres, and after shipwreck, wee go ageine too
the seas. How muche more then becommeth it vs to continew
in dooing good turnes? whiche if a man bestowe not, because he
receiueth not; then bestoweth he too the ende he may receiue, &
so iustifieth he the cace of the vnthankfull, vntoo whom it is a
shame not too requyte if they maie. How many are vnworthie
of the lyght? And yet the daie springeth still. How many bewaile
that euer they were borne? And yet Nature yeeldeth
newe issue, and suffereth those too bée, whiche had leuer not too
bee. It is the propertie of a noble and vertuous minde, not too
respect the profit of welldooing, but the welldooing itself:
yea, and too doo good euen after it hath met with euill menne.
For what noblehartednesse were it too doo good too many, if
no manne did deceiue? The trewe noblenesse then, is too bestowe
benefites that shall neuer make returne, whereof the
princely hart reapeth his frute out of hand. Surely, so little
ought that matter too discourage mée, or too hinder the doing
of so goodly a thing: that although I were past hope of finding
a thankfull persone, yet should I rather forbeare the receiuing
of good turnes, than the dooing of them. For he that dooth thē
not, is vnkynde before vnkyndnesse bée offered. Neuerthelesse,
to say as I thinke, he that renderet
                     •
                   not one good turne for an
other, offendeth more than he that dooth it not speedily.
            
            
               
               ¶The Seconde Chapiter.
               
                  If lauishe too all men thou purpose too bee,
                  A like of thy benefites: holde thee content,
                  For one well bestowed, a number too see,
                  On persones vnthankfull quyte lost and misspent.
               
               
                  IN the first verse, a manne maie finde
faulte with bothe the partes of it.
For neither are benefites to bee lasshed
out vpon all men: and as for lauishenesse,
it is vncommendable in
any thing, and least commendable in
benefites: for i
                     •
                   yee take discretion
from them, thei cease too bee benefites,
and maie rather bee called by
what other name yee list. The residue that followeth, is woonderfull
geere, as which with the bestowyng of one good turne
well, comforteth the bestowyng of many amisse. But see I pray
you, if it bee not bothe trewer, and more agreeable too the noble
hart of a well doer: That wee encourage him too doo good
turnes, euen though he should bestowe none well. For it is a
false grounde, too say that many must bee lost. None is lost,
forasmuch as he that forgoeth it, made his reckenyng too hazard
it. There is but one way for thee too doo good turnes:
bestowe them. If he render any thing, it is cléere gaine: and if
he render not, yet it is no losse. I bestowed it too make a free-gift
of it. No man keepes a register of his benefites: neither
dooth the couetous Usurer call dayly and howrely vppon his
detter. A good man neuer thinketh vpon the good tournes he
hath doon, except he bee put in mynde by him that requyreth.
For otherwyse they passe intoo y• nature of de
                     ••
                  es. It is a vy
                     •
                  e
Usurie too keepe a reckening of benefites, as of expenses.
Whatsoeuer successe thy former benefites haue had, continue
thou still in bestowyng vppon others. Better is it for thee, too
let them rest emong the vnthankfull, whom either shame, or
occasion, or feare may at one tyme or other make thankfull.

Cease not too bestowe: go through with thy woorke: and accomplishe
the dutie of a good man. Helpe this man with thy
goodes, that man with thy credit, the thirde with thy fauour,
an other with thy counsell, and an other with thy wholesome
instructions.
            
            
               ¶The third Chapiter.
               
                  YEa euen wilde beastes perceiue who
doo them good: neither is there any
Beaste so sauage, but that by cherishing
it, a man shall make it tame, and
win it too loue him. Liōs suffer their
keepers too handle their mouthes,
and hurt them not. Prouender winneth
the wilde Elephantes, euen vnto
slauishe obediēce. So much dooth
the continuaunce of diligent cherishyng ouercome, euen those
thynges that are without the compasse of vnderstandyng, and
consideration of a benefite. A man perchaunce is vnthankfull
for one good turne: for an other he will not bee so. He hath forgotten
twoo: The third will bring hym too remembraunce of
bothe the other that were slipt away. That man hath lost his
good turne, whiche in haste beleeueth he hath loste it. But he
that holdeth on, and loadeth benefite vppon benefite; wresteth
out kindenesse, euen from the churlishe and forgetfull persone.
He can not haue the hart too lift vp his eyes ageinste many.
Wheresoeuer he turne himself too shunne his owne consciēce
there let him see thee. Besette him with thy benefites: and I
will tell thee what the force and propertie of them is, if thou
wilt first giue me leaue too ouerronne these thynges that pertaine
not too the matter: namely why there bee three Graces,
why they bee sisters, and why they go hand in hand: why they
looke smyling, why they bee yoong, and why th
                     •
                  y bee maidēs,
and appareled in looce and sheere raiment. Some would haue
it ment thereby, that the one of them bestoweth the good turne
the other receiueth it, and the thirde requiteth it. Othersome,

meene that there bee three sortes of benefyting: that is too
wit, of be
                     •
                  réendyng, of requyting, and both of receiuyng and
requyting together. But take whiche of these you list too bée
trew. What dooth this maner of knowledge profite vs? Why
walkes that knot in roundell hand in hand? It is in this respect,
that a good turne passing orderly from hand too hand,
dooth neuerthelesse returne too the giuer: and the grace of the
whole is mard, if it bee anywhere broken of▪ but is most beautifull,
if it continew toogether and kéepe his course. The cause
why they looke smyling, is for that the countenances of such
as deserue well, are chéerfull, like as theirs also is woont too
bee, both whiche bestowe, and which receiue benefites. Yoong
they bee, bycause the remembraunce of good turnes must neuer
wex old. Uirgins they bee, bicause benefites must be without
foyle, pure, and holy too all men, wherein there ought too
bee no bondage nor constreint. And therfore they weare looce
garmentes, howbeit very sheere and thin, bicause weldooinges
are willing too bee seene. Admit now that some man bee
so farre in thraldomme too the Greekes, as too vphold that
these thinges are necessarie: yet is there no man that can
deeme these thinges folowing too perteyne too the matter:
namely, that Aegle should bee the eldest, Euphrosyne the middlemost,
and Thaleia the third: whiche are names that Hesiodus
gaue them. And whereas Hesiodus gaue them these names vppon
pleasure: euery man wresteth the interpretation of them
according as hee thinkes they will best fit his owne purpose,
and indeuereth too apply them vntoo some meening. Homere
therfore chaunged the name of one of them, and called hir Pasithea.
Yea and he brought hir foorth vntoo a mariage: wherby
ye may knowe they bee no cloce Nunnes. I can fynd you another
Poët, that bringes them foorth with Girdles about them,
and Eares of Corne in their handes. Yea and Mercurie standeth
with them: not bicause reason commendeth benefites,
but bicause it so pleased the Peinter. Chrysippus also (in whom
is so excellent sharpnesse of wit, and so percing intoo the bottome
of the truthe, who speaketh altogither too the purpose,

and vseth no mo woordes than serue for the vnderstanding of
the matter:) stuffeth all his booke with these toyes: i
                     •
                  somuch
that he speaketh very little of the maner of the bestowyng, receiuing,
& requyting of benefites. Neither powdereth he these
thinges with Fables, but fables with these thinges. For bes
                     •
                  
                  des
the said things (which Hecaton wryteth) Chrysippus saieth,
that the thrée Graces are the daughters of Iupiter and E
                        •
                     ri
                        ••
                     
                     me,
and that they bee yoonger than the Howres, but farre more
beautifull of face, and therefore are appointed too wait vppon
Venus. Moreouer hee thinkes the name of their moother to
make greatly too the matter. For he saieth shee was called Eurynome,
bicause hee had neede too bee a man of greate welth,
that should doo many men good. As who would say, that moothers
were woōt too bee named after their daughters, or that
Poetes reported trew names. Nay verely, like as a reporter
of newes vseth boldnesse in sted of memorie, and when he cannot
reādely hit vppon mens names, giueth them some name of
his owne makyng: euen so Poëtes thinke it not materiall too
say truthe: but either vppon force of necessitie, or vppon imagination
of comelinesse, they tearme a man by suche name as
sometyme maketh trimly ageinst them. Neither is it any
cracke too their credit, though they enlarge the matter with
some newe deuice of their owne. For the last mencioned Poët
makes the foresaid Ladies to beare names of his appointyng.
And that yee may knowe it too bee so, behold Thaleia (abow
                     •
                  
whom is most adoo) is with Hesiodus one of the Graces, and
with Homer one of the Muses.
            
            
               ¶The fourth Chapter.
               
                  BUt least I doo that thing myselfe, whiche
I finde fault with in others: I will 
                     •
                  eaue
all these toyes, whiche are so farre out of
the matter, that they come nothyng neere
it nor about it. Onely stand thou in my defence,
if any man chardge mee for contro
                     •
                  
                  ling
of Chrysippus (in good sooth) a greate

clerk, but yet a Gréek, whose sharpnes of wit being ouer thin,
is soone blunted and oftentymes turneth edge: & when it seemeth
too doo somewhat; it pricketh, but pearceth not through.
For what sharpnesse of wit is this? He should speak of Benefites,
and set order in a thing that most of al other knitteth men
togither in felowship: he should haue made a lawe too liue by,
so as neither vnaduised plyantnesse might bée setby vnder colour
of gentlenesse: nor liberalitie (whiche ought too bee neither
skant nor ouerlauish) bee restreined by the same rule that
goeth about too measure it. He should haue taught men too
receiue willingly, and too requyte willingly: and that those
whiche bynd men by their deedes, prouoke them too a greate
encounter, not onely how too matche them, but also how too
surmount them in good will, bicause that hee whiche must requyte;
neuer ouertaketh, if he haue not outgone. The one sort
were too bee taught too vpbrayd nothyng: and the other sort
too thinke themselues the more in de
                     •
                  te. Too this m
                     •
                  st hon
                     •
                  
                  rable
striuyng who might ouermatche other in dooing good,
Chrysippus exhorteth by telling vs, that inasmuchas the Graces
bée Iupiters daughters, wée must beware that wée thinke it
not a small offence too their father, if we offer wrong too so
trim Ladies. Teach thou mee some of those thinges that may
make mee the forewarder too doo men good, and the thankfuller
too suche as deserue well at my hand: whereby the mynds
of them that make men beholden, and of them that are beholden
may striue: the bestowers too forget, and the detters too
beare in remembraunce. And as for these toyes, leaue them vp
too Poëtes, whose purpose is too delight mens eares, and too
frame pleasaunt tales. But as for those that meene too amend
mennes dispositions, and too mainteine faithfulnesse in worldly
affaires, and too imprint the remembraunce of good turnes
in mennes myndes: let them speake earnestly, and deale effectually:
vnlesse perchaunce thou imagin, that the oue
                     •
                  throwe
of gooddooing (the thing of all others moste perillous and
hurtfull) may bee letted by lyght and fond fabling, and by olde
wiues doting reasons.
            
            
               
               ¶The fifth Chapter.
               
                  BUt like as I must ourronne superfluous
thinges: so muste I needes
shewe, that the first lesson which we
ought too learne, is what wee owe
whē we haue receiued a good turne.
For some man thinkes he oweth
the Mouny that he hath receiued,
another the Cōsulship: another the
Preesthod: and another the Presidentship.
These thinges are badges of benefites, but not the
benefites themselues. The benifite it selfe may bee caried in
hart, but it cannot be touched with hand. There is greate difference
betweene the matter of a benefite, and the benefite it
selfe. Therfore, neither Gold, nor Siluer, nor any of the thinges
that wee receiue of our neighbours, is a benefite: but the
good will of the giuer. Neuerthelesse, the vnskilfull regarde
onely the thyng that is seene with the eye, and deliuered with
the hande, and hild in po
                     •
                  session: and as for the thing that is
deere and precious in the matter, they set light by it. These
thinges whiche wee handle and 
                     •
                  ooke vppon, and whiche our
greedinesse is so fast tyed vntoo are transitorie. B
                     •
                  th misfortune
and force may take them from vs. But a good turne endu
                     •
                  eth
still, yea euen when the thyng that was given, is gone.
For it is suche a good deede as no force can vndoo. As for example:
I haue reskewed my freend from Pirates: another
enemy catches hym and castes hym in prison: now he bereeueth
hym, not of my benefite, but of the vse of my benefite. Agein
I haue saued a mans children from shipwrecke, or pluckt
them out of the fyre, and deliuered them home too him: afterward
either siknesse or vnfortuna
                     •
                  e mischaunce takes them away
from him: yet the thyng that I gaue in them, contineweth
euen without them. All the thinges therefore that wrongfully
vsurp the name of a good turne, are but instrumentes
wherby the frendly good will, vttereth it self. The same happeneth

in other thinges likewise; insomuch that the shewe of
the thing is one where, and the thing it self another where.
The general of an Army rewardes some Souldier with garlondes
for skaling or for reskewing: What preciowsenesse
hath the Garlond or Crowne it felf? what hath the Robe?
what hath the Scepter? what hath the Chayre of Estate?
what hath the Chariot? None of all these thinges is honour,
but the Badge of honour. Euen so the thing that is seene is
not a benefite, but the signe and token of a benefite.
            
            
               ¶The .vi. Chapter.
               
                  WHat is a benefite thē? It is a frendly
good deede, giuing gladnesse au
                     •
                  
taking pleasure in giuing, foreward
and redie of it owne occord, too doo
the thing that it dooeth. And therfore
it is not material what is doon,
or what is giuen, but with what
mind. For the good turne consisteth
not in the thing that is doone or giuen:
but in the verye intent of the
dooer or giuer. And that there is greate difference betwixt the
sayd thinges, a man may perceyue euen by this, that the benefite
it self is qnestionlesse good: but the thing that is doone or
giuen, is neyther good nor bad. It is the meening that aduaū
                  ceth
small thinges, and ennobleth bace thinges: that imbaceth
greate thinges, and disgraceth thinges of estimation.
For the thinges that are coueted, are of their owne nature neither
good nor euill: the matter standes altogether vppon the
directing of them by the mynd, which hath the rule of them,
and which giueth all thinges their ryght names. Then is it
not the good turne it self, that is nombered or delinered: like
as also the honoring of God consisteth not in the flaughter of
beastes, bee they neuer so fat and glistering with Gold: but in
the deuout and ryght meening of the woorshippers. Therfore
are good men religious, though they offer but Bran in Earthen

vessells: wheras on the othersyde, euill men escape not
the blame of vngodlinesse, though they imbrewe the Altars
with neuer so much blud.
            
            
               ¶The .vii. Chapter.
               
                  IF good turnes consisted in the thinges,
and not in the very will of wel-dooing:
thā should they bee so much
the greater, as the thinges be greater
which wee receyue: but that is
not so. For oftentymes wée bee most
beholden too him that gaue vs smal
thinges, howbéeit with greate good
will: that with his hart did match
the welth of Kinges: that gaue but little, howbeeit gladly:
which forgate his owne pouertie, too releeue myne: who had
not only a good will, b
                     •
                  t also a desyrounesse too help mee: who
thought himself too receyue a good turne, when he did o
                     •
                  e:
who gaue without mynding too receyue, and receiued as
though he had not giuen: who both sought, and also preuented
occasion too doo mee good. Contrariwise, vnacceptable
(as I sayd) are the thinges, eyther that bee wrong out, or that
slip from the bestower; seeme they neuer so greate in the déede
dooing, or in the outward apparance. And much more welcome
is the thing that is giuen quickly, than the thing that is
giuen with full hand. It was a small thing which that man
bestowed vppon mee: but he was able too doo no more. Agein
it is a greate thing that this man gaue mee: but he cast douts
but he made delayes: but he syghed when he gaue it mee: but
he gaue it disdeinfully: but he blazed it abrode, and he ment
not too please him too whom he gaue it: he gaue it too his
owne vaynglorie, and not too mee.
            
            
               ¶The .viii. Chapter.
               
                  
                  AT such tyme as manie men (eche one according
too his abilitie) offered manie
thinges vnto Srcrates: Aeschines being a
poorescholer of his, said: Syr, I fynd nothing
of sufficient worthinesse too bestowe
vppon you, and by that meanes I feele myself
too bee poore. Therfore I giue vntoo
you the only thing that I haue, euen myself. This present, such
as it is, I pray you take in good woorthe: and consider that
wheras others haue giuen mutch vntoo you, they haue left
more too themselues. To whom Socrates answered: And why
is not the gift that thou haste giuen mee greate, as well as
theirs? vnlesse perchaunce thou thinke thy self little woorth.
I will doo my indeuer therefore, too restore thee too thyself,
better than I receyued thee. In this gift, Aeschines surmoū
                  ted
the mynd of Alcibiades matched with equall riches, and
also the bountifulnesse of all the the welthy yoong men.
            
            
               ¶The .ix. Chapter.
               
                  YOu see how the hart may fynd wherwith
too bee liberal euen in the vtter distresse of
pouertie. He s
                     •
                  emeth too mée too haue sayd
thus: O fortune, thou ha
                     •
                  t woonne nothing
by making mee poore. For I will neuerthelesse
fynd out a gift meete for this man:
and bycause I cannot giue him of thyne, I
will giue him of myne owne. And there is no cause why yee
should thinke he made small account of himself: he gaue himself
in exchaūge for. Socrates Like a wittie fellowe, he foūd the
meanes how too win Socrates too himself. We must not haue
respect how greate thinges bee: what maner of persone he is
that giueth them. Some fineheaded felowe graunteth accesse
euen vnto such as are vnmeasurable crauers, and féedeth their
importunate desyres with faire words, mynding not too help
them at all in deede. Bu
                     •
                   yit worse is he too bee liked of, who
being churlish in speeche, and sowre in countenance, vttereth

his cace with disdeine. For men doo both fawne vppon him
that is in prosperitie, and also enuye him: yea and they hate
him that dooth but as themselues woold doo, if they could.
Some men, bycause they haue dishonested other mens wiues,
(and that not priuely but openly) are content too lend their
owne wyues vnto other men. If there bee anie man that wilnot
suffer his wyfe too setfoorth hirself too sale in hir Coche,
aud too bee iaunced from place too place as a gazingstock for
all men too toote at: he is a Rudesbie, a Cloyne, and a cankred
Carle, yea and a hatingstocke among greate Ladies. If there
bee any that hath not blased himself by some louer, or lent
his Ring too another mannes wyse: him doo the braue Dames
call a Hodip
                     ••
                  ke, a sorie Leacher, and a singlesoaid louer.
Heeruppon commeth it too passe, that whoredome is counted
honest wedlocke: and in the opinion of vnwyuing Bachelers,
noman hath wedded a wife, but he that hath inuegled hir from
hir Husbond. Furthermore, they onewhyle striue to was
                     •
                  e
whatsoeuer they can rap and rend: and anon with like couetouseness
they stryue as fast too scrape toogether agein the
thinges they haue scatered. They set all at six and at seuen, disdeyning
other mennes pouertie, and dreading their owne; and
as for other harme, they feare none. They spare no wrong, but
make hauocke of the weaker sort, and keepe them vnder with
force and feare. For, that Prouinces are pilled, and Offices

                     •
                  hopped and chaunged with louing and boding fr
                     •
                  m man too
man: it is no wonder, considering that by the Lawe of al realmes,
a man may sell that whiche he hath bought.
            
            
               ¶The .x. Chapter.
               
                  BUT the matter itself hath prouoked mee too
raūge further than I thought too haue doon.
Therfore let vs so end it, as the blame lyght
not altogether vppon our present age. This
haue our Father complayned of, this complayn
wee of, and this shall our posteritie complayn of: that
good behauyour is subuerted, that lewdnesse reigneth, and

that the world decaying into all kynd of wickednesse, groweth
euery day woorse than other. Notwithstanding, these thinges
keepe at one stay, and shall keepe with small oddes vnder or ouer,
like the waues of the Sea, which the Tyde at his flowing
bringeth further in, and at his ebbing draweth back agein too
the vttermost pointes of the shore. One whyle men shall sin
more in whordome than in other vices; and chastitie shal haue
no stay of hirself. Another whyle outrageous feasting shall florishe,
and the Kitchin shall most shamefully deuour mennes liuinges.
Another whyle the world shalbee giuen too ouermuch
curiousenesse of apparell and regard of beautie, bewraying in
the bodie the deformitie of the mynd. In another age inordinate
libertie shall turne too malapert behauour and flat Ruffianrie.
Otherwhyles men shalbe set wholly vppon crueltie
as well publikly as priuately, and shall go toogither by the
eares like madfolk, wherby al Religion and ryght shalbee cō
                  founded.
The tyme will come that Drunkennesse shalbee had
in estimation, and it shalbee counted a vertew too quaffe much
wyne. Uyces continew not alwayes at one stay, but are euermore
fleeting and at warre among themseues, and in turmoyling
doo heaue out one another by turnes. And yit for all that,
wee may alwayes sing one song of ourselues: naught wee are
naught wee were, and (loth I am too say it) naught wee shalbee.
The world shall neuer bee without Murtherers, Tyrantes,
Theeues, Whoremoongers, Extorcioners, Churchrobbers,
and Traytors. Beneath all these were an vnthankfull
persone, sauing that al these proceede from a thanklesse mynd;
without which there hath not lyghtly growen anie greate
mischeef. On thyne owne part eschew thou the committing of
this, as the greatest fault that can bee: but if another man cō
                  mit
it, beare with it as a lyght offence. For, all the harme that
thou canst receyue by it, is but the losse of thy good turne. But
the best of it, (which is, that thou hast bestowed it) remayneth
whole vnto thee. Nowthen, like as héede is too bee taken that
we bestow our benefites specially vppō such as wilbee thankfull
for them: so must wee bestowe and doo some good turnes,

euen where wee ha
                     •
                  e no good opiniō at al; not only although
wee mistrust that they wilbee vnthankfull hereafter, but also
though wee knowe them too haue bin so before. As for example.
If I can saue a thanklesse mans children from some great
daunger, and restore them too him without inconuenience too
myself: I shalnot sticke too doo it. As for a woorthie man, I
shall defend him with the losse of my blud, and hazard myself
too doo hym good. Also if I can saue an vnworthie man from
robbing by raysing hew and krye: it shall not greeue mee too
auoord him my voyce too doo him good, bycause he is a man.
            
            
               ¶The .xi. Chapiter.
               
                  IT followeth that wee declare what
benefytes are too bee bestowed, and
how. First let vs bestowe suchas bee
needfull, secondly suche as bee profitable,
thirdly sucheas are acceptable,
and in any wyse durable. But wee
must begin at suche as are needfull.
For thinges that concerne lyfe or liuing,
doo touche a mannes mynd otherwyse
than the thinges that doo but garnishe, or furnishe
him. A man may well make lyght account of the thing that he
may easly forbeare, of whiche it may bee sayd, I passe not for
the hauing of it, I am cōtent with that whiche I haue of myne
owne: yea, and when a man can fynde in his harte, not onely
too sende backe the thing that he receyueth, but also too cast it
away. Of thinges that bee needfull, somme chalenge the cheef
roome, without whiche wee cannot liue: Somme chalendge
the second roomee, without whiche wee should not liue: and

                     •
                  omme the thirde roome, without whiche wee would not liue.
               Of the first sort bee suche as theis: too bee rescewed out of
the handes of enemies, from the crueltie of Tyrauntes, from
arreignement, and from the 
                     •
                  undrie and vncertaine perilles
that beseege mannes lyfe. From whichesoeuer of theis thinges
wee rid a man, the greater and terribler it is: the more

thanke shall wee win. For it ronneth alwayes in their mynde,
from how greate miseries they were deliuered, and the feare
that went before, is an aduauncing of the good turne that enseweth.
Yet notwithstanding, wee must not therefore vse the
lesse haste in sauing of a man, than wee can, too the ende that
feare may make our good turne of more weight. Next vntoo
theis, are the thinges without whiche wee may in deede liue:
howbeeit in suehewyse as a man had leuer bee dead: as libertie,
Chastitie, and a good mynd. After theis wee may place the
thinges that are deere vntoo vs by reason of Aliaunce, kinred,
customme, and long acquaintance: as children, wyues, howsehold
and suche other thinges, whiche the mynd hathe so neerly
alyed too it self, that it esteemes it agreater greef too bee pulled
from them, than too dye. Then followe profitable thinges,
whiche haue sundrie and large groundes too woorke vppon.
Of this sort is monnye, not superfluous, but orderly prepared
for necessarie vses. Of this sort also is Honour, and the procéedinges
of them that seeke too clymbe hygh: for of all profites,
the best is to profit a mannes self. As touchyng the thinges
that serue but for delyght, there is greate store of them. In
theis wee must indeuer, that they may bee acceptable for their
opportunitie; that they bee not comon, but such as feawe haue
had, or feawe haue within that tyme; or suche as though they
bée not precious of their owne Nature, may becomme acceptable
for the season or place of them. Let vs consider what may
doo moste pleasure when it is offered, and what may oftest
comme too hand with him that shall haue it, so as it may stand
vs in sted as oft as it is with him. In anye wyse let vs beware,
that wee send not vnfit presentes: as hunting
                     •
                  eawe too a woman
or an old man, or bookes vntoo a Cloyne, or Nettes too
one that is giuen too studie and learnyng. Likewyse wee must
looke about vs on the 
                     •
                  ontrarie part; that when wee mynd too
send acceptable thinges, wee send not suche thinges as maye
note a mannes disease: as wyne to a drunkard, or Poti
                     •
                  arie
ware to a 
                     ••
                  kly man. For the thing becommeth a Corzie, & not
a Courtezie, wherein the disease of the receiuer is noted by it.
            
            
               
               ¶The .xii. Chapiter.
               
                  IF the choyce of giuing bee in our owne
power, wée must cheefly séeke durable thinges,
that our giftes may not dye ouer hastely.
For feawe are so thankfull as too
thinke vppon a thing that they haue receiued,
when it is out of their sight. But euen
thanklesse persones stumble vppon the remembraunce
of a gift, when they see it before their eyes, so as
it suffereth them not too forget it, but presenteth and offereth
vntoo them the giuer of it. And truely so muche the more durable
thinges must wee seeke too giue, because wee must neuer
putt the receyuer in mynd of them. Let the verie thyng it self
reuyue the remembraunce of it that was vanishyng away. I
had leuer giue siluer wrought, than coy
                     •
                  ed: and I had leuer
giue Images and pictures, than apparell or a thing that w
                     •
                  ll
soone bee worne out. Feawe thinke them selues beholden for a
thing when it is once gone. But there bee many that neuer
mynd thinges giuen, longer than they serue their turne.
Therefore if it bee possible, I wllnot haue my gift consumable.
Let it abyde with my freend, let it sticke by hym, let it liue
and dye with hym. None is so foolishe as too neede warning,
that he should not send swoordplayers, or baytingbeastes too
him that is gone out of office: or that he should not giue Sommergarmentes
to weare in Winter, or Wintergarmentes
too weare in the hoate Sommer. Inbestowing benefytes, le
                     •
                  t
a man followe comon reason. Let him obserue tyme, place, and
person. For somme things are acceptable or vnacceptable, according
too their tymes. How much more thanksworthy is it,
if wee giue a man the thing he hathe not, than if wee giue him
that wherof he hath store? Or a thing that he hath long sought
and could not fynd, than a thing that is too bee had euerywhere?
Let presentes bee, not so muche costly, as rare and gezon:
and sucheas may bid themselues welcomme euen vntoo a
riche man: Like as comon Apples which within feawe dayes

after wilnot bee woorth the eating, are well liked when they
comme more tymely than other frutes doo. Also it can not bee
that suche thinges should bée vnesteemed, as either none other
man hath giuen them the like, or as wee ourselues haue not
giuen to others afore.
            
            
               ¶The .xiii. Chapter.
               
                  AT suche tyme as Alexander King of Macedonie
tooke vppon him aboue the state of
a man, because he had counquered the East:
the Corynthians sent their Ambassadors to
reioyce with him of his good successe, and
offered too make him Lord of their Citie.
When Alexander lawghed at this kynd of
Courtesie: Wee neuer (ꝙ one of the Ambassadors) gaue anye
man the protection of our Citie, saue you and Hercules. Then
toke he willingly the honor that was offered him: and interteyning
the Ambassadors with feasting and all other kynd of
royall Courtesie, began to think with himself, not what they
were that gaue him this honor, but what he himself was too
whom they had giuen it. And being a man giuen all too glorie,
(wherof he knew neyther the nature nor measure) in folowing
the footesteppes of Liber and Hercules, (yea and not staying
there where they left of,) he turned his eye from the giuers,
too him with whom they had matched him in honor. As who
woold say, that bycawse he was matched with Hercules, he had
alredye gotten vp too heauen which he had apprehended in his
owne vayne imaginacion. For what likenesse was there betweene
Hercules and this mad yoong spri
                     •
                  gald, whom prosperouse
rashnesse serued in stede of valeantnesse? Hercules winning
nothing too himself, traueled ouer the whole world, not
conquering it, but setting it at libertie. For what could he win,
that was an enemye too the euill, a defender of the good, and a
pacifyer bothe of sea and Land? But Alexander was from his
chyldhod a Robber, a waster of Countries, a destroyer of his
freends as well as of his foes, and such a one as made it his

cheef felicitie too be a terror too all men: forgetting that not
only the féercest, but also euen the cowardlyest beasts are feared
for their hurtfull poyson.
            
            
               ¶The fourthtene Chapter,
               
                  NOw let vs returne agein too our
purpose. The benefyte yt is bestowed
vppon euery man without exception,
is bestowed vppon noman. Noman
thinks himself beholden too an Inkeeper
or too him that keepes an ordinarie
table, for his interteinement
                     •
                  
neyther dooth anye take himself for a
bidden gwest, too him that maks a comon
feast, wherof it may bée sayd, what hath he bestowed vppō
mée? marie euen as he bestowed vppon this man whom he was
scarce acquaynted with, or vppon that man that is his vtter
foe yea and perchaunce a verye varlet. What? did he think me
a woorthie persone? no, he did it but too feede his owne humor.
looke what thow wooldest haue well accepted, that make thou
gezō. Who can abyde too bee cloyd with any thing? Let nomā
so conster theis woords as though I w
                     •
                  nt too restrein liberalitie,
and too reyne it backe with a rowgh bit. Let it goe at as
large scope as it liste
                     •
                  h: but let it go, & not gad. A mā may giue
in such wyse, as although a nomber receiue all of one thing,
yet eueryman shal think himself too bee made more account of
than y• rest. Let euerymā haue some familiar token, wherby he
may conceyue opinion, that he was better accepted than others.
Let him say, I haue receyued the same thing that he did:
but myne was vnrequested. I receyued the same that he did:
but in shorter tyme, wheras he had deserued it lōg afore There
are that haue the same thing: but not giuen with like woords,
nor wt like courtesie of the bestower. He obteyned it by intreatance:
but I was intreated too take it. This man receiued as
well as I: but he is able too requyte it eas
                     •
                  y, and he is such a
one as his age and lacke of children promise greate things.

Although he gaue vs all one thing: yet was his gift greater
too méeswards, bycause he gaue where there is no hope too receiue.
Like as a courtizane so imparteth hirself vntoo many 
                     •
                  ouers,
as none goeth away without some signe of hir kynd hart:
euen so he that purposeth too haue his good turnes well liked,
deuyseth bothe how he may make manie beholden vnto him,

                     〈◊〉
                   yet that eche one of them may haue some peculiar poynt,
wherin too prefer himself before the residew. But I will bee
no hinderer of gooddooings. The mo and the greater that they
bee, the more comēdacion doo they procure. Neuerthelesse, let
discretion bee vsed. for noman can like well of the things, that
are doone at all aduentures and vnaduysedly. Wherfore if anie
man think vs (in giuing theis precepts) too streighten the
bownds of welldooing, and not too giue it frée scope ynowgh:
vndowtedly he misconstrueth our lessons. For what vertue doo
wée more reuerence? To what vertue giue we more encoragement?
Or too whom belōgeth it so mutch to exhort men thertoo,
as vntoo vs which indeuer too stablish the societie of mankynde?
            
            
               The .xv. Chapiter.
               
                  WHat then? Inasmuch as there is no
opera
                     •
                  ion of the mynd commendable
(no not although it proceede frō
a ryght intent) sauing suche as is
measured by the rule of vertew: I
forbid liberalitie too ronne royet.
Thē doth it a mā good too receyue
a benefite, (euen with open handes)
when reason leadeth it vntoo the
woorthie, & not when euery lyght occasion and vnaduysed géerishnesse
offereth i
                     •
                  : the whiche a man may vaunt of as cleere
gotten
good, and thanke noman for it but himself. Termest
thou them good turnes, the author whereof thou art ashamed
too bee acknowen of? How much more acceptable are they,
and how much more deep
                     •
                  ly sink they intoo a mannes brest

neuer too depart agein, when it delyghteth hym too thinke,
rather of whom, than what he hath receiued: Crispus Passienus
was woont too say, he had leuer haue some mennes iudgement
than their benefyte, and some mennes benefyte than
their iudgement: and he added examples. I had leuer (sayeth
he) too haue the good opinion of the Emperour Augustus:
and I had leuer haue the benefyte of Claudius. But I am of opinion
that nomannes benefyte is too bee desyred, whose discretion
is too bee mislyked. What then? was not the gift of
Claudius too be receiued? Yis marie was it: Howbeeit as at
fortunes hand, who (as men know) may byanby become euill.
Why then deuyde we these thinges that are interlaced toogither?
It is no good turne which wanteth the beste part of itself,
that is too wit, too bee doone with discretion. Otherwise,
a greate masse of Monnye (if it bee not giuen
with discretion and with ryght meening) is
no more a benefyte, than a Treasure.
There bee many thinges that
a man may receiue, and
yet not bee
indetted
for them.
               The ende of the first Booke.
            
         
         
            
            ¶The second booke of Lucius Annaeus
Seneca, declaring in vvhat
wyse a benefyte or good turne
ought too bee bestowed.
            
               ¶The first Chapiter.
               
                  MY verie good freend Liberalis, let vs
consider that whiche remayneth of
the former part: that is too wit, after
what sort good turnes are too
bee dooen. Whereof mee thinkes I
can shewe a verie redie way. Let vs
so doo, as wee would ber dooen vntoo.
Before all, let vs doo them willingly,
speedely, & without sticking.
Scarce woorth gramercie is the good turne, that cleaueth
long too the handes of the bestower; whiche a man seemeth
loth too forgo, and whiche he seemeth too depart with in suche
wyse, as if it were wrested from him perforce. If there happen
any delay, lette vs in anywyse be ware that wee seeme not too
haue cast doutes of the matter: for he that douteth, is next cousin
too him that denyeth; and suche a one deserueth no thankes.
For seing that in a bene
                     •
                  ite, the acceptablest thing is the good
will of the bestower: he that by his long lingeryng witnesseth
himself too bestowe vnwillingly, bestoweth not at all; But vntowardly
draweth backe from him that would fayne hale him
on. Manie there bee that becomme liberall, because they haue
not the countenaunce too say a man nay. Moste acceptable are
those benefytes that are redie at hand, that comme 
                     •
                  asely, and
wherin there is no stop but the modestie of the receiuer. The
best poynt is too outgo a mannes desyre, and the next is too folowe
it. But yet is it farbetter too preuent it, before wee bee
requested. For inasmuche as an honest man is out of countenaunce,
and ashamed too craue: he that releaceth him that torture,

dubbleth his good turnes. He that obteynes a thing by
intreatance, commes not freely by it. For (as it séemed too our
aunceters, who were men of verie graue consideration,) nothing
is bought more déerly, than that whiche is gotten by intreataunce.
Men would pray verie seeldomme, if they should
pray openly: So muche had wee leuer to make our petitions
secretly, and within ourselues, yea, euen too the Gods, vntoo
whom wee may doo it with moste honestie.
            
            
               ¶The seconde Chapiter.
               
                  IT is a sore and a heauie woorde, yea,
and suche a woorde as will make a ma
                     •
                  
too cast doune his head in his bosome,
too say, I beseeche you sir. Wee must
discharge our freend of that woord, yea,
and whomsoeuer w
                     •
                  e purpose too make
our freend by our good vsage. Make he
neuer so muche haste, yet giueth he too
late, that giueth vppon intreatance. Therefore wee must gesse
what euery man would haue: and when wee vnderstand it, wee
must ease them of that moste gr
                     •
                  euous necessitie.
               Assure thyself that that benefyte dooeth a man good at the
hart, and will continewe long in remembraunce, whiche meeteth
a man at the halfe turne. If it bee not our hap to preuent
ones request: lette
                     •
                  vs cut him of from many woordes, least wee
may seeme too bee sewed vntoo: and assoone as wee knowe his
mynd▪ lette 
                     •
                  s graunt it out of hand, and let vs shewe by our
hastemaking, that wee would haue dooen it vnrequested. For
like as in sickfolke the cōmyng of somme meate in dewe tyme
hath brought health, and the giuing of water in season hathe
remedyed the disease: Euen so, bee the benefyte neuer so meane
and small, yet if it comme ridely without lingering or for
                     •
                  lowyng
of tyme, it greatly aduaunceth it self, and winneth more
thanke than a costly present that is s
                     •
                  owe in comming, and
long breathed vppon.
            
            
               
               ¶The third Chapiter.
               
                  NO dout but he that dooeth so ridily▪
dooeth it willingly, And therefore he
dooeth it cheerfully, with a countenaunce
agreeable too his mynde.
Somme men haue disgraced their
greate good turnes by counterfetting
a grauitie and sobernesse in holding
their peace or speaking leisurely,
because they graunted them with
countenaunce of de
                     •
                  yall. How muche better is it too m
                     ••
                  che
good woordes with good déedes, and too beautify the thinges
that thou performest, with courteous and gentle speeche? Too
the end the partie may blame himself for being too s
                     •
                  owe in asking,
thou mayst fynd fault with him in suche familiar maner
as this. I am angrie with you, that whereas you wanted any
thing, you haue not made mee priuie too it sooner, or that you
haue trubbled your self too sewe for it, or that you haue vsed
any other meane than yourself. But for myne owne part, I am
glad that it pleased you too try my good will. Whatsoeuer you
haue neede of heerafter, you shall commaund it at your pleasure.
I will beare with your bashfulnesse for this once.
               So shalt thou make hym too set more by thy good wil, than
by the thing that he came too desyre, whatsoeuer it bee. Then
is the bountifulnesse of the giuer greate, then is his courtesie
greate: when the partie that is gone from him shall say too
himself, This day haue I made a great purchace. It dooth mée
more good that I haue found him such a one, than if the thing
had come duble and treble too mee another way. For I shall
neuer bee able too requite this good will of his.
            
            
               ¶The fourth Chapter.
               
                  BUt there bée many that bring their benefytes in hatred
by their rough woordes and stately lookes, vsing
such language and pryde, as it woold irk a man
too haue obteyned the thing at their handes. Agein,

when they haue graunted, there folowe delayes. But truely
there is no greater corzie, than too bee driuen too 
                     •
                  ew for that
which a man hath gotten graunt of alreadie. It is a harder
matter too get a good turne out of some mennes hands, when
it is graunted, than too get graunt of it; and such must bée called
vppon. One must bee prayed too put him in remembrance,
and another too take it vp. And so one gift is tossed through
many mennes handes, by meanes wherof the least part of thankes
redoundeth too the giuer. For whosoeuer is sewed vntoo
afterward, muste needes bee a derogacion too the first graunter.
Therfore if thou wilt haue the performance of thy good
turnes accepted thankfully: thou must deale so, as they may
come whole and vntasted vntoo them whom thou hast promised,
without anie abatement as they terme it. Let noman haue
too deale with them by the way. For nomā can make his owne

                     •
                  han
                     •
                  e of that whiche thou myndest too giue, but that he must
diminish thyne.
            
            
               ¶The fifth Chapiter.
               
                  NOthing is more greeuouse thā long
lingering. Some can better b
                     •
                  are
a flat nay, than too bée foaded of. But
it is the fault of diuers men, too delay
the performance of their promises
through a fond vaingloriousenesse,
least the nomber of their Suters
should abate. Of which sort are
the Officers in Kinges Courtes,
and suchas beare authority about Princes, which haue a pleasure
too behold the long trayne of their owne pryde, and think
themselues able too doo little, if they set not out their port too
euery man, by making them daunce attendance a long whyle.
They doo nothing out of hand, they dispatch nothing at once.
They be swift too doo harme, but slow too doo good.
               Wherfore assure thyself it is most trew which the Comical
Poet sayeth: What? perceiuest thou not that the longer thy
delay is, the lesse is thy thanke? Heeruppon come these speeches,

which the gentle hart vttereth with gréef. If thou doo
the thing, doo it out of hand. Nothing is woorth so much sewt.
I had leuer now too haue a flatte nay: for I am so weerie of
way
                     •
                  ing for the Benefyte, that my hart beginneth too hate it.
               Can a man bee thankfull for such dealing? Like as it is a
poynt of a most bitter crueltie, too prolong a mannes punishment,
and a kynd of mercie too kill him out of hand, bycause
speedie torment bringeth end too itself, and the tyme that goeth
before execution, is the greatest part of the payne that foloweth
with it: euen so, the lesse whyle a good turne hath lingered,
the better welcome is it. For euen in good thinges▪ lingering
is greeuouse too such as long for them. And wheras
manie benefytes may remedie some mannes necessitie: he that
eyther suffereth the partie too bee long martyred, whom he
may dispatch out of hand, or delayeth his gladnesse: fordooeth
his benefyte with his owne handes. All courtesie maketh hast▪
and it is the propertie of a weldooer, too doo thinges willingly
and quickly. He that hath giuen slowly, and doone a man
good with delay of tyme, hath not doone it with his hart. And
so hath he lost twoo cheef thinges at once; that is too wit, both
his tyme, and the tryall of his freendly good will. For too
meene a thing slowly, is as much as not too meene it at all.
            
            
               ¶The .vi. Chapiter.
               
                  IN all matters (my freend Liberalis) the maner
how any thing is sayd or doon, is not the smallest
part. Spéedinesse hath much holpen, and
delay hath much hindered: like as in Dartes
the power of the Stéele is all one, and yet there
is excéeding greate oddes, whither they bee throwen by a forcible
Arme, or whither they bee let slip from a lazy hand. One
selfsame Swoord may both pricke & perce through: the matter
is, with what force the Arme sendz it. Likewise the thing
that is giuen is all one: but the maner of the giuing maketh
the difference. How swéete and how precious is the gift, when
he that gaue it suffered not himself too bee thanked for it, but

forgate his giuing of it by that tyme he had giuen it? For too
checke a man though thou doo neuer so muche for him, or too
mingle tauntes with thy good turnes, is a madnesse. Benefytes
therfore must not bee made bytinges, neyther must they
be sawced with any sowernesse. If there bee any thing wherof
thou wouldest warne him, take some other tyme for it.
            
            
               ¶The .vii. Chapter.
               
                  SUch a good turne, hardly bestowed
by a churlish person, Fabius Verucosus
was woont too call stony bread▪
which a hungrie bodie must needes
take, though it bee too his peyne.
Tyberius Caesar being desyred of his
Nephew Marcus Aelius sometyme
Pretor of Rome, to helpe him out of
det, bade him giue him a Bill of his
Creditors names. This was no rewarding, but a calling toogither
of his Creditors. When the Bill was exhibited, he
wrate too his Nephewe, that he had giuen order for the payment
of the Monnie. By which reprochefull admonition he
brought to passe, that his Kinsman was neither indetted too
others, nor beholded too him. Somewhat there was that Tyberius
ment by it. I beléeue he was loth that anye mo should
trubble him with the like sewte. Peraduentur it myght bee 
                     〈◊〉
                  
spéedie way too represse mens importunate sutes with shame:
But he that will bestow benefytes, must vtterly folow a clean
contrarie way.
            
            
               ¶The .viii. Chapter.
               
                  IN all thinges that thou giuest, too the intent it
may bee the more acceptable, thou must beautifie
it by some meanes or other. This dealing of
Tyberius, is not too doo a man a good turne, but
too take him in a trippe. And by the way, that I
may say what I think in this cace also; It s
                     •
                  arsly stādeth with

the honour of a Prince, too reward a man too shame him withall.
Yet for all that, Tyberius could not escape disquietting by
that meane that he thought too haue doone. For there were
dyuers afterward, which made the same sewte vnto him: all
whom he commaunded too shewe the causes of their Det too
the Senate, & thervppon gaue certein summes among them.
This is not a liberalitie: it is a checke: it is a poore helpe, it
is a Princis almes. That is no Benefyte which I cannot remember
without blusshing. I was sent too the Iudge, and I
was fayne to pleade my cace before I could get any thing.
            
            
               ¶The .ix. Chapter.
               
                  THerfore all Authors of wisdomme
teache, that some benefites must bée
bestowed openly, and some secretly.
Openly, which are a prayse too attein:
as rewardes of Chiualrie, and
honour, and whatsouer else becommeth
more honourable by beeyng
knowen. But asfor the thinges
that auaunce not a mannes credit
or estimation, but reléeue his weaknesse, his wāt, or his shame:
they must bee giuen secretly, so as they may bee knowen too
none but those that take good by them.
                     
                        •
                     et not thy 
                        ••
                     ght hande 
                        ••
                     nowe what 
                        •
                     hy left hand 
                        •
                     ooeh. Yea and sometymes
euen he that is too bee holpen must bee beguyled, so as he may
haue the thing, and yet not knowe of whom he had it.
            
            
               ¶The .x. Chapter.
               
                  ARcesilaus (as the report goeth) hauing a poore
fréend that cloked his owne pouerty, which was
also sik and woold not bée acknowen of it, nor yet
that he wanted wherwith too beare out his néedfull
charges: considered how he was too bee succored
secretly, and put a Bag of Gold vnder his Bolster without
making him priuy too it, to the intent that the man which
was shamefast too his owne hinderance, might rather fynde

the thing that he wanted, than receiue it. What then? shall he
not know of whom he had it? At the first let him not knowe it,
sith the not knowing of it is a peece of the good turne. I will
afterward doo many other thinges, and I will giue hym manie
thinges, whereby he may vnderstand from whēce the other
came. Finally though he knowe not whence he had it, yet shall
I knowe who gaue it. That is too small purpose, say you. Too
small purpose in deede, if thou mynd too take Loan for it. But
if thou mentest too giue it in such wyse as myght most auayle
him that receiued it; thou wilt giue it fréely, & thou will desyre
no mo witnesses but thy self. Otherwise thy meening is not
too doo wel by him, but too seeme too haue doone well by him.
But (say you) I will haue him knowe it. Then seeke you too
make him your Detter. No, but I woold haue him know it.
What if it bee more for his behoofe, not to knowe it? what if
it bée more for his honestie? what if it bée more too his lyking?
will you not bee of another mynd? I tell you I would haue
him knowe it. So shalt thou not keepe the man in darkenesse.
I deny not but that as oft as the cace will beare it, a man may
reape pleasure of the good wil of y• receiuer. But if he stand in
néede of helpe, and is ashamed too haue it knowen; if the thing
that I bestow vppō hym shall greeue him if it be not concealed
from him: I wilnot make my benefite a matter of record. For
why should I discouer myself too him to haue giuen it, seeyng
it is one of the firste and moste uecessarie Rules, neuer to vpbrayd
a man, no nor neuer too Cypher it vnto him? For the
Lawe of benefyting betweene men is this: That the one
must foorthwith forget that he hathe giuen, and the other
muste neuer forget what he hath receiued. For the ofte rehearsall
of good deseruinges, dooth greatly frette and greeue
the mynd.
            
            
               The .xi. Chapiter.
               
                  
                  I Could fynd in my hart too krye ou
                     •
                  ,
as the man did that was not able too
beare the pride of certein freend of
the Emprors, whiche had saued his
lyfe at such tyme as the Triumuirs
proclamed traytors whō they listed.
Put mee intoo Cesars hand agein,
(quoth he). How oftē sayest thou too
mée, I haue saued thée, I haue deliuered
thee from death. If I make mention of it of myne owne
frée will, it is lyfe: but if thow put me in mynd of it, it is death.
If thy sauing of mee was too make a vaunt of mee, I owe thee
nowght. How long wilt thow leade mee abowt as a gazing-stocke?
how long will it bee ere thow suffer mée too forget my
misfortune? In y• tryūph I should haue bin led about but once.
Wee must neuer make woords of that which wee haue doone
for anie man. He that tells him of it, demaunds it agein. But
he must not bee vrged, he must not bee put in rememberance,
otherwyse than by reuyuing the former benefyte by the bestowing
of another: no, wee may not tell it vnto other folks.
Let him that hath doone the good turne, hold his peace: and let
him that receiued it blaze it abrode. For else it wilbee sayd vntoo
him, as one sayd too a man that was bosting euyrewhere
of his good turne that he had doone: Wilt thow denye that
thow haddest recōpence? and when he answered where or whē?
Oftentymes and in manie places (sayed he): namely as often
and in as manie places as thow haste babbled of it abrode.
What néededest thow too tell it owt? what neededest thow too
take another mannes office out of his hand? There is another
man that might haue doone it with more honesty, vppon whose
good report, this also woold turne too thy prayse, that thow

                     •
                  ellest it not abrode thyself. Thow must needs condemne mee
for a churle, if thow think that noman should haue knowen it
but by thyne owne reporting. Which dealing is so much too
bee eschewed, y• if a man should make report of our benefits before
our faces, wee should answer, Truly he is ryght woorthie

of greater benefyts, which I knowe myself more willing than
able too performe. And this must be spoken, not as of one that
woold set himself too sale, nor with such colorablenesse as some
mē put the things from them which they woold faynest drawe
too them. Besydes this,Bee not 
                        •
                     eerie of doo
                        ••
                      good. there must be added all maner of courtesie.
The husbandman shall lose that he hath sowen, if he leaue
his labor at the seede. It requyreth much payne too bring the
seede too haruest. Nothing commeth too yeelding of frute, if
it bee not throwly tended and husbanded from the first too the
last. In like cace is it with benefyts. Can there bee anie greater
than those that fathers bestowe vppon their children? Yit
were all but lost, if they should giue them ouer in their chyldhod,
and not cherish their charge foorthon with continewall
kyndnesse. All other benefits are in the same state. If yow help
them not foreward,The ground of all good dooing is loue from an vnfeyned hart. yow lose them. It is too small purpose too
haue bestowed them: they must bee still cherished. If thou wilt
haue them thankfull whom thow makest beholden vntoo thee:
thow must not only bée beneficiall too them, but thow must also
loue them. Inespecially (as I sayd) let vs not trubble mennes
eares. Rehersal bréedeth irksomnesse; and vpbrayding, hatred.
In dooing good turnes, nothing is too bee eschewed so much
as pryde. 
                     •
                  hat needeth anye high looks? what needeth anye
greate woords? The thing itself aduaunceth thée. Uayne vaunting
must bee put away. The things themselues will speake
thowgh wee hold our peace. A good turne that is doone with
pryde, is not only thanklesse, but also hatefull.
            
            
               ¶The .xii. Chapiter.
               
                  C Aesan gaue Pompey of Affrike his lyfe (if
at leastwyse he may bée said too giue, which
taketh not away): and afterward when he
came too giue thankes for his Pardon, he
offered him his left foote too kisse. Suche
as excuse Caesar, say he did it not for anye
pryde, but onely too shewe his Gilt or rather
his Golden shooe set with Pearle and Preciouse stones.

And so, what dishonor was it for a nobleman and a Consulles
peere, too kisse Gold and Perle?
               And could that Caytif, borne for the nonce too chaunge the
customes of his free Countrie intoo Persian 
                  
                     ••
                  auerie, could he
(I say) pick out no clenlyer part of all his bodie too bee kist?
Thought he it a smal matter that an auncient Se
                     •
                  ator, should
so farre abace his honor, as to cast himself downe at his feete,
in the presence of Princes, in such sort as vanquished enemies
haue bin woont too couche at the feete of their Conquerors?
He had found a place beneathe his knees, too thrust freedome
and libertie doune vntoo. Is not this a trampling of the common
weale vnder foote? In good faith (will some man say) it
can make nothing to the matter, that he did it with his left
foote. For it had not bin a pranke of pryde fowle and outrageouse
ynough, too sit vppon the lyfe of a Consulls peere in
shooes of Golde and Pearle, except that like a lustie Gallant,
he had also thrust his goutie Féete into the Mouth of a Senatour.
            
            
               ¶The .xiii. Chapter.
               
                  OThe pryde of greate prosperitie! O
most mischeuous folie! How happie
is it too receiue nothing at thy hād!
O how thou turnest euery benefyte
intoo bane! O how thou delightest
too ouerdoo all thinges! O how
all thinges disgrace thee, and the
higher that thou aduauncest thyself,
the more art thou abased! Thou
shewest thyself not to know these good things wherwith thou
art so puffed vp. What soeuer thow giuest, thow marrest it.
Therfore I woould fayne wéete of thée what it is that maketh
thée so carelesse, what altereth so thy looke & coūtenance, that
thow haddest leuer haue a visor than a face. Pleasaunt are the
things that are giuen with a courteowse and gentle countenance,
whiche when my superior gaue mee, he tryumphed not

ouer mee, but behaued himself as familiarly as could bee, and
made himself fellowlyke with mée, & without any glorious setting
out of his gift, wayted a conuenient tyme too pleasure
mée, rather vppon occasion than vppon cōstreint. There is but
one way too perswade suche maner of men that they should not
marre their benefites through their owne statelinesse: namely
too shewe them that their benefytes are not the greater, bycause
they bee giuen with greater adoo; nor they themselues
the better thought of for so dooing: but that the greatnesse of
their pryde beyng fonde, causeth thinges otherwise woorthy
of loue, too bee hated.
            
            
               ¶The .xiiii. Chapiter.
               
                  THere are somme thinges that would turne too
the hurte of the receyuer; the which it is a benefyte
too deny, and not too performe. And therefore
wée must rather consider the profit of the demaunders,
than their▪ desyre. For oftentymes
wee couet hurtfull thinges, and wee bee not able to discerne
howe noysomme they bee, bycause affection blyndeth reason.
But when our passionatenesse is well settled, and the rage of
the fyrie fury that chaced away discretiō, is throughly alayed:
thē hate wee the mi
                     •
                   bestowers of these hurtfull giftes. Wherfore
like as we de
                     •
                  ye cold Water too sickfolkes, and weapon
too such as bee in sorowe or rage; and whatsoeuer the heate of
loue desyreth too vse againste it self, too suche as bee in loue:
euen so muste wee continew too denye hurtfull thinges too
those that earnestly, humbly, yea and oftentymes also rewfully
request them. It becommeth men too haue an eye, bothe too
the beginning and too the ending of their benefyts and good
turnes, and too giue such thinges as may like a man, not only
at the receiuing of them, but also euer after. There bee manie
that will say, I knowe it will do him no good: but what should
I doo? He intreateth mee, and I cannot withstand his request,
let him looke too himself, he shalnot blame mee. That is vntrew.
For he shall blame thee, and that woorthely too, when he

is come too his ryght wittes ageine, and when the fit that inflamed
his mynd is ouerpast, for why should he not hate him, by
whom he was furthered too his hurt and perill? It is a cruell
kyndnesse too bee intreated too mischeef one. Like as it is a
goodly poynt of charitie to saue men that bée euen loth and vnwilling
too bee saued: so is it a fawning and courteouse kynd
of hatred, too graunt thinges hurtfull too those that desyre
them. Let our benefyte bee suche as the vse of it may make it
still better belyked, and suche as neuer may turne too harme.
I shall not giue a man monie, if I may know he will bestowe
it vppon a harlot, least I bee found too bee a maynteyner of his
filthie act or purpose. If I can, I shall call him from it: if not,
I shalnot further his wickednesse. Whither anger driue a
man too doo that he ought not, or whither the heate Ambition
withdrawe him from his welfare: yet shal I not suffer him too
mischeef himself, neyther shall I giue him cause too say afterward,
He hathe killed mee with his kyndnesse.
            
            
               ¶The .xv. Chapiter.
               
                  OFtentymes there is no defferēce betwene
the pleasuringes of fréendes, and the practizes
of foes. For looke what the enemie
could haue wisshed, that dooeth the vnseasonable
ouerkyndnesse of the fréend, bothe
force vntoo, and arme vntoo. And what
fouler shame can there bee, than that there
should bee no differēce betweene a bane and a benefate? which
thing commeth too passe oueroften. Lette vs neuer giue thinges
that shall redound to our owne shame. For seeing that the
hyghest poi
                     •
                  t of freendship, is for a man too sette as muche by
his freend as by himself: bothe parties must bee prouided for
alike. I will giue too him that wanteth, but so as I want not
myself, I will succour one that is like too perishe, but so as I
perish not myself, except I maie bee the borowe of somme singular
persone, or of somme greate thing.
               I will bestowe no suche be
                     •
                  efyte, as I could not aske with

out shame.
               I will neither inhaunce small thinges, nor suffer greate
thinges too bee taken for small. For like as he that twitteth a
man by that he hath giuen him, dooth marre the grace of his
gift: euen so he that dooth but shewe, how muche he hath giuen
too one that abaceth the same, dooth but commende his
gift, and not vpbrayd it.
               Euerie man must haue an eye to his owne abilitie and power,
that wee bestowe neither more nor lesse thā wee bee able.
               Wee must consider the persone of him to whom wee giue.
For somme thinges are too small too come from greate men:
and somme are too greate for him that should receiue them.
And therefore wey with thyself, the persone of either of them.
When thou myndest too bestowe, examine whither the thing
bee more than the giuer can forbeare, or whither it bee too little
for him too bestowe: and ageine, whither he that is too receiue
it, may hold skorne of it; or whither it bee more than is
meete for him.
            
            
               ¶The .xvi. Chapter.
               
                  ALexander being vndiscreete, and myndyng
none but ouer greate thinges, gaue one a
Citee. When he too whom it was giuen,
measuring himself in himself, re
                     •
                  uzed it for

                     •
                  eare of being enuyed for so greate a reward,
saiyng it was not agreeable too his
estate: I passe not (ꝙ Alexander) what becommeth
thee to receiue, but what it becommeth me too giue.
It seemeth too bee a noble saiyng, and yet being a kinges saiyng,
it is moste foolishe. For nothing becommeth any man, in
respect of himself alone. The respectes that make it comly, are
what, too whom, when, why, where, and suche other, without
whiche there is no reason in dooing. Proude Peacocke, if it
becomme not him too receiue it, neither becommeth it thee too
giue it. There is a proportionable respect of persones and degrees.
And seeing that on either side, the 
                     〈◊〉
                   is the meane;

as well is that a fault that ouerreacheth, as that whiche commeth
too short. Well, admit it bee lawfull for thee, and that
Fortune hath so highly aduaunced thee, that thon mayst giue
whole Citées for rewardes, in the not receiuing where of, there
was more noble courage, than in the rechele
                     ••
                  e gift of them:
yet is there somme man too meane too haue a Citée thrust intoo
his bosomme.
            
            
               ¶The .xvii. Chapiter.
               
                  ONe of Diogenes sect desired Antigonus too
giue him a Talent.
                     
                        •••
                     ueling in 
                        •••
                     oing good 
                        •
                     nes. 
                  Antigonus answered it
was more than one of the Doggishe secte
ought too craue. Uppon this deniall he desired
a pennye. Antigonus answered it was
lesse than became a king too giue. Suche
caueling is too shamefull. He founde a shift
too giue neither of bothe. In the pennie he respected his owne
royaltie, and in the Talent the others beggerie: whereas notwithstandyng
the might haue giuen the pennie as to a begger,
and the Talent as a king. But admitte there may bee somme
thing to greate for a beggar to receiue: yet is there nothing
so small, whiche the courtesie of a Prince may not giue with
his hono
                     •
                  r. If you demaund myne opinion, I allowe the dealing
of Antigonus. For it is not too bee borne with, that a man
should bothe craue monnie, and contemne it. Thou hast vowed
the hatred of monnie: it is thy profession: thou hast taken that
parte to playe: and thou must playe it throughly. It is ageinst
ryght and reason, that thou shouldest gather monnie vnder the
glory of begging.
                     
                        ••
                     he persones 
                        •••
                     othe of the 
                        •••
                     uer, and of 
                        ••
                     e receiuer 
                        ••
                     ust bee con
                     
                        ••
                     dered. A man therefore must as well consider his
owne persone, as the persone of him whom he myndeth too releeue.
I will vse my frer
                     •
                  d Chrysippus similitude of the play at
the ball, whiche doubtlesse falleth 
                     〈◊〉
                   the ground, if either the
sender or the receiuer misse his stroke. It do
                     •
                  eth then keepe
his 
                     •
                  ourse, when it is featly tossed and turned from hand too
hand on bothe sides. It be
                     •
                  oueth the good player too 
                     ••
                  rike it
after one sor
                     •
                  e, if his play fellow bee a 
                     〈◊〉
                   man, & after another

if he bee a lowe man. In like cace is it with a good turne. For
except it bee fitly applied to bothe persones, as well of the dooer,
as of the receiuer: it shall neither passe from the one, nor
comme to the other in suche wise as it ought too dooe. If wee
haue too dooe with a practized and skilfull player, wee maye
strike the ball the boldlyer: for howsoeuer it commeth, a redye
and nimble hande will strike it backe ageine. But if wee deale
with a Nouice and a learne
                     •
                  , wee must not in
                     •
                  ounter him so
roughly, nor with so full blowe, but wee must meete the Ball
ley
                     •
                  urely and softly, and as it were leade it intoo his hande ageine.
The like thing is too bée dooen in benefytes. Wée must
trayne on somme men, and thinke it enough if they putfoorthe
themselues▪ if they aduenture, and if they bee willing. But comonly
wee ourselues dooe make menne vnthankfull, and wee
like well of it that it should bee so: as who would saie, our benifites
were therefore the greater, because the partie is not able
too requite them, according to the maner of wranglyng
game
                     ••
                  ers, which finde fault with their playfellowes for the
nonce, to the intent too giue ouer the game, whiche cannot bée
co
                     •
                  tinewed but by consent. Many are of so vntoward a nature
that they had leuer lose that whiche they haue bestowed, than
too seeme too haue reteiued aught, they bee so proude and so
skornefull. But how muche better, and how muche greater
cour
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  ie were it, too deale so as the otherside might play their
partes also; and so too beare with them, as they myght bée able
too shewe themselues thankfull; and too conster all thinges too
the best, and too like of him that yeeldeth thankes, no lesse than
if he yeelded recompence; and too behaue ones self so gently,
that looke whom he hath moste bound, him he is moste willing
to discharge? The Usurer is woont too bee ill spoken of, if he
bee too hastie in demaunding: and as ill he spokē of, if he seeke
delayes and bee 
                     •
                  lowe and loth to receiue. As well is a good
turne too bee receiued ageine, as not too bee exacted ageine.
He is best that giueth ridely, and neuer exacteth agein. He that
receiueth the re
                     •••
                  ne of a benefyte, with like mynd as if he receiue
                     •
                  
the first gift of it: is glad that it is rendered, and yet forgetteth

in good earnest what he had dooen for the other.
            
            
               ¶The .xviii. Chapter.
               
                  SOme men not onely bestowe good tur
                     •
                  es
skornfully, but also receiue them skornfully:
which is not too bee committed. For
now wee will passe too the other part, and
shewe how men ought too behaue themselues
in receiuing good turnes. Therfore
where a dewtie consisteth of twoo parties:
there is required as much of y• one as of ye other. When a man
hath looked what maner a one a Father ought too bee; he shall
vnderstand, there remaynes as muche woorke for him, too see
what maner a one the Sonne ought too bee. There 
                     •
                  e certein
dewties requisite in the Husbond; and no lesse is looked for in
the wife. As much as these doe require one of another, so much
also doo they owe one another; and are to bee measured all by
one rule, which (as Hecaton sayeth) is hard. For al honest thinges
are hard too atteine vntoo, and so are the thinges that approche
neere too honestie. For they must not only bee doone,
but they must bee doone with reason. Shee must be our guyde
too followe all our lyfe. All thinges both small and great must
bee doone by her aduyce: according as shee counselleth, so must
wee giue. The first thing that shee will teache vs, is that wee
must not take at all mennes handes. Of whom then shall wee
take? Too answer thee in feawe wordes, of them too whom it
may beseeme vs too giue. For certesse wee ought too bee more
precyse in seeking too whom wee may make ourselues detters,
than on whom wee may bestowe. For although there folow
none other discommoditie; (as there folowe verie many)
Yet is it a greate corzie too bee in daunger too such a one as
thou wouldest not. Contrariwise it is the greatest pleasure in
the world, too haue receyued a good turne at such a mannes
hand, as thou couldest fynd in thyne harte too loue, euen after
he hath doon thee wrong. But for a man too be driuen too haue
him of whom he hath no liking; it is too an honest and shamefast

mynde, the greatest miserie that can bee. I must alwayes
put you in remembraunce, that I speake not of perfect wyse
men: which lyke whatsoeuer they ought too doo, which haue
their willes at cōmaundement, which bynd themselues whervntoo
they liste, and performe whatsoeuer they haue bounde
themselues vnto: but of vnperfect men, which haue a desyre too
folowe honestie, but their affections are stubborne in obeying.
Therfore he must bee a chozen man, at whose hand I should receyue
a benefyte. And truely I ought too bee more heedfull
too whom I indette my self for a benefyte, than for monie. For
too him that lendes mee monny, I must paye no more than I
haue taken: and when I haue payd it, I am free and discharged.
But vntoo the other I must pay more: and when I haue
requyted him, yet neuerthelesse I am still beholden to hym.
For when I haue requyted I must begin new agein, & freendship
warneth mee too admit no vnworthie persone. So is the
Law of benefites a most holy law, wherout of sprinketh frendship.
Some man will say, It lyes not alwayes in myne owne
power too refuse: I must sommetyme take a good turne whither
I will or no. A cruell and testie Tyraunt profers mee a
gift, & if I refuse it, he wil thinke I hold skorne of hym. Shal
I not take it? Put the same cace of a Murderer or a Pyrate,
as of a Tyrant that hath a murdering and theeuish hart: what
shall I doo? He is not worthie that I should bee beholden too
him. When I say thou must make choyce too whom thou wilt
bee beholdē; I except force and feare, in whose presence choyce
hath no place. If it bee free for thee, if it bee at thine owne discretion
too take or refuze: then aduize thyselfe what to doo.
But if constreint barre thee of thy libertie, thou must vnderstand
that thou dooste not receiue, but obey. Noman is bound
by the receyuing of that which he might not refuse. Wilt thou
know whither I bee willing or no? then set mee at liberty too
bee vnwilling if I list. But what and if he haue giuen thee lyfe?
It makes no matter what it bée that is giuen▪ except it bee giuen
willingly too one that is willing too haue it. Although
thou haue saued mee, yet art thou not therefore my Sauiour.

Poyson hath some tymes healed a man; and yet is it not
therefore counted a wholsome thing. Somme thinges doo a
man good, and yet they bynd him not.
            
            
               ¶The .xix. Chapter.
               
                  A Certein man that came too kill a Tyrant,
happened too launce a Byle of his with his
Sword: and yet the Tyrant kund him no
thank for his curing of that thing by hurting
him, which the Surgiōs were afrayd
too sette hande vntoo. You see there is no
greate weight in the deede it self. For he
seemeth not to haue doone him a good turne, which did it with
purpose to haue doone him harme. For he may thank chaunce
for his good turne, & the man for his harme. I sawe once a Lyon
in the round Listes, which knowing one of the condemned
men that had bin his Keeper aforetymes, defended him from
the assaultes of the other beastes. Was not this Lyons help a
benefyte? No verely, bycause the Lyon neyther had will too
doo it with al, nor did it of purpose to doo good. Looke in what
cace I put the wyld beaste, in the same put thou also the Tyrantqueller.
For both he and the beast gaue lyfe, and yet neyther
he nor the beast did a good turne, bycause that too hee cō
                  pelled
to receiue a good turne, is no good turne in deede. It is
no benefyting too make a man beholden whither he will or
no. For first thou must giue mee free libertie of myself, and thē
offer mee thy good turne.
            
            
               ¶The .xx. Chapter.
               
                  IT is woont too bee a question concerning
Marcus Brutus, whither he ought to haue
accepted his life at Iulius Caesars had, séeing
he iudged Caesar worthy of death. What
reason led him to kill him, I will declare
another tyme. For although in all other
thinges he were a noble man: yet in this

cace mee thinkes he was farre ouershot, and behaued not himself
according to too the disciplyne of the Stoikes, inasmuchas
he either feared the name of a King, wheras the best state of a

                     •
                  ammon weale is vnder a ryghtfull king; or hoped for freedomme
where there was so greate reward both of souereintie
and slauerie; or imagined that the Citie might be brought
backe agein too her former state, when she had lost hir former
condicions, or that indifferencie of Iustice might continew
and Lawes stand in force, where he had seen so many thousand
men fighting, too whither partie they should becomme slaues.
But how quyte had he forgotten the nat
                     •
                  re of the world, or of
his owne Countrie, whiche beleeued that if one were dispatched,
there were no mo of the same mynde; seeing that after
so many kinges s
                     •
                  ayne by sword and lyghteninges, there was
yet stil a Tarquyne too be found? Yet for al this, Brutus myght
haue taken lyfe at Caesars hand: but he should not haue accepted
such a one for his father, as had wrōgfully purchased that
power too▪ doo him good. For he saues not a man, which killes
him not: neyther dooth he benefyte him, but dismisse him.
            
            
               ¶The .xxi. Chapiter.
               
                  THis may rather come in question, what a
prisoner should doo, when a man of filthie
life and slaunderouse tung profereth too
paye his Raunsome for him. Sall I suffer
myself too bee saued by a varlet? And
when he hathe saued mee, what thank shall
I yeeld him? shall I liue with a ribawd? no.
Shall I not liue wt my Raūsomer? no nother. What will you
haue mee to doo then? I wil tel you. Euē of any such persone I
may take mony too pay for y• raūsome of my life. And I take it
as a thing lent, but not as a benefyte. I will pay him his monnye
agein; and if occasion serue that I may saue him in daunger,
I will saue him also: but as too ioyne freendship with him,
which matcheth like too like, that will I not doe; neyther will
I account him as my Sauyour; but as an vsurer, too whom I

knowe I must restore that which I haue receyued.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      must not 
                        ••
                     eiue too 
                        ••
                     hinderāce the giuer. Some man
is woorthie too haue a benefite receiued at his hand, but it will
hurt him if he giue it: & therfore shal I not take it. As for example,
as he is redy too doe mee good, too his owne hinderāce, yea
or also too his owne perill, (as peraduenture he is willing too
defend mee at the Barre, but by his standing in my defence he
shall procure himself the kinges displeasure): now were I his
enemie, if I should not doe that whiche myght bee doone with
his moste ease, yt is too wit, if I should no stand too myne owne
perill without him, seing he would hazard himself for my sake.
Hecaton putteth this fond and tryfling example of Arkesilaus,
whom he reporteth too haue refuzed monnye that was offered
him by a mannes sonne yit vnder yeeres of discretion, least the
chyld might haue ronne in the dspleasure of his nigardly father.
What thing did he woorthie of prayse? That he receiued
not stolne goodes? and that he had rather not too receyue than
too bee driuen too restitution? Not too receyue other mennes
goodes, was a poynt of stayednesse. But if wee want an example
of a noble mynd, let vs looke vppon that woorthie wyght
Graecinus Iulius, whom Caius Caesar slew, for none other offence,
but bycause he was a better man than it is expedient that anie
should bee too a Tyrant. At such tyme as this Graecinus tooke
monye of his freendes that made a contribution towardes
his charges of certein gaminges: one Fabius Persicus sent him
a greate somme of monnie, but he would in no wyse receiue it.
And when his freendes hauing respect too the gift and not too
the giuer, found fault with him for refusing it: shall I (quoth
he) take a benefyte at the hand of him, whō I would not voutsafe
too pledge in a cup of drinke? Likewise when one Rebilus,
a Consulles peere, but yet of thesame stampe that Fabius was,
had sent him a greater summe, and was verie importunate vppon
him too receiue it: I praye you pardon mee (ꝙ he) for I
haue taken none of Persicus.
               
            
            
               ¶The .xxii. Chapter.
               
                  
                  WHither was this a receiuyng of giftes,After wha
                        •
                      maner bin
                        ••
                      fites are t
                        •
                      bee receiu
                        •
                     
                   or a
choozing of Senators? When wée thinke
it méete to receiue, lette vs receiue cheerfully
with apparaunce of gladnesse, and let
thesame bee manifest too the giuer, that he
maie reape present frute thereof. For it is
a iust cause of gladnesse, too see a mannes
fréend glad; but it is a iuster cause too haue made him glad. Let
vs shew that wee accept the thing thankfully, by powryng out
our affections; and let vs witnesse it, not onely in his heeryng,
but also euerywhere. He that hath taken a good turne thankefully,
hath payed the first paiment of it.
            
            
               ¶The .xxiii. Chapiter.
               
                  SOmme will not receiue a good turne but
in secret, shunnyng too haue any manne as
witnesse, or priuie of it. You maye bee sure
suche men meene no good. Like as the bestower
must bring his benefite so farfoorth
too knowledge, as it maye delight him on
whom it is bestowed: so he that receiues it
must make others priuie to it. Looke what thou art ashamed
too owe▪ that receiue thou not. Somme giue thankes by
stelth, and in a corner, and in ones eare. This is not shamefastnesse,
but a lothnesse too bee acknowen of it. That man is vnthankfull,
whiche giueth thankes in hudther mudther. Some
men would borowe monnie, and yet neither make the Brokers
nor the publik▪ Notaries priuie too it, nor yet giue bill of their
hande. In like sort deale they, whiche indeuer too keepe from
all mennes knowledge, the good turne that is bestowed vpon
them. They bee loth too blaze it abrode, beeause they would
bee sayd to haue compassed it by their owne connyng rather
than by any other mannes helpe. They seldomme make any
countena
                     •
                  nce too those that they are indetted too for life or
preferment: and while they shunne too bee counted hangers
vppon other mennes sleeues, they ronne intoo the reproche of

vnthankfulnesse, whiche is woorse.
            
            
               ¶The .xxiiii. Chapiter.
               
                  OThersomme speake woorst of them that deserue
beste. A manne may more safely dooe
somme men a displeasure, thē a good turne.
For they seeke too proue themselues nothing
beholden too men, by hating them.
But wee ought too labour for nothing
more, than that the remembraunce of good
turnes, may alwayes sticke fast in our myndes: which must bée
newe burnished from tyme to tyme, because none can requite a
good turne, but he that beareth it in mynde, and the verie bearing
of it in mynde is a requitall. A man must receiue neither
squeimishly, nor vnderling like and bacely. For he that is negligent
in the first taking, when all good turnes like men best
because of their newnesse: what will he doo when the first pleasure
of it is ouerpast?
               One takes a good turne skornefully, as though he would
say, In good faithe I haue no neede of it, but séeyng thou art so
greatly desirous, I am cōtent thou shalt vse my pacience. Another
takes it reckelesly, so as he leaues the bestower in doutte,
whither he perceiued it or no. The third scarce openeth his
lippes, and pla
                     •
                  es the churle more than if he had hild his peace.
A man must speake out earnestly according to the greatnesse
of the matter: and he must knit it vp with suche woordes as
theis: You haue made mée beholden too you more than you are
awareof. (For there is noma but he is glad too haue his good
turne extend with the furthest.) you knowe not how much you
haue doone for mee: but I assure you, it is much more than you
take it too bee.
               He requyteth out of hād, which chargeth himself thus. I shal
neuer bee able too requyte your freendlienesse. But surely I
will neuer cease too report euerywhere that I am not able too
requite it.
            
            
               
               ¶The .xxv. Chapiter.
               
                  
                     FVrnius did not in any thing more purchace
himself the fauour of the Emperour Augustus,
and win him easie too grau
                     •
                  t him
other thynges, than that when he had gotten
his fathers pardon, who had takē part
with Antonie ageinst Augustus, he saied:
This one wrong doo I receiue at thy hand
O Caesar, that thou haste dealt in suche wise with me, as I must
liue and dye vnthankfull. What so greace signe of a 
                     ••
                  thankfull
mynde can bee, as by no meanes to satisfie a mannes self,
no nor yet too conceiue any hope that euer he shalbee able too
come neere the requityng of a good turne? By this and suche
other kynde of speeches let vs so deale, as our good will maye
not lye hidden, but bee disclosed and come too light. Yea, and
though woordes cease: yet if wee bee mynded as wee ought
too bee, the conscience will bewraye it self in our countenance.
He that purposeth too bee thankfull, myndeth requityng as
soone as he receiueth. Chrysippus saieth he ought too bee disposed,
like one that hath put himself in a redinesse too ronne for a
wager, and standeth within the listes, waityng for his tyme to
step forward at the sounde of the Trumpet. And surely he had
néede of greate swiftnesse, and greate inforcing of himself, that
should ouertake him that is gone afore him.
            
            
               ¶The .xxvi. Chapiter.
               
                  NOw is it too bée seene what thing maketh
men vnthākful most.What thyng maketh men vnthankfull moste. It is either the ouerweenyng
and ouerlikyng of themselues,
and of their owne thinges, a fault ingreffed
in mannes Nature: or it is couetousnesse,
or els it is Enuie. Let vs beginne at
the first. There is no man but he is a fauorable
Iudge in his owne cace. Herevppon it commes to passe,
that he thinkes he hath deserued al thinges, and taketh himself

too bee bounde to noman, sopposing himself not too bee esteemed
according too his woorthinesse. He gaue mee this (saieth
he): but how late, and after how muche trauess? How many mo
thinges might I haue obteined in the while, if I had fa
                     ••
                  ed vppon
suche a man, or suche a man, or if I had sought myne owne
profit? I looked not for this. I am made a rascall. Could he beteeme
mee no more than this? It had bin more honestie too
haue quite ouerslipt mee.
            
            
               ¶The .xxvii. Chapter.
               
                  
                     CNeus Len
                        •
                     ulus the Soothsaier, the greatest
example of riches that euer was seene,That is twentie hundred thousande pounde ster
                        •
                     lyng▪
                   before
suche tyme as his Franklinges m
                     •
                  de
him poore, (for he sawe * Fower thousande
Sestertia of his own, I spake properly in
                     ••
                  
saying, for he did no more but sée them) was
as dul of wit, as weake of courage. For although
he was exceeding couetous: yet did he vtter his monnie
faster than his woordes; so farre was he too séeke what too say.
Whereas this man owed all his aduauncement too the Emperour
Augustus, vntoo whom he had brought nothing but beggerie,
distressed vnder the title of Nobilitie: being now becōme
cheef of the Citée, bothe in monnie and fauour; he was woont
oftentymes too make his moane too the Emperor, that he was
drawen awaye from his studie, and that all that euer the Emperor
had bestowed vppon him, was nothing in comparison of his
losse, by giuing vp his studie of Eloquence. And yet emong other
thinges, the Emperor Augustus had doon this for hym
also, that he had deliuered him from being mocked, and from his
vaine labour. Couetousnesse suffereth not any manne too bee
thankfull. For whatsoeuer is giuen, is neuer enough too him
that gapeth for more. The more wee haue▪ the more wee couet,
and much more eagre is the couetousnesse that is béezied in the
raking togither of greate riches: like as the force of a flame is
a thousande tymes feercer, according as the fire is the greater
that it blazeth out of. Also after the same sorte, Ambition suffereth

not any manne too rest within the measure of that honour,
whiche heretoofore he would haue bin ashamed too haue wisshed.
Noman giueth thankes for a Tribuneship, but grudgeth
that he is not aduaunced too a Pretorship. Neither thinketh he
the Pretorship woorth gramercie, if he comme not too the Cō
                  sulship.
Neither will the Consulship suffize him, if he haue it not
more than once. Ambition stalketh still foreward, and neuer
perceiueth when he is well, because he neuer looketh frō whēce
he came, but alwaies whither he would. A more vehement and
persing maladie than all these is Enuie: whiche vexeth vs with
making of comparisons. He bestoweth this vppon mee (sayeth
Enuie) but he bestowed more vppon him, and more spéedily vppon
that man. Thus weyeth he no mannes cace but his owne,
and fauoureth himself ageinst all men.
            
            
               ¶The .xxviii. Chapiter.
               
                  HOw much playner dealing, and how much
more wisdomme were it, too aduaunce a
good turne receiued▪ and to consider that
noman settes so much by 
                     •
                  nother, as euery
man settes by himselsef.
               I ought too haue had more at his hand,
but it was not for his ease to
                     •
                   forbeare any
more. There were many other too bee rewa
                     •
                  ded at his han
                     ••
                  
as well as I. This is a beginning; Let vs take it in good
woorth, and toll him forewarde by accepting his good will
thankfully.
               He hath doone but a little at once: he will doo it the oftener.
He hath preferred that man before mee, and mee before
many others. That man is not able too matche mee in vertue
courtly behauior, but yet hath he his peculiar grace. By grudging▪
I shal neuer make myself woorthy of greater benefites:
but I may make myself vnwoorthy of those y• I haue alredie.
There was more giuen too those lewde vnthrifter. What is
that too mee? how sildome dooth fortune vse discretion? Wée
dayly complayne that euill men bee luckie. Oftentymes the

Hayle that ouerpassed the groundes of the woorst folke, hath
striken the Corne of the best. Euery man must hold him to his
Lot, as well in receyuing of freendshippe as in other thinges.
There is no benefyte so perfect, whiche enuy can not nip: nor
no benefite so skant, whiche a good accepter may not inlarge.
Thee shal neuer want causes of co
                     •
                  plaint, if a man looke vppon
benefites on the woorse syde.
            
            
               ¶The .xxix. Chapter.
               
                  SEE howe vnindifferentlye Gods
giftes are esteemed,T
                        •
                     e vnthankfulnesse of men towardes God. euen of some
that professe wisdomme. They fynd
faulte that wee bée not as bigge bodyed
as Elephantes, as swifte of
foote as Hertes, as light as Birdes,
as strong as Bulles: that beastes
haue substancialler hydes than
wée, that the falow Déere hath a fairer
heare, the Beare a thicker, the Beuer a softer: that Dogges
excell vs in smelling, Aegles in seeing, Rauens in long liuing,
and diuers beastes in easie and happie swimming. And
whereas nature suffereth not certein thinges to ioyne toogither
in one, (as, that swiftnesse of bodye should bee matched
with equall strength: they call it an iniurie, that man is not
compounded of diuerse and disagreable properties: and they
blame the Gods of neglecting vs, bycause they haue not giuen
vs perfect health, inuincible strength and corage, and knowledge
what is too comme. Yea and they scarce refreyne themselues
from russhing into so shamelesse impudencie, as too
hate nature for making vs inferiour too the Goddes, and not
felowes with them and full as good as they. How much more
meete were it for vs too returne backe too the beholding of
their so many and so great benefites, and too yeeld them thankes,
that it hat pleased them too allot vs the second roome in
this mo
                     •
                  t beautiful house, and too make vs Lords of all earthly
thinges? Is there any comparison betweene vs and those

beastes wherof wee haue the souereintie? Whatsoeuer is denyed
vs,How great
                        •••
                      manne is 
                        〈◊〉
                      holden to
                        •
                      God for his benefites. could not be giuen vnto vs. And therefore whosoeuer
thou art that doost so vnderualew mannes Lot, bethinke thee
how greate thinges our souerein Parent hath giuen vs: how
much stronger creatures wee bring in subiection, how muche
swifter creatures wee ouertake, and how there is no mortall
thing exempted from our power. Consider how many vertues
wee haue receiued, how many artes, and what a mynd, whiche
perceth through all thinges euen in the same instaunt that it
setteth itself vntoo them, being more swift than the planettes,
whose courses it foreseeth many hundred yeeres before they
come too passe. Finally marke what plentie of frutes, what abundance
of riches, what store of all thinges heaped one vpon
another bee bestowed vppon vs. Well: Take the vew of all
thinges, and bycause thou canst fynd no one whole thing that
thou haddest leuer bee: picke out suche seuerall thinges as
thou wouldest wish too bée giuen thée out of them al. So when
thou hast wellweyed the louing kyndnesse of nature, thou shalt
be forced too confesse, that thou wart hir Dealing. And so it is
in deede. The Gods immortall haue loued vs and doo loue vs
most deerly: and (which is the greatest honour that could bee
giuen) they haue placed vs next vnto themselues. Greate thinges
haue wee receiued, and greater we could not take.
            
            
               ¶The .xxx. Chapiter.
               
                  THese thinges) my freend Liberalis)
haue I thought requisite too bee
spoken, both bycause it behoued mée
too say somewhat of greate benefytes
when wee were talking of small
benefites: and also bycause the boldnes
of his horrible vyce floweth frō
thence into all other thinges.Vnthenkfulnesse too God breedeth vnthankfulnesse towardes mē. For
vntoo whom will he become thankfull,
or what good turne will he esteeme greate or woorth the
requy
                     •
                  ing, which despyzeth the hyghest benefites? Too whom

will he think himself beholden for his lyfe, which denyeth himself
too haue receiued lyfe of the Goddes, to whom he prayeth
dayly for it? Whosoeuerthen teacheth too bee thankfull, dealeath
with the cace both of men and Gods; too whom, notwithstanding
that they neyther want aught nor couet aught, wee
may render thankefulnesse neuerthelesse.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      requyte 
                        〈◊〉
                      good turne 
                        〈◊〉
                      an easye 
                        •
                     atter. There is no reason
why any man should lay the blame of his thanklesse mynd vppon
his owne weakenesse or pouertie, and saye, what shall I
doo? How or when may I requite thankes too my superiours
the Lords of all thinges? Too requyte is an easie matter: yea,
if thou bee a Nigard, euen without cost: and if thou bee slothfull,
without labour. Truly, if thou listest, thou mayst bee euen
with any man, euen in the same instaunt that he maketh thee
beholden vnto him. For he that hath receiued a benefyte with
a weldisposed mynd, hath requyted it.
            
            
               ¶The .xxxi. Chapiter.
               
                  IN my opinion, this Paradox of the Stoikes,
That he whiche hath receiued a good
turne with a weldispozed mynd hathe requyted
it, is neyther straunge nor incredible.
For inasmuche as wee measure all
thinges by the mynd; looke how muche a
man is fully mynded too doe, so much hath
he doone.Wherewith a man may requyte without cost or labour. And forasmuch as Godlinesse, faithfulnesse, vprightnesse,
and finally all vertue is perfect in itself: although a man
could not put foorth his hand, yet maie he bee thankfull euen
with his hart. As oft as a man compasseth his purpose, he reapeth
the frute of his owne woork. What thē purposeth he that
bestoweth a benefite? Too profit the partie on whom he bestowes
it, and to delight himself. Now if he haue accomplished
that which he ment, so as his good turne is come too my hādes,
and hathe made bothe of vs glad: he hath obteyned that whiche
he sought. For his intēt was not too haue anie thing in recompence:
for then had it not bin a benefite but a bargeine. He hath
sayled well that comes too the hauen which he made his course

vntoo. The darte that hitteth the marke it is throwen at, hath
performed the part of a stedie hand. He that doeth a good turne,
meeneth too haue it accepted thankfully. If it bee well taken,
he hath his desyre.
               But he hoped for some commoditie by it. Then is it no benefite;
the propertie whereof is too mynd no returne. As for the
thing that I tooke, If I tooke it with like meening as it was
giuen, I haue requyted it. Otherwyse the thing that of itself is
best, were in woorst cace. Too the end I should bee thankfull,
I am sent vntoo fortune. If I cannot requyte for want of her
fauour, I will satisfye good will with good will. What then?
Shall I not dooe what I can too requyte, and seeke oportunitie
of tyme, and matter, and indeuer too fill the bosome of
him, at whose handes I haue receiued anie thing? Yes. But
yet the world went ill with gooddooing, if a man might not bée
thankfull euen with emptie handes.
            
            
               ¶The xxxii. Chapiter.
               
                  HE that hath receiued a good turne (sayest
thou), although he haue taken it with neuer
so wellmeening a mynde: yet hathe he
not doon his deutie too the full. For there
is a peece yet still behynd, namely too Requyre:
like as it Tēnis it is somewhat too
take the ball conningly and ridily, and yet
he is not called a good player, vnlesse he send it backe agein as
fast and featly as he tooke it. This example is vnlike. Whyso?
Because the cōmendacion of this game, consisteth in the quicke
stirring and nimblenesse of the bodie, and not in the mind. And
therfore it is requisite that the whole should bee layd forthe at
large, where the eye must be iudge. Yet will I not for all that,
denye him too bee a good player, that taketh the ball as he
owght too doe, though he strike it not agein, so the fault bee
not in himself. But (sayest thou) although there bee no want
of connyng in the player, inasmuchas he did part and was able
too haue doone the rest that he did not: yet is the game itself

mayned, which consisteth of taking and striking back the ball
agein. I will stand no longer about confuting in this cace: let
vs graunt that there is some want in the playe and not in the
player. So also in this matter whiche wée treate of, there wanteth
somewhat in respect of the the thing that was giuen, whervntoo
another part is dew; but there wanteth nothing in respect
of the mynd: he that hath found one like mynded too himself,
hathe accomplished his owne desyre as muche as lyeth in
him.
            
            
               The .xxxiii. Chapter.
               
                  HE hath bestowed a good turne vppon mee,
and I haue accepted it euen as he would
haue wished. Now hath he the thing that he
sought, yea & the only thing that he sought:
for I am thankfull. Herafter remaineth the
vse of mee, and some commoditie too redound
too him by my thankfullnesse. This
is not the remnant of an vnperfect dewtie, but an income too
a perfect one. Phidias makes an Image. The frute of his
woorkmanship is one, and the frute of his woork is another.
The end of his woorkmanship is too haue made the thing that
he ment too make. The end of his woorke is too haue doone it
too some profit. Phidias hathe finished his woorke, though he
haue not sold it. He reapeth three frutes of his woork. The one
is of his owne conceyte; and this he receiueth assoone as his
woorke is finished: the other is of his fame; and the third is of
his profit whiche shall come vntoo him eyther by fauour, or by
sale, or by some other meane. Likewyse of a benefyte or good
turne, let the firste frute be the frute of a mans owne conceyte.
This hath he reaped whiche hath brought his gift thither as
he would. The secōd frute is of fame: And the third frute is of
suche thinges as may bée performed by one towardes another.
Therfore when a good turne is accepted freendly, he that bestowed
it hath alredie rece
                     •
                  ued recompence, but not reward.
And therfore looke what is without the benefite itself, it must

bée repayed by taking the same well.
            
            
               ¶The .xxxiiii. Chapter.
               
                  WHat then? hath he requited, which hath doone
nothing? Nay he hath doone verie much: hee
hath rendered good wt a good will, yea & like
for like also, whiche is the propertie of frendship.
Ageine the payment of a Benefite is one
way, and the payment of a det is another way.
You muste not looke that I should shewe my payment too the
eye: the thing is doone betweene mynd and mynd. Although
the thing that I say, dooe feight at the first ageinst thyne opinion:
yet shall it not seeme hard vntoo thee, if thou wilt apply
thyself vntoo mée, and consider how there bée mo thinges than
woordes.The want 
                        〈◊〉
                      proper name causeth dyuers thinges too bee termed all by one name. There are a greate nomber of thinges without names,
which wee vtter not by their proper termes, but by termes
applyed from other thinges. For wee saye this woord
foote, of our selues, of a Bed, of a Hanging, and of a Uerse.
Wee call by the name of Dogge, both a Hound, a Fish, and a
Starre. For wee haue not woordes I now too yeeld vnto euery
seueall thing his seuerall name: and therefore when wee

                     〈◊〉
                  , wee borowe. Stoutnesse is a vertue that rightly despyseth
perilles: or else it is a knowledge how too repulse, eschew,
and aduenture vppon perilles. Yet notwithstandyng wee say
that a Fencer, and a leawd Seruant whom rashnesse dryueth
headlong too the contempt of death, are 
                     •
                  tout men. Sparingnesse
is a knowledge how too eschew superfluous charges, or
a skill how too vse a mannes household prouision measurably:
and yet wee call hym a very sparing man, whiche is of a nigardly
and pinching mynd, wheras notwithstanding there is
infinite oddes betweene measurablenesse and pinching. These
are of diuers natures, and yet for wante of woordes, wee bee
fayne too call both the one and the other a Sparer. And also
as well he that despyzeth casuall perilles through reason, as
he that rusheth out into perilles without reason, are called

                     〈◊〉
                   men▪ So also, doth the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of benefyeing & the thing that

is giuen or doone by that act, (as Monnye, House, and Apparell,)
are called a benefyte. The name of both of them is all
one, but truely the force and power of them is farre differing.
            
            
               ¶The .xxxv. Chapter.
               
                  GIue eare therefore. Now thou perceiuest
that I say nothing whiche
thyne opinion should mis
                     •
                  ike. That
benefyte or good turne whiche is finished
in the dooing of it, is requited
if wee take it thankfully. But asfor
the other which is conteyned in
the thing: wee haue not yet requyted
it, but we intend too requyte it.
We haue satisfied good will with good will, and wee owe still
thing for thing. Therefore although we report him to haue requited,
whch taketh a good turne with a welmeening mynd▪
yet doo wee will him too render 
                     〈◊〉
                   like thing vntoo that
which he hath taken. Some of the thinges▪ that wee speake,
doo differ from common custome: and afterward another way
they retourne too custome again. Wee denye that a wyse man
taketh any wrong: and yet the man that 
                     •
                  miteth him with his
Fist shalbee condemned of 
                     ••
                  ongdooing. Wee denye that a
foole hath any goodes of his owne: and yet if a man steale any
thing from a foole, wee will condemne him of felonie. We say
that all men bee mad, and yet wee cure not all men with Elleborus.
Wee giue voyces in election of officers, and wee commit
authoritie too the same men whom wee call mad. So also
doo wee say that he which hath taken a good turne with a welmeening
mynd, hath requited it: but yet neuerthelesse we leaue
him still in dette, too make recompence euen when he hath requyted.
Our so saying is an exhortation, and not a renouncing
of the good turne. Wee neede not bee afrayd, that the
burthen should bee so intolerable, as too beare vs doune, and
to daunt our hartes. Goods bee giuen mee, my good name is
defended, my miserie is taken from mee, I inioy life and libertie.

And how shall I requyte these thinges? when will the day
come that I may shewe him my good will again? This is the
day wherein he hath shewed his.
               Take vp the good turne, imbrace it, and bee glad: not for
that thou takest, but for that thou requirest, and yet shalt thou
abyde in this Dette still. Thou shalt not aduenture vppon so
greate a thing, as that mischance may make thee vnthankful.
I wil cast no incomberances in thy way: let not thy hart fayle
thee: shrink not for dout of paynes and long thraldome. I defer
thee not, it may bee doone with thinges that thou hast already.
Thou shalt neuer bee thankfull, if thou bee not thankefull
out of hand. What must thou doo then? must thou not put
thyself in Armes? Perchaunce thou must. Must thou not sayle
ouer the Seas? Perhappes yes, yea euen with blustering
wyndes at thy settingfoorth. Wilt thou requyte a
good turne? Take it in good woorth, and thou
haste requyted it: not so as thou shouldest
think thyself quyte discharged, but
so as thou mayest owe it with
the more hartes ease.
               The end of the second Booke.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ The third booke of Lucius Annaeus
Seneca, concerning Benefites.
            
               ¶The first Chapiter.
               
                  NOt too bee thākfull for a good
turne (my freend Eubutius Liberalis,)
is bothe a shame,
                     
                        •
                     f vhthank
                     
                        •
                     ulnesse, and 
                        •
                     ho be most 
                        •
                     nthankfull. and so counted emōg
all men. Therefore euen the vnthankfull
finde fault with them that bee vnthankfull,
when neuerthelesse that
cleaueth too them all, which all of
them mislike. And wée bee so froward
that wee hate some men moste deadly,
not onely after they haue doon vs good, but also euen for dooing
vs good. I deny not but it happeneth in somme menne
through the crabbednesse of their Nature: But in mo because
continewaunce of tyme maketh them forgetfull. For, the thinges
that were freshe in mynd with them, while they were newly
doon, dooe weare out of remembraunce in processe of tyme.
Concerning whiche sort of men, I remember I haue had hard
hold with you, bycause you termed them not vnthankfull, but
forgetfull. As who would say, that that thing should excuse an
vnthankfull persone, which made him vnthankfull: or els that
because some man happeneth too bee forgetfull, he should therfore
not bee counted vnthankfull, whereas noman happeneth
too bee forgetfull, but the vnthankfull. There are many kyndes
of vnthankfull persones, as Théeues and Murtherers: of
whom the fault is all one, but there is greate diuersitie in the
circumstances. Unthankfull is he that denieth the receiuyng
of a good turne whiche he hath receiued. Unthankfull is he
that dissembleth it. Unthankfull is he that requiteth it not.
But moste vnthankfull of all, is he that hath forgotten it. For
although the rest discharge not themselues; yet are they detters
still, and there remaineth with thē some print of the good

turnes, shet vp within their euill conscience. And the time may
come, that somme cause or other maye turne them too thankfulnesse,
if either shame shall put them in minde, or some soodein
pang of honest dealyng, such as is wont too start vp for a tyme
euen in euill Natures, if occasio
                     •
                   serue them too dooe it with
their ease. But neuer can he become thankfull, that hath vtterly
forgotten the whole benefite. And whither thinkest thou him
woorse, in whom the thanke of a good turne is loste, or him in
whom the verie remembraunce of it is loste also? Faultie are
those eyes that cannot awaye with the lyght: but starke blynde
are those that see not at all. Not too loue ones Parentes is a
point of wickednesse: But not too knowe them is starke madnesse.
Who is so thanklesse as he, whiche hauyng suche a thing
as he ought too bestowe in the foremoste parte of his mynde,
where it might alwayes bee redie at hand, hath laied it so farre
backe, and cast it so farre of, as he knoweth not of it at all? It
should seeme he thought not often of requityng, that could vtterly
forget it.
            
            
               ¶The second Chapter.
               
                  TOO bee short,The vyce of forgetfulnes a hinderance too thankfulnes. too the requityng of a good
turne there néedeth trauell, and tyme, and
abilitie, and fauorable Fortune. But he that
beareth it in mynde, is thankfull without
coste. He that performeth not this, wherevntoo
he néedeth neither painstaking, nor
welth, nor good Fortune; hath no couert to
shroude himself withall. For neuer ment he too bee thankfull,
whiche did cast a good turne so farre of that he bestowed it out
of sight and remembraunce. Like as the thinges that are occupied,
and daily handled, are neuer in perill of rusting, whereas
the thinges that come not in sight, but lye out of the way as
superfluous, doo gather soyle by continewance of tyme: Euen
so whatsoeuer is occupied & newe burnished by often thinking
vppon, is neuer worne out of memorie, whiche lofeth not any
thing, saue that whiche it hath not often looked backe vntoo.
            
            
               
               ¶The third Chapter.
               
                  BEsides this,
                     
                        •
                     ouetouse
                     
                        •
                     esse a hin
                     
                        •
                     erance too 
                        •
                     hankfulnes. there bee other causes also,
whiche droune mennes greatest desertes
in vs. The first and theefest is, that beeyng
alwaies busied about newe desires, wee neuer
consider what wee haue, but what wee
would haue: settyng our whole mynde, not
vppon that whiche is obteined, but vppon
that whiche is coueted. For whatsoeuer wee haue in possessiō,
is nothing woorth. Now then it followeth, that assoone as the
desire of new thinges hath made a man set light by that which
he hath receiued alredie, the bestower of them must also growe
out of estimation. Wee loue some man and fa
                     •
                  ne vppon hym,
and protest him too bee the founder of our welfare, so long as
the thinges that wee had at his handes dooe like vs. Anon after
there steppeth intoo our conceit a greater likyng of other
thynges, and our mynde ronnes vppon them, (as the maner of
men is) after greate thynges couetyng still greater: streight
waie is forgotten whatsoeuer wee termed heretoofore by the
name of a benefite.Enuy another hinderance vntoo thankfulnes. And wee looke not vppō those thinges that
haue preserued vs before others: but only vppō those thinges
wherein other men haue had the Fortune too outgo vs. But it
is not possible for any man, bothe too repine and too be thankfull.
For, to repine is the propertie of hym that findeth faulte,
and is discontented: but too giue thankes, is the propertie of
him that is well pleased. Moreouer, although none of vs know
but the tyme that is alredie paste: yet dooe feawe or none caste
backe their minde too thynges past. By meane hereof it faules
out, that Schoolemaisters and their weldooynges go too the
grounde togither, because wee leaue our whole childhod behynde
vs. By meanes hereof it commes to passe, that the thinges
whiche are bestowed vppon vs in our youth are lost, bycause
our youth neuer comes too hand agein. Noman accounteth
that whiche hath bin, as a thing past, but as a thing lost.
And therfore flyghfull will the rememberance bee of thinges

that are too come.
            
            
               ¶The .iiii. Chapiter.
               
                  IN this place I must hold with Epicuras,
who contineually complayneth of our vnthankfulnesse
for thinges past, bycause that
what good turnes so euer wee receiue, wee
call none too rememberance, nor account
them among pleasures: wheras notwithstanding,
there is no pleasure more certein,
than that whiche cannot bee taken awaie anie more. Present
good thinges are not yet whole and full: some mischaūce maie
cut them of. Good thinges too come doe hang in vncerteintie.
But that which is past is layd vp in safetie. How then can that
man bee thankfull towardes suche as doo him good, who bestoweth
all his life iu gazing vppon thinges present, and in
gaping after thinges too come. It is myndfulnesse that maketh
a man thankfull. He that hangeth moste vppon hope,
groundeth least vppon myndfulnesse.
            
            
               ¶The .v. Chapter.
               
                  MY Liberalis, like as some thinges once perceiued
doe sticke fast in memorie; and in
some thinges, the once lerning of them is
not enough too make a manne cunnyng in
them: (for the knowledge of them decaieth,
if it bée not cōtinewed by exercise, I meane
Geometrie and Astonomie, and suche other
thynges as are slipperie by occasion of their subtiltie:)
Euen so the greatnesse of some Benefites suffereth them not
too bee forgotten; and some beyng lesse (though they bee verie
many in number, and bestowed at sundrie tymes) doo slip quite
awaye, because (as I said) wee doo not record them from tyme
too tyme, nor willyngly bethinke vs how muche wee are in
eche mannes dette. Herken what speeches sewters cast forthe.
Euery man saies he will beare it in mynde while he liueth: Euery

man protesteth and voweth himself too bee at commaundement,
and whatsoeuer other lowely terme he can deuise too
indaunger himself withall. But within a while after, thesame
persones eschew their former woordes, as too bace and scarce
gentlemanlike: and finally they comme too that point whiche
(as I suppose) euery of the leudest and vnthankfullest cā come
vntoo, that is to say, too forget it. For euen as vnthankfull is
he that forgetteth, as he is thankfull that beareth in mynde.
            
            
               ¶The .vi. Chapter.
               
                  BUT heere rizeth a question, whither this
hatefull vice ought too bee vnpunished, or
whither the lawe that is put in vre in schooles,
ought also too bee executed in Comonweales;
so as a man might haue his Action
ageinst an vnthankfull persone, whiche séemeth
indifferent Iustice for all men. Why
not? Seeing that Realmes vpbrayd Realmes with the thinges
they haue doon for them, and picke quarelles too the successors,
for the thinges that were bestowed vppon their predecessors?
Our aunceters béeing (as a man may perceiue) men of
noble corage, demaunded onely monnie of their enemies. As
for benefites, they bestowed them frankly, and bare the losse of
them as frankly. There was neuer yet action graunted ageinst
an vnthankfull persone in any Nation, sauyng in the Realme
of Macedonie. And this is a greate reason why none should
haue bin graunted; because that whereas wée haue giuen consent
too the punishment of all other missedéedes, so as bothe for
manslaughter, witchcraft, vnnaturall murther, and breache of
Religiō, there are in sundrie places sundrie punishmentes, and
in all places some: This fault whiche is ryfeste of all, is euerywhere
misliked, but nowhere punished. Yet doo wee not acquite
it: But forasmuche as the triall of so vncertein a matter
would bee verie hard: wee haue but condemned it too bee hated,
leauing it emong those thinges, whiche wee put ouer too
the vengeaunce of the Goddes.
            
            
               
               ¶The .vii. Chapiter.
               
                  I Finde many reasons, why this fault ought
not too bee made a matter in Lawe. Firste
of all, the beste part of the benefite or good
turne perisheth, if a manne should haue his
Action for it, as he vseth too haue for lending
of monnie, or for bargaines of hyring
and letting out. For the greatest grace of
a good turne, is that wée haue doon it, euen though wee should
lose it, so as wee haue put the matter wholly too the courtesie
of the receiuers. But if I arrest him: If I call him before a
Iudge: It beginneth too bee a dette, and not a benefite. Agein
whereas it is a moste commendable thing too requite: It ceaseth
too bée commendable, if it comme too bée of necessitie. For
noman will commend a thankfull persone, more than him that
hath restored a thing that was deliuered him too keepe, or discharged
his dette without being sewed. So shall wee marre
twoo thinges at once, that is too witte, a thankfull man, and a
beneficiall man; than whiche, there are not any goodlier thinges
in mannes life. For what greate point of excellencie is
there, either in the one if he bestowe not his good turne freely,
but lende it: or in the other if he requite, not because he is willing,
but because he needes must? It deserueth no praise too bée
thankfull, except a man may safely bee vnthankfull. Moreouer
this inconuenience would insewe: that all Courtes would bee
too little for this Lawe. Who is he that myght not sewe; who
is he that might not bee sued? All men extoll their owne dooinges,
all men inlarge the thynges that they haue bestowed vpon
others, bee they neuer so small. Furthermor, whatsoeuer
thinges doo fall within the compasse of examination, may bee
determined without giuing the Iudge infinite libertie. And
therefore the state of a good cace, séemeth better if it bee putte
too a Iudge, than if it bée put too an vmper; because the Iudge
is bounde too an order, and hath his certeine boundes set him,
whiche he may not passe: But the vmpers conscience beeyng

frée, and tyde too no boundes, may bothe adde and take awaye,
and directe his sentence, not accordyng as Lawe and Iustice
counsell him, but accordyng as humanitie and pitie shall moue
him. An Action of vnkyndnesse would not bynde the Iudge.
but sette him at libertie too rule thinges as he listed. For it is
not certein what a benefite should bee. Agein▪ how greate soeuer
it bee, it were muche too the matter, how fauourably the
Iudge would conster it. No Lawe defineth what an vnthankfull
persone is. Oftentymes he that hath rendered as muche
as he receiued, is vnthankfull: and he that hath not rendered, is
thankfull. Also there bee somme matters, whiche euen an vnskilfull
Iudge maye dismisse the Court of: as in caces where
the parties must confesse a deede, or no deede. Where the opening
of the Euidence dispatcheth all doutes: where verie reason
is able to determine the ryght. But when mennes myndes
must bee coniectured of; when a thing commeth in question,
whiche onely wisedome is able too discerne: in suche caces a
man cānot take him for a Iudge, that is called to office for his
riches, or because he is a gentleman borne.
            
            
               ¶The .viii. Chapiter.
               
                  THis thing therfore séemed not very vnmete
too haue bin made a matter in Lawe,The greatest benefites admit not requitall with lyke for lyke. but
that noman could bee found too bee a competent
iudge in the cace. Whiche thing
thou will not thinke straunge, if thou consider
throwly how hardly hee should bee graueled,
whiche should enter intoo the ouerruling
of suche caces. Some man giueth a greate peece of
Monny: but he is a riche man, and suche a one as can not feele
the losse of it. Another giueth likewyse, but with daunger of
forgoing his whole inheritance. The some is all one, but the
benefite is not all one. Yea let vs yet adde further: that the

                     •
                  ne payeth Mony for a welwi
                     ••
                  er of his, but he hath it at home
lying by him: and that the other giueth as muche, but he is
fayne too take vp it vppō Interest, or too borrow it with much

intreatance, and too indaunger himself greatly too him that
lent it. Thinkest thou there was no oddes betwixt him that
bestowed his good turne with ease, and this other that borowed
too giue? Some thinges become greate for their season,
and not for their summe.
               The giuing of a peece of ground, whose frutefulnesse may
ease the derth of Corne, is a benefite. And one Loaf of Bread
giuen in tyme of Fam
                     •
                  n, is a benfite also.
               Too giue a man whole Countries with many greate Riuers
in them able too beare Shippes, is a benefite. And too

                     •
                  hewe a Waterspring too suche as are thirstie and scarce able
to fetche their breath for drynesse, is a benefite also.
               Who shall compare these thinges togither? who shall wey
them throughly? Hard is the determinatiō of that cace, which
requyreth the force of a thing, and not the thing it self. The
thinges may bee all one; and yet the maner of bestowing them
shal alter the estimation of them. A man hath doone mée a good
turne; but hee did it vnwillingly; hee was sorie when hee had
doone it: he looked scornefullyer vppō mée than he was woont
ont too doo: hee did it with suche lingering, as he had pleased
mee muche more too haue sayd mee flat nay out of hande. How
shal a iudge make an estimate of these thinges, when the spéech,
and the douting, and the countenaunce if a man maye marre
the grace of his good turne.
            
            
               ¶The .ix. Chapter.
               
                  AGein, some thinges are termed Benefites, bycause
they bee ouermuch desyred: and othersome
being not of that comon sort, but much greater,
doo beare a lesse showe. Yee call it a benefite too
haue made a man free of the head Citie of our puissant
commonweale; and too haue aduaunced him too honour,
or to haue saued him vppon an Inditement of Life and Death.
And what call you it too haue giuen a man good counsell? too
haue wrested the Sword out of a mannes hand, that was redy
too haue fordoone himself? too haue recomforted a forlorne

persone with effe
                     •
                  tuall perswasions? and too haue brought
him backe agein too the folowship of lyfe, from his wilfull séeking
of that which he longed for? What think you it too bee,
to haue sit by a sicke man; and whereas his health consisted intending
him, too haue giuen him his Meales when his Stomacke
would serue him best, and too haue refreshed his feeble
pulfes with Wyne, and too haue holpen him too a Phisician
when hee was like too dye? Who shall valewe these thinges?
who shal commaund these benefites too bee recompenced with
the like?
               Some man perchaunce hath giuen thée a house: and I haue
forewarned thee that thyne owne is falling doune vppon thy
head. He hath giuen thee Landes and Goods: and I haue giuen
thée a Boord too flote vppon in shipwrecke. Another hath
fought for thée and was wounded: and I haue saued thy lyfe by
holding my peace. Seeing that a good turne is doon one way,
and recompenced another: it is a hard matter too make them
matches.
            
            
               ¶The .x. Chapiter.
               
                  FUrthermore, there is no day set for
the requyting of a good turne, as
there is for repayment of Monnye
that is lent. Therefore he that hath
not requyted, may requyte. For I
would haue thee too tell mee within
what tyme a man may bee found
too bee vnthankfull. The greatest
benefites haue no tryall at all. Oftentymes
they lye hidden betwéene the cōsciences of the twoo
parties, vnspoken of. Shall wee bring the worlde too that
poynt, that wee may not doo a good turne without witnesse?
What punishment then shal wee appoint for the vnthankfull?
Shall wee punish all alike, whereas the benefites bee vnlike?
or shall wee appoint diuersitie of punishmentes, greater or lesser,
according too the measure of eche mannes benefite? Peraduenture

you wil haue the penaltie too bee but a monny matter.
Why? Some benefites concerne lyfe, yea and are greater
than lyfe. What penaltie shalbee appointed for those? Lesse
than the benefite? That were not indifferent. Aequall and
deadly? What can bee more vnkindly, than that the end of benefites
should be bluddie?
            
            
               ¶The .xi. Chapter.
               
                  CErtein prerogatiues (say you) are
giuen too Parentes. Looke howe
consideration is had of these extraordinarily:
so must consideration bée
had of other mennes benefites likewise.
We haue priuiledged the state
of Fatheres and Moothers, bycause
it was expedient too haue Children
bred and brought vp. They were too
bee incoraged too this trauell, bycause they aduenture vppon
vncerteine chaunce. It cannot bee sayde too them as may bee
sayd too others that bestowe benefytes: If thou bee deceyued,
take one that is meete for thee and helpe him. In bringing vp
of Children, it is not at the choyce of the Parentes too haue
them suche as they list: all that they can doe, is but too wishe
well and hope well. Therefore too the intente they myght the
more willingly aduenture this chaunce, it was reason that
some prerogatiue should bee giuen them. Agein the case standeth
otherwise with Parentes: for they both doo and will still
bestowe benefites vppon their Children, although they haue
doone neuer so muche for them alreadie: and it is not too bee
feared that they will beelye themselues in giuing. Certesse in
all other men, it may stande vppon tryall, not onely whither
they haue receyued, but also whither they haue giuen or no.
But asfor the desertes of Parentes, they bee alwayes to bee
taken for matter confessed. And bycause it is beehooffull for
Youth to bee ruled: wee haue set as it were household magistrates
ouer them too keepe them in awe. Besydes this, the benefyting

of all Parentes is after one sorte, and therefore it
myght bee valewed all after one rate. But the benefytinges
that are doone by others, are dyuerse and vnlike, and there is
infinite oddes of difference betwixt them: by reason whereof
they could not fall within the compasse of any lawe, forasmuch
as it were more reason that all should bee let alone, than that
all should bee made equall.
            
            
               ¶The .xii. Chapiter.
               
                  SOmme thynges are costly too the giuers▪
and some are muche woorth too the receiuers,
and yet stand the giuers in nothyng.
Somme thynges are giuen too freendes,
and somme too folkes of no acquaintance.
It is more (though the thing that is giuen
bee all one) if thou giue it too suche a one,
as thou beginnest thy first acquaintance with him by thy good
turne. This man giueth releef, that man preferment, and another
man comfort. Ye shall finde somme man that thinkes not
any thing more pleasaunte, or any thing greater; than too haue
one that may bee a staye too him in his miserie. Ageine ye shall
finde some man more carefull for his honestie, than for his safetie.
And there bee other somme that would thinke themselues
more beholden too him by whose meanes they might liue at
their ease, than too him by whose meanes they might liue in
somme counntenaunce of estimation. Therefore these thinges
would fall out too bee greater or lesser, according as the Iudges
mynde were bent too the one, or too the other. Furthermore,
I am at myne owne choyce for my creditor: but now and
then I take a good turne of him that I would not, and sometyme
am bounde ere I wote of it. What wilt thou doo? Wilte
thou call him vnthankfull, that had thy good turne cast vppon
him, and wist it not; who if he had knowen it, would not haue
receiued it? And wilt thou not call him vnthankfull, who after
a sorte accepted it, and yet requited it not?
            
            
               
               ¶The .xiii. Chapiter.
               
                  A Man hath dooen me a good turne: and afterward
he dooeth me a shreude turne. Now
whither dooeth that one good turne of his,
bynde me too beare all displeasures at his
hand: or whither is it all one as if I had requited
him, because he himself hath cutte of
his owne good turne, by dooyng me wrong
afterwarde? Ageine how wilt thou discerne, whither that bee
more wherein I was pleasured, or that wherin I was harmed?
Tyme would faile me, if I should take vpon me too recken vp
all inconueniences. Somme man will say, that wee make men
slower too doo good, when wee chalenge not the thinges that
are giuen, but suffer the denyers too scape vnpunished. But you
must bethinke you of this also on the contrary parte: that men
wilbee muche lothther to receiue benefites, if they shall stande
in perill of answeryng to the cace. Also, by this meanes wee
our selues shall becomme the lother too doo men good: for no
man will gladly pleasure men ageinste their willes. But whosoeuer
is prouoked too pleasure menne of his owne goodnesse,
and for the verie goodlynesse of the thing itself: he will bée willing
too doo good, euen vntoo such as shal think themselues no
more beholden too him, than they list. For the commendation
of that benefite or good turne is maimed, whiche carieth a prouiso
with it.
            
            
               ¶The .xiiii. Chapiter.
               
                  SO shall there bee fewer good turnes.
               Yea, but they shalbee trewer. And what
harme is it too haue the rashnesse of benefiting
restreined? For euē this sought they
whiche made no Lawe for it: namely, that
wee should bée the circumspecter what wée
bestowed, and the warer in choosing on
whom we bestowed. Consider throwghly too whō thou giuest.

So shal there bée no sewing, so shall there bee no chalendging.
Thou art deceiued if thou think that anye iudge can help thée.
no Lawe is able too set thee cleere agein. Onely haue thou an
eye too the faithfulnesse of the receyuer. So shall benefytes
keepe their estimacon, and continew honorable. Thou staynest
them, if thou make them a matter of Lawe. In dettes it is a
most vpright speeche and agreeable too the Lawe of all Realmes,
too say, Pay that thou owest. But it is the fowlest woord
than can bee in benefiting, too say, Pay. For what shall he pay?
Admit he owe lyfe, Dignitie, safetie, welfare, or health? All
thinges that are of the cheefest sort, are vnpayable. Let him
(say you) pay somewhat of like valewe. This is it that I spake
of: namely that the estimation of so noble a thing should perish,
if wee make a merchandyze of benefites. The mynd is not too
bee prouoked vntoo couetowsenesse, repyning, and discord: it
ronneth intoo these thinges of the owne accord. Let vs withstand
them as muche as wee can, and let vs cut of occasions of
complaint.
            
            
               ¶The .xv. Chapter.
               
                  I Would wee could perswade men too take
no monnye agein that they haue lent vppō
credit, saue only of suche as were willing
too repay it. Whould God that no 
                     ••
                  retie
myght bée taken of the purchacer by the
seller, nor bargaines and couenantes bee
made vnder hand & seale: but rather, that
the performance of them were referred too the faithfulnesse
and vpright meenyng of mennes consciences. But men haue
preferred profit before honestie, and thei had leuer inforce men
too bee faithfull, than too finde them faithfull. One manne by
meanes of Brokers taketh vp monnie of diuers men, vpon assuraunce
in writyng, and witnesses are called on bothe partes.
Another is not contented with sufficient sureties, vnlesse he
hath also a pa
                     •
                  ne in his hande. O shamefull bewraying of the
deceitfulnesse of man, and of the leaudnesse that is commonly

vsed. Our Seales are more sette by than our soules. For what
purpose are worshipfull men called to record? Why sette they
too their handes? Uerely least the partie should deny the receit
of that, whiche he hath receiued. Would not a man take suche
too bee vncorrupte persones, and mainteiners of the truthe?
And yet euen they also by and by after cannot bee trusted for any
monnie, but vpon like dealyng. Had it not bin more honestie,
too let somme menne go with the breakyng of their credit,
than that all men should bee mistrusted of vnfaithfulnesse? Couetousnesse
wanteth onely but this one point, namely that wée
should doo noman good without suretiship. It is the propertie
of a Gentlemanlike and Noble harte, too helpe and profite others.
He that dooth men good freely, resembleth the Goddes:
but he that lookes for recompence, resembleth the Usurers.
Why then abace wee our selues too those vilest sorte of rakehelles,
by resembling them.
            
            
               ¶The .xvi. Chapter.
               
                  BUt if no Action may lye againste a thanklesse
persone, there will (sayest thou) bee the mo
thanklesse persones. Nay rather there wilbee
the feawer: for men will take the better héede
too the bestowing of their benefites. Agein it
is not good too haue it knowen too the world,
what a nomber of vnthankfull persones there bee. For the
multitude of offenders taketh away the shame of a deede; and
a comon cryme ceaseth too bee counted a reproche. Is there
almost any woman now adayes ashamed of dyuorcement, since
the tyme that certein of the noble Ladyes and Gentlewomen
haue made account of their yeares, not by the nomber of Consulles,
but by the nomber of their husbandes, and haue gone
from their husbandes too bee maryed, and maryed too bee dyuorced?
So long as Dyuorcement was rare, so long was it
feared. But after that feawe Mariages were cōtinewed without
Dyuorce: the often heering of it taught them too vse it.
Is any Woman now a dayes ashamed of whoredomme, since

the world is come to that poynt, that fewe take a Husband but
too cloke their Whoredome? Chastitie is a token of deformitie.
Where shall a man fynde so very a Wretche or so very a
Puzzle, that one payre of Adulterers may suffyze hir? Nay,

                     •
                  hee doteth and is to muche of the old stampe, whiche knowes
not that the keeping of one Leman is counted good wedlock.
Like as too bee ashamed at these faultes is vanished away at
these dayes, since the thing began too get larger scope: so shalt
thou make the thanklesse sort both mo and more bolde, if they
may once begin too muster themselues.
            
            
               ¶The .xvii. Chapiter.
               
                  WHat then? Shall the thankelesse persone
scape vnpunished?
               What becomes of the malicious? what
becomes of the couetouse? what becomes
of him that hath no stay of himself? What
becomes of the cruell man? Thinkest thou
that the thinges whithe are hated, are vnpunished?
Or thinkest thou that there can bee a sorer punishment,
than too bee hated of all men? It is a punishment, that
he dares not take a good turne at any mannes hande, that hee
dares not bestowe a good turne vppon any man, that he is a
gazingstocke too all men, or at leastwyse beléeues himsef too
bee so, and that he hath forgone the vnderstanding of the thing
that was both singularly good and singularly sweete. Callest
thou him vnhappie that wanteth his eyesight, or whose eares
bee stopped by some disease: & wilt thou not call him a wretch,
that hath lost the feeling of Benefites? Hee is afrayed of the
Gods the witnes bearers ageinst al vnthankful persons. The
disappointing of him of benefiting or being benefited, fretteth
and gnaweth his conscience: and finally it is punishmēt great
inough, that (as I sayd afore) he hath forgone the fruition of
so sweete a thing. But he whom it delyghteth too haue receyued
a good turne, inioyeth a measurable and continuall pleasure,

and it dooth him good too behold, not the thing, but the
mynd of him at whose hand he had it. A good turne delighteth
a thankful persone euer, and an vnthankfull persone but once.
Besydes this, let eyther of their lyues bee compared with others.
The one is sad and sorowfull, and suche as a denyer and
deceyuer is woont too bee, who hath no dew regard of Father
and Moother; or of them that brought him vp, or of his Teachers.
The other is merry, cheerfull, longing for occasion too
requyte, and taking great pleasure of the same desyre; not seeking
in what wise, too whom, or in what thing, but how he may
answere most fully and bounteously: not onely too his Parentes
and Frendes, but also too Folke of the meanest sorte. For
though it bee a Bondman that hath doon him the good turne:
he regardeth not of whom, but what he hath receiued.
            
            
               ¶The .xvii. Chapter.
               
                  BUT some men (emong whom Hecaton is
one) demaunded whither a Bondman
can benefite his Maister or no. For there
bee that make this distinction: That some
thinges are Benefites, somme dewties,
and somme seruices: and that a benefite is
that whiche is doone by a Fréeman: (A
Freeman is suche a one as might haue left the thing vndoone
without blame.) That dewtie is of children, of wife, & of those
persones whom kinred or aliance stirreth vp, and willeth too
help vs: And that seruice is of the Slaue or Bondman, whom
his degree hath put in suche state, as he cannot chalege his
superior for any thing that he dooeth for him.
               Notwithstanding all this, he that denyeth that Bondmen
maye sometyme too their Masters a good turne, is ignoraunt
of the Lawe of Nature. For it skilles not of what calling the
man bee that dooeth the good tnrne, but of what mynde he is.
Uertue is forstalled from noman: She is set open for all men:
She admitteth all menne: She allureth all men: Gentlemen,

Franklinges, Bondmen, Kinges, and Banishedmen: She fancyeth
neither house nor Substaunce, but is contented with the
bare man. For what safegard should there bee ageinste casualties,
or what could the noble harte assure itself of; if Fortune
could alter vertu
                     •
                   by substaunce? If the Bondman cannot doo
his Maister a good turne: neither can the Subiecte doo it for
his Prince, nor the Souldier for his Capitein. For what matter
makes it, in what state of subiection a man bee, if he bee in
any? For if necessitie and feare of extremitie doo barre a Bond
man from atteining the name of desert: the same thing will
also barre him that is vnder a King, or a Capiteine, because
thei haue like authoritie ouer him, though by vnlike title. But
men doo good turnes too their Princes, and menne doo good
turnes too their Capiteies: Ergo they maye also doo good
turnes too their Maisters. A Bondman maye bée iuste, he may
bee valeant, he maye bee of a noble corage: Ergo he maye also
benefite, or doo a man a good turne, for euen that also is a point
of vertewe. Yea, and it is so possible for Bondmen too benefite
their Maisters, that oftentymes they haue bounde their Maisters
too thē by their good turnes. There is doutt but a Bondman
maye benefite any other man: and why then should he not
bee able too benefite his maister also?
            
            
               ¶The .xix. Chapiter.
               
                  BEcause (sayest thou) he cannot become his
Maisters creditor. though he should lende
his Maister monnie. Otherwise he should
daily make his Maister beholden vntoo
him. For he lackyeth after him when he
iourneyeth, he tendeth him in his sicknesse,
he tooyleth himself out of his skin too doo
him ease: And yet all these thinges (whiche should bee called
good turnes, if another bodie did them) are but seruices as
long as a Bondman dooeth them. For that is a good turne,
whiche is doone by a manne that was at his owne free choyce,

whither he would doo it or no. But a Bondman hath not libertie
too say nay. And therefore he dooeth not benefite, but obey:
neither can he boaste of his dooing, whiche too refuse he hadde
no power.
               Now will I cast thee; & in thyne owne turne, I will bring a
Bondman so far
                     •
                  e foorth, as too many thinges he shalbee frée.
But tell me by the waye: If I shewe thee a Bondman fighting
for his Maisters safegard, without respecte of himself, and striken
through with many woundes, and yet still spēding the rest
of his bloud, euen from the verie harte, and by his owne death,
making respit that his Maister maye haue leisure too scape:
wilte thou saye he did not his Maister a good turne, because he
is his Bondman? If I shewe thée one that by no promises of a
Tyraunt could bee corrupted, by no threates bee feared, by no
tormentes bee forced too bewraye his Maisters secretes, but
(as muche as he could) remoued all suspicions that were surmised,
and spent his life too keepe his faithfulnesse: wilte thou
deny him too haue doone his Maister a good turne, because he
was his Bōdman? Se
                     •
                   rather if it bee not so muche the greater
good turne, as the example of vertewe is rarer in Bondmen:
and consequently so muche the more woorthe thankes,
for that whereas superioritie is commonly hated, and all 
                     •
                  onstreint
greeuous: yet the loue of some one towardes his Maister,
hath surmounted the common hatred of bondage. So thē
it is not therefore no good turne because it proceeded from a
Bondman: but it is so muche the greater good turne, for that
not euen bondage could fraye him from dooing of it.
            
            
               ¶The .xx. Chapiter.
               
                  IF any bodie thinke that bondage entereth
intoo the whole man: he is deceyued. The
better part of him is priuiledged; mennes
bodies are subiect and tyed too their Maisters.
But the mynd is at his owne libertie;
whiche of itself is so free and vnbound, as it
cannot bee hild, no not euen within this prison
wherin it is inclosed, but vseth his force, and woorketh

greate thinges, and passeth beyond all 
                     •
                  oundes in companie
with the heauenly sorte. It is the bodie therfore, whiche fortune
hath giuen too the master. This he buyeth, this he selleth. Asfor
that inward part, it cannot bee brought in bondage. Whatsoeuer
isseweth from that, is frée. For neither may wée masters
in all thinges commaund: neither may our bondmen in all thinges
obey. They shall obey no commaundement ageinst the comon
weale: they shall put their handes too no wickednesse.
            
            
               ¶The .xxi. Chapter.
               
                  THere bée some thinges which Lawes neyther

                     •
                  id nor forbid a man too doo. In these
hath a bondmā matter too woorke a good
turne vppon. As long as no more is doone
than is woont too bée exacted of bondmen
                     •
                  
it is seruice. But when a bondman dooth
more than he is bound too doo, it is a Benefite.
When it passeth intoo the affection of a 
                     •
                  reend, it ceaseth
too bee called a seruice. There bee some thinges whiche the
Maister is bounde too bestowe vppon his Bondman: as foode
and raiment. Noman will terme this a benefite. But if he haue
delt fauorably with him, and haue brought him vp like a gentleman,
and trained him in the Sci
                     •
                  nces that are taught vnto
gentlemen; it is a benefite. The same thing is doone on the cō
                  trary
parte, in the persone of 
                     •
                  he Bondman. Whatsoeuer it is
that exéedeth the rate of a Bondmannes duetie, whiche is not
doone of awe, but of good will: it is a benefite, if it bee so great
as it maye beare that name, if any other man doo it.
            
            
               ¶The .xxii. Chapiter.
               
                  A Bondman (as it liketh Chrysippus) is a con
                  
                     ••
                  ne
hyreling. Now like as the hyreling
befréendeth a manne, whom 
                     •
                  e dooeth
more than 
                     •
                  ee was hyred too doo: so when
the Bondman, of good will towardes his
Maister, surmounteth the measure of his
degree, and attempteth some higher matter,

whiche might beseeme euen one of noble birthe, and ouergoeth
his Maisters hope: It is a freendship founde at home
within his house. Seemeth it indifferent vntoo thee, that with
whom wee are offended, if they doo lesse than their duetie; wee
should not bee beholden too them, if they doo more than duetie
and ordinarie? Wilt thou knowe when it is no benefite? It is
then none, when it may bée said, he shall neither will nor chooze
but doo it. But when he dooeth that whiche he needed not, except
he had listed: it is praiseworthy that he listed. A good turne
and a shreude turne are contraries. If he maye take wrong at
his Maisters hande, he may also doo his Maister a good turne.
But concernyng the wronges doone too Bondmen by their
Maisters, there is one sette in office too heare their caces, who
hath authoritie too restreyne bothe their crueltie, and their
leudnesse, and their nigardship in giuing their Bondmen néedfull
thinges too liue by. What then? Dooth a Maister receiue
a good turne of his Bondman? Nay, rather one man receiueth
a good turne of another. Too bee shorte, he hath doone what
was in his power too doo: He hath benefited his Maister. Not
too receiue it at thy Bondmannes hande, that is in thy power.
But who is so greate, whom Fortune compelleth not too haue
neede euen of the basest? I wlil streytwaies reherce many exā
                  ples
of befreending, bothe vnlike, and some also contrary one
too another. Somme haue saued their Maisters life, somme
haue bin their Maisters death. Another hath saued his Maister
from perishing; and (if that bee but a small matter) he hath
saued him by perishing himself. One hath furthered his Maisters
death, & another hath saued his maister by beguyling him.
            
            
               ¶The .xxiii. Chapiter.
               
                  
                     CLaudius Qudrigarius in his xviij. booke of Chronicles,
reporteth that when the Citée Grument
was beseeged, and stoode in vtter perill to bee
loste, twoo Bondmen fledde too the enemie, and
tooke wages too serue him. Afterward when the
Toune was taken, and the 
                     〈◊〉
                   oue
                     •
                  ranne all places:

the Bondmen ranne afore by priuie wayes, to the house where
they had serued, and draue out their Mistresse before them. And
being demaunded what shee was; they said shee was their Maistresse,
and the cruellest woman that euer liued, and that they
caried her out to putte her too death. But assone as thei had her
without the walles, they hid her close till the 
                     •
                  ge of the enemie
was alayed. And afterward when the Romane souldiers were
satisfied and comme ageine to their owne disposition, (whiche
was soone doone): the Bondmen also returned too their owne
side ageine, and set their Mistresse at her libertie. Shee immediately
made them bothe free, and disdeined not too haue taken
life at the handes of those, ouer whom shee herself had had power
of life and death. Yea, so muche the more for that, had shee
cause too thinke herself happie. For had shee bin saued otherwise,
it had bin no straunge matter, nor any thing els than a
point of comon and ordinarie gentlenesse. But being saued after
this maner, shee became a famous bywoorde, and an example
of twoo Citees. In so greate hurlyburly at the taking of
the Citée, when eueryman shifted for himself, all creatures forsooke
her saue the runnagates. But they (too shewe with what
mynde they had reuolted afore) fledde ageine from the conquerours
too a captiue, pretending the countenaunce of murtherers,
whiche was the greatest point in that benefite. So muche
thought they it better too seeme murtherers of their Mistresse
than that shee should haue bin murthered in deede. It is not, beleeue
me, it is not the point of a stauishe cour
                     •
                  ge, to compasse a
noble facte with the slaunder of wickednesse. As Antonius the
Mayer of the Marses, was ledde to the Lieutenante Generall
of the Romanes, a Bondman of his 
                     〈◊〉
                   out the Souldyers
sworde that ledde him, and firste slewe his Maister. And
hauing doone so, it is tyme for me (sayeth he) to prouide for my
self. I haue alredie giuen my Maister his freedome: and with
that woorde he strake himself through with one blowe. Shewe
me any that hath saued his Maister more stoutly?
            
            
               ¶The .xxiiii. Chapiter.
               
                  
                  
                     CEsar beseeged Corfinium and Domitius
being shet vp within the Toune, commaunded
his Phisician (who was a Bondman
of his) too poyson him. When he sawe him
make Curtesie at the matter; why stickest
thou (ꝙ he) as though the matter lay wholy
in thy power? I that desyre death am armed.
Then his Bondman agreed and gaue him a hurtlesse medicine
too drink, wherwith he cast him intoo a dead sleepe, and
going out of hand too his Sonne, sayd: Sir, cammaund mee
too bee kept but so long till you perceyue by the sequele, whither
I haue poysoned your father or no. Domitius escaped and
had his lyfe pardoned by Caesar: but yet his bondman had sa
                  
                     •
                  ed
him first.
            
            
               ¶The .xxv. Chapiter.
               
                  IN the tyme of the Ciuil warres, a Bondman
hid his maister that was proclaymed Taitour.
And when he had put his Maisters Ringes on
his Fingers, and arayed himself in his Apparell,
he went out too the Executioners, and telling
them that hee craued no fauour, bade them execute their
Commission, and therwithall hild out his necke for them too
cut of. How great manhod was it for him too yeeld himself too
death for his Maister, in a tyme when faithfulnes was geson:
and too bee loth that his Maister should dye in the common
crueltie: yea and too be founde so trustie when trecherie was
vniuersall, as too craue death in recompence of his faithfulnes,
euen when Treason was most highly rewarded?
            
            
               ¶The .xxvi. Chapter.
               
                  
                     I
                   Will not let passe the Examples of myne owne
tyme. Under Tiberius Caesar, the outrage of appeachi
                     •
                  g
men was very ryfe, and in maner comon:
wh
                     •
                  che thing gaue a sorer wound too the
settled state of this Citie, than al the Ciuill warres

had doone. Aduauntage was taken of dronkenmens talke,
and of thinges spoken simply in mirth, nothing was in safetie.
Euery occasion of picking thankes was liked of. And men
mused not what should become of them that were accused: for
they were all serued with one sawce. One Paule a mā of honor
being at a certein feast, had on his finger a ring with a riche
stone sticking out, wheron was ingrauē the image of the Emperour
Tyberius. I should play the foole too muche, if I should
make nycenesse too tell you how he tooke a Chamberpotte.
Which thing ouer Maro a comon knowen promoter of that
tyme, tooke good heede of. But a bondman of this drunkenmā
for whom the bayt was layed, pulled of his masters ring And
when Maro bade the gwestes beare witnesse, that he had put
the Emperours image too his priuities, and thervppō would
haue framed a bill for them too haue subscrybed: the bondman
shewed him the ring vppon his owne finger. If a man may call
this man a slaue, he may also call the other an honest gwest.
            
            
               ¶The .xxvii. Chapter.
               
                  IN the tyme of the Emperour Augustus,
before mennes woords were
yet treason, though they bred them
trubble: one Ruffus a Senatours
peere (as he sate at Supper) wished
that the Emperour might not come
home ageine alyue from a progresse
whiche hee then intended: adding
furthermore, that all Bulles and
Calues wished the same. There were that tooke good heede of
those words. Assone as next morning came a bondman of his
that had wayted vppon him at Supper ouer night, tolde him
what woordes hee had cast foorthe in his drunkennesse as hee
was at Supper, and counselled him too hye him too the Emperour
before hand, and too bée his owne accuser. His maister
following his aduyce, met the Emperour at his first comming
abrode. And when he had sworne vnto him that he was not wel

in his wittes ouer night: he prayd God that his wishe myght
light vppon himself and his Sonnes, beseeching the Emperour
that he would pardon him and receyue him intoo his fa
                  
                     •
                  our
agein, When the Emperour had graunted his sewt: noman
(sayd Ruffus) will beléeue you haue taken mee intoo your
fauour agein; vnlesse you giue me some thing. Therewithall
he asked no tryfling some of Monye, and obteyned it. And I
for my part (sayd the Emperour) will indeuer that I may neuer
bee displeased with thee. Honourably did the Emperour
deale with him, both in pardoning him, and also in matching
liberalit
                     •
                  e with his gentlenesse. Whosoeuer shall heere of this
example, must needes prayse the Emperour: but yet hee must
prayse the Bondman firste. Doo ye not looke I should tell yee
that he was made free for dooing this deede? He was so: but
not for nought: for the Emperour payed for his manumission.
            
            
               ¶The .xxviii. Chapter.
               
                  AFter so many examples, there is no dout but a
Maister maye receyue a freendly turne at his
Bondmannes hand. Why should the persone rather
imbace the thing, than the thing innoble the
persone? All men haue one beginning, and all
spring out of one Roote▪ Noman is more Gentleman than other
sauing he that hath a better disposed nature, and more apt
too good artes. They that setfoorth their Pedegrees & their
aunceters on a long rowe interlyned with many braunches of
Collateralll descentes on the fore
                     ••
                  unt of their houses, are rather
notorious than noble. There is but one parent of all
men, euen the world. Whither it bée by famous or bace descēt,
euery man conueyes his 
                     〈◊〉
                   Pedegree from him. There is no
cause why these that keepe 
                     〈…〉
                   their aunceters should beguile
thee. Whersoeuer the 
                     〈◊〉
                   hath made any man re
                     •
                  owmed,
byandby they feyne him too bee a God. D
                     •
                  spize no man
though his Pedegree bee worne out of remembraunce, and
smally furthered by vnfrendly fortune. Whither your aunceters
were freemen, or bondmen, or Alean
                     •
                  es: bee of good corage

hardily, and whatsoeuer bacenesse lieth in your way, leape
ouer it. Greate noblenesse abydeth for you alost. Why should
Pryde puffe vs vp into so great fondnesse, that wee should disdeyne
too take a good turne at our Bondmennes handes; and
looke so much at their degree, that wee should forget their desertes?
Callest thou any man Slaue, being thyself the bondslaue
of Lecherie and Gluttonie, and the comon kickhor
                     •
                  e, not
of one Strumpet but of manye? Callest thou any man 
                     ••
                  aue?
Whither a Gods name doo these Colecariers iaunce thée, carying
this thy Couch vp & doune? Whither doo these Clokemen
like a sort of braue Soldadoes, whither (I say) doo they
conuey thee? Too the doore of some doorekéeper, or else too
the Garden of some Rascall that hath not so much as an ordinarie
office. And yet denyest thou thyself too bee beholden too
thyne owne Seruant, which thinkest it too bée a greate frendship
too get a kisse of an other mans Seruaunt? How happeneth
it that thou art so at oddes with thyself? At one instaunt
thou both despysest and honourest slaues. Within doores thou
art Lordly and full of commaundementes: and without doores
Loutlyke and as muche skorned as skornfull. For none
are sooner out of countenance, than they that take most stoutly
vppon them in all naughtinesse. Neither are any folke buzyer
too tread others vnder foote, than suche as haue learned too
ryde vppon others, by putting vp reproche at other mennes
handes themselues.
            
            
               ¶The .xxix. Chapiter.
               
                  THese thinges were too bee spoken, to pull
downe the pryde of men that hang vppon
fortune, and too recouer vntoo bondmē the
ryght of benefiting, in likewyse as it is too
bee yeelded vntoo children. For it is a question,
whether children can by anie meanes
bée more beneficiall too their parētes, than
their parentes haue been vntoo them? This is a playne cace,
that manie sonnes haue become greater, and of more abilitie

than their fathers, and in that respect haue bin better than
their fathers: which thing being admitted, it may also fall out
that they haue doone more for them, considering that bothe
their abilitie was greater, and their will better. Uerely (will
some man say) whatsoeuer it bee that the sonne dooth for his
father, it is lesse than his father hath doone for him, bycause he
had not bin in case too haue doo
                     •
                   it, if it had not bin for his
father. So can no benefiting surmount him that is the ground
of the surmounting of itself.
               First it is too bee considered, that some thinges take their
beginning of other, and yet are greater than their beginninges.
Neither is any thing therefore lesse than that frō whence
it hath his beginning, for that it could not haue growen too
that greatnesse, excepte it had had a beginning. There is almoste
nothing but it farre exceedeth his first originall. Seedes
are the causes of all thinges, and yet are they the least part
of the thinges that growe of them. Looke vppon Rhyne, looke
vppon Euphrates: too be short, looke vppon all noble Riuers:
and what are they, if you measure them by their heades from
whēce they spring? whatsoeuer they bee fearedfor, whatsoeuer
they bee renowmed for, they haue purchaced it in their far going.
Take away rootes, and there shalbee no woodes; neither
shall the greate Mountaynes bee clad with Trees. Looke vppon
the growing timbertrees. If ye regard the great heighth
and hougenesse of their Bodies, or the greate thiknesse and
brode spreddingout of their Boughes: how small a thing in
comparison of these, is that whiche is conteined in the Roote
with his fyne little stringes? Temples stand vpon their foundacions,
and so doo the Walles of this famous Citie: and yet
the thinges that beare vp the whole woorke, lye hidden in the
ground. The same cometh too passe in all other thinges. The
greatnesse that groweth out, dooth alwayes ouerspred his
owne originall. I could not atteyne too any thing, except my
Parentes had first begotten mee. Yet is not euery thing that I
haue atteined too, lesse therfore than the thing without which
I had not atteyned vntoo it. If my Nurce had not cherished

mee when I was a Ba
                     •
                  e, I could haue compassed none of the
thinges which I now doo both with head and hande: neyther
should I haue com
                     •••
                   
                  
                     •
                  his renowme and honour whiche I
haue earned with my tra
                     •
                  ell both in peace and warre. Wilt
thou therefore preferre my Nur
                     ••
                  s dooinges before my greatest
deedes? And what differ
                     ••
                  de is there, seeing I could nomore
ha
                     •
                  e 
                     •
                  om
                     ••••
                   
                  
                     ••
                  o any thing without the benefyte of my
Nurce, than without the benefyce of my father?
            
            
               ¶The .xxx. Chapiter.
               
                  BUt if all that euer I am now able too doo,
ought too bee imputed too my firste originall:
You must consider that my Father is
not my beginner, no nor my Grandfather
nother. For alwaies the further yee go,
there shalbe still some other beginning of
the beginning that went last afore. But no
man will saye I am more beholde too myne Aunce
                     •
                  ers whom
I neuer knewe, and whiche are passed the reache of remembraunce,
than too my Father. But I should bee more beholden
too them than too my Father, if I bée beholden too myne aunceters
that I had a Father to beget mee.
               Whatsoeuer I haue doone for my Father, though it bée neuerso
much, yet (sayest thou) it is nothing in respect of my
Fathers desertes, bycause I had not bin if he had not begotten
mee. After this maner of reasoning, if any man haue healed
my Father when he was sicke and at deathes doore: there
is nothing that I can doo for him, but it is lesse than he deserueth,
bycause my Father had not begotten mee if hee had not
bin recouered. But see if this carie not a more likelyhod of
truthe: that the thing which I both could doo and haue doone,
shouldbee esteemed as myne owne, and in myne owne power,
and at myne owne wil. That I am borne, if thou looke throwly
what a thing 
                     •
                  o is, thou shalt fynde it a small matter and an
vncertein, and an occasion of good and euill alyke, doutlesse
the first steppe vntoo all thinges, but yet not by andby greater
than all thinges bycause it is the first of all thinges.
               
                  
I haue saued my Fathers lyfe and aduaunced him too high
estate, and made him a Prince in his Countrie; and I haue not
onely innobled hym with deedes doone by mee, but also giuen
him a large and easie ground too woork vpon himself, no lesse
voyd of perill than full of renowme. I haue heaped vppon him
both honour, and welthe, and whatsoeuer may allure mannes
mynd vntoo it: and wheras I was aboue all other men, I submitted
my self vnder hym. Tell mee now: that a man is able
too doo these thinges, cometh it of his Father? I will answer
for thee. Yea vndoutedly if too the dooing of these thinges, it
was inough too bee onely borne. But if too liuing well, the
least part bee too liue: or if thou haue giuen mee no more, th
                     ••
                  
that whiche wyld Bea
                     •
                  tes and other liuing thinges (whereof
some are very small, and some moste vyle) haue as well as I:
then chalenge not that too thyself, whiche I haue not of thee,
though I haue it not without thée. Put the cace I haue rendered
lyfe for lyfe. In so dooing I haue surmounted thy gift, in
asmuchas I haue giuen it wittingly, and thou hast receyued it
wittingly: & in that I haue giuen it thee, not for myne owne
pleasures sake, or at leastwyse not through pleasure: and finally
in that it is so much a greater thing too keepe lyfe still than
too receiue lyfe, as it is a lyghter matter too dye before a body
can feare death, than afterward.
            
            
               ¶The .xxxi. Chapter.
               
                  I Gaue life too thee when thou mightest vse
it out of hande: but thou gauest life vntoo
mee, when I could not tell whither euer I
should enioye it or no. I gaue thee life whē
thou wart afrayd of death thou gauest me
life, that I might dye. I ga
                     •
                  e thee a full
and perfecte life: tho
                     •
                   beg a
                     •
                  est mee voyde,
of reason, and another bodies burthen. Wilt thou knowe how,
small a benefi
                     •
                  e it is too giue life in suche wise? Thou shoulde
                     •
                  s
haue cast mee awaye: or tho
                     •
                   diddest mee wrong too beget
me. Whereby I ga
                     ••••
                  , 
                     ••
                  at the begetting vp the 
                     •
                  ather and
Moother, is the least benefite that 
                     〈…〉
                  , vn
                     •
                  esse there go with

it all other thinges, whiche ought too folowe this enteraunce
of benefiting, whiche is too bee ratified with other naturall
dueties. It is not good too liue: but too liue well. But I liue
well: yea, and I might haue liued ill. So is there no more
thyne, but that I liue. If thou vpbrayed mée with a life, whiche
of it self is naked, and witlesse, and vaunte
                     ••
                   of it as of a greate
good thing: remember that thou twytest mee by suche a good
thing, as is comon too Flyes and Woormes. Ageine, (that I
maye alledge none other matter, tha
                     •
                   the appliyng of my self
too good learning, too the intent too direct the race of my life
in the right waie): If I liue well, thou haste euen in this benefite,
receiued a greater thing than thou gauest. For thou gauest
mee too myself, rude and vnskilfull: but I haue rendered thee
thy sonne suche a one, as thou mayest bee glad that euer thou
begattest him.
            
            
               ¶The .xxxii. Chapiter.
               
                  MY Father hath cherish
                     •
                  d mee: if I dooe the
same too him. I render with an ouerplus,
because it dooeth him good, not onely too
haue cherished his sonne, but also too bee
cherished by his sonne: and he taketh more
pleasure of my good. 
                     〈◊〉
                  , than of the verie
deede. But his 
                     〈◊〉
                   of mee, 
                     〈◊〉
                   no
further than too my bodie. What if a manne had procceded so
farre, that for his Eloquence, his Iustice, 
                     〈◊〉
                   his Chiu
                     •
                  lrie▪ he
were becomme▪ famous in forrein 
                     〈…〉
                   also made
his Father, highly renowmed, 
                     〈…〉
                   of his

                     〈◊〉
                   to shine foorth by the 
                     〈…〉
                   should

                     •
                  e 
                     〈…〉
                  
Should any man haue knowen 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  Marc
                        ••
                      Agrippa more beholden to his Father, who

was not so muche as knowen after the decease of Agrippa; or
his Father more beholden too him, who nobly atteined a Seagarlande
(the highest honour emong all the rewardes of Chiualrie);
and builded so many greate woorkes in the Citée, surmounting
the royaltie of all former woorkes, and vnable too
bee matched of any that were made after? Whither did Octauius
more for his sonne Augustus: or the Emperor Augustus
more for his Father Octauius? howbeit that the shadowe of the
Father by adoption, did ouercouer the Father by nature. How
would it haue reioyced his harte, if he had seene him reigning
in quiet peace, after the Ciuell warres were ended? He had
bin more happie than he could haue perceiued; and as often as
he had looked vppon himself, he would scarcely haue beleeued,
that so noble a persone could haue bin borne in his house.
What should I now proceede with any mo, whom forgetfulnesse
had outworne long ago, had not the glorie of their children
delued them out of darknesse, and kepte them still in the
light? Hereafter let vs not aske, whither any sonne hath doon
more for his Father, than his Father hath d
                     •
                  one for him▪ but
whither it bee possible for any Sonne, to doo more for his Father,
or no? Although the examples that I haue reherced alredie
doo not yet satisfie thee, or surmount the benefites of their
Parentes: yet is it possible by Nature, 
                     •
                  oo bee doone, howbeeit
that no age hath hither too brought foorth any suche as hath
doone it. For albeeit that no one benefite or mo seuerally, bee
able too 
                     •
                  urmount the greatnesse of the Parentes desertes: yet
maye many knit togither in one surmount them.
            
            
               ¶The .xxxiii. Chapiter.
               
                  
                     SCipio saueth his Father in battell: and béeing
scarce man growen, setteth Spurres
too his horse▪ and giueth charge vppon his
enemies. Is it but a small thing, that for
desire too res
                     •
                  owe his father, he regardeth
not so many perilles, so many noble Capiteines,
so many thinges assailyng him, so

many stoppes incountering him? That being a rawe souldier,
and the firste tyme that euer he came intoo the feelde, he ouerrunneth
the old expert souldyers, and 
                     •
                  utgoeth his owne yeeres?
Ad here vnto that he defendeth his Father arreigned, and
deliuereth him from the conspiracie of his e
                     •
                  emies that were
too strong for him: That he maketh him Cosull twice or thrice
and preferreth him too other offices of honor, meete too bee couered
euen of Consulles, and Consulles pee
                     •
                  es: That he reléeueth
his pouerty with gooddes gotten by the Lawe a
                     •
                   armes,
and (whiche is the honorablest thing of all emong menne of
warre) inricheth him with the spoile of enemies. If all this
bee too little, putte too further, that he contineweth him in extraordinarie
offices, and in the gouernement of Prouinces: ad
also, that by ouerthrowing of moste mightie 
                     〈…〉
                  
without fellowe, being the founder and mainteiner of the Romaine
Empire, that was too comme from Easte too West, aduaunceth
the noblenesse of his noble Father. Shewe mee the
matche of this Scipio, and there is 
                     〈…〉
                  
of begetting, shalbee 
                     〈…〉
                  
and vertewe of suche a one, I am not able too saye, whither
too th
                     •
                   greater welfare, or too the greater honour of his
countrie.
            
            
               ¶The .xxxiiii. Chapiter.
               
                  MOreouer, if all this bee too little: admitte
that somme man haue discharged his Father
from tormentes, and taken them too
himself. For you maye inlarge the weldooinges
of a sonne, as farre as you list, considering
that the benefiting of the Father is
simple and easie, yea, and also delightfull to
the dooer. What neede wee many woordes? The father giueth
life he knowes not too whom. And in dooyng of it he hath a
Copartner: he hath an eye too the Lawe of fatherhod; too the
reward of fathers, too the continewance of his house and familie,
and vntoo all thinges rather, than him too whom he did it.

What if a man hauing obteined wisedome, doo teache thesame
too his father? (For wée wil reason vpon that point also:) whither
hath he doone more for his Father, in teaching him too
liue a blessed life: or his Father more for him in giuing him life
onely? Whatsoeuer thou dooest (will somme menne saye) and
whatsoeuer thou art able too bestowe, it is by the benefite of
thy father. As well maye my Schoolema
                     •
                  ster claime it for his
benefite, that I haue profited in the liberall Sciences vnder
him: and yet wée excell those that haue taught vs such thinges:
at leastwise those that haue taught vs our first principles. And
although no manne can atteine any thing without them: yet is
not all that a manne hath atteined, inferiour to them. There is
greate difference betweene the firste thinges, and the greatest
thinges. The firste thinges are not by and by comparable too
the greatest thinges, because the greatest can not bee atteined

                     •
                  nto
                     •••
                  ithout the first thinges.
            
            
               ¶The .xxxv. Chapter.
               
                  NOw it is tyme for me to bring somewhat
out of myne owne store, if I
maie so terme it.
               He that bestoweth suche a benefite
as may bee bettered, may bee surmounted.
The father hath giuen his
sonne lyfe: but there are thinges better
than lyfe: Ergo the father maie
be surmounted, bycause there is some
better thing than the benefite that he hath bestowed.
               Yea if one that hath giuen a man lyfe bee once or twyce deliuered
from perill of death for it, he hath receyued a greater
benefyte than he gaue: Ergo if the Sonne saue his father oftentymes
from daunger of death, the father receyueth a better
turne than he bestowed.
               He that receiueth a good turne, receiueth so much the greater
good turne, as he hath more neede of it: But he that liueth
hath more neede of lyfe than he that is not yet borne, (as who

can finde no wāt at all of it): Ergo the father receiueth a greater
benefite in his sonnes sauing of his life, than the sonne receyueth
in his fathers begetting of him.
               [But thou sayest still, that] the fathers benefites cannot bee ouermatched
by the sonnes benefites. Why so? Bycause he hath
receyued lyfe of his father, whiche if he had not receyued, he
could haue doon no good turnes at all. This care of the father
is comon too all menne that haue preserued anie bodyes life:
for they could not haue requyted, if they had not receyued lyfe.
By the same reason it is not possible too reward a Phisician aboue
his desert, (for a Phisician is woont too giue life): nor
a mariner if he haue saued a man from shipwrecke. But the benefytes
as well of these men, as of all others that by anie meanes
haue giuen vs lyfe, may bee surmounted: Ergo the benefites
of parentes may bee surmounted also.
               If a man haue bestowed suche a benefite vppon mee as hath
neede too bee furthered by the benefytes of manie men: and I
bestowe suche a benefite vppon him, as should neede the help of
noman: I haue bestowed a greater than I haue receiued.
               The father giueth his chyld suche a life as should haue perished
out of hand if there had not folowed manie thinges too
mainteine it: But if the sonne saue his Fathers life, he giueth
him suche a life as wanteth the helpe of no man, as too the continewance
of it: Ergo the Father that hath receiued life at his
sonnes hande, hath receiued a greater benefite than he gaue.
            
            
               ¶The .xxxvi. Chapiter.
               
                  THese thinges diminishe not the reuerence
towardes Parentes, ne make their Children
woorse too them, but rather better.
For by Nature Uertewe is desirous of
praise, and preaceth too outgo the formest.
The childs loue wil be the more chereful
if it goe on too requite benefites, with hope
of surmounting. If this may comme too passe by the mutuall
consent of the Fathers and the Children: for asmuche as there

bee many thinges wherein wee maye bee vanquished too our
owne behoofe: what luckier incounter, what greater felicitie
can there bee to Parentes: than too bee driuen too confesse thē
selues, ouermatched by their Children in weldooyng? If wêe
bée not of this opinion: wee giue our Children cause of excuse,
and make them the 
                     •
                  lower too render thankfulnesse, whereas
wee ought rather to spurre them foreward, and too say? Gotoo
good sonnes there is an honorable wager layed betweene the
Fathers and the Sonnes, whither they shall haue giuen or receiued
greater benefites. They haue not therefore wonne the
wager, because they haue begunne firste: Onely plucke vp a
good harte as becommes you, and faint not, that ye may ouercomme
them that would bee glad of it. In so goodly an enterprise,
you cannot want Capiteines too incorage you too doo
as they haue doone afore you, and too haste you foreward in
their owne footesteppes, too the victorie whiche they haue often
heretofore gotten of their Parentes.
            
            
               ¶The .xxxvii. Chapiter.
               
                  
                     AEnaeas ouermatched his father. For wheras
his father had borne him a Babe when
he was a light and safe cariage: he tooke
vp his father heauie with age, and caried
him through the thickest preace of his enemies,
and through the ruines of the Citie
falling doune about him, at what tyme the
deuout old man holding his holie Relikes and housholdgods
in in his armes, loded him with another burthen heuyer than
himself. Yet bare he him in the fyre, yea and (what is not naturall
loue able too doo?) he bare him thorough, and shryned him
too be woorshipped among the Founders of the Romaine Empyre.
The yoongmen of Sicilie ouermatched their Father. For
when Mount. Aetna bursting foorth with greater force than
was accustomed, had cast foorth his fyre intoo the Townes,
intoo the Feeldes, and into the greatest parte of the Ilande:
they caught vp their Parentes, and men beléeue that the 
                     ••
                  ames

claue a sunder, and withdrawing on either syde of them,
did set open a Gap for those most worthy yoongmen too ronne
out at, that they might safely performe their greate attempt.
The like victorie befell too Antigonus: who hauing vanquished
his enemies in a sore Battell, did put the reward of the victorie
ouer too his Father, and gaue the kingdome of Ciprus
intoo his handes.Titus Manlius,
the Sōne of Lucius Manlius. Looke in Liuie the vii. booke of the first Decad. Marcus Pomponius. The trewe reigning, is, not to reigne when
thou mayst. Manlius also ouercame his lordly father. For when
his father had put him away for a tyme, bycause of the brutishnesse
& dulnesse of his youth: he came to a Tribune of the people
that had sommoned his father too answere too an inditement:
& when the Tribune (in hope he had hated his father, and would
therefore haue bin a Traytour too him) beléeuing hee should
haue doone the yoongman a pleasure, whose banishment (among
other thinges) he obiected too Manlius as a heynouse
cryme,) demaunded of him the tyme that his Father had set
him: The yoongman getting him alone, drewe out a Dagger
that hee had hidden in his sléeue, and sayd too hym. If thou
sweare not too mée to discharge my father of his Indytement,
I will thruste thee through with this Dagger. It is in thy
choyce after what sort my Father shall haue no accuser. The
Tribune sware, and kept touch with him, certifying the Court
of the cause why he let his Action fall. It had not bin for any
other man thus too haue ouerruled the Tribune, and too haue
gone cleere away with it.
            
            
               ¶The .xxxviii. Chapiter.
               
                  THere are examples vpon examples,
concerning suche as haue deliuered
their Parentes out of Daungers,
aduaunced them from the bacest degree
to the highest state; and lifting
them from the common and rascall
sort, haue commended them too the
world, neuer too bee forgotten. No
force of woords, no excellēcie of wit

is able too expresse, how greate, how commendable, and how
woorthie a matter it is too bee had alwayes in remembrance,
for a man too bee able too say: I haue obeyed my Parentes, I
haue giuen place too their commaundemētes were they right
or wrong, easie or hard, I haue behaued myself obediently and
with submission: In this one point onely haue I bin wilfull:
that I myght not bee ouermatched in well dooing. Contende
you also I pray you: and when you bee vanquished, giue
a newe onset. Happie are those that shall so vanquish; happie
are those that shalbee so vanquished. What thing can bee
more noble, than that yoongman whiche myght saye too
himself, (for it is not lawfull for him too saye it too any
other body) I haue ouermatched my father in weldooing?
What thing can bee more fortunate
than that old man, which might euery
where make his vaunt vnto all
men, that his sonne hath
ouergone him in
weldooing?
And
what greater felicitie can
there bee, than too
yeld in such
a cace?
               The end of the third Booke.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ The fourth booke of Lucius Annaeus
Seneca, concerning Benefites.
            
               ¶The first Chapiter.
               
                  OF all the thinges that wee haue discoursed
(my frende Ebutius Liberalis,)
it may seeme that no one thing
is so needefull, or (as Salust saieth)
too bee treated of with more heede,
than that which wée bée now in hand
with: namely whither the dooing
of good tur
                     •
                  es, and the rendering of
thankfulnesse, are thinges too bee
desyred for themselues. There are too bee found, which set not
by honestie but for aduauntage sake, and whiche like not vertue
without reward: whiche notwithstanding hath no noblenesse
in it, if it haue any thing sette too sale. For what fowler
shame can there bee, than for a man too make reckening what
it may bee woorth too him too bee honest? when as Uertue is
neyther allured with gayne, nor frayed away with losse, and is
so farre from brybing any man with profers or promises, that
shee willeth men too too spend all vppon hir, and is commonly
with them that giue themselues freely vnto hir? He that will
go vnto hir, must tread profit vnderfoote. Whithersoeuer shee
calleth, whither 
                     ••
                  euer shee sendeth; thither must a man go
without regard at his worldly goods, yea and sometyme without
sparing his owne blud, and he must neuer refuze too doo
her commaundment. What shal I gayne (sayest thou) if I doo
this thing valeantly, or that thing bountifully? There is nothing
promised 
                     〈…〉
                   happen
too thee, 
                     〈…〉
                   thinges is
in themselues. 
                     〈…〉
                   thing is too
bee desyred for it self, 
                     〈◊〉
                   goo
                     •••
                  oing is an honest thing: it
must needes bee in the same 
                     〈◊〉
                   seeing it is of the same nature.
But that the thing which is honest, is too bee desyred for
it self: it is often and sufficiently proued alreadie.
            
            
               
               ¶The second Chapiter.
               
                  IN this poynt I muste wage Battell
ageinst the delicate and nyce companie
of Epicures, whose Philosophie
is in their feasting, among whom
Uertue is the Handmayd of pleasures.
Them shee stoopes vntoo, them
shee attende vppon, them shee beholdes
aboue hir. There is no pleasure
(sayeth the Epicure) without
vertue. But why is pleasure put before vertue?
               Thou reasonest concerning the order. Our question concerneth
the whole thing, and thou argewest vppon a part of it.
Uertue is not vertue if shee can folowe. Uertue chalengeth
the cheefest preheminence. Shee muste leade, shee muste commaund,
shee must stand in hyghest place: and thou biddest hir
fetch hir watchwoord at another.
               What skilles it thee, sayst thou? for I also doo deny that
there can bee any blissed lyfe without vertue. I myself also disallowe
and condemne the pleasure whiche I folowe, and too
whiche I haue yelded myself in bondage, if vertue bee seuered
from it.
               The only thing that is in question, is whither vertue bee
the cause of the souerein good, or the souerein good it self.
               Admit that these bee the onely thing in question. Suppos
                     •
                  st
thou that the asking of it concerneth but the transposing of
the order onely? Certesse it were a verie confusion and a manifest
blindnesse, too set the Cart before the Horse. I am not
displeased that vertue is marshalled behynd pleasure: but that

                     •
                  hee is in any wyse matched with pleasure. Shee is the disdeyner
& enemy of pleasure, and shūneth her as farre as shee can.
Shee is better acquaynted with peynfulnesse and greefe, and
more meete too be grafted into manly misfortune, than intoo
this womanish felicitie.
            
            
               ¶The third Chapter.
               
                  
                  THese thinges were too bée spoken (my Liberalis)
bycause the dooyng of good turnes (whiche is
the matter wherof wee treate) is a poynt of vertue:
& it is a foule shame that it should bee doone
in any other respect, than to haue it doone. For if
wee should doo it in hope of receyuing agein: then should wee
doo it too the richest, and not too the woorthyest. But now wee
preferre the poore man before the gréedie riche man. That is
no benefyte, whiche hath an eye too the welth of the persone.
Moreouer, if only profit should allure men too doo good: they
should doo least good, that best might: namely riche men, men
of authoritie, and Kinges, bycause they haue least neede of other
mennes helpe. And a
                     •
                  for the Goddes, they should bestowe
none of these their manifold giftes whiche they power out vppon
vs Night and Day without ceassyng. For their owne nature
suffizeth them in all thinges, and maynteyneh
                     •
                   tthem in
abundaunce, in safetie, and in impossiblitie too bee annoyed.
Therefore shall they doo good too none, if the onely cause of
dooing good bee the regarde of themselues & their owne profite.
Too looke about one, not where it may bee best bestowed,
but where it may bee bestowed too most aduauntage, and from
whence it may bee taken away with most ease: is not beneficialnesse,
but vsurie. But forasmuchas suche dealing is farre of
from the Goddes: It foloweth that they bee rightly liberall.
For if the onely cause of dooing good bee the profit of the dooer:
Sith God can looke for no profite at our hande: there is
no cause why God should doo vs any good.
            
            
               ¶The fourth Chapter.
               
                  
                     I
                   Knowe what aunswere is made too this.
Surely God dooth no good turnes at all,
but is carelesse and regardlesse of vs; and
being quyte giuen from the world, buzieth
himself about other matters, or (whiche
seemeth too the Epicure too bee the souereine
felicitie) about nothing, nor is a
                     •
                  ie

more inclyned too benefiting, than too dooing wrong. He that
so sayeth, thinketh not y• God heereth the voyces of them that
pray, nor of them yt euerywhere lift vp their hands too heauen
in making their vowes bothe priuate and publike. Whiche
thing doutlesse had neuer comme too passe, neither would all
the world haue agreed too bee so mad, as too make sewt vntoo
deaf Goddes and helplesse Idolles, except they had felt their
benefytes in verie deede, one whyle freely bestowed, anotherwhyle
giuen vppon prayer, and the same too bee greate, sent
in dewe season, and by their tymely comming ridding men frō
greate miseries that manaced them. And who is so muche a
wretch or so smally regarded? who was euer borne too so hard
a destinie and too so sore penance, that he hath not felt this so
greate bountifulnesse of God? Looke vppon the miserables
                     •
                   of
them, euen when they lamēt and bewayle their owne cace: and
yee shalnot finde them altoogither voyde of the heauenly benefytes.
yea Yee shall fynd none that hath not drawen somewhat
out of that most bountifull fountaine. Is it a small thing that
is giuen indifferently too all men in their birth? Or (too let
passe the things that are distributed afterward in vnegall proportion)
did nature giue a small thing when shee gaue herself?
            
            
               ¶The .v. Chapiter.
               
                  DOoeth not God bestowe benefytes?
from whence thē hast thou these thinges
wherof thou art owner? whiche
thou giuest? whiche thou Denyest?
whiche thou keepest? whiche thou
catchest? From whence comme these
inumerable thinges that delyght the
eyes, the eares, and the minde? From
whence is this abundance that furnisheth
euen our ryotous excesse? For, not only our necessities
are prouyded for, but euen our pleasures also are tendered.
Whence haue wee so manie trees bearing sundrie sortes of
frutes, so manie wholsome herbes, and so manie diuersities of

meates seruing for all seasons through the whole yeare? insomucheas
the verie foode that commeth of the earth wee wote
not how, were able too finde an vnpurueying sluggard. What
should I speake of all kynde of liuing thinges, some breeding
vppō the drye and hard ground, some within the moyst waters,
and some sent doune from aloft, too the end that euery peece of
nature should yeeld some tribute vntoo vs? what should I say
of Riuers, some with moste pleasaunt wyndlasses inuironing
the féeldes, and othersome passing foorth with houge streames
able too be are shippes, and intermedling themselues with the
sea?uphrates. 
                        •
                     ygris. Nilus. 
                        •
                     o. & others. Wherof some, at certeine ordinarie dayes, take woonderfull
increace, so as the soodein force of the somers flud, moysteneth
the groundes that are situate vnder the Droughtie and
burning clymate. What shall I say of the veynes of medcinable
waters? what shall I say of the boyling vp of whot Bathes
euen vppon the verie shores?
               
                  And what of thee ô Mighti Lare, and Benacus which swell▪
                  
                  With roring Bilowes like the Sea whē windes doo make it fel?
               
            
            
               ¶The .vi. Chapiter.
               
                  IF a man had giuen thee a feawe Acres
of Ground, thou wouldest say
thou haddest receyued a benefite at
his hand: & denyest thou the vnmeasurable
hougenesse of the broade
earth too bee a Benefite? If a man
should giue thee Monnie and fill
thy Chest (for that is a greate matter
with thee) thou wouldest call it
a benefite: and thinkest thou it no Benefite, that GOD hath
hoorded vp so manie Metalles, and shed foorth so many streames
vppon the Sandes, in ronning doune whereuppon, they
carie with them a houge masse of Gold, Siluer, Brasse, and Yron
hidded euerywhere: and also that he hath giuen thee cunning
too fynde it out by setting markes of his couert riches
vppon the vpper part of the Earth? If a man should giue thee

a house wherein there were a little glistering Marble, and a
roofe shyning with gold or vernished with colours; wooldest
thou call it a meane benefite? God hath builded thee a greate
house, out of perill of burning or falling, wherein thou seest,
not little peeces and thinner than the Chizell itself wherewith
they were heawen: but entier huge Masses of moste Preciouse
stone, whole through out of sundrie and seuerall woorkemanship
the small peeces whereof thou woonderestat; the roofe of
whiche house shyneth after one sorte in the day tyme, and after
another in the nighttyme: and doo
                     •
                  t thou now denye that thou
hast receiued anie benefite at all? Agein, whereas thou settest
greate store by these thinges whiche thou hast: thinkest thou
(whiche is the point of a thanklesse persone) that thou art beholden
too nobodie for them? from whence haste thou this
breath which thou drawest? from whence hast thou this light,
whereby thou disposest and orderest the dooinges of thy lyfe?
from whēce hast thou thy blud, by whose mean thy lyuely heate
is maynteyned? from whence haste thou these thinges whiche
with their excellent taste prouoke thyne appetyte, euen more
than thy stomacke can beare? from whence hast thou these intycementes
of pleasure euen till thou bee weerie of it? from
whēce hast thou this ease wherin thou welterest and witherest
awaye? wilt thou not (if thou bee thankfull) say?
               
                  God giues this ease, and he shalbee my God for euermore:
                  His altars shal my tender Lambes imbrew ful oft therefore.
                  For he it is that makes my Neate to wander (as yee see)
                  And giues mee powre on Otē Reede to pype with merry glee.
               
               God is hee, not that hath sent out a feawe Oxen, but whiche
hath dispersed whole herdes of all maner of Catell intoo the
whole world: which giueth pasture too the flockes that stray
here and there in all quarters: which giueth Somerféede and
Winterféede one vnder another: which not only hath taught
men too playe vppon a reede, and after some maner too sing a
rude and homely song vntoo it: but also hath deuysed so many
artes, so many varieties of woordes, and so many soundes, too
yeeld sundrie tunes, some by force of our owne breth, and some

by outward wynd. For wee can no more say, that the thinges
whiche wee haue inuented, are our owne dooinges: than that
it is our owne dooing that wee growe, or that the bodie hathe
his full proportion and properties according too his determinate
tymes: as the falling away of teeth in chyldhod the lu
                     •
                  tinesse
of youth growing vntoo yeeres of more discretion, and
the strongnesse of mannes estate passing from thence in too the
last age, whiche pitcheth the boundes of our flyghtfull lyfe.
There are sowen in vs the seedes of all ages, and of all artes:
and God as a schoolemaster dooth secrettly trayne foorth our
naturall dispositions.
            
            
               ¶The .vii. Chapter.
               
                  NAture (sayest thou) giueth mée these
thinges. Perceyuest thou not, that
when thou saye
                     •
                  t so, thou doost but
change Gods name? For what else
is Nature, than God, and Gods ordinance
planted in the world and in
the partes therof? As often as thou
listest, thou mayst call him, sommetymes
the author of all thinges, and
sometymes Ioue,
                  Iupiter Opt. Max. Tonans. Stator. Stat
                        •
                     lio. that is too say, the moste graciouse and most
myghtie. Also thou mayst wel terme him y• Thunderer, and the
Stander: for he is the verie Stāder, and Stayer: not bycause
the battell of the Romanes which was fleeing, stayed and stood
still after the making of their vow, (as our historiographers
haue reported): but bycause all thinges stand and are stayed by
his benefite.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Moreouer if thou call him Fate, thou shalt not lye.
For whereas Fate is nothing else but a holding on of causes
linked one within another: he is the first cause whervppon
all the rest depend. Finally thou mayst properly apply too him
what names so euer thou wilt, whiche conteine anie force and
effect of heauenly thinges. Looke how manie properties or operacious
he hath: so manie names may he haue.
            
            
               
               ¶The .viii. Chapter.
               
                  OUr men doo also terme him father Liber.
and Hercules, and Mercurie. Father Liber,
bycause he is the father of all thinges, by
whom was first found out the power of
seedes, which should bee the maynetenance
of all thinges through pleasure. Hercules,
bycause his power is inuincible, and shall
returne intoo fire when it is wéerie of woorking. And Mercurie,
bycause Reason, and nomber, and order, and kunning are in
his power. Whithersoeuer thou turne thyself, thou shalt fynd
hym meeting thee. Nothing is exempted from him. He himself
filleth his woorke too the full. Therefore thou vnthankfullest
of all wyghtes, thou talkest vaynly when thou sayest thou art
not beholden too God, but too nature. For neyther is nature
without God, nor God without nature: but both are one thing,
without difference of office. If for a thing that thou haddest receiued
of Seneca, thou wooldest say thou art detter too Annaeus,
or Lucius, thou shouldest not thereby chaūge the persone of thy
Creditor, but his name: bycause that whither thou call him
by his forename, his proper name, or his Sirname, yet shall he
bee but all one man. Euen so, whither thou vse the termes of
Nature, Fate, or Fortune, it makes no matter: bycause they al
are the names of the selfsame God, vsing his power diuersly.
Iustice, Honestie, Wisedome, Manlinesse and Thriftinesse are
the goods of the mynd whiche is but one. If thou lyke any of
these, thou lykest the mynd.
            
            
               ¶The .ix. Chapiter.
               
                  BUt too the intent I raunge not asyde intoo bymatters:
I say that God bestoweth right manie and exceeding
great benefytes vppon vs, without hope of
receyuing aught agein, bycause that neither he needeth
any thing too bee bestowed vppon him, nor wee are able
too bestowe any thing vppon him, Ergo Benefiting is a thing

too bee de
                     •
                  yred for it owneself, and nothing is too bee respected
in it but onely the receyuers commoditie. This is the thing
that wee must tend vnto, setting a
                     •
                  yde our owne commodities.
               But (sayeth he) thou hast told vs we must make ware choyce
on whom we bestowe our good turnes: bycause that not euen
the husbandman will beta
                     ••
                   his seede too the sand: Ergo wee
must seeke our owne profit in dooing good turnes, lyke as wée
doo in tilling and sowing: for too sowe is not a thing too bee
desired for itself. Besides this, yee take aduysement in dooing
your good turne: which thing ought not too bee, if the dooing
of good Turnes were a thing too bee desired for itself: for in
what place so euer and in what wyze so euer it were doone, it
were still a good turne.
               Wee folowe the thing that is honest, for none other cause
than for it self. And although none other thing bee too bee
sought in in it: Yet notwithstanding wee bethinke our selues
what wee may doo, and when, and after what sort, for in these
thinges it consisteth. Therefore when Ibethinke mee vppon
whom I may bestowe my good turne: I indeuer that it may
bee a goodturne in deede. For if it bee bestowed vppon an vnhonest
persone; it can hee neyther honest, nor a goodturne.
            
            
               ¶The .x. Chapiter.
               
                  TOO restore a thing that a man hath taken
too keepe, is a thing too bee desyred for itself:
Yet shall I not alwayes restore it, nor
in all places, nor at all tymes. Sometyme
my vtter denying of it may bee as good as
the open restoring of it. I must haue an eye
too the profit of him to whom I should restore
it: and if the deliuerance wil doo him hatme, I shall kéepe
it still from him. The same thing must I dooe in benefyting. I
must consider too whom I giue, when I giue, in what wyse,
and wherefore. For nothing is too bee doone without discretion.
It is no good turne except it bee doone vppon reason:
bycause reason is the companion of all honestie. How oft haue

wée herde men (that found fault with them selues for their vnaduised
bestowing), caste foorth these woordes? I had leuer I
had lost it, than bestowed it where I did. It is the fowlest kynd
of bestowing that can bee, too bestowe vnaduisedly: and it is
muche more greef too haue bestowed a good turne amisse, than
not too haue receyued any. For it is the fault of other men that
wee haue receiued none: but it is our owne fault that wee
made no choyce in bestowing. In making my choyce, I will
respectt nothing lesse than that whiche thou surmysest: namely
of whom I shalbée best recompenced. For I will choose such
a one as wilbe thankfull, and not suche a one as will make recompence.
Oftentymes, hee that shall neuer requite, shalbee
thankfull, and hee that hath requyted shalbee vnthankfull. I
make estimation of him by his mynde. Therefore I ouerpasse
the riche man, if he bee vnwoorthy: & bestowe vppon the poore
man that is good. For in extreme pouertie, hee wilbe thankfull:
and when he wanteth al thinges, his hart shal yeld abundance.
I hunt not for gayne by my good turne, nor for pleasure, nor
for glorie. Contenting myself too please but one, I will bestow
too the ende too doo as I ought too doo: And that whiche I
ought too doo, is not too bée doone without choyse. What maner
of choyse the same shalbee, that doo you demaund.
            
            
               ¶The .xi. Chapter.
               
                  
                     I
                   Will chooze a man that is honest,
playne, myndful, thankfull, not gripple
of other mennes goodes, nor couetously
pinching his owne, and such
a one as is well mynded. When I
haue found such a man, although fortune
lend him nothing wherwith too
requyte: yet is the matter falne out
as I wished. If selfprofit and filthie
forereckenyng vppon gayne doo make mee liberall: If I shal
befreend non, but bycause he should befreend mee agein: then
shal I not benefite him that is taking his iourney into forrein

and farre countries: then shall I not pleasure suche a one as
must dwell awaie for euer: then shall I not doo for one that is
so sicke as hee is past all hope of recouerie: Then shall I not
bestowe aught when I am passing out of the world myself: for
I shall haue no tyme too receyue frendship agein. But too the
intent thou mayst knowe, that the dooing of good turnes is a
thing too bée coueted for itsef: wée must reléeue the straungers
that arryued but euen now vppon our coast, and shall go away
by and by ageine. If a straunger suffer shipwrecke, wee muste
giue him a ship redie rigged too conuey him home agein. Hee
goes his way scarce knowing the woorker of his welfare: and
neuer thinking too come in our sight agein, he setteth vs ouer
too the Goddes for his Det, and prayeth them too make recompence
for him. In the meane whyle wée bee delighted with
the rememberance of a barrein Benefite. I praie you, when
wee bee hard at deathes doore, and when wee make our Will:
doo wee not distribute benefites that shall nothing profite ourselues?
How muche tyme spend wee, how long debate wee in
secret, how muche wee may giue, and too whom? But what
skilles it too whom wee giue, séeing wee shal receiue of none?
Nay rather, wee bee neuer more ware in bestowing, nor wee
neuer streyne our wittes more than at that tyme, when all
profit set asyde, there standeth nothing before our eyes but honestie.
For so long as feare, or the doltish vyce of voluptuouse
                  
                     •
                  esse
corrupteth or iudgement, wee continewe euill iudges of
deuties and desertes. But when death hath forestalled all thinges,
and sent an vncorrupt iudge to giue sentence: Then séeke
wee the worthyest too bestowe our thinges vppon. Neither
haue we a more conscionable care too set anie thing at a staye,
than that whiche perteyneth no longer vnto vs.
            
            
               ¶The .xii. Chapiter.
               
                  AND in good sooth, it is euen then a greate pleasure
for a man too thinke with himselfe, I shall
make suche a one welthier: and by increasing his
riches. I shall aduaunce the countenance of his estate.
If wee shal doo no good, but when wee may

receyne agein: then must wee dye intestate.
               You auouch (sayth he) that a benefite is an vndischargeable
Dette: but a Dette is not a thing too bee coueted for itselfe:
Ergo benefyting or gooddooing is not too bee desyred for itself.
When wee terme it a Dette, wee vse a resemblance and a
borowed spéech. For likewyse wee know that Lawe is the rule
of right and wrong: and yet that a rule is not a thing too bee
couered for it self. Our falling intoo these termes, is for the
better opening of the matter. When I say a Det, I meene as
it were a Det. And that thou mayst knowe my meening to bee
so, I ad, vndischargeable: when as there is no Dette but it eyther
may or ought too bee dischaged. So little ought a goodturne
too bee doone for lukers sake, that oftentymes (as I
sayd) wée must doo it with our losse and perill. As for example:
I reskwe a man beset with theeues, so as he is suffered too go
away safely. I defend an accused persone that is in daunger to
bee oppressed by parcialitie, and purchace the displeasure of
greate men for my labour: so as they charge mee with mayntenance:
and the miserie that I dispatched him out of, lighteth
perchaunce vpon myself, whereas I might haue gone ageinst
him, or safely haue sitten still as a looker on in another mans
matter. Yea I vndertake for him when iudgement is past ageinst
him, and suffer not execution to go out vpon his goods,
but offer too bee bound for him too his creditors: and too the
intent I may saue him from outlawing. I ronne in daunger to
be outlawed myself. Noman being redy too purchace the Manur
of Tusculum or of Tyburt for his healthes sake, or too repose
himself in it in the sommer season, will stand debating for
what yeeres he shall buye it: when he hath bought it, he muste
hold him too it. The like reason is in benefyting. For if yee
aske what it should yeld agein, I answere, a good conscience.
What dooth Benefyting yeeld? Tell thou mee what Iustice
yeeldeth, what innocencie yeeldeth, what noblenesse of corage
yeeldeth, what chastitie yeeldeth, what aduysednesse yeeldeth,
and whither thou exactest any more of these, than the vertues
themselues.
            
            
               
               ¶The .xiii. Chapiter.
               
                  FOr what purpose acc
                     •
                  mplisheth the world
his dewe course? For what purpose dooeth
the Sunne lengthen and shorten the daye?
All these bee benefites: for they bee doone
for our behoofe. Like as it is the duetie of
the worlde too carie thinges aboute in order:
And as it is the duetie of the Sunne
too shift his place from whēce he rizeth, too the coast where he
setteth: and too doo these thinges for our welfare, without rewarde:
euen so is it mannes duetie, emong other thinges, too
doo good turnes also. Wherefore then dooeth he them? Least
he should not doo them, and so lose occasion of welldooyng. It
is a pleas
                     •
                  re too you too accustome the lither bodie to lazie Idlenesse,
and too seeke a kynde of ease verie like theirs that are
in a slumber: and too lurke vnder a couerte shadowe, feeding
the sluggishenesse of your drouzie myndes, with moste nyce cō
                  ceites,
whiche you terme quietnesse: and too pamper your vnweeldie
carkeses till they wex wan, with meates and drinkes
in the lurkingholes of your gardeines. But as for vs wée haue
a manlie pleasure: namely too doo good turnes, either too our
owne paine while wee ease other menne of their paines; or too
our owne perill, while wée plucke other folkes out of perill; or
too the increase of our own charges, while wee releeue the necessities
and distresses of others. What matter is it too mee,
whither I receiue any good turnes or no? For euen when I
haue receiued, then muste I bestowe. Benefiting hath respecte
too the commoditie of him on whom it is bestowed, and not too
our owne. Otherwise wee bestowe it on our selues, and not on
him. Therefore many thinges that greatly profite other men,
doo lose their grace and thanke, because they bee doone for
gaine. The Merchantman dooeth good too his Countrie, the
Phisician too sicke persones, the Horsecourser too his Chapmen:
and yet all these menne make not those beholden to them
that receiue good by them, because that in their profiting of others

they seeke their owne gaine.
            
            
               ¶The .xiiii. Chapiter.
               
                  IT is no benefite, that is sett too sale. This
will I giue, this will I take, is plaine bargainyng.
I cannot call her a chaste woman
which hath giuen her Louer a repulse too
set him the sharper. Shee that keepes her
self honest for feare of the Lawe, or feare of
her housebande, is not honest. For as Ouid
saieth,

                     The wife that liues chastly compelled thereto,
                     Because that shee dareth none otherwise doo:
                     Deserues too bee counted as ill in effecte,
                     As shee whom her doinges doo plainly detect.
                  
               
               Not vndeseruedly is shee accounted in the number of offen
                  
                     •
                  ers,
whiche kept herself honest for feare, and not for honesties
sake. In semblable wise, he that dooeth a good turne too the
i
                     •
                  tente too receiue another, dooeth none at all. Otherwise it
might bee inferred, that wee benefite the brute beastes, whiche
wee cherishe either for our seruice, or for our foode: and that
wee benefite our Drtyardes when wee tende them, that they
maye not decaye through brought or binding of the sooyle, for
want of digging and lookingtoo. But it is not in respect of
right and equitie, that any manne takes in hande too Manure
the grounde, or to doo any other thing whose frute is without
it self. Neither is it a couetouse and filthie thought, that leadeth
a man too doo good turnes: but it is a manly and a franke
harte, desirous too bestowe euen when it hath bestowed alred
                     •
                  e;
and too augment the old with freshe and newe; not regarding
how gainfull they maye bee too the bestower. For els, too
doo good because it is a mannes owne profite, is a bace thing,
praiselesse, and commendacionlesse. What excellencie is it for
a man too loue himself, too spare himself, and to gather for him
self? The true purpose of benefiting, calleth a man awaie from
all these thinges: and laiyng hande vpon him draweth him too

losse. It forsaketh selfprofit, and ioyeth exceedingly in the berie
acte of gooddooing.
            
            
               ¶The .xv. Chapiter.
               
                  IS there any doute, but harme is contrarie
too dooyng good? Like as too doo harme
is a thing too be eschewed and shunned for
it self: euen so too doo good, is a thing too
bee coueted for it self. In the first, the shame
of dishonestie preuaileth ageinst all rewardes
that allure to wickednesse: in the other
the beautifulnesse of honestie, being effectuall of it self, allureth
men vntoo it. I shall speake no vntruthe, if I saye there is no
man but he loueth his owne benefites; nor no man but he is of
that mynde, that he would bee the gladder too see him, for whō
he hath doone muche; nor no man that would forbeare too doo
one good, because he had doone for him once afore. Whiche
thing could not comme too passe, except the welldooyng it self
delighted vs. How often shall ye here men saye: I cannot finde
in my harte too forsake him whose life I haue saued, and whom
I haue deliuered out of daunger. He requesteth me to stande
on his syde ageinst men of authoritie. I am loth too doo it: but
what shall I dod? I haue befreended him once or twice alredie.
See you not how in this cace, there is a certein peculiar force
whiche compelleth vs too doo men good? Firste because it behoueth
too doo it: & afterward because wee haue doone it alredie?
Uppon whom wee had no cause too bestowe any thing at
the first, vppon him wee bestowe somewhat afterward, euen in
respecte that wee haue doone for him alredie. Yea, and so-little
dooeth our owne profite moue vs too benefiting: that wee perseuer
in tendering and mainteinyng the same, euen without
profite, onely for loue of dooing good. And it is as naturall a
thing too beare with our vnluckie bestowing, as to beare with
our children when they doo amisse.
            
            
               ¶The .xvi. Chapiter.
               
                  
                  THE same persones beare vs in hande, that
men render thankfulnesse also, not for that
it is honest so too doo, but because it is profitable.
Whiche thing maye bee disproued
with the lesse labor, because that looke with
what argumentes wee haue gathered, that
the dooyng of good turnes, is a thing too
bee desired for it self: by the same waye wee also gather, that
the rendering of thākfulnesse is of the same sort. This is once
an vnmoueable ground, from whence wee fetche our proofes
for the rest: that the thing whiche is honest is too bee folowed,
for none other cause, than for that it is honeste. And who is so
fonde as too doute, whither it bee an honeste matter too bee
thankfull? Who would not detest an vnthankfull persone vnprofitable
too himself? When thou hearest of one that is vnthankfull
to his fréende that hath bin very beneficiall too him,
how wilt thou conster it? That he hath plaied an vnhonest part
in so dooing: Or that he hath delt fondly, in omitting the thing
that was for his commoditie and profite? I trowe thou wilte
take him too bee the wicked man, whiche ha
                     •
                  h néede of punishment;
and not him whiche hath neede of an ouerseer too looke
too the orderyng of thinges too his profite. Whiche thing
should not fall out so, vnlesse thankfulnesse were a thing bothe
honest, and too bee desired for itself. Other thinges perhappes
doo lesse vtter their owne worthinesse, and haue neede of an interpreter
too tell whither they bee honeste or no. But this is
more apparaunte & beautifull than that the brightnesse thereof
should caste but a dimme and glimeryng light. What is so
commendable, what is so vniuersally receiued in the myndes
of all men: as to render thankfulnesse for good desertes?
            
            
               ¶The .xvii. Chapter.
               
                  BEsides this: tell me what cause leadeth vs too bée
thankfull? Gaine whosoeuer despiseth not gaine
is vnthankfull. Ambi
                     •
                  ion? And what bragge is it
too haue payed that whiche thou owest? Feare? A
manne néedes not bee afrayed too bee vnthankfull.

For as though Nature had prouided sufficientely in that
behalf: wée haue made no Lawe for it, like as there is no Lawe
too bynde children too loue their Parentes, or Parentes too
tender their children: For it is more than needeth, too inforce
vs too that thing wherevntoo wee are inclined of Nature.
And like as noman needes too bee incoraged too self loue, bycause
he hath it by kynd: So is noman too bée exhorted too couet
honest thinges for their owne sake, bycause they like vs of
their owne nature. Yea and vertue is so graciouse a thing: that
too allowe of good thinges, is ingraffed euen in euill menne.
Who is he that would not séeme beneficiall? who couets not
too bée counted good, euen when he dooeth moste wickednesse
and wrong? Who is he that settes not somme colour of right,
vppon the thinges that he hath doone moste outrageously? Or
that would not séeme too haue bin good maister, euen too those
whom he hath harmed? Therefore are they contented too receiue
thankes of those whom they haue vexed. And because
they cannot shewe them selues too bee good and liberall in
deede: they sette a good face vppon the matter. Whiche thing
they would not doo, vnlesse the thing that is honest, and too bée
desired for itself, compelled them too seeke an opinion contrarie
too their disposition, and too cloke the naughtinesse whose
frute they couette, though they hate the thing itself, and are ashamed
of it. Neither hath any man reuolted so farre from the
Lawe of Nature, and degenerated so farre out of kynde, that
he would bee naught for none other cause, but for his myndes
sake onely. Aske any of these that liue vppon the spoyle, whither
they had not leuer too comme by the thinges whiche they
seeke, by good meanes, than by robbing and stealing? He that
makes his gaine of setting vppon men by the highwayes side,
and of killing menne that passe by, would wishe too finde those
thinges, rather than too take them by force. Yea, ye shall finde
no man, whose harte would not fame inioye the reward of his
naughtinesse, without the dooing of the naughtie deede it self.
Moste highly are wee bounde too Nature in this respect, that
vertue sheadeth her light so intoo mennes myndes, as euen

they that followe her not, doo see her.
            
            
               ¶The .xviii. Chapiter.
               
                  TOO the end thou mayst knowe that
the affection of a thankfull mynd, is
a thing too bee desyred for it self: too
bee vnthankfull is a thing too bee
eschewed for itself: Nothing dooth
so much vnknit and plucke asunder
the concorde of mankynd, as that
vyce. For in what other thing haue
wee so muche saferie, as in helping
one another wt mutuall freendlynes? Through this onely one
intercourse of good turnes, our life is both better furnished, &
better fenced ageinst sodein assaultes. Put eueryman too himself
alone, and what are wee? A pray for beastes, a slaughter for
Sacrifice, and very eazie to haue our blud shedde. Bycause the
rest of liuing creatures, should haue strength inough for their
owne defence: as manie of them as are bred too stray abroad,
and too liue solitarie by themselues, are armed. Man is hemmed
in with weakenesse. Nature hath giuen him twoo thinges
(namely Reason and Felowship) whiche make him strongest
of all, whereas else hee should bee vnderling too all. And
so, he that by himself alone could bee able too matche none; by
meanes of felowship ouermatcheth all. Felowship hath giuen
him the souereintie of all thinges. Whereas he is borne but
for the Land: felowship hath conueyed him intoo the souereintie
of an other nature, and made him Lorde of the Sea also.
This hath restreyned the rage of Diseases, prouided helpes aforehand
for old age, and giuen comfort ageinst sorowes. This
maketh vs strong: so as wée may bée able too hold plea ageinst
fortune. Take away this felowship, and yee rend asunder the
vnitie of Mankynd, whereby our lyfe is maynteined. But yee
take it away, if yee bring too passe that a thanklesse mynde is
not too bee eschewed for itself, but bycause it should stande in

feare of some other thing. For how many be there, that might
bee vnthankfull without hurt or daunger? Therfore too conclude,
whosoeuer is thankfull for feare of afterclappes, I auow
him too bee vnthanfull.
            
            
               ¶The .xix. Chapiter.
               
                  NOman that is sound of his Wittes,
feareth the Goodes. For it is a madnesse
too feare wholsome thinges:
Neither dooth any man loue those
whom he feareth.
               Bylyke then thou Epi
                     •
                  ure disarmest
God. Thou hast bereft him of al
his weapons, and of all his power.
And least anie man might bee afrayd
of him, thou hast cooped him vp in a corner, beyond the reache
of feare. For sith thouhast inclosed him within so house a wal,
where it is not possible for him too get out, and hast separated
him so farre from men, as he can neyther touche them nor see
them: it were no reason thou shouldest bee afrayd of him, for he
hath nothing to deale with thee, eyther too doo thee good or
harme. Sitting in a middle roome betwéene thus Heauen and
another, all alone without companie of anie creature, without
anie thing, he shunneth the ruines of the worlds falling doune
aboue him and about him, neither herkening too our prayers,
nor hauing any care at all of vs. And yet thou wilt needes
seeme too woorship him as thy Father, onely (as I wéene) of a
thankfull mynd. Or if thou wilt not seeme thankfull, bycause
thou art not benefited by him, but art casually & at all aduentures
clumpered togither by these little mores and fyne crommes
of thyne: why doost thou woorship him? For his excellent
maiestie (sayest thou) and for his singuler nature. I graūt
thou doost so: and then dooest thou it not vppon perswasion of
any reward: Ergo there is some thing too bee desyred for itself,
the verie woorthinesse wherof draweth thee vnto it▪ and
that is honestie. But what is more honest, than too bee thankfull?

The substaunce of this vertue spreadeth out as farre as
dooth our lyfe.
            
            
               ¶The .xx. Chapiter.
               
                  BUT in this good thing (sayst thou)
there is some profite: for in what
vertue is there no profite?
               Nay verely, that thing is sayd to
bee coueted for itself, which though
it haue some commodities without
itself, is notwithstanding well lyked
of, euen when those commodities
bee set asyde and taken away.
It profiteth mee too bee thankfull: yea, and I wilbee thankfull
though it were too my harme. What seeketh hee that is
thankfull? That his thankfulnesse may win him mo freendes
and mo goodturnes. But what if it should procure him displeasure?
what if a man shall perceyue himself too bee so farre
from gayning any thing at all by it, that he must for go muche,
euen of that whiche he had gotten and layd vp in store? Shall
he not willingly hazard his owne losse? He is a Churle which
beares a sick man companie, bycause he is about too make his
will: or hath his mynd ronning vppon the Heritage or Legacies
that shall bee bequeathed him. For although hee doo all
thinges that a good freend and one that is myndfull of his
duetie ought too doo: yet notwithstanding, if his mynd waue
in hope, if he long for luker, if he castfoorth his angle, if he linger
for the death of the partie and houer about his Carkesse,
like Caryon Crowes whiche stand spying neere at hande for
the fall of Cattell with the Rotte: Hee is but a Churle. The
thankfull mynd is led with the goodnesse of his owne purpose.
            
            
               ¶The .xxi. Chapter.
               
                  
                  WIlt thou
                     •
                  bee fure that this is so, and that a
thankfull persone is not corrupted with
gayne? There bee two kyndes of thankfulnesse.
He is called thankfull whiche rendereth
somewhat for that whiche he hathe receyued.
This man perhappes maye vaunt
himself, he hath where of too boast, he hath
too alledge for himself. And he is called thankfull also, whiche
hath taken a goodturne with good will, and with good will oweth
it. This mā is shet vp within his owne consciēce. What
profite can befal him of his owne hidden affection? Yet is this
man thankfull, if he bee able too doe romore: for he loueth, he
oweth, and he would fayne requyte. What soeuer is wanting
else, the lacke is not in him. A woork mā is a woork mā though
he want tooles too woork withall: and a cunuing Musician is
a Musician, though his voyce cannot bee harde for the noyze
of tramplers. If I bee willing too requyte: yet is there somewhat
behynd: not that may make mee thankfull: but that maye
make mee free. For oftentymes he that hath requyted is vnthankfull,
and he that hath not, is thankfull. For like as of all
other vertues: so of this also, the whole estimation redoundeth
too the mynde. As long as he dooeth his dewtie: whatsoeuer
wanteth besydes, is the fault of fortune. In like maner as an eloquent
man is eloquent though he hold his peace: and a strōg
man is strong, euen when his handes are shet togither, yea or
fast bound: and as a Pylot is a Pylot though he bee vppon the
dry Land: bycause ther is no want of perfectnesse in their skill,
although there bée some let that their skill cannot showe itself:
Euen so also is he thankfull that, onely hathe a desyre too bee
thankfull, and hath none other record of his willingnesse but
himself. Nay, I will say thus muche more: Sometyme euen he
is thankfull, whiche seemeth vnthankfull, and whom misweening
opinion hath reported too bée blame worthy. What other
thing now hath suche a one too sti
                     •
                  ke too, but his owne conscience?
whiche gladdeth euen when it is ouerwhelmed; which
k
                     •
                  yeth co
                     •
                  rarie too the multitude and the report of common

brute, and reposeth all her trust in herself: and though shee see
neuer so houge a multitude holding ageinst her: shee accoūteth
not the nomber of their voyces, but iustifyeth herself by our
owne secret knowledge. And albéeit shée perceyue her faithfulnesse
too beare the punishment of falshhod: Yet shee abateth nowhit
of her haultinesse, but aduaūceth hirself aboue hir punishment.
            
            
               ¶The .xxii. Chapiter.
               
                  I Haue (sayeth he) that I would haue,
and that I desyred. It repentes mee
not ne shall repent mée, neither shall
fortune (doe the woorst shée cā (bring
mee too the poynt that I should say:
what ment I? what hathe my good
will booted mee? It booteth mee
euen vppon the Racke; It booteth
mee euen in the fire. For though it
should bee put too euery mēbe
                     •
                   one after another, and consume
the bodie aliue by pée
                     •
                  emeale: yet too a man that knowes well
by himself, whose hart being good is full fraughted with the
streame of a cleere conscience, the fire shalbee welcome wherethrough
the b
                     •
                  yghtnesse of his good conscience 
                     〈◊〉
                  
foorth. Now also let this argument aforesayd come in place
ageine: namely, what is the cause that moueth vs too bee so
frendly at the tyme of our death? why wée should wey eche persones
desertes? why wee should inforce our memorie too examine
all our former lyfe, and by all meanes indeuer too shewe
that wee haue not forgotten anie mannes kyndnesse? At that
tyme there remayneth nothing for hope too 
                     •
                  inger vppon: and
yet standing at the pi
                     •
                  tes brim, our desyre is too depart this
world as freendly as maie bee. Uerely yee may see there is a
greate reward of the déede, in the verye dooing of it. And great
is the power of honestie too allure mennes hartes vnto it. For
the beauty therof surpryseth mens mindes, and rauisheth th
                     •
                  m
with singular pleasure in beholding the bryghtnes of h
                     •
                  r light.
               
                  
But manie commodities ensew of it, and good mē liue more
in safetie, yea and (according too the iudgment of good men)
more at ease too, where innocencie and a thankfull minde goe
with it. For nature had doone vs too muche wrong, if it had
made this so greate a good thing, too haue bene miserable, and
vncerteine, and barrein.
               But looke thus muche further: whither thou couldest finde
in thy hart, too make thy way vntoo this vertew, whiche (oftē
                  tymes
hath a safe and easie passage vnto it) by stones and rockes,
or by a passage beset with sauage beastes and Serpentes.
            
            
               ¶The .xxiii. Chapiter.
               
                  
                     A
                   Thing is not therfore the lesse too bée desyred
for it owne sake, bycause it hath somme
forrein profite cleauing vntoo it too boote.
For comonly the goodlyest thinges are all
of them accompanyed with manie casuall
cōmodities: but yet so, as they drawe 
                     〈◊〉
                  
commodities after them and they thē selues
goe before. Is there anie dout, but that the Sonne and the
Moone doe gouerne this dwelling place of mankynd, by keeping
their tur
                     •
                  es in passing about? or that by the heate of the

                     〈…〉
                   bodyes bee cherished, the earth releeued, superfluouse
moysture abated, & the irksomnesse of winter that byndeth
all thinges alayed? or that by the effectuall & percing warmth
of the Moone, the rypening frutes are moystened? Or that
the frutefulnesse of man is answerable too the course of her?
Or that the Sonne by his farre compassing, maketh the yeere
discernable: and the Moone by her turning in shorter space,
maketh the moneth? But admit thou tookest these thinges away:
were not the Sonne of itself a meete sight for the eyes to
behold, and worthie too bee had in estimation, though he did no
more but passe by vs? were not the Moone worthie to bee reuerenced,
though shee ranne by vs but as an ydle Starre?
When the Skye casteth foorth his fyres by Nyght, shyning
with such an innumerable multitude of Starres: whom doth

it not force too looke earnestly vpō it? And who thinketh then
of anie profit by them, when he so woondereth at them? Behold
these thinges that glyde aloft in the still Skye, after what sort
hyde they their swiftnesse vnder apparance of a standing and
vnmouable woorke? How much is doone in this night, which
thou obseruest onely for a reckening and difference from the
dayes? what a multitude of thinges is wound out in this stilnesse?
what a rowe of Destinies dooth this certeie bound
bring foorth? These thinges which thou regardest not otherwyse
than as thinges dispersed for beautifying, are euery one
of them occupied in woorking. For thou must not thinke, that
only the seuen Planets doo moue, and all the reste stande still.
Wee comprehend the mouinges of feawe, but there bee Gods
innumerable and withdrawen far from our sight, whiche both
go and come. And of those that our sight can perceiue, dyuerse
walk an elendge course, & passe in couert. Whythen shouldest
thou not be delighted to behold so houge a woorke, yea though
it ruled thee not preserued thee not, cherished thee not, ingendered
thee not, ne watered thee not with his spirit?
            
            
               ¶The .xxiiii. Chapter.
               
                  NOw like as in these things, although they
bee most behooffull, and are both necessary
and profitable, yet is it the maiesty of them
that occupieth the whole mynd: Euen so
all vextue, (and specially the vertue of
thankfulnesse,) yeeldeth verie muche profite.
but it will not bee loued for the same,
for it hath yet a further thing in it, neither is it sufficiently
vnderstoode of hym, which accounteth it among gainfull thinges.
               A man is thankfull bycause it is for his owne profite: Ergo,
also he is thankfull but so muche as is for his profite. Uertue
interteineth not a miserly louer. A man must not come vntoo
hir streytlaced. The Churle thinketh thus: I would fayne requyte
kyndnesse, but I am afrayd of cost: I am afrayd of daunger:

I am afrayd of displeasure: I will rather doo that which
is for myne ease. One selfsame cause of dealing cannot make
a man both thankfull and vnthankfull. As their woorkinges
are dyuers, so are their purposes diuers. The one is vnthankfull
though he ought not, bycause it is for his profit. The other
is thankful though it bee not for his profite, bycause he ought
so too bee.
            
            
               ¶The .xxv. Chapiter.
               
                  OUR purpose is too liue according
too Nature, and too folowe the example
of the Gods. But whatsoeuer
the Gods doo, no other reason leadeth
them too doo it, saue onely the
deede it self: vnlesse peraduenture
thou imagin them too receyue the
reward of their dooinges, from the
smoke of beastes Bowelles, and frō
the ranke sent of Frankincence. See how great thinges they
dayly bring too passe: how greate thinges they bestow among
men: with how greate foyzon of Fruites they replenishe the
earth: with how seasonable wyndes and fitte too carie at all
howres, they blowe through the Seas: and with how greate
Showres soodeinly powred doune, they soften the ground, refresshing
the dryed Ueynes of the Springes, and renewing
them by sheading couert nurrishment intoo them. All these
thinges doo they without any profite coming too themselues
thereby. Therfore let our Reason also (if it disagree not from
his Patterne) keepe the same course, that it come not as an
hyreling too honest thinges. Let it bee ashamed too make saleware
of any weldoowing. Wee haue the Goddes francke and
free. If thou folowe thexample of the Goddes, thou must doo
good euen to the thanklesse: For the Sonne ryseth vppon the
wicked, and the Seas are open too Pyrates.
            
            
               ¶T .xxvi. Chapiter.
               
                  
                  IN this place they demaund, whither
a good man shall doo a thankelesse
persone a good turne, knowing him
too bee thanklesse. Giue mee leaue
too say somewhat by the way, least I
bee ouertaken with this captiouse
question. You must vnderstand, that
after the constitutions of the Stoikes,
there bee twoo maner of thanklesse
persones. The one of these thanklesse persones, is the Foole.
For a foole is hee that is euill; but he that is euill, is voyd of
no vyce: Ergo he is also vnthankfull. Likewyse wee saye that
all euill men are heddie, couetouse, lecherous, and malicious.
Not bycause all these greate vices are notorious in euery euil
person: but bycause they may bee, and are in them though they
bee vndis
                     •
                  ouered. The other thanklesse persone is hee that is
comonly sayd too bee naturally inclyned too the vyce of vnthankfulnesse.
To that thanklesse persone which hath the vyce
of thankfulnesse, none otherwise but as he hath al other vyces,
a good man must doo good turnes. For if he should withhold
from suche: he should doo good too noman. But affor the other
thanklesse persone, too whom all is fish that comes too Nette,
and whiche makes no conscience at all of the matter: he shall
nomore bestowe a good turne vppon him, than vppon a Theef.
Who will put an vnthrift in trust with his Monie, or leaue a
Pledge in the hande of him that hath forsworne many men
their Pledges before? Wee call him fearefull whiche is foolish
and led by naughtipackes that are beset with all kynd of
vyces without exception. Also he is properly called fearefull
by nature, which is frighted at euery tryfling noyze. The foole
hath all vyces, yet is he not naturally giuen to them all. One
is giuen too Nigardship, another too Lechery, and another
too malapertnesse.
            
            
               ¶The .xxvii. Chapiter.
               
                  
                  T
                  
                     •
                  ey do
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   therefore, which say
to the Stoikes: What then? Is Achilles
                  
                     •
                  earfull? What then? Is Aristides
(who is renowmed for Iu
                  
                     •
                  ice)
vnius
                     •
                  ? Wha
                     •
                   then? Is Fabius
(who 
                     〈◊〉
                   the Comon weale by
his pausyng) rashe? What then? I
                     •
                  
                  Decius afraied of Death? Is Mutius
a traytour? Is Camillus a forsaker?
Wee saye not that all vices are after like sort in all men,
as they vtter themselues seuerally in somme men: but wee say
that an euill man and a foole are not vtterly v
                     •
                  yde of any vice,
in so muche that wee acquite not the bold man of feare, nor di
                     •
                  
                  charge
the prodigall man of nigardlynes. Like as men haue
all senses, and yet all men haue not eyesight like vntoo Lyncens
Euen so all Fooles haue not all vices so feerce and head
                     •
                  e, as
somme of them haue some vices. All vices are in all men: But
yet all vtter not them selues in euery man. One man is nat
                     •
                  
                  rally
ledde vntoo Couetousnesse, another vntoo Lecherie, and
the third is giuen too Drunkennesse: Or if he bee not yet giuē
ouer too it, at leastwise he is so framed too it, that his disposition
draweth him towardes it. Therefore (too the intente I
maye turne agein too my purpose,) There is no man but he is
vnthankfull, because there is no man but he is euill: for he hath
the seedes of all naughtinesse in him. Notwithstanding, properly
he is called vnthankfull, whiche is bente too the vice of
vnthankfulnesse. Upon suche a one shall I bestowe no benefite.
For like as he prouideth ill for his daughter, that marieth her
to a man diffamed and often diuorced: and like as he is counted
an ill housholder, which maketh such a one Steward of his
house, as hath bin condemned of false dealyng: and like as he
shall make a verie madde will, whiche leaueth suche a one too
bee his sonnes Gardeine, as is a spoyler of Fatherlesse Children:
So shall he bee tho
                     •
                  ght too bestowe his benefites verie
vnaduisedly, whiche picketh out thanklesse persones, on whom
all that is bestowed is loste.
            
            
               
               ¶The .xxviii. Chapter.
               
                  THe Goddes (saieth he) giue many thinges
too the thanklesse, whereas they had prepared
them onely for goodmen. Naye, thei
happ
                     •
                  n also too the euill, because they cannot
bee parted asunder. And it is more reason
too profite euen the badde for the gooddes
sake, thā too faile the good for the baddes
sake. For accordyng to thyne owne saiyng, the Daye, the
Sunne, the intercourse of Winter and Summer, the middle
temperatenesse of Springtyme and Harueste, the Showers
and Waterspringes, and the ordinarie blastes of the Windes
were deuised by the Goddes for all men in generall, and they

                     •
                  ould not barre menne from them in seuerall. The king giues
promotions too the worthie, and dole euen too the vnworthie.
As well the Theefe as the periured persone, and the Whoremonger,
and without exception, whosoeuer is a citezen, takes
parte of the como
                     ••
                  g
                     •
                  aine. When there is any thyng too bee
bestowed simply as vppon a Citezen and not as vppon a good
Citezen; bothe the good and the badde receiue of it indifferently.
God also hath graunted somme thinges in comon too all
mankynde, from whiche no man is excluded. For it could not
bee, that one 
                     •
                  el
                     •
                   same w
                     •
                  nde should bee prosperous too good
men, an
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  ontrary too euill men. Now then, that the sea should
bee open for traffike, and that the dominion of mankind should
haue a larger scope: it was for the como
                     •
                   benefite of all men.
Agein, it was not possible too 
                     •
                  ynde the Rayne too any Lawe
in fallyng, so as it shoul
                     •
                   shunne the groundes of e
                     •
                  ill and wic
                  
                     ••
                  d
menne. 
                     〈◊〉
                   thinges are sette indifferente. Citees are

                     〈◊〉
                   as well 
                     〈…〉
                   men as for good. The monumentes
of 
                     〈◊〉
                   are pu
                     •••
                  shed by settyng foorth, and shall comme too
the handes euen of the vnwoorthie. Lea
                     •
                  hecrafte ministereth
helpe e
                     •
                  en too the wicked. Noman suppresseth the making of
wholsomme Salues, for 
                     〈◊〉
                   leas
                     •
                   the vnwoorth
                     •
                  e should bee
healed. 
                     〈◊〉
                   thou a 
                     〈◊〉
                   examination and 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
in the thy
                     •
                  ges that are be
                     ••
                  towed seuerally as vppon the
worthie, and no
                     •
                   in the thinges that admit euery rasc all without
exception. For there is greate difference betweene the
not excludyng of a man, and the choosyng of a man
                     •
                   The right
of the Lawe is yeelded too all men. Euen Murtherers inioye
the peace, and those that haue taken awaye other mennes goodes
recouer their owne. Suche as are redie too quarell, and
too strike euery manne in tyme of peace, are defended from the
enemie with a wall in tyme of warre. Suche as haue offended
moste heinously ageinst the Lawe, are defended by protection
of the Lawe. Somme thinges are of that Nature, that they
could not happen too any in seuerall, if they were not permit
                  
                     •
                  ed
too all in generall. Therefore there is no cause why thou
shouldest make any talke of these thinges, wherevnt
                     •
                   wee bee
called in comon. But as for the thyng that must comme too another
man by my discretion, I will not bestowe it vpon suche
a one as I knowe too bee a Churle.
            
            
               ¶The .xxix. Chapter.
               
                  WIlte thou then (saieth he) neither giue 
                     •
                  
Churle coun
                     •
                  ell if he aske thyn
                     •
                   aduice,
nor suffer him too drawe water, nor shewe
him his waye if he bee 
                     •
                  ut of it? Or wilt
                     •
                  
thou doo these thinges, but not be
                     ••
                  owe 
                     •
                  
                  ny
thing vpon him?
               I will make a distinction in this cace, or
a
                     •
                   leastwise I will assaye too make one. A benefite is a behooffull
deede, and yet is not euery 
                     〈◊〉
                   deede 
                     •
                   Benefite.
For somme thinges are so small as th
                     •
                  y atteine not too the
name of a benefite. Twoo thinges 
                     〈…〉
                   m
                     •
                  kyng
of a benefite. First, Greatnesse: for some thynges are farre vnder
the reache of that name. Who euer termed 
                     〈◊〉
                   a benefite, too
haue gotten a shiuer of bread, or a vile Dodkin by beggyng?
O
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  oo haue 
                     •
                  otten leaue too light a Candell at an other mā
                  nes
fire? And 
                     〈…〉
                   and then; these thynges 
                     〈…〉
                   in
more stead than the greatest thinges. But the profite of them

bereeueth them of their grace, euen when the necessitie of the
tyme maketh them needefull. Ageine, (whiche is of greatest
force) it must fall out that I doo my good turne for his sake
too whom I would haue it comme, and that I deeme him worthie
of it, and that I giue it with a good will, as one that is
glad of his welfare. Of whiche pointes there is none at all in
these thinges that wee spake of. For wee bestowe them not as
vppon worthie persones, but carelessely as small thinges: and
wee giue them not for the mannes sake, but for maners sake.
            
            
               ¶The .xxx. Chapiter.
               
                  I Deny not but I maye now and then bestowe
somme thinges, euen vppon the vnwoorthie,
for other mennes sakes: like as
in sewtes of promotion, somme that were
verie vnhonest haue for their nobilitie bin
preferred before those that were full of actiuitie:
and not without reason. For holie
is the memoriall of greate vertewes, and it prouoketh the mo
too bee good, when the thanke of their well dooynges dieth
not with them selues. What thing made Ciceroes sonne Consull,
but his Father? What thyng receiued Cinna now alate
out of the enemies Campe too the Consulship? What thing
admitted Sextus Pompeius and the other Pompeies likewise,
but the greatnesse of that one manne Cneus Pompeius, who
had been of suche reputation, that euen his verie fall was
ynough too his posteritie? What made Fabius Persicus (whose
mouthe euen the filthie sorte of menne were lothe too kisse)
what made him preeste (I saye) in mo Colledges than one,
but the Verrucoses and Allobrogikes, and those three hundred
whiche aduentured their whole fam
                     •
                  lie, in defence of the common
weale, ageinst the inuasion of the enemie? So muche are
wée beholden vntoo vertewes, that wée ought too honor them,
not onely while they bee presente, but also when they bee gone
out of out sight. For like as those persones haue delte in suche
wise, as they not onely did good vntoo one age, but also lefte

their bene
                     ••
                  tes behinde them: so also are wee thankfull too thē
in mo ages than one. This man hath begotten noble personages:
he is woorthie of good turnes whatsoeuer he himself is,
because he hath brought foorth suche. Another is borne of noble
aunce
                     •
                  ors: whatsoeuer he himself is, lett him bee shrouded
vnder the shadowe of his forefathers. Like as vncleane places
bee lightened by the brightnesse of the Sunne: so let vnthriftes
bee ouershined with the brightnesse of their auncetors.
            
            
               ¶The .xxxi. Chapiter.
               
                  MY freend Liberalis, Heere I meene too excuse
the Goddes. For oftentymes wee bee
woont too say, what prouidence was it to
                     •
                  
make Arrhideus king? Thinkest thou that
this befell him for his own
                     •
                   sake? No: it
befell him for his father
                     •
                   and his brothers
sakes. Why did God giue th
                     •
                   souereintie
of the world too Caligula, a man so ouerdesyrous of mannes
blud, that he made it too comme sp
                     •
                  uting out before his face,
as if he would haue receyued it in his mouth. Welthen, supposest
thou he had this preferment for his owne sake? No: it
was for his father Germanicus sake; it was for his graundfather
and great graundfathers sake; and for other of his auncetors
sakes afore them, who were as noble as they, though they
liued a pryuate life no hygher in degr
                     •
                  e than other mē. What?
when thou thyself madest Mamercus Scaurus consull, wist thou
not in what filthinesse he wallowed with his lasses? For, did he
himself dissemble the matter? Had he anie will too seeme honest?
I will rehearse a saying of his whiche I remember is
comonly bruted, and whiche was praysed in his owne presence.
Using a Ribaudly terme, he sayd too one Pollio Annius, that
he woould doe a thing too him whiche he had leuer haue doone
too himselfe. And when he sawe Pollio begin too knit the browes
at him; if I haue said amisse (ꝙ he) too myself and to myne
owne head bee it spoken. This saying of his, he himself blazed

                     •
                  br
                     •
                  de. Haste thou admitted a man so 
                     •
                  penly filthie, too the

Mace and the Iudgementseate? Uerely when tho
                     •
                   thoughte
                     ••
                  
vppon the auncient Scanrus the cheef president of the Se
                  
                     •
                  ate,
it greeued thee that his ofspring should bee imbaced.
            
            
               ¶The .xxxii. Chapiter.
               
                  IT is a likelyhod that the Goddes deale the fa
                  
                     •
                  orablier
with some men for their Parentes
and Aunceters sakes: and with othersome for
the towardnesse that shalbee in their Children
and childers children, and in the issue of them a
greate whyle too come. For they knowe the successe of thei
                     •
                  
w
                     •
                  orke, and 
                     〈…〉
                   thurrowe
their 
                     〈◊〉
                  , is alwaies manifest vntoo them: b
                     •
                  t it stealeth
vpon vs 
                     〈◊〉
                   of the couert. The thinges that wee suppos
                     •
                  
too be casuall and soodein, are foreséen and familier vnto them.
Let these bee Kinges (say they) though their Aunceters were
none, bycause they haue accounted Iustice and ab
                     •
                  t
                     •
                  nencie too
bee the highe
                     ••
                   souereintie, & because they haue applyed themselues
to the com
                     •
                  nwelth, & not the comōwelth to themselues.
Let these reigne because some good mā was their great graūdfather,
whose mynd surmounted his fortune, who in ciuill dissention
chose rather too bee vanquished than too vanquish, because
it was for the pro
                     •
                  ite of the comon weale. His goodnesse
could not bee requyted of so long a whyle. In respect of that
man, let this man haue preheminence ouer others: not because
hee is of knowledge and abilitie too vse it, but because the
other hath deserued it for him. For peraduenture this man
is of bodie misshapen, of countenance lothsome, and will bee a
slaunder too the place and persons of his adua
                     •
                  ncement. Now
will men fynd fault with mee, and say I am blynd and rashe,
and ignorant where too bestowe the thinges that are due too
the cheefest and excellentest persones. But I knowe that my
giuing of this thing too the one, is a paying of it too the other
too whom it was due long ago. Whereby (say they) doo yòu
knowe that this man that was suche a shunner of glorie when
it folowed him, that he aduentured vppon perill with the same

c
                     •
                  untena
                     •
                  ce that others escape it, and that he neuer made difference
betwe
                     •
                  n
                     •
                  , his owne profite and the profit of the comon
weale? Where is this man? who is he? how know you him?
These reckeninges of suche Receites and Paymentes are
striken out of my bookes I know what I owe too euery man.
Too so
                     •
                  me I make payment after long tyme, too other some
I giue aforehand: or else I deale with them according as occasion
and the abilitie of my substance will beare.
            
            
               ¶The .xxxiii. Chapiter.
               
                  THe
                     •
                   shall I now, and then bestowe

                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •••
                  hankfull, but
not for his owne 
                     〈…〉
                   (saith he)
what if you knowe 
                     〈◊〉
                   whither he be
thankfull or vntha
                     ••
                  full? Will you
tarie till you maye knowe? Or will
you not lette slip y
                     •
                  ur tyme of benefiting?
You maye 
                     •
                  ary too long. For
(as Plato saieth) it is hard too conie
                     •
                  ture

                     •
                   mannes mynde. And not too tary is a point of rashenesse.
Herevnto I answere: That wee neuer tarye for the exacte
bo
                     •
                  ltyng out of thynges, because the triall of truthe is
farre of: but wee proceede by that waye, whiche likelihod of
truthe leadeth. This is the path that all dueties trace. So doo
wee sowe, so doo wee saile, so goe wee on warfare, so Marrie
wee wiues, so bring wee vp children: and yet the falling out of
them all is vncerteine. Wee aduenture vppon those thinges
wherof we thinke there is good hope. For who cā warrane increase
too him that soweth, a hauen too him that saileth, victorie
too him that g
                     •
                  eth awarfare, a chaste wife too him tha
                     •
                  
marrieth, or godlie children too the Father? Wée followe that
waye whiche reason draweth, and not that waye whiche truth
draweth. Stande ling
                     ••
                  ing and doo nothing, till thou bée sure
of the successe, or meddle thou with nothing till thou bee assured
of the truthe▪ and then shal
                     •
                   tho
                     •
                   do
                     •
                   nothing at all, thy life
is at a staye. So long as likelihodes of truthe, maye moue mée

too this or that, I will not shrinke too doo a good turne, to
suche a one as is likely too bee thankfull.
            
            
               The .xxxiiii. Chapiter.
               
                  MAny thinges (saiest thou) will steppe in, where
through an euill man maye créepe vp for a good,
and a good man bee misliked for an euill. For the
apparaunces of thinges that wee trust too, are
deceitfull.
               Who sayes naye too that? But I finde none other thing
whereby too direct my meening. By these footesteppes muste
I pursewe the truthe. Certeiner meanes I haue none. I will
doo the beste I can too weye them throughly, and I will not
bee hastie in yeelding too them. For it maye so happen in battell,
that my hande beeyng misguyded by somme mistaking,
may thrust at myne owne fellowe, and spare myne enemie as if
he were my freende. But it shall sildome happen so, and not
through myne owne faulte, who am purposed too strike myne
ene
                     •
                  ie, and too defend my countryman. If I may knowe him
too bee thanklesse, I will caste awaye no benefite vppon him.
But what if he haue krept in vppon mee and beguyled me? In
this cace I am not too blame for my bestowing, bicause I haue
done it as too a thankfull persone.
               If thou haue promised one a good turne (sayeth he) and afterward
vnderstand him too bée thanklesse, wilt thou performe
it or no? If thou performe it wittingly: thou offendest: for thou
doest it too whom thou oughtest not. And if thou refuse too doe
it, thou offendest that way also, bycause thou performest not thy
promis. Thus your conscience staggereth in this behalf, and
so fayleth that proude brag of yours, that a wyseman neuer repenteth
him of his dooing, nor neuer repealeth that whiche he
hath done, nor altereth his determinacion.
               A wyse man altereth not his determinacion, so bee it that all
thinges continew as they were at the tyme of his determining.
And therfore he is neuer touched with repentance, bycause at
that tyme no better thing could haue bin done than was done,

nor better thing haue bene determined than was determined.
Neuerthelesse, his aduenturing vppon all thinges is with exception,
if no
                     •
                  hing b
                     ••
                  yde that may bee a let. And therfore we
                     •
                  
say that all thinges fall out well vntoo him, and that nothing
happeneth contrarie too his opinion: bycause he for
                     ••
                  asteth in
his mynd, that somewhat may step in by the way 
                     〈◊〉
                   hinder his
determinacions. It is a fond presumption too assure ones self
of Fortune. But a wiseman bethinketh him of bothe her partes.
He knoweth what swaye errour beareth, how vncerteine
worldly thinges bee, and how many thinges maye withstande
mennes determinations. Too the doutfull and slipperie lo
                     ••
                  e
of thinges he proceedeth with suspence, and too the vncertein
fallinges out of them he proceedeth with certein aduisednes.
And so his exception, (without which he determineth not any
thing, ne enterpryseth anie thing) defendeth him in this cas
                     •
                  
also.
            
            
               ¶The .xxxv. Chapiter.
               
                  I Haue promised a good turne, so there happen nothing
why I should not performe it. For what if
my Countrie forbid mee to performe that whic
                     •
                  
I haue promised him? What if a Lawe bée made
that noman shall doo the thing▪ that I had promised
too doo for my freend? Put the 
                     〈◊〉
                   I haue promised thee
my daughter in mariage, & afterward it falles out that thou
art a straunger borne, and I may not alye myself with a Forreiner.
The 
                     •
                  ame thing defendeth mee whiche forbiddeth mee.
Then let mee bee counted a promis
                     •
                  reaker, then let mee bee
blamed of vnconstancie, if all thinges continewing the same
they were at any promismaking, I bee not full as good as my
woord. Otherwyse, whatsoeuer is altered, settes mée frée too
take deliberation new agein, and dischargeth mee of discredit.
I promis you too bee your aduocate: and afterward it appeereth
that the same cace tendeth too the preiudice of my Father:
I promis to go a iourney with you, and woo
                     •
                  d is brought m
                     •
                  e
that the waye is layd with Th
                     •
                  eues: I should haue come too
some presente buisinesse of youres, but my 
                     ••
                  ildes 
                     ••••
                  nesse

                  
                     •
                  r my Wyues labour kéepe mee at home. If yee will bynd the
credit of him that promiseth: al thinges must continewe in the
same state as they were at the promismaking. But what greater
alteration can there bée, than if I haue found thee an euill
and vnthankfull man? Looke what I promised thee as too a
woorthie, that will I withhold from thee as from an vnwoorthie;
yea and I shall haue good cause too bee angrie with thee
for deceyuing mée.
            
            
               ¶The .xxxvi. Chapiter.
               
                  NEuerthelesse, I will looke vppon
the thing that thou claymest, and see
how greate it is. The maner of the
thing promised shall counsell mee. If
it bee but a small thing, I will let thée
haue it, not because thou art woorthie,
but for my promis sake. And yet
will I not doo it as too pleasure thée,
but as too redeeme my woord, and I
will wring myself by the Eare. My rashnesse in promising, I
will punish with my losse. Lo, (say I too my self) too the intent
it may gréeue thee, and that thou mayst bee better aduysed ere

                     •
                  hou speake hereafter, I will giue thee a Barna
                     ••
                  e as wee

                     •
                  erme it. But if it bee too greate a thing, I wil not bee so costly
(as Mecoenas sayeth) as too buye myne owne blame with a

                     •
                  undred Sesterti
                        •
                     sses.
                  That is CC. 
                        〈◊〉
                      of our M
                        •
                     n
                     
                        •
                     ye. For I will compare the oddes of both
toogether. It is somewhat woorth too bee as good as a mans
promis; & agein it is muche woorth not too bee too precyse in
pleasuring an vnwoorthie Persone. So greate a matter as
this must bee considered accordingly. If it bee a lyght thing,
we
                     •
                   may wincke at it. But if it may bee eyther greatly too my
losse, or greatly to my shame; I had leuer blame myself once for
denying it, than con
                     •
                  inually for performing it. All the whole
w
                     •
                  ight of the matter re
                     •
                  teth (I say) vppon this point: namely,
at how muche I am woorthie too bee amerced for my woords.
For if it hee muche, I shalnot onely withhold the thing that I

promised rashly; but also I shall call that barke agein which I
haue bestowed amisse. He is out of his wittes, whiche performeth
for his errour sake.
            
            
               ¶The .xxxvii. Chapter.
               
                  PHilip King of Macidonie had a tall souldier, and
a stoute man of his handes, whose seruice hee had
founde profitable in many voyages. He had diuerse
tymes rewarded him with parte of the booties
for his hardinesse. And because hee was a
man that had his soule too sell, he euermore kindled his corage
with often payes.
               This man suffering shipwreck, was cast a land on the Mannor
of a certein Macedonian. Who hauing woord thereof, came
running to him out of hand, and recoueryng life of him, conueyed
him home too his saied Manour, and laied him in his owne
bedde, refreshed him ill at ease and halfe deade, tended him thirtie
daies at his owne charges, recouered him, and at his departure
gaue him wherewith too beare his charges by the waye.
And the other said oftentymes vntoo him, I will requite thy
kyndenesse, if euer I maye comme where I maye see my King
and Capitein. He told Philip of his Shipwrecke, but he spake
not a woorde of his succour, but by and by desired him too
giue him a certeine mannes Landes. The manne was euen he
that had bin his hoste, euen he that had taken him vp, and recouered
him. Yee maye see by the waye, how Kinges now and
thē (and specially in warre) giue many thinges with their eyes
shet. One iuste manne is not of power enough ageinst so many
armed lustes. A man cannot doo the dueties of a good man, and
of a good Capitein bothe at once. How shall so many thousandes
of vnsatiable men bee satisfied? What should they haue, if
euery man maye keepe his owne? So did Philip saye too himself,
when he gaue commaundement, for the putting of him in
possession of the gooddes that he had craued. The manne that
was violently thrust from his possessions, did not putte vp the
wrong with silence like a cloyne, and holde him well appaied

that he himself had not bin giuen awaie to
                     •
                  : But wrate a letter
vntoo Philip, bothe r
                     •
                  ugh and full of libertie. At the receite
whereof, Philip was in suche a chafe, that without delaye, he
comma
                     ••
                  ded Pausanias too restore the first owner to his goodes
agein: and too imprint vppon that leawde Souldier, that
vnkinde guest, and that couetous seabeaten wretch, suche markes
as might witnesse him too bee an vnthankfull Gueste. Beleeue
me, he that could finde in his harte, too strip his hoste out
of all that euer he had, and too driue him like one that had suffered
Shipwrecke, too the same shore where he him self had
lyen; was worthie too haue had those Letters, not Imprinted,
but ingrauen vppon his face. But let vs see what measure had
bin too bee kepte in his punishement. In deede, the thing that
he had moste wickedly intruded vppon, was too bée taken from
him ageine. And who would haue bin sorie for the punishemēt
of him, whose facte was so heinous, as no manne could haue pitied
him, had he bin neuer so pitifull?
            
            
               ¶The .xxxviii. Chapiter.
               
                  MUste Philip bee as good t
                     •
                  o thee as
his promise? Euen though there bee
cause too the contrary? Though he
should doo wrong? Though he should
doo a wicked deede? Though by that
one facte of his, he should barre all
Shipwreckes from the shore? It is
no point of lightnesse for a mā to forsake
a knowen and condemned error.

                     •
                   man ought rather too confesse plainly and too saye, I miss
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     •••
                  ke the
ca
                     •
                  e, I am deceiued. For it is a point of wilfull pride
and folie, too bee so heddie as too say, Looke what I haue once
spoken, bee what it bee maie, I will abide by 
                     •
                  t, and make good
my woorde. It is no dishonestie too alter a mannes mynde,

                     •
                  hen the matter requireth. Goe too, if Philip had mainteined
the S
                     ••
                  ldier i
                     •
                   possessio
                     •
                   of those groundes, whiche he had

gotten by his Shipwr
                     •
                  cke: had he not barred all out cast
                     •
                  s frō
succour and 
                     •
                  eleef? Nay (saieth Philip) yet were it better that
thou shouldest beare aboute these Letters printed in thy moste
shamelesse forheade, for all menne to gaze vppon, throughout
the boundes of my kingdome. Shewe thou how sacred a thing
the table of hospitalitie is. Let euery man 
                     •
                  eade this d
                     •
                  erée of
myne in thy face, for a wa
                     ••
                  āt y• it shall not bee preiudiciall for
any manne too succour afflicted persones in his house. So shal
this constitution of myne bée more auailable, than if I had ingra
                     •
                  ed
it in Brasse.
            
            
               ¶The .xxxix. Chapiter.
               
                  WHat thinke you 
                     •
                  hen (sayeth he) by our foū
                  der
Zeno? for wheras he had promised too
lende one fiue hūdred pence, and afterward
found him too bee scarce a meete man: Yet
cōtrarie too the persuasion of his fréedes,
he preserued in trusting him for loue of his

                     •
                  romis. First the cace is otherwyse in a
credit, than in a benefite. If I lend monny amisse, I maye call
f
                     •
                  rit ag
                     •••
                  e, and I may arre
                     ••
                   my detter at his day. And if he
driue
                     •
                  e
                     •
                   too 
                     •
                  ewe him, I shall recou
                     •
                  r part. But asfor a 
                     〈…〉
                  
too haue 
                     •••
                  dited him▪ if the 
                     〈…〉
                  
but fyue hundred pe
                     •
                  ce. O
                     •
                  e sicknesse 
                     〈…〉
                  
as men are woont too say. It was not woorth the reuok
                     •
                  ng of
a mannes promis. If I promis a 
                     〈…〉
                  
will goe though i
                     •
                   bee cold, but not if it 
                     〈◊〉
                  . I will 
                     〈…〉
                  
wedding, for my pr
                     ••
                  is sake, though I haue 
                     〈…〉
                  
my mea
                     •
                  e: but not if I haue a fit of an 
                     〈…〉
                   will come
too giue my wo
                     •
                  rd f
                     •
                  r thee bycause I haue promised▪ but not
if thou wouldest make me giue my woord vppo
                     •
                   vncerteintie,
or bynd mee too the forfe
                     •
                  ture 
                     •
                  f all that I 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈…〉
                   Lawfull. If thinges must bee performed: set the matter
in the same state when thou demaundest, that it was in
when I promised, and haue with thee. But it can bee no poynt
of lighte
                     •
                  esse too disappoint one, If there happen anie altera
                  
                     •
                  io
                     •
                  
by the waye. For why shouldest thou thinke it straunge,
that a man should alter his determinacion, when the state of
the pr
                     •
                  miser is altered? Make mée all thinges too bée the same
that they were: and I am the same man that I was. Wee bynd
our selues too appeere at a day, and appeere not: Yet shalnot
the forfet bee taken in all caces. A greater extremitie shall excuse
the default of appeeraunce.
            
            
               The .xl. Chapiter.
               
                  THE same may serue thee for a full answer
too thy sayed question, whither kyndnesse
be too be requyted in any wyse, or whither
a good t
                     •
                  rne 
                     •
                  ee euerm
                     •
                  re too bee performed.
I am 
                     〈◊〉
                   too yeelde a th
                     •
                  nkfull
hart: but as for too re
                     ••
                  yte, sommetyme
myne owne vnfortunat
                     •
                  esse, and sommetyme
his fortunat
                     •
                  esse too whom I am indetted, wilnot suffer
mee. For what recompence can I make too a King, or too a
Prince, or too a greate riche man? specially seing that somme
are of that nature, that they think they haue wrong, if they receyue
a good turne at a nother mannes hande: and they are alwayes
loading of men with benefites one vpō another. What
help haue I ageinst suche persones, more than too bée willing?
For I may not therfore refuze his new benefites, bycause I
haue not requyted the old. I will take it with as good a will
as it is offered, and I will yeelde myself too my freend as a
mou
                     •
                  d of large receyte, fit for him too woorke his goodnesse in.
He that is lothe too receyue anewe, is sorie that he hath receiued
alredie.
               I requite not. What is that too the matter? If I wante either
occas
                     •
                  on or abilitie, that lacke is not in mee. But he performed
v
                     •
                  to meeward. I graunte it, and he had bothe occasion

and abilitie too doe it, Whither is he a good manne, or a bad?
With a good manne my cace is good enough: with a badde
manne I will not pleade. Truely I thinke not that wee ought
too bee so eagre, as too requite in poste haste, whither men will
or no, or too preace vppon them when thei refuze. It is no requiting
of kyndenesse, too render that thing ageinst a mannes
will, whiche thou receiueddest with his will. Somme menne
when they bee presented with somme small gifte, sende another
by and by ageine out of season, and saye they owe him
nought. This sending of an other out of hande agein, and this
driuyng of one present out of doores with another, is a kynde
of reiecting. Sometyme I shall not requyte a good turne
though I can. When is that? when I shall more hinder myself
by it than profite him. When hee shall feele himself nothing amended
by receyuing it, and I shall féele myself greatly impayred
by forgoing it. Wherefore, hee that hasteth too requyte,
hath not the harte of a thankfull persone, but of a good
Detter. And too conclude in feawe woordes hee
that desyreth too discharge himselfe too hastely,
is loth too owe, and hee that is loth
too owe is vnthankfull.
               The end of the fourth Booke.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ The fifth booke of Lucius Annaeus
Seneca, concerning Benefites.
            
               ¶The first Chapiter.
               
                  I May well séeme too haue accomplished
my purpose alreadie in my former
bookes, forasmucheas I haue
shewed after what maner a good
turne is too bee doone, and after
what maner it is too bee taken. For
those are the endes of that duetie.
Whatsoeuer I tarie vppon further,
is not of necessitie, but for the wellyking
of the matter: whiche must bee folowed so farre as it
leadeth, but not so farre as it allureth. For there will continually
ryse some one thing or other, whiche may intyce the mynd
with some swéetenesse, rather vnsuperfluouse than necessarie.
N
                     •
                  uerthelesse sith you will haue it so: now that wee haue dispatched
the thinges that cōteined the pith: let vs also go foreward
in searching the things y• are as appurtnances too them,
but not percell of them; whiche whoso considereth diligently,

                     •
                  eyther dooth a thing ful woorth his labour, nor yet loseth his
labour. But vntoo thee my Ebutius Liberalis, who art of a sing
                     •
                  lar
good nature and foreward too benefyting, no commendacion
of it can suffize. Neuer yet sawe I anie man that was
s
                     •
                   frēdly an esteemer of good turnes, were they neuer so small.
Yea and so farre is thy goodnesse procéeded, that whatsoeuer
good turne is doone too any man, thou accountest it doone too
thyself. And because noman should repent him of his weldooiyng,
thou art redie too make recompence for the vnthanfull:
and thou art so farre from all bragging, and so desyrous out of

                     •
                  and too vnburthen those whom thou byndest vntoo thee, that
whatsoeuer thou bestowest vppon anie manne, thou wouldest
seeme, not too performe it, but too pay it. And therefore the
thinges that thou bestowest so, returne too thee more ple
                     •
                  teously,

For comonly good turnes pursue him that d
                     ••
                  h not
challendge them. And like as glorie foloweth more and more
after suche as flee from it: so the frute of gooddooing redoundeth
more thankfully, too such as giue men lea
                     •
                  e too be thanklesse
if they list. Uerely there is no let in thee, but that suche as
haue receyued good turnes, may freely call for new: and thou
wilt not refuze too bestowe moe vppon them: but rather suppressing
and dissembling the former, thou addest moe and grea
                  
                     •
                  er.
It is the poynt of a singular good nature and of a verie noble
mynde, too beare with a thanklesse persone, so long till he
haue made him thankfull. Neyther dooeth this reckening de
                  
                     •
                  eyue
thee. For Uyces sincke doune vnder vertues, if a man
make not too muche haste too hate them ouer soone.
            
            
               ¶The .seconde. Chapter.
               
                  THou haste a singular lyking of this saying,
as most princely, That it is a shame too bée
ouercomed in doing good. Which saying▪
whither it bee trew or no, there is good
reason too demaund: for it is a 
                     •
                  arre other
thing than thou weenest. It is no shame at
all too bee ouercome in the incounter of
honest thinges, so thou haue a desyre too vanquish euen whe
                     •
                  
thou art ouercommed, and cast not away thy weapons. Al men
bring not like strength too a good enterpryse, nor like abilitie,
nor like fortune, which alonly ordereth the successe, euen of the
best determinations. The will of him that indeuereth aryght
is too bee commended, although another man haue outgone
him by swiftnesse of pace. It is not in this cace as it is in wagers
that are made at Gaminges, where the victorie sheweth
who is best▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   that in those also, cha
                     ••
                  ce 
                     •
                  ooth oftentymes
preferre the woorser▪ For Wheras the matter standeth vppon
freend
                     •
                  inesse, which eyther partie coue
                     •
                  eth too haue performed
too the full: Although the one bee of better abilitie, and haue
sufficient at hande wherwith too woorke his will, so as fortune
giueth him leaue too doo what he li
                     ••
                  eth▪ If the other haue as
good will as he, though he yeelde 
                     〈◊〉
                   thinges than he receiued,

yea or requyteth not all, but is willing 
                     〈…〉
                   requyte,
and is full bent theruntoo with his whole hart: He is no more
ouercome, than he that dyeth fyghting, whom his enemie maie

                     •
                  a
                     ••
                  yer kill, than make him turne head. That which thou countest
shamefull, cannot happen too a good man, that is too saye,
that he should be ouercomme. For he neuer shrinketh, he neuer
giueth ouer, he standes vppon his garde too the last daie of his
lyfe, and he will dye on his grounde that he hath taken too defend,
acknowledging himself too haue receiued great thinges,
and shewing himself desyrous too haue rendered the like.
            
            
               ¶The .iii. Chapiter.
               
                  THe Lacedemonians forbade anie of
theirs too contend in Pancracie or
in buffeting with Bagges, where
the confession of the partie sheweth
who is ouercome. The ronner that
cometh first too the races end, hath
outgone his Marrow in footema
                     •
                  
                  ship,
but not in mynd. The wrestler
that is caste thrée tymes, hath loste
the wager▪ but not yeelded the wager. Because the Lacedemonians
made greate account of it too haue their Countrymen
vn
                     •
                  anquished: they 
                     •
                  arred them from al Wagers wherin the

                     〈…〉
                  
                  
his hart. The cace is all one in good turnes. What though a
man haue receiued greater thinges and oftener? Yet is he not
ouercome. Peraduenture his benefites are ouermatched with
benefites, in respect of the things that are giuen and receyued.
But if yee compare the giuer with the receyuer, whose mynds
also must bee con
                     •
                  idered apart by themselues: neither of them
both shall haue woonne the vpperhand. For it is woonte too
come too passe, that when somme man is mangled with manie
woundes, and his aduersarie is but lightly hurt: they bee say
                     •
                  
too haue gone away of euen hand, though the one 
                     •
                  f them may
seeme too haue gone by the woorse.
            
            
               ¶The .iiii. Chapiter.
               
                  
                     ERGO no man can bee ouercom in benefiting.
That man knoweth how too bee beholden,
whiche is willing too requite, and
supplieth the thing with his harte, whiche
he cannot doo with his goodes. So long
as he holdeth at that 
                     •
                  taye, and so long as
he concineweth in this mynde, he ratifieth
his thankfull hart by signes. What skilles it on whither part
mo giftes can bee reckened? Thou art able too giue many
thinges, and I am able onely too take. Good fortune is on
thy side, and good will is on myne. And yet for all that, I am as
able too matche thee, as a feawe naked or light armed menne
are able too matche many armed too the proofe. Therefore no
man needes too bee ouercome in good turnes: because he may
bee as thankf
                     •
                  ll as he listeth. For if it bee a shame too bee

                     〈…〉
                  
                  
There bee some that are withdrawen without the compasse
of couetousnesse, and are scarsly touched with any worldly
desires▪ whom Fortune her self is not able to pleasure at
all. I muste needes bee ouercomme by Socrates in benefites. I
must needes bee ouercomme by Diogenes, who walked naked
through the middes of the wealthe of the Macedonians, trampling
the kinges riches vnder his feete. Might not he then
whorthely haue seemed, (bothe too himself and too all others,
whose eyes were not too dimme too espie out the truthe) too
surmount him that had all thinges vnder him? Truely he was
muche mightier and richer than Alexander, who at that tyme
was Lorde of all the worlde. For there was more that Diogenes
would not take, than there was that Alexander was able
too giue.
            
            
               ¶T .v. Chapiter.
               
                  IT is no shame too be ouercomme by suche.
For neyther am I the woorse man of my
handes, though yee matche mee with an enemie
that cannot bee wounded: neyther
hathe fyre the lesse nature of burning,
though it light vppon sōme stuffe that cannot
bee hurt by fyre: neither hath an edgetoole
therefore lost his propertie of cutting, bycause it is put
too the clyuing of somme stone that is ouerhard and of nature
inuincible ageinst the edge of thinges. The same thing doo I
answere you for a thankfull persone. It is no shame for him
too bee ouercome in benefiting, if he bee bound too suche men,
as the greatnesse of their state, or the prerogatiue of their vertue,
stoppeth vp the waye that benefites should returne by. Comonly
wee bee ouercomme by our Parentes. For as long as
wee deeme them greeuous vntoo vs, and as long as wee want
discretion too consider their benefites: so long doo wee misselike
them. But assone as age hath gathered somme discretion,
and it beginnes too appeere, that they deserued. Loue at our
handes for the same thinges for whiche wee misliked them,

                  
                     •
                  amely for their admonishementes, for their streightnesse, and
for their diligent bridlyng of our vndiscreete youth: then are
wee rauished with the loue of them. Feawe haue liued so long,
as to reape the true frute of their children. The rest haue felte
their children but in burthenwise. Yet is it no shame too bee
outgone by a mannes Parentes in benefiting. And why should
it not bee no shame at all, seeyng it is no shame too bee ouergone
by any man? For some there bee too whom wee bee bothe
matches, and no matches. Matches in mynde, whiche is the
onely thing that they seeke; and the onely thing that wee promise:
and no matches in abilitie, whereby though wee bee hindered
too requite, yet muste wee n
                     •
                  t therefore bee ashamed, as
though wee were quite ouercomme. It is no shame not too ouertake,

                     •
                  o a manne pursewe still. Oftentymes wee bee driuen
too require newe benefites, before wee haue requited the old.
Neither doo wee therefore leaue crauyng, or craue too our
shame, because wee runne further in dette, beeyng vnable too
requite. For wee would faine bee thankfull if wee might: But
there steppeth in some forrein thing by the way, whiche letteth
vs. Yet shall wee not bee ouermatched in harte, neither shall it
redounde too our shame, too bee ouermatched in suche thinges
as are not in our awne power.
            
            
               ¶The .vi. Chapiter.
               
                  
                     ALexander King of Macedonie was won
                     •
                  
too boaste, that neuer manne ouermatched
him in benefites. There was no cause, why
he being ouer high mynded, should regard
the Macedones▪ Gre
                        •
                     kes, Cari
                        •
                     ns, Persians,
and other Nations, whom he him self had
distressed, and left without force. But leaste
he should thinke that his king
                     •
                  om
                     •
                   (whiche stretched from the
corner of Thrace, too the shore of the v
                     •
                  knowen sea) had giuen
him that prerogatiue: Socrates might boaste in that behalf as
well as he, and so might Diogenes too, who ouermatched hym.
For why should he not bee thought too bee ouermatched tha
                     •
                  
                  
daye, when he swellyng aboue the measure of worldly Pride,
sawe one whom he could neither giue any thing too, nor take
any thing from: Kyng Archelaus requested Socrates to comme
vntoo him: and it was reported that Socrates should answere,
he was loth too comme too suche a one, as at whose handes he
should receiue freendshippes, seeyng he could not requite the
like ageine. For it was in Socrates power not too receiue: and
secondly, he him self began firste to shewe freendshippe. For he
came at his requeste, and gaue him that thing, whiche he doutlesse
could neuer giue Socrates ageine. For whereas Archelaus
should giue Golde and Siluer: he was too receiue the contempt
of Golde and Siluer. Could not Socrates then haue requited
the kyndnesse of Archelaus? What thing could he haue
receiued so greate as he had giuen, if he had shewed hym the
knowledge of life and death, and throughly taught him the endes
of thē bothe? Or if he had made the King acquainted with
the 
                     •
                  ature of thinges, who went astraye in the open light, and
was so ignorant, that on a daye when the Sunne was eclipsed
he shet in his Court gates, and polled his Sonnes heade, (as
menne are woont too doo in mourning and aduersitie): How
greate a benefite had it bin, if he had drawen him out of his
lurking hole, and willed him too plucke vp a good harte, saiyng?
This is no failyng of the Sunne, but a meeting of the
twoo Planettes, wherein the Moone running the lower way,
hath put her Circle directly vnder the Sunne, and hidden him
by setting her self betweene him and vs. Sometyme hidyng a
small parte of him, if she cote him lightly in her passing by: and
sometyme coueryng more, if she beare more fully vppon hym:
and sometyme hidyng him whole out of sight, if shee gotte full
vnderneath him, betwixte him and the yearth. But anon the
swiftnesse of these Planettes will cary them a sunder, one onewaye
and another another waie: anon the yearth shall recouer
her wonted light; and this order shall continew for euer. They
haue their dayes certeine and foretold, wherein the Sunne is
hindered too shewe foorthe the fulnesse of his rayes, by reason
of the comming in of the Moone. Tary awhile, and he will forsake

as it were this cloudinesse, and straite waies he shalbe rid
of all impedimen
                     •
                  es, and he will giue foorth his wonted light
freely agein. Could not Socrates haue doon asmuch for Archelaus,
as Archelaus should haue doone for him? What if he had
taught him how too reigne? As little as you make of it, it had
bin so greate a benefi
                     •
                  e, as he could haue giuen Socrates none
like it. Wherefore then did Socrates saye so? Beyng a pleasant
conceited manne, and wont too vtter his mynde in figuratiue
speeches, and a Iester with all men (but specially with greate
menne) he thought rather too saye him naye cunningly, than
stoutly and proudly. He saied he would receiue no benefites at
suche a mannes hande, as he could not render him the like.
Perchaunce he feared least he might haue bin compelled too
take thinges that he would not. Somme will saye if he would
not, he might haue refuzed. But then should he haue prouoked
the kinges displeasure, who was hautie, and would haue all
thinges highly esteemed whiche came from him. It is all one
with kinges, whither you will giue them nothing, or take nothing
of them. Either of the gainsaiynges are too them alike.
And too a proude Prince, it is a greater corzie too bee dis dayned,
than not too bee feared. Wilte thou knowe what Socrates
was so loth of? He whose freenesse a free Citée could not away
with, was loth too goe into wilfull bondage.
            
            
               ¶The .vii. Chapter.
               
                  AS I suppose, wee haue sufficiētly discussed
this point, whither it bee a shame too bee
ouercomme in benefiting. Which question
whoso demaundeth, knoweth that men are
not woont too bestowe benefytes vppon
themselues. For it had bin manifest, that it
is no shame for a man too bee vanquished of
himself. Notwithstanding, among somme Stoikes it is also debated,
whither a mā can benefite himself, and whither he ought
too requyte himself with thankfulnes. The causes why this
seemed a question too bée moued, were these. Wée are wont too

say, I maie thanke myself, I can complayne of noman but my
self, I am angrie with myself, I will punish myself, and I hate
myself. And manie suche other thinges doe wee saye▪ wherein

                     •
                  che man speaketh of himself as of another. If I can hurt myself
(sayeth he) why can I not also doe myself a good turne? Ageine,
why should not the thinges bee called benefites when I
bestowe them vppon myself, whiche should bée called so if I bestowed
them vppon anotherman? why should I not bée béeholding
too myself for giuing too myself, as well as bée beholding
too anotherman for receiuing at his hande? why should I bee
vnthankfull too myself, whiche is no lesse shame than too bee
nigardly too myself, or than too bee hard and cruell too mysef,
or to bee carelesse of myself. A Bawde is defamed as well for
his owne bodie as for anothers. Uerely a Flatterer and a soother
of other mens woordes, and suche a one as is readie too
iustifie vntruthes, is blameworthie. And no lesse is he too bee
blamed, which standeth in his owne conceyt, and hath an ouerweening
of himself, and (as a man myght terme him) is a selfflatterer.
Uices are hatefull, not onely when they preiudice others,
but also when they redound vntoo mens owne selues.
Whom will yée more commend, than him that ouermaystereth
himself, and hath himself at his owne commaundement? It is
easyer too ouerrule the barbarous nacions that cannot abyde
too haue their heades vnder another mannes girdle, than too
bridle a mannes owne affections, & too make obedient thē too
himself. Plato (sayeth he) thanketh Socrates for that whiche he
lerned at his hand: and why should not Socrates thanke himself
for teaching himself? Marcus Cato sayeth: That whiche thou
wantest, borowe of thyself. And if I can lende too myself, why
should I not giue too myself? Innumerable are the thinges
wherein custome deuydeth vs. Wee bee woont too say let mee
alone, I will talke with myself, and I will twitch myself by the
Eare. If these thinges bee true: then like as a man may bee
angrie with himself: so may hee also thanke himself. Like as
he may rebuke himself, so may he also prayse himself. Like as
he maye hinder himself, so may he also further himself. For an

ill turne and a good turne are contraries. If wee may say, hee

                     •
                  ath doone himself harme: wee may also say he hath doone him
                  
                     ••
                  lf
good. By nature (sayest thou) he hath doone it. Nature requireth
that a manne should first owe before he can requyte. A
Detter is not without a Creditor, nomore than a huseband is
without a wife, or a father without a childe.
            
            
               ¶The .viii. Chapiter.
               
                  TOO the intent there may bee a receyuer,
there must first bee a giuer.
Too conuey out of the left hand intoo
the right, is neyther giuing nor
receyuing. Like as noman caryeth
himself although hee moue and remoue
his bodie frō place too place:
Like as noman is coūted his owne
Aduocate, though hee haue pleaded
his owne cace: Like as noman settes vp an Image too himself
as his owne founder: and like as a sicke man demaundeth
n
                     •
                  t reward of himself for recouering himself by his owne cunning:
So in all other matters, although a man haue doone neuer
so well, yet can he not requyte his owne kyndnesse, because
he hath not towardes whom too requyte it. But admit that it
bee a bestowing of a good turne, when a man is both the giuer
and receyuer thereof himself. And admit it bee a receyuing of
a good turne, when he is both the taker and the giuer. The returne
(as men terme it) is made at his owne doore, and it passeth
away foorthwith, as a name of dalyance. For he that giueth
is none other than hee that receyueth, but they bee both
one. This woord Owe hath no place, but betweene twoo seuerall
parties. How then continueth not he still in one, which dischargeth
himself by bynding himself? Euen as in a Bowle or a
Ball nothing is nethermost, nothing is vppermost, nothing
last, nor nothing first, because the order of it is shifted by mouing,
so as the thinges go before that came behinde, and the
thinges come vp that went doune, and all thinges, howsoeuer

they go, returne intoo one: euen so must thou thinke it falles
out in man. Chaunge thou him intoo neuerso manie thinges,
and yet is he the same partie still. He hath beaten himself: hée
hath no man too sewe for dooing him wrong. Hee hath tyed or
shut vp himself: he can haue no action of false imprisonment.
He hath done himself a good turne: hee requyted it euen with
the dooing of it. The nature of the thing cannot bee sayd too
haue forgone aught, because that whatsoeuer is plucked from
it, returneth intoo it agein: neither can anie thing bee loste,
whiche hath not whereoutof too passe, but wyndeth backe agein
intoo whence it came. What lykenesse (sayeth hee) hath
this example too the question propounded? I will tell thee.
Put the cace thou bee vnthankfull too thyself: yet is not this
good turne lost: for the bestower of it hath it still. Put the cace
thou wilt not rec
                     •
                  iue it: thou hast it with thee before it bee deliuered
thee. Thou canst not forgo aught: for whatsoeuer is
taken from thee, is gotten too thee. The Whéele is turned
within 
                     •
                  hyself: In ta
                     •
                  ing, thou gi
                     •
                  est, & in giuing, thou takest.
            
            
               ¶The .ix. Chapiter.
               
                  A Man (sayeth hee) muste doo himsef a good
turne, ergo he must also requyte it. The Antecedent
is false, whervpon the consequent
hangeth. For noman dooeth good turnes
too himself: but he followeth his owne Nature,
whiche hath framed him to
                     •
                   a certein
selfloue, by meanes wh
                     •
                  rof he hath a singular
regarde too eschew thinges hurtfull, and too seeke after
thinges that may doe him good. Therfore, neither is he liberall
that giueth too himself, nor mercifull that forgiueth himself,
nor pitifull that reweth his owne miseries. That whiche
were liberalitie, Mercie, and Pitie, if it were doone too another
man: is but nature, being doone too a mannes self.
               A good turne is a free thing: but too doe good too ones self,
is of naturall necessitie. The moe good turnes a man dooeth,
the more 
                     〈◊〉
                   is he. But who was euer praysed for helping

himself
                     •
                   or for defending himself from robbers? Noman
bestoweth a benefite vppon himself, nomore than he bestoweth
interteinement vppon himself. Noman giueth too himself, nomore
than he lendeth too himself. If a man befreend himself:
he doeth it alway and without ceassing. He cannot keepe a iust
reckening of his freendships: and how shall he then requyte
them, sith that by his requyring, he benefiteth himself ageine?
for how should a man discerne, whither he doe himself a good
turne or requyte one, seeing the matter is wrought all in one
persone? I haue deliuered myself out of some daunger: haue
I now bestowed a benefite vppon myself? I deliuer myself ageine
from daunger: now whither doe I bestowe or requyte?
Moreouer, although I should graunt thee the first part: namely
that wée bestowe benefites vppon our selues: Yet will I not
graunt thee that whiche foloweth. For althouge wee bestowe,
yet doe wee not owe. Whyso? Bycause wee receiue ageine out
of hande. In benefiting, it behoueth vs, first too receiue, then
too owe, and afterward too requyte. But heere is no tyme of
owing, inasmuche as wee receiue ageine without taryaunce.
There is no giuing, but too another man: there is no requyring,
but too anotherman. This thing whiche so oftentymes
requyreth twoo properties, is not possible too bee done still in
one.
            
            
               ¶The .x. Chapiter.
               
                  TOO haue doone a thing too a mannes behoof,
is a benefite. Yea, so the woorde doo,
haue respect too an other man. For wilnot
men thinke him too hée out of his wittes,
that shall say hée hath sold a thing too himself?
For selling is an alienatio of a thing
that is a mannes owne, and a conueying ouer
of his right in the same too another man. And like as too
sell, so also too giue, is too passe away a thing from thyself, and
too make anotherman owner of that whiche was thyne afore.
Now if benefiting bee of the same forte: then can 
                     〈◊〉
                   benefite

himsef, because noman can giue aught to himself. For then
should twoo contraries cloze in one; so as giuing and taking
should bee al one thing. But there is great difference betwixt
giuing and taking. And good cause why: considering how
those woordes are matched fullbutte one ageinste another. I
sayd a little afore, how some woordes haue relation too otherfolkes,
and are of suche nature, that the whole signification of
them departeth from ourselues. I am a brother, howbeeit too
anotherman: for noman is brother too himself. I am a peere;
but too anotherman: for noman is peere too himselfe. The
thing that is compared, is not vnderstoode without his
match: and the thing that is cuppled is not without a felowe.
So also, the thing that is giuen, is not without a receyuer:
neither is a Benefite without another too bee benefited by it.
The same thing appeereth by the verie Terme wherein this
benefiting is cōteined. But noman benefiteth himself, nomore
than hee fauoureth himself or taketh part with himself. Wee
may prosecute this matter yet longer and with mo examples.
And why not? sith a benefite is to bee counted in the nomber
of those thinges whiche require a second partie. Some thinges,
though they bee honest, verie goodly, and right excellently
vertuouse: yet haue they not their effect, but in a copartner.
Faithfulnesse is commended and honoured for one of the greatest
things belonging too mankynd. And yet, is any man sayd
too haue bin faythfull or to haue kept promis with himsef?
            
            
               ¶The .xi. Chapiter.
               
                  NOw comme I too the last part. He that requytes
a good turne, must forgoe sommewhat,
like as hee doeth that payeth monnye.
But he forgoeth nothing, whiche rendereth
too himself: Nomore than he gayneth,
whiche receiueth of himself, Benefyting,
and Requyting must passe too and
fro: but within one man there is no intercourse. He that requiseth
most pleasure the partie that had pleasured him afore. He

that requyteth too himself, whom pleasureth he? Himself. But
what man lookes not for the requitall of a benefite onewhere,
and for the benefite itself anotherwhere? He that requit
                     •
                  th too
himself, pleasureth himself. And wher was there euer so ranke
a carle that would not doe that? Yea rather, who hathe not
played the Carle, too doe that? If wee maye thanke our selues
(sayth he), wee may also requyte kyndnesse to our selues. Wée
say, I thank myself that I tooke not suche a woman too wyfe,
and that I entered no felowship with suche a man. In so saying
wee prayse ourselues, and for the better allowing of our
fact, wee abuse the woordes of thanksgiuing. That is a benefite,
whiche is at libertie not too bée receyued, euen when it is
in performing: But he that bestowed a benefite vppon himself
cannot but receyue his owne profer: Ergo it is no benefite. A
benefite is receyued at one tyme, and requyted at another. And
in benefiting, the thing that is most allowable, the thing that
is most commendable, is that a man forgetteth his owne profit
too doo anotherman good, and taketh from himself to giue
to anotherman. But so dooth not hee that benefiteth himself.
Benefiting is a felowlike thing: it purchaseth fauour: it maketh
men beholden. But in giuing too a mans self there is no
felowship at all, there is nomans fauour purchased, it maketh
noman beholding, it incorageth noman too say, This man deserueth
too bee much made of, he hath doone such a man a good
turne, and he will doo mee one too. That is a benefite, whiche
a man giueth not for his owne sake, but for the parties sake to
whom hee giueth it. But hee that dooth himself a good turne,
dooth it for his owne sake: Ergo it is no benefite.
            
            
               The .xii. Chapiter.
               
                  SEemeth it now vntoo thee, too bee vntrue whiche I
sayd at the beginning? Thou sayest I am quyte gone
from dooing that whiche is woorth my labour, or rather
that I lose all my labour in good sadnesse. Giue
mee leaue a little, and thou shalt haue yet better cause too say
so, when I shal haue brought thee too such 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ as when

thou art scaped out of them, thou shalt haue gayned no more
by it, but that thou mayst wynd thee out of suche narrow pointes,
as thou needest not too haue come intoo, except thou haddest
listed. For too what purpose is it too buzie a mannesself,
in vntying the knottes whiche he himself made too vntye? But
like as some are so twisted toogither for pleasure and pastyme.
as an vnskilfull bodie shall hardly vnknitte them: and yet hee
that twisted them vndooeth them with ease, because he knoweth
the braydes and lettes of them, whiche notwithstanding
haue some pleasure in them, (for they trye ye sharpnes of mens
wittes, and make them too take héede): Euen so, these thinges
which seeme su
                     •
                  tle and captiouse, doo rid mennes myndes frō
Securitie, Dulnesse, and Sloth: and therfore the feeld wherin
they walke, must now and then hee strewed with suche thinges,
and some harshnesse and roughnesse muste erewhyles bee
cast in their way, so as they may but euen 
                     •
                  reepe out, and take
the better heede where they set their foote. It is sayd, that noman
is vnthankfull: and that is gathered thus. A benefite is
that whiche profiteth: but as you Stoikes vpholde, noman can
profit an euill man: Ergo an vnthankfull man taketh no benefite:
and so consequently he is not vnthankfull. Age in, a benefite
is an honest and allowable thing: but an honest and allowable
thing cannot bee fastned vppon an euill man: neyther then
can a benefite be fastened vppon an euill man. But, if he cannot
receyue it, then ought he not too requyte it: and so is he not vnthankfull.
On the other sade, (as you say) a good man dooth althinges
aright: But if he doo all thinges aright, then can hee
not bee vnthankfull: Ergo inasmuche as a good man requyreth,
and an euill man taketh not: it followeth that there is
neyther good man nor euill man vnthankfull: and so, vnthankfull
and thanklesse are but wast termes among men, and vtterly
without signification.
               There is but one good thing among vs, and that is honestie.
This cannot light vppon an euill man. For he ceasseth too
bee euill, assone as vertue entereth into him. But as long as he
is euill, noman can fasten a good turn vpon him, because good

thinges and euill thinges are at discorde among themselues,
and cannot cloze in one. The same also is the reason why noman
can profite him, because that whatsoeuer commeth too
him, he marreth it by abusing it. For like as the stomacke that
is infected with sicknesse and accloyed with choler, chaungeth
all the meates that it receyueth, and turneth all foode intoo the
nurrishment of his disease: Euen so a blynded mynd, whatsoeuer
you commit vnto it, maketh it a burthen, a mischeef, and
an occasion of miserie vntoo itself. But the greater prosperitie
and welth that euill men haue, the more is their excesse of
outrage: and they feele themselues so much the lesse, as they
haue lighted intoo greater matter wherein too flote: Ergo
nothing can come too euill menne, whiche should doo them
good: or rather, nothing can come at them that shall not doo
them hurt. For whatsoeuer befalles them, they chaunge it into
their owne nature: and the things that of themselues should
bee verie goodly and profitable if they were bestowed vppon a
good man, are vntoo them right noysome. Therefore, neyther
can they doo a good turne (for noman can doo that whiche is
not in him too doo) neyther haue they any will too doo good.
            
            
               ¶The .xiii. Chapiter.
               
                  WEll, though these thinges were as you
say; Yet may an euill man receiue thinges
like vntoo benefites, for the not requyting
whereof he shalbee vnthankfull. There bee
goodes of the mynde, goodes of the bodie,
and goodes of fortune. The goods of the
minde are barred from a foole and an euill
man. But he is admitted too the goodes of fortune, and he is
able too receiue them, and bound too requite them: and if he requyte
not, he is vnthankfull. And this is not our constitution
onely. For the Peripatetikes (who giue verie large and wyde
scope too mannes felicitie) saye that the smaller sort of benefites
doe befall vnto euil men also. Now he that requyteth not
those, is vnthankful. But wée like not that those things should

bee called benefites, whereby the minde fareth not the better.
Howbeeit wee denye not that they bee commodities: and wee
denye not but they bee too bee coueted. These bee the thinges
that an euill man may both giue too a good man and take of a
good man: as monnye rayment, promotions, & lyfe. Which if
he requite not, he falleth into ye blame of an vnthankful person.
               But how can you call him vnthankfull, for not requiting of
that whiche you say is no benefite?
               Somme thinges, although they bee not the trew thinges
themselues: Yet are comprehended vnder the same terme, by
reason of their likenesse vntoo them. So terme wee Scalop
shelles though they bee made of siluer or gold. So terme wee
him vnlerned, not only whiche is altoogither without lerning,
but also which hath not atteyned too somme déepe knowledge.
So a man that hath seene one thinclothed and altoo ragged,
sayes he hath seene a naked man. After the same maner, these
thinges are no benefites, but yet they beare the countenance of
benefites.
               Then like as these bee as it were benefites, and not benefytes
in deede: so is he as it were vnthākfull, and not vnthankfull
in deede.
               That is false, bycause that as well he that receyueth them
as he that giueth them, doe bothe account them as benefites.
               And therefore as muche is he vnthankfull, whiche deceiueth
vnder pretence of taking a trew benefite: as he is poysoner
whiche giueth a man Poyzon, in stede of good Iewce.
            
            
               ¶The .xiiii. Chapiter.
               
                  
                     CLeanthes dealeth yet more rigorously. Although
(sayeth he) it bée no benefite, whiche
he receiueth: yet is he vnthankfull, bycause
he would not haue requited, though it had
bin one. So also is a man a Murtherer,
before he haue steyned his handes: bycause
he is alredie armed, and fully purposed too
rob and flea. The verie déede doeth put his naughtines in execution,

and discloze it, but not begin it. The thing that he receiued,
was not a good turne, but was so termed. Churchtraytors
are punished though none of them can laie hand vpon the
Goddes.
               But how (sayeth he) can any body bée vnthankfull towardes
an euill man, seeing that a benefite cannot bee fastened vppon
an euill man? Uerely in this respect, that he hath receiued of
him, somme of the thinges that goe for good among the v
                     •
                  
                  skilfull:
and therfore euill though he bee, yet must he bee thankfull
towardes him with somme like thing: and seeing he tooke
them for good, he must requite them for good, whatsoeuer they
bee. They are sayed too haue borrowed monnye, bothe he that
oweth gold, and also he that oweth Lether coyned with the comon
stampe, suche as was among the Lacedemonians, bycause
it serueth the turne of currant monnye. Looke in what kynde
of thing thou art bounde, in the same kinde discharge thou thy
credit.
            
            
               ¶The .xv. Chapiter.
               
                  WHat thing benefites bée, and whither
the maiestie of that noble name ought
too bee plucked doune too this vyle
and bace geere, it skilles not you, it
is demaūded for other folkes sakes.
Settle you your myndes vppon the
outwarde showe of the truthe, and
when yee speake of honestie, whatsoeuer
it be that is bruted by the name
of honest, that hold you your selues vntoo.
               As by you (sayeth he) noman is thanklesse: so ageine by you
all men are thanklesse. For you hold opinion that all euill men
are fooles: and he that hath one vyce hath all vyces: and so are
all men fooles forasmuche as all are euill: Ergo all men are vnthankfull.
Now what then? doeth not the reproche light vniuersally
vppon all mankynd? Is it not a common complaint,
that good turnes are lost, and that there bee verie feaue, whiche

requite not euill too suche as haue deserued well? There is no
cause why yee should thinke this too bée the grudge of vs only:
and that wee alone doo think all thinges are enill and starkenaught
that fall not out euen and iust with the Rule of right.
Behold, I wot not what a voyce, (not sente out of the house of
the Philosophers, but out of the middes of the common mu
                     •
                  titude)
condemning whole Peoples and Nacions, kryeth out.
               
                  The Guest may scarsly trust his hoste, nor yet the hoste his Guest:
                  Nor fathers wel their soninlawes. Yea seeldome tymes doth rest
                  Betweene borne brothers such accord as brothers ought to haue.
                  The man woold bring his wyfe, the wyfe hir husbād too his graue.
               
               This is more than I spake of. Benefites are turned intoo Banes,
and the blud is not spared of those for whō blud ought too
bée spent. Wée persecute benefites with Sword & poysoning.
Too rebell ageinst a mannes owne Countrie, & too oppresse it
with hir owne Sword, is now reputed for puissance and woorthinesse.
Hee that hath not mounted aboue the Comon weale,
thinkes himself too stand very lowelike an vnderling. The armies
receiued of hir, are turned too hir confusion, and it is become
a Capteinly exhortation too say: Sirs, fight ageinst your
Wines, fight ageinst your Children, make assault vppon your
owne Churches, your houses, & your Goddes. You that ought
not too haue entered into the Citie, 
                     〈◊〉
                   not euen: to a tryumph,
without the leaue of the Senate: and 
                     〈◊〉
                   that o
                     •
                  ght too haue
hi
                     •
                  d your Courtes without the Walles, euen when you bring
home your armies with victorie: now marche ye intoo the Citie
with Banners displayed, after you haue murthered your
owne Countrimen, and bathed your selues in the blud of your
owne Kinsmen. Let libertie be clean driuen ou
                     •
                   among Soul
                  
                     •••••
                  
Ensignes, and let that people whiche is the Conque
                  
                     ••••
                  
and 
                     〈◊〉
                   of Nacions, bée nowe at length beséeged
within hir owne Walles, and bee put in feare of hir owne Baners
after she hath chaced away al outward Warres, and suppressed
all forrein feare.
            
            
               ¶The .xvi. Chapiter.
               
                  
                  VNkynd was Coriolane, who becomming
pitifull too late, layd awaye
Weapon after repentaunce of his
wickednesse, howbeit in the middes
of Ciuill slaughter. Unkynde was
Cateline, who thought it but a smal
matter too conquer his owne Coū
                  trie,
except he might lay it wast, and
bring in the Armies of Sauoy and
Delphynois, and cal in the enemyes from beyond the Alpes, too
wreake their old and natiue hatred vppon the Citie, so as the
Romane Capteines myght pay the yeeremyndes de we of lōg
tyme too the Tumbes of the Galles. Unkinde was Caius Marius,
who being called from the Gallis
                     •
                  op too the Consulship,
could not feele his displeasure sufficiently reuenged, nor himself
well settled in his former state, till he had ouermatched all
former slaughters wt the slaughter of the Cimbrians, & not only
blowen vp a Trumpet, but also bin himself as a Trumpet too
the banishment and Ciuill flaughter of his Countrimen. Unkynd
was Lucius Sylla, in healing his Countrie with 
                     •
                  orer remedies
than the perilles themselues were. Who hauing gone
vppon mannes blud from the Towre of Prenest too the Gate
Collina, 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
was of rype yeeres: rendered this thancke too the Common
weale, that he put others in possession of it also, as though he
might haue made his owne preheminence the lesse enuyed, by
making the thing lawfull for many men, whiche was lawfull

for many men, whiche was lawfull for noman. For whyle hee
sought extraordinarie gouernementes: whyle hee distributed
Prouinces to take the choyce of them to himself: whyle he deuided
the common weale too the Thréemen, so as two partes
of it remayned in his owne House: hee brought the People of
Rome too fuche an afterdéele, as they could not continue in
safetie, but by the benefite of bondage. Unkind was the verie
enemie and vanquisher of Pompei, Caius Iulius Caesar: who, for
all his tendering of the Comon weale, and for all his fawning
vppon the Comonaltie, led the Warres about from Fraunce
and Germanie intoo the Citie, and pitched his Campe in the
Circle of Flaminius, neerer than Porsenna had doone. In déede,
right did temper the rigour of his victorie, and he performed
his ordinarie saying, whiche was that he slew noman but if he
were in Armes. What fault had he then? Whereas the residue
vsed their weapons more bluddily, yet at length they were
satisfied, & layd them doune agein. But this man did soone put
vp his Sworde, but he neuer layd it away. Unthankfull was
Antodie too his owne preferrer, in that hee auowed him too
hee lawfully slayne, and admitted his murtherers too Prouinces
and gouernement. And when hee had torne his Countrie
with proscriptions, inuasions, and battelles: after all these
mischeeues, he gaue it ouer intoo bondage: and that not vntoo
Romane Kinges, but after suche a sorte, as the same Comon
weale whiche had fullie restored right libertie, and fréedome,
too the Achayas, Rhodians and many other noble Cities, should
it self pay tribute too gelded men.
            
            
               ¶The .xvii. Chapiter.
               
                  TYme would fayle me if I should recken vp all
that haue bin vnthankfull, euen with the vtter
destruction of their countries. And as endlesse
a matter would it bee, too ronne ouer the
excellent and weldispozed men, too whom
the Comon we ale itself hath bin vnthanckefull:
and 
                     •
                  oo shewe how shée hath oftentymes off
                     ••
                  ded no

lesse ageinst others, than others haue offended ageinst her.
               It ba
                     •
                  ished Camillus, it sent Scipio out of the waie, and it
outlawed Cicero euen after he 
                     •
                  ad suppressed Catiline, beating
doune his house spoyling his goodes, and dooing whatsoeuer
Catiline himself would haue done too him if he had gotten the
victorie. Rutilius was rewarded for his innocencie, too goe
hyde his head in Asia. The people of Rome sayed Cato nay of
the Pretorship, and vtterly denyed him the consulship. Wée bée
comonly vnthankfull all of vs. Let euery man aske his owne
conscience. Eche man complaynes of others vnthankfulnesse.
But it could not fall out that all should complayne, vnlesse
there were cause too complayne of all. Are all men then but
only vnthankfull? Yis, they bee also all couetouse, all maliciouse,
and all fearfull, specially those that seeme too bee most
hardie. Yea I say further, they bee all ambitiouse, and all vngodly.
But there is no cause why yee should bee angrie with
them: rather beare with thē, for they bee all out of their wittes.
I wilnot call thée backe too vncerteinties, I prey thée see how
vnthankfull youth is. Who is he, (bee he neuer so innocent,
meeke, and kyndharted,) that doeth not wish, wayt, and long
for his fathers death? Where is there one among a nomber,
that would be loth his wyfe should dye, and not rather, maketh
reckening vppon her death, bee shee neuer so good a wyfe? I
pray you, what man being intangled in the Lawe, and rid out
of it by somme other mannes helpe, will beare so greate a benefite
in minde, anie longer than till the next matter that commes
may put it out of his head? This wee bee sure of: there
is noman dyeth without gurdging: there is noman that at his
last hour dares saie,

                     Now welcom death whiche endes the race
                     That fortune gaue mee heere too trace.
                  
Who departeth not vnwillingly? who departeth not sighing▪
But it is the point of an vnthankfull persone, not too bee contented
with the tyme forepast. Alwayes the daies of a mannes
life wilbée fewe, if he fall too numbering them. Consider how
the sou
                     ••
                  ein good consisteth not in tyme. How long or short so

euer thy tyme bee, take it in good woorth. The prolonging of
thy deathes day auayleth thee nothing too blissednesse, because
that by cōtinewance the life is not made the blisfuller but the
longer. How muche better were it, too bee thankfull for the
pleasures that a man hath receiued, and not too stand counting
of other mennes yeeres, but too esteeme his owne gently, and
too take them for a vauntage? This hath God voutsaued vppon
mee, this is ynough, he could haue giuen mee more, but
euen this also is his benefite. Let vs bee thankfull too the
Goddes, thankfull too men, thankfull too suche as haue bes
                     •
                  owed
aught vppon vs, and thankfull too those also whiche haue
doone good too anie of ours.
            
            
               The .xviii. Chapiter.
               
                  THou byndest mee out of measure (sayest
thou) when thou sayest Ours. Therefore
set mee somme 
                     •
                  ad. By your saying, he that
doeth a good turne too the chyld, doeth it
also too the father. First I would haue thee
too set mee somme bound: and afterwarde
too tell mee, if a good turne bee doone too
the father▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   the same extend also too the brother too the
vncle, too 
                     〈…〉
                   father, too the wyfe, and too the father inlawe?
Tell 
                     〈…〉
                   I may stop, and how farr I shall pursew
thee pedegree of persones? If I till thy Lande for thee, I
shall doe thee a good turne: and if I quenche thy house that is
on a 
                     〈…〉
                   in reparacions that it der
                     ••
                   not, shall

                     〈…〉
                   If thou saue 
                     •
                  ut my slaue, I shall thinke myself

                     〈◊〉
                   too thee: and wilt not thou count it a 
                     •
                  enefite if
I 
                     〈…〉
                  
               
            
            
               ¶The .xix. Chapiter.
               
                  TH
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   vnlike examples. For he that

                     〈…〉
                  , benefiteth 
                     〈◊〉
                   my Lande; but mee.
And he that shoreth vp my house that it fall not,
doeth the pleasure too mee: for the house i
                     •
                  self is

senslesse. I am his d
                     •
                  tter for it, or other wyse he hath none. Also
he that 
                     〈…〉
                   it not too deserue well of my
grounde, but of mee. The same doe I saye of my Bondman, for
he is a part of my chatteiles, & is saued for mee, and therfore I
am detter for him. But my sonne is himself capable of a good
turne. Therfore it is he that receiueth it, and I am glad of his
we
                     •
                  speeding. I am touched with him, 
                     •
                  ut not bound with him.
               Well then I would fay
                     •
                  e that thou whiche thinkest not thyself
bound, shouldest answer mee; whither the helth, welfare,
and prosperitie of the so
                     ••
                  e perteyne no
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  oo the father? He
shalbee the happyer if hee haue his sonne safe, and the vnhappyer
if he forgoe him. Now then, if by 
                     〈◊〉
                   meanes he bee made
the more happier, and deliuered from the daunger of extreme
miserie; receiueth he no benefite?
               No, sayes he. For somme thinges are bestowed only vppon
othermen, though they reache euen vnto vs. And therfore the
thing is too bee demaunded at nomannes hande but his that
receiued it: like as 
                     〈◊〉
                   is dema
                     ••
                  ded of the partie too
whom it was lent, although the same did in somme wyse come
too my handes also. There is no benefit
                     •
                   whose commoditie
extendeth not too them that bée next hand, yea & now and then
also too suche as bee furtherof. Our 
                     〈◊〉
                   is not, too
whom the good turne is passed ouer from him 
                     〈…〉
                   it bestowed
vppon him: but where 
                     〈◊〉
                   bestowed 
                     〈…〉
                   must 
                     •
                  eeke
the thankes at the partie himself, and at the verie welles head.
               Go too the
                     •
                   I pray thee, when thou acknowledgest that I
haue giuen thee thy sonne, and tha
                     •
                   if he 
                     •
                  ad 
                     〈…〉
                  
hadst 
                     〈…〉
                  
life of 
                     〈…〉
                  
suche tyme as I saued thy sonne, thou fellest 
                     〈…〉
                  ,
thou paydest thy 
                     〈◊〉
                   vntoo the Goddes, as if thou haddest
bin saued thyself, and thou diddest cast foorth suche woordes
as these: It is all 
                     〈…〉
                   mee: you
haue saued twoo, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   most of 
                     〈…〉
                   thou
so, if thou receiued no good 
                     〈◊〉
                  ?
               Bycause that if my sonne 
                     〈…〉
                  , I will

pay his creditor; but not as dewtie of myne owne. And if my
sonne bee taken in aduowtrie, I wilbee ashamed of it, but yet
shalnot I therfore bee the adulterer. I say I am bound too the
for my sonne: not bycause I am so in deede, but bycause I am
contented too offer myself too bée thy detter of myne owne frée
will. But thou alledgest, that by thy sa
                     ••
                  ing of my sonne, I receiued
greate pleasure and commoditie, and escaped the greeuous

                     •
                  orzie of being chyldlesse. The question is not now, whether
you haue pleasured mee, but whither you haue benefited
mee. For a beast, or a S
                     •
                  one, or an her
                     •
                  e may pleasure vs; but
yet they benefite vs not: for a benefite cannot bee bestowed, but
by a thing that is indewed with will. Now then, thy will was
not too bestowe vppon the father, but vppon the sonne, and it
may bée, that thou knewest not the father. Therfore, when thou
sayest, I haue benefited the father by my sauing of his Sonne:
saie thus also on the otherside, I haue benefited one that I neuer
kne
                     •
                   nor neuer thought of. Besides this, now and then it
falles out, that a man maye hate the father and yet saue the
sonne; and wilt thou seeme too haue benefited him, too whom
thou wart an enemie at the tyme of the déede dooing? But too
the intent too set asyde this alter
                     •
                  ation of intertalke, and too
answer like a counseler in Lawe: the mynde of the be
                     •
                  ower
must bee considered. Looke on whom his will was too bestowe
his good turne, on him he bestowed it. If he did it for the fathers

                     •
                  ake, the father receiued a benefite. Otherwyse, the father
is not bound by the benefite bestowed vppon his sonne, although
he haue fruition ofit. Notwithstanding, if opportunitie
serue him, he h
                     •
                  mself also will doo 
                     〈◊〉
                   for him: not as
of 
                     〈…〉
                  , but as taking occasion too begin. The benefite
is not 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  ee claymed at the fathers hande. If he doo
anie thing of courtesie for his sonnes sake, he is iust, but not
thankfull. For it were an infinite matter, if the benefite that I
bestowe vppon the sonne, were 
                     〈…〉
                   his father, and his

                     〈◊〉
                  , and his 
                     〈…〉
                  , and his 
                     〈◊〉
                   v
                     •
                  cle, and his

                     〈◊〉
                  , and his 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and his fréendes, and his seruantes,

                     〈◊〉
                   countrie.
               
                  
Where then beg
                     ••
                  neth a benefite too stay? For now commeth
in the inso
                     ••
                  ble kreeper, whiche is hard too restreyne, bycause
it stealeth vp by inchmeate, and neuer leaues kreeping.
Men are woont too put suche a 
                     •
                  ace as this. Twoo brothers
are at variance. If I saue the one of them: whither doe I be
                     •
                  efite
the other, who wilbee s
                     •
                  rie that his brother perished not?
No dout but that like as it is no benefite if I doo a man good
ageinst my will: so is it a benefite too doo an vnwillyng man a
good turne ageinst his will.
            
            
               ¶T .xx. Chapiter.
               
                  TErmest thou it a good turne (sayth
he) wherewith a man is offended
and greeued? ma
                     •
                  ie good turnes
haue a sorowfull and sower looke,
as the cut
                     •
                  ing and searing of a man
too heale him, and the 
                     •
                  rydling of
men by imprisonment. A man 
                     〈◊〉
                  
not looke whither one bee so
                     ••
                  ear
the receyuing of a good turne; but
whither hee haue cause too bee glad. A peece of Coyneis not
the woorse because an Alient and one tha
                     •
                   kn
                     •
                  wes not the comon
stamp refu
                     •••
                  h it. Hee both ha
                     •
                  eth the good turne, and 
                     ••
                  iceyueth
it. Now if it doo him good, and that the inte
                     ••••
                   the
bestower was too doo him good: it makes no matter th
                     ••
                  gh a
man receyue the good turne with an euill will. Gotoo, turne
this the contrarie waye. A man hateth his Br
                     •
                  ther, whom it
were for his behoof too haue still 
                     ••
                  yue. Him 
                     〈◊〉
                   I slea. It is
no be
                     •
                  efite, al
                     •
                  ecit that hee take it for one, and hee glad of it.
Moste trayter ou
                     ••
                  y dooth he hurt, whiche getteth thankes 
                     〈◊〉
                  
dooing harme.
               I vndersta
                     •
                  d you. Because a thing dooth good, therefore it
is a benefite: and if it doo harme, it is therefore no benefite.
               Behold I will bring you a thing that shal doo neither good
nor hame, and yet it shalbe a benefite. I find a mans father, dead
in wilderuesse, and I burye his bodie. I haue doone the deadman

no good, (for what had it skilled him after what maner
he had bin consumed?) nor yet too his sonne: for what commoditie
had he thereby?
               I will tell thee what the Sonne gotte. By mee he performed
a reuerend and necessarie dutie. I haue doone that thing
for his father, whiche hee himself both would and should haue
doone. Now, if I did it not for comon pitie and manners sake
onely, as I might haue buried any other dead mans bodie: but
knewe the carkesse, and thought vppon the Sonne at the same
tyme, and did it for his sake: then is it a Benefite. But if I cast
earth vppon an vnknowen persone: I haue no detter for this
courtesie, because it was but a poynt of Publik humanitie.
               Some man will say why make you suche a question on whō
you bestowe your benefite, as though you ment too clayme it
ageine at some tyme or other?
               There are that thincke it ought neuer too bee claymed ageine,
and they alledge these causes. He that is vnworthie wilnot
render though it bee claymed: and a woorthie persone will
render of his owne accorde. Moreouer if thou haue bestowed
vppon a good man, take heede thou doo him not wrong in calling
vppon him, as though he would not haue requyted of his
owne free will. And if thou haue bestowed vppon an euil man,
bee sory for thy so dooyng: but disgrace not thy benefite with
thyne owne woords, by making it a Det. Furthermore, looke,
what the Law of benefiting hath not commaunded to bee claymed,
that hath it forbidden too bee claymed.
               These bee but woordes. For as long as nothing pincheth
mee, and as long as misfortune compelles mee not: I will rather
let my good turne slip, than chalendge it. But if my Children
stand in hazard of their lyfe, if my wyfe bée brought in perill,
if the welfare and libertie of my Count
                     ••
                  e sende mee too
suche a place as I am loth too comme at: I will streyne courtesie
with my shame, and I will shewe myself too haue doone al
that euer I could doo, that I might not haue needed the helpe
of a Churle. In fine, the necessitie of receyuing a good turne,
shall ouercome the shame of clayming it. Agein when I bestowe

a ben
                     •
                  fite vppon a good man, I bestowe it in suche wise
as I will neuer call for it ageine, vnlesse necessitie inforce mee.
But the Lawe (sayth he) in not giuing leaue too clayme, forbiddeth
thee too clayme.
            
            
               ¶The .xxi. Chapter.
               
                  MAnie thinges haue neither Lawe,
nor Action. But customme of mans
lyfe, whiche is of more force than all
Lawe, bringeth them in. No Lawe
forbiddeth a man too bewraye his
frendes secretes, nor byndeth a man
too keepe promis with his foe. Yea
what Lawe byndeth vs too bee iust
of our woord too anie man? None.
Yet will I find fault with him that shall bewray my talke had
with him in secret, and I wilbee discontented with him that
shall gyue mee his faith and not keepe it.
               By this meanes (sayth he) of a benefite thou makest a Det.
               No, not so. For I doo not exact it, but request it ageine, no
nor request it agein, but warne him of it. For vtter necessitie
may driue mee so farre, that I shall come vnto him. Asfor him
that is so churlish, that a warning will not suffyze him, but I
must bee fayne too stryue with him: I will passe him ouer, and
not make so muche account of him, as too force him too bee
thankfull. For likewyse as there bee some Detters whom a
Creditour wilnot cal vpon, because he knoweth they haue wasted
al away, & it were but farther losse too meddle with them,
forasmuchas nothing can make them ashamed: euen so also
will I passe ouer some that are openly and wilfully thanklesse,
neyther will I clayme a good turne at anie mannes hand, saue
where I may receyue it without haling of it from him.
            
            
               ¶The .xxii. Chapiter.
               
                  
                  THere bee many that knowe neither
how too deny that which they haue
receyued, nor howe too requite it:
whiche sorte are neither so good as
thankfull, nor so bad as vnthankful,
but are dull and grossewitted, and
slowe Paymaysters, howbeeit not
euill. Too such as these I wll make
no clayme: but I wil admonish them
and trayne them foorth too their dutie whyle they bee otherwyse
occupyed, so as they shall by and by answere mee in this
wyse. I pray you beare with mee. In good faith I knewe not
that you had neede of this; for had I knowen it, I would haue
offered it you. I beseech you think not any vnkindnesse in mée,
I remember well what you haue doone for mee.
               Why should I sticke too make suche as these, both better
too mee, and better too themselues? If I can, I shall keepe any
man from offending: and specially from offending ageinst
my selfe. In not suffering him too become a Churle, I bestow
another benefite vppon him. Yet shall I not roughly vpbrayd
him with that whiche I haue doone for him: but too the ende
I may giue him leaue to render frendship, I shall with gentlenesse
renew the rememberance of it, and request him too doo
mee some pleasure: and asfor my clayming, lette him espye
that himself. Now and then also I shall vse somewhat quicker
woordes, if I hope he may bee amended by them. But if he bee
past recouerie, I shall not stirre his patience, least of my faint
freend I make him myne vtter foe. For if wée let the vnthankfull
slip without prompting them by some remembraunce; wée
shall make them but the slower too requite. Agein there bee othersome
within compasse of re
                     •
                  ouery, which may be brought
too goodnesse if they bee a little bitten: whom wee shall suffer
too come too naught by withdrawing admonishment, wherethrough
the father otherwiles hath amended his Sonne, and
the wyfe reclaymed hir straying Husband, and the fréend quick
                     •
                  ned
vp the faithfulnesse of his fainting freend.
            
            
               
               ¶The .xxiii. Chapiter.
               
                  TOO wake some men, you must not strike
them, but iog them. After the same maner,
the assurednesse of somme men in requiting
kyndnesse, dooth not cease, but faint: and
these must wee iog. Turne not thy goodturne
intoo a shrewd turne. For thou doest
mee wrong if thou chalendge not sommetyme,
too the ende I should bee thankfull. What if I knowe
not whereof thou haste want? What if I espyed not the occasion,
bycause I was buzyed in weyghtie affaires, and called too
other matters? Shew mee what I maye doo, and what thou
wouldest haue. Wherefore despayrest thou before thou haue
tryed? Wherefore makest thou suche haste too lose bothe thy
benefite and thy freend? How knowest thou whither I wilnot,
or whither I wote not: whither I wāt will, or whither I want
abilitie? Trye mee.
               Then will I admonishe him, not bitterly, nor openly, but
with out reproche, so as he maie thinke he calles it too mynde
of himself, and is not put in minde of it by mee.
            
            
               ¶The .xxiiii. Chapter.
               
                  ONE Publius Militio an old souldyer of Iulius
Caesars, had a sewt before him ageinst
his neyboures, and was like to haue gone
by the woorse. Capteine (quoth he) remember
you not how you sprēt your ancle once
about Sucro in Spayne? Yis sayed Caesar.
Then you remember also, that when you
went too sit do
                     •
                  ne vnder a certeine tree that cast verie little
shadow, (for the sonne was exceeding whot and the place very
rough in whiche that only one tree grew out from among the

                     •
                  ragged cliffes): one of your souldyers did spred his cloke vnder
you. When Caesar had answered, yea marrie, why should I
not remember it? for when I was nygh dead for thirst: bycause

I was not able too goo too the next spring by reason of my
foote, I would haue krept thither vppon all fower, but that a
souldyer of myne, a tall stout felowe, brought mée water in his
burganet. Capteine (quoth he) and doo you knowe that man,
or that burganet if you see them ageine? Caesar sayed he knew
not the burganet, but the man he knew very well. And (as I
thinke being angrie with him for withdrawing him from the
heering of the matter too that old stale pageant) he added, but
I am sure thou art not he. Caesar (quoth he) I blame you not
though you knowe mee not. For when this was done, I was
whole and sounde. But afterward myne eye was striken out in
the battell at Munda, and splitters of bones were pikt out of
my skull. Neyther coulde you know that Burganet if you saw
it. For it was clyued asunder with a Spanish Holberd. Hereuppon
Caesar commaunded that this souldyer should bee trubbled
no further, and gaue him the grounde through whiche the
waye laie that made this strife and sewt betweene him and his
neyboures.
            
            
               ¶The .xxv. Chapiter.
               
                  WHat then? Should he not clayme the good
turne at his Capteines hande, whose memorie
the multitude of thinges had confounded,
and whom the greatenesse of his
charge in ordering whole armyes, suffered
not too think vpon euery seueral souldyer?
This is not a clayming of a benefite, but
a fetching of it in a good place, where it was layed vp in store
and redie for him. And yet if a man will haue it be must reache
out his hande too take it. Therefore, forasmuche as the thing
that I will doo, shalbee either for myne owne necessities sake,
or for his sake of whom I demaunde it; I will challenge it. As
one was saying too Tyberius Caesar, Remember you? at the first
dash, before he could vtter anie moe tokens of olde acquayntance,
I remember not (quoth hee) what I haue bin. How long
should a man haue forborne the clayming of a benefite at this

mannes hande? He stopped his mouth with forgetfulnesse. He
could not away with the acquayntance of anie of his freendes
and companions. His present state was the only thing that he
would haue them too looke at, too think vppon, and too speake
of. Affor an old freend, he tooke him but for a spye. A man must
bee more choyce in taking of his tyme when he will clayme a
benefite, than when he will request one: and he must vse a discreetnesse
in his woordes, so as euen the vnthankfull maie not
be able too dissemble. If wee liued among wyse men, we should
hold our peace and tarie their leysure. And yet is it good too
make wyse men priuie too our estate. For wee traue of the
Goddes, from whom the knowledge of nothing is hidden, and
yet doo not prayers certifie them, but intreate them. Yea truly,
that
                     
                        ••
                     hryses the 
                        ••
                     est of Aplo. lib. 1. 
                        ••
                     ad. Preest in Homere appointeth seruices and altars deuoutly
haunted, euen too the verye Goddes, therby too make
them plyable, and they inclyne vntoo him. Too bee willing
and inclynable too bee admonished, is a principall vertue. The
mynde of suche (whiche in feawe menne is the beste ruler of itself)
must bee reyned softly this waie and that waie. The next
are suche as amende vppon admonishment: and suche are
not too bee lefte destitute of a Guyde. When a mannes eyes
are blyndfolded, the sight of them is the same it was, but it
standes him in no steede, till the Goddes doo let in the lyght
too them, and call them foorth too their accustomed seruis.
The instrumentes cease, except the woorkman applye them too
their woorke. Likewyse, there is a good will in our myndes:
but it is benommed onewhyle with pleasures, anotherwhyle
with restinesse, and anotherwhyle with ignorance of our dewtie.
This must wee make profitable, and not through impaciencie
leaue it in the stockes. But lyke as 
                     ••
                  hoo
                     ••
                  masters doo patiently
beare with the seapes of their yoong scholers, that happen
through stippernesse of memorie, and bring them too saye
their whole lessons without booke, by prompting thē a woorde
or twayne: Euen so must men bee reclaymed too requite kyndnesse,
by gentle admonishment.
               The end of the fifth Booke.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ The sixth booke of Lucius Annaeus
Seneca, concerning Benefites.
            
               ¶The first Chapiter.
               
                  S
                  
                     •
                  mme thinges (my fréend Liberalis) are
sought onely for exercise of wit, and lye alwayes
without the lyfe, and othersome are
both delightfull in the seeking, and profitable
when they bee found: I will make
thee partaker of them all. According as
thou thinkest good, commaund thou them
too bee either gone through with, or too bee brought in, but to
set foorth the order of the game, Yea and euen in these thinges
also there wilbe some good doon, if thou bid mee dispatch them
out of hand. For it is good too knowe euen that thing whiche
is superfluouse too lerne. Therefore I will hang vppon thy
countenance, and according as that shall counsell mee, somme
thinges I will stand long vppon, somme I will dispatch out of
hand, and othersome I will abridge.
            
            
               ¶The seconde Chapter.
               
                  IT is a question whither a Benefite
can bee taken awaye from a man.
Somme say it can not, because it is
not a substance, but a déede. For like
as a present is one thing, & the presenting
of it is another: and like as
he that sayleth is one thing, and the
sayling itself is another: And albéeit
that a sicke man bee not without
sicknes: yet is not the sicke man and his sicknesse alone thing:
So likewise the benefite itself is one thing, and the thing that
commeth too eche of vs with the Benefite, is another thing.
The benefite itself is a bodilesse thing▪ and cannot bee made

voyd: but the matter of it is tossed too and fro, and chaungeth
his Mayster. Therefore although thou take it awaye, yet can
not nature call backe that which shee hath giuen. Nature may
breake of hir benefites, but shee cannot reuoke them. He that
is dead, hath bin alyue: and he that hath lost his eyes, hath also
seene. It may bee brought too passe that the thinges whiche
are come too vs, may cease too bee: but that they may not haue
bin, it is impossible. A part of a benefite, yea and the surest part
of a benefite, is that whiche hath bin. Diuerse tymes wee bee
letted too inioye the vse of a benefite anie long tyme: but the
benefite itself cannot bee razed out. Although nature should
call all her powers about hir too doo it, yet should she not bee
able too vndoo that whiche is once doone. Houses, Monnye,
Bondmen, and whatsoeuer else the name of a benefite cleaueth
vntoo, may bee taken away. But the Benefite itself is stedfast
and vnmouable. No force can bring too passe, that the one shal
not haue giuen, and the other receyued.
            
            
               The .iii. Chapiter.
               
                  MEE thinkes it was very well doone of
Marcus Antonius (in the Poetrie of Rabirius)
when he sawe his good fortune passing
away, and nothing left him saue the
right of death, whereof he was like too bee
disapointed also (if he tooke it not betimes)
too krye out: What I gaue, I haue. O
how muche myght he haue had, if he had listed? These bee the
assured riches whiche shall alwayes abyde in one place (let the
world turne whiche waie it will) and the greater that they bée,
the lesse shall they bee enuyed. Why sparest thou them as
though they were thy
                     •
                  e owne? Thou art but an Amner. All
these thinges whiche make you swell, and hoyse you vp aboue
mannes estate, causing you too forget your owne frayltie:
which you kéepe i
                     •
                   yr
                     •
                  n chistes garded with armed men: which
you purchace with othermennes blud, and defend with your
owne: for which you send foorth Nauies too dye the Seas red

with blud: for whiche you shake Cities, and yet you knowe not
what store of Artillerie Fortune hath prepared ageinst youre
selues: for whiche with so often breache of the Leagues of Alyance,
frendship, and felowship, the whole world is crusshed
betwixt you twoo, whyle you stryue for the Gole: al these thinges
(I say) are none of youres, they are but as thinges committed
too your custodie, whereof another man is alreadie the
right owner, and whiche shall shortly bee possessed either by
your open enemie, or by one that hath an open enemyes hart.
               Thou askest how these things may bee made thyne? By giuing
them away. Prouyde thou then for thyne owne estate, and
put thyself in sure and vnauoydable possession of them: so shalt
thou make them, not onely more honorable, but also more certein.
The thinges whiche thou makest so muche of, whereby
thou thinkest thyself riche and puissant, lye vnder a bace name
as long as thou keepest them: for they bee but Houses, Seruantes,
and Monnye. But when thou haste giuen them, they
are a benefite.
            
            
               ¶The .iiii. Chapter.
               
                  YOu graunt (sayeth hee) that sometyme
wee are not in his Det, of whō
wee haue receiued a good turne: Ergo
wee are bereft of it agein.
               There are many causes why wee
cease too bée beholden for a benefite:
not because it is taken awaye from
vs ageine, but because it is marred
by him that receiueth it. Admit a mā
haue defended mee at the barre, and afterward he rauisheth my
Wife by force. In so dooing he hath not bereft mee of his former
benefite, but he hath discharged mee of being indetted, by
matching it with as greate a wrong. And if he haue doone mée
more harme than he had erst doone mee pleasure: I not onely
owe him no thankes but also am set at libertie to reuenge myself
and too krye out vpon him, because that in comparison the

wrong outweyeth the benefite: and so the benefite is not bereft,
but ouercountered.
               What? are not somme fathers so hardharted and wicked,
that of good right a man maie lothe them and eschew them?
Doo suche then bereeue their children of the thinges they had
giuen them?
               No. But yet the vnnaturalnesse whiche they vse afterward,
taketh awaie the commendacion of all their former kyndnesse.
The benefite is not taken awaie, but the thank of the benefite:
and it commeth too passe, not that I haue it not, but that I am
not beholden for it. A man lendes mee Monnye, and he burnes
my House. My losse dischargeth my Dette; and though I paye
him nought, yet I owe him nought.
               Euen so standes the cace heere. Though a man in somme
poynt deale freendly and liberally with mee: yet if he afterward
deale proudly reprochfully and cruelly with mee manie
waies▪ he hath set mée in suche cace, that I am as frée from him,
as if I had neuer receiued aught at his hande. He hath ouerthrowne
his owne benefites. If the Landelorde treade out his
Fermours corne vppon the grounde, and fell doune his frute-trees:
the Fermor standes not bound too him though the Indentures
remayne vncancelled. Not bycause the Landlorde
hath receiued that whiche he couenanted for: but bycause that
he himself was the let that he could not recei
                     •
                  e it. So also dyuers
tymes the creditor is cast in domages too his detter, whē
he hath by somme other meanes taken more from him than the
det came too. Not only betweene the creditor and the detter
sitteth the Iudge too saye: Thou haste lent him monnye. But
what for that? Thou haste driuen away his Cattell, thou hast
slaine his Seruantes, thou holdest away his ground which he
should pay thée for. Ualew these thinges one with another, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
thou that camest hither a creditor, shalt depart hence a detter.
Manie tymes also the benefite remayneth, and yet is not the
receiuer beholden for it: as for example, if the bestower repented
him of his gift, if he found fault with himself for giuing it,
if in departing from it he sighed, or looked big, or thought it

lost and not giuen, if he gaue it for his owne sake, or at leastwyse
not for myne, if he ceassed not too twytt mee by it, if he
boasted of it, if he blazed it abrode, or if he made his gift irksomme.
The benefite therfore remayneth, although it bee not
too bee requyted, in lykewyse as somme dettes are owing and
yet shalnot bee recouered, bycause the creditor can haue no
Lawe ageinst the partie.
            
            
               ¶The .v. Chapiter.
               
                  THere is also an Audit too be kept betwéene
goodturnes and badturnes. A man dooeth
mée a pleasure, and afterward he dooth mée
a displeasure. There is bothe thankes dew
too his good turne, and reuengement too
his shrewd turne. For neither ought he to
bee thanked of mee, nor I too bée reuenged
of him. Either quitteth other. Whē I say I haue requyted his
good turn
                     •
                  ; I meene not that I haue redeliuered y• same thing
I receiued, but that I haue yeelded somme other thing for it.
For too requyte is too giue one thing for another. And why
not, seing that in all paymentes, it is not the selfsame thing, but
asmuche that is restored. For wee bee sayd too haue payed our
dette, although wee render golde for siluer, and although wee
deliuer no monnye at all, but make our payment by setting ouer,
or by exchaunge. Mee thinges I héere thée saie, thou losest
thy labour. For what am I the better by knowing whither the
thing that is not owed abyde still or no? These are pretie nyce
poyntes of Lawyers, which hold opinion how it is not the inheritaunce
itself that can bee inioyed, but the thinges that are
conteyned in the inheritaunce. As who should saye, the inheritaunce
were aught else than the thinges that are conteyned in
the inheritaunce. Nay rather, dispat
                     •
                  h mee of this dout, which
may make too the purpose: namely, when the same man that
hath doon mée a good turne dooth mée afterward a displeasure,
whither ought I bothe too requy
                     •
                  e his good turne, and yet neuerthelesse

too bee reuenged of him, and so to make euen with
him seuerally, as in seuerall respectes: or else to set the one ageinst
the other, and too make no more adooe of it: so as the
displeasure shall wype away the good turne, & the good turne
wype away the displeasure? For I see that that is the order of
this court. What is the law of your schoole, looke you to that.
Actions must be pleaded seuerally, and looke whereof wée commence,
too the same must wee bee answered. If a man that hath
committed Monnie to my keeping, doo afterward steale it frō
mee, and I sewe him of felonie and he answere mee of Det, the
maner of pleading is confounded.
            
            
               ¶The .vi. Chapiter.
               
                  MY frend Liberalis, the examples that
you haue alledged, are conteined
within certein boundes which must
needes be folowed. For y• one La
                     •
                  e
is not intermingled with the other.
Either of them keepeth his owne
course. Uerely as well is there a peculiar
action for gages, as for theft.
But benefiting is not fubiect to any
Lawe. It referreth itself too myne owne discretion. It is lawfull
for mee too compare, how eche man hath profited mee or
hindered mee. And when I haue doone, I may giue sentence
whither I bee more in his det, or he in myne. In Lawmatters
wee haue no power of our selues, wee must folowe as wee bee
led. But in benefiting I haue full authoritie in myselfe: and
therfore I neither separate nor deuide them, but bring as well
the wronges as the benefites, both before one Iudge. Otherwise
thou wouldest haue mee both too loue and too hate, and to
giue thankes, all at once: which is an impossibilitie in nature.
Nay rather, by comparing the benefite and wrong toogither▪
I shal see who is most in others det. For like as if a man should
write other ly
                     •
                  es aloft vppon my wrytinges he should deface

the first letters but not take them away: Euen the displeasure
that foloweth vppon a good turne, doth but blemishe the good
turne.
            
            
               ¶The .vii. Chapiter.
               
                  THy countenance (too the gouer
                     •
                  ement
wherof I haue submitted myself)
gathereth wrincles and frowneth
vppon mee, as though I ran
at randon. Mee thinkes I heere
thée say: whither raungest thou mée
out so farre on the Right hande?
drawe more hitherward and keepe
thee too the shore.
               I can keepe no neerer. Therefore if thou thincke I haue satisfied
thee in this poynt: let vs passe to the other; namely whither
wee bee anie thing beholden too him that hath doone vs
good ageinst his will. I could haue spoken this more plainly,
but that the proposition must bee somewhat confuzed, too the
ende that the distinction immediatly insewing may shewe how
I demaund, both whither wee bee beholden too him that hath
doone vs good and ment it not, and also whither wee bee beholding
too him that hath doone vs good and wist it not. For
if a man bée forced too doo vs good, it is more manifest that he
byndeth vs not, than that any woordes should bee spent in the
proofe of it. This question, and all other that may bee moued
like vnto it, is easely discussed, if wee beare this principle continually
in mynd: namely that it is no benefite at all, which is
not first by some meane ment towardes vs, and therewithall
also both frendly and courteouse. And therefore wee thancke
not the Riuers although they beare greate Shippes, and r
                     •
                  n
in large continuall streames too conuey home store of welth:
nor for their rōning full of fish, and with pleasure through batling
groundes. Noman thinketh himself more bound too Nilus
for the good hee receiueth by it, than hee hateth him for his
swelling ouer high, or for his falling away too slowly. Neyther

doth the wynd bestowe a benefite, though it blowe gentle
and prosperous: nor our meate because it nourisheth and is
wholsome. For he that shall benefite mee, muste not onely doo
mee good, but also haue an intent too doo it. Therefore men
bee not indetted too the dumb beastes: and yet what a nomber
haue bin deliuered from daunger by the swiftnes of their horses?
nor yet too the Trees: and yet how many haue bin succored
with the shadowe of their boughes in extremitie of heate?
What skilles it mee whither hee that dooth mee good knowe
not that he doth it, or bee not able too knowe it: sith that both
of them wanted will too doo it? And what difference is there
whither you would haue mee too owe a good turne too a ship,
or a Charyot, or a Speare; or too suche a man as no whit more
purposed too benefite mee, than anie of those thinges did: but
did mee good by hap only?
            
            
               ¶The .viii. Chapiter.
               
                  A Man may receiue a benefite vnwitting, but
he cannot bestowe it vnwitting. For like
as manie men bee healed by mischaunces
and yet the same mischaunces are no medicines;
as for example, the falling intoo a riuer
with greate rush, hath vntoo some men
bin a cause of health, and somme haue bin
rid of a quartane by whipping, so as the sodein feare hath disappointed
the fit by turning the minde too another thought,
and yet are none of these thinges helthfull though they haue
wrought helth for the tyme: Euen so somme men doo vs good
when they meene it not, or rather by meening the contrarie,
and yet wee are not their detters of a good turne. What if fortune
haue turned their hurtfull intentes too my good? Suppose
you I am anie whit beholding too him whose hand strake
at mée and hit myne enemie, and had hurt me if it had not swarued?
Oftentymes the periurie of a mannes enemie hath discredited
him vppon trew allegations and witnesses, and made
the defendant too bee pitied, as intrapped by conspiracie. The

mayne force that oppressed somme man hath bin the cause of
his deliuerance, and the iudges would not condemne him for
pitie, whom they would haue condemned for his cace. Yet haue
none of these benefited mee, though they haue saued mee. For
the question is, wherat the dart was throwen, and not what it
did hit: and the thing that putteth the difference betweene a
benefite and a wrong, is not the falling out, but the intent.
Myne aduer sarie offendeth the iudge with his pryde, and furthereth
my cace by speaking contraries, and by putting himself
rashly vppon one witnesse. I ask not whither he misbehaued
himself too pleasure mee or no: for his will was bent ageinst
mee.
            
            
               ¶The .ix. Chapiter.
               
                  VErely too the end I maie bée thankfull,
I must haue a will too doo as he
hath doone too mee: like as it behoued
him too haue an intent too doo
mee good, too the end too benefite
mee. For what greater wrong can
there bee, than too hate a man for
treading on his foote in a throng, or
for spitting vppon him, or for thrusti
                     •
                  g
him whither he would not. And yet forasmuch as there is
misusage in the deede: what other thing is it that can excuse
him from blame, than that he will not what he did? The same
thing that exempteth the one from being thought too haue
doone wrong, exempteth the other also from being thought
too haue doone a pleasure. It is the intent that maketh fréend
or foe. Manie haue bin excused from warfare by sicknesse.
Somme haue bin held from meeting with the fall of their
owne house, by keeping their daie of appeerance at the sute of
their enemies. And some by sh
                     •
                  pwr
                     •
                  cke haue scaped the handes
of Pyrates. Yet owe wee none of these a good turne, bycause
chaunce is without the compasse of curtesie: Neyther am I
anie thing beholden too myne enemie, whose sute saued mee

whyle he trubled mee and hild mee awaie. It is no good turne
except it proceede from a good will, and except the partie that
did it wist it. Hath a man profited mee, and knewe not of it? I
am nothing in his det for it. Did he mee good when he would
haue hurt mee? I will folowe his example.
            
            
               ¶The .x. Chapter.
               
                  LET vs turne ageine too the first poynt:
That too the end I should bee thankfull,
thou wilt haue mee too doo sommewhat:
and yet the other, too benefite mee, hath
doone nothing at all. Secondly thou wilt
haue mee too bee so kyndharted, that I
must requyte that thing willingly, whiche
I receiued of him ageinst his will. For what should I speake
of the third, whose harme turned too my benefite? If thou
wilt haue mee too owe thee a good turne, it is not inough for
thee too bee onely willing too doo mee good. But too make
mee vnbeholden too thee, it is inough that thou mentest it not
towardes mee. For the bare will maketh not a benefite. And
like as it is no benefite if there want successe of performance,
though the will bee neuer so well disposed and bente too doo
good: so likewise it is no benefite, except good will go before
the successe of the deededooing. For if thou wilt haue mee beholden
too thee: thou muste not onely doo mee good, but also
thou must doo it purposely.
            
            
               ¶The .xi. Chapiter.
               
                  
                     CLeanthes vseth suche an example as this. I
sent out twoo boyes (sayeth he) intoo the
Academie too seeke Plato, and too bring
him too mee. The one of them searched all
the Walkes and Galeries, and ranne séeking
him through all other places where
hee thought hee might bee found, and yet
came home weerie and disappointed. The other of them sate

him doune at the next Puppetplayers, and afterward gadding
about the Streetes like a Stray, fell in companie with other
wagges, and as hee was playing, spyed Plato passe by, whom
he neuer sought. I (sayeth Cleanthes) will commend the Boy
whiche (as muche as in him lay) did the thing hee was commaunded:
and I will beate the other Boy that was rechelesse,
for all his good lucke. It is the will that woorketh mee frendship:
the intent whereof must bee considered, if thou wilt haue
it too bynd mée too bée thy detter. It is small woorth to meene
a man good, vnlesse thou doo it. For put the cace a man ment
too giue mee sowewhat, and gaue it not: soothly I haue his
hart, but not his good turne, whiche requyreth both the deede
and the intent, to make it perfect. For like as I owe nought to
him that mynded too lend mee Monnie, and lent it not: so likewyse,
vntoo him that was mynded to doo mee good and couldnot,
I shall beare good will, but I shall not bee bound. And I
meene too doo for him, because he ment too haue doon for mée.
Notwithstanding, if good fortune serue mee too doo aught
for him: in so dooing I shall bee the first dooer of a good turne,
and not the requyter of a good turne. It shalbee his duetie too
render thankes, and the enterance of his thankfulnesse shall
haue proceeded from mee.
            
            
               ¶The .xii. Chapiter.
               
                  I Perceiue alreadie what thou meenest
too demaund. Thou needest not
too tell mée, thy countenance telleth
it mée. If a man haue doone vs good
for his owne sake, are we any thing
indetted too him sayest thou? For I
heere thee complayning oftētymes
of this, that men doo many thinges
for themselues, and chalendge other
men for them.
               I shall tell thee my Liberalis: But firste I will diuyde this
question, and set the right asunder from the wrong. For it is

muche too the purpose, whither a man doo vs a good turne for
his owne sake, or for our sake, or for his owne and ours toogither.
Hee that hath regarde all wholly too himself, and dooeth
vs good bycause he can none otherwise profit himself: seemeth
vnto mée too be all one with him, that prouydeth winterstouer
and Sommerféede before hand for his Cattell, or that feedeth
wel his Prisoners too fell them the better, or that stalleth and
currieth his fayre Oxen too make the redyer vtterance of
them, or lyke a Maister of Fence that exercyseth his Usshers
with all care, too set them out as braue as he can. There is
greate oddes (sayeth Cleanthes) betweene benefiting and barganing.
            
            
               ¶The .xiii. Chapiter.
               
                  AGeine, I am not so streyt laced, that I
would bee nothing beholden too him that
hath profited himself by dooing mee good.
For I requyre not that he should pleasure
mee without regarde of himself: but rather
I wish with all my hart, that the benefite
bestowed vppon mée, may turne too the
greater auayle of the bestower; condicionally that he had an
eye too bothe of vs in bestowing it, and had an intent too part
the stake betweene him and mee, though the greater share fell
too himself. If he made mee his partener and ment it too vs
bothe: I not only doo him wrong, but also am a ranck churle if
I reioyce not that the same thing profited him whiche profited
mee. It is the greatest churlishnesse that can bée, too account a
thing too bee no benefite, except it bee so mine discommonitie
too the bestowes. But asfor him that respected only himself
when he profited mee, I will aunswer him otherwyse. Seeing
thou didst vse mee but too serue thyne owne turne, why shouldest
thou say thou didst pleasure mée, rather than that I pleasured
thee? Put the cace (sayeth he) that I could not otherwyse
bee admitted too somme office, than if I raunsomed ten of my
countrymen from out of a greate nomber of prisoners. If I

redeeme thee for one of the ten, wilt thou think thyself nothing
beholden too mee for deliuering thee out of thraldomme and
bondes? And yet I doo it for myne owne sake. Heruntoo I answer:
In this cace thou doost somewhat for thyne owne sake,
and sommewhat for myne. Thy raunsoming of mée is for thyne
owne sake, and thy choozing of mee is for myne. For the accomplishment
of thy purpose, it was sufficient for thee too
haue redéemed any ten. And therfore I am beholding too thee,
not for redeeming mee, but for choozing mée. For thou mightest
haue obteyned the same thing, by raunsoming of somme other
as well as mee. Thou impartest the profite of the thing to
mee, and admittest mee too thy benefite whiche shall turne too
the behoof of vs bothe. This thou proferest mée before others,
and this thou dooest wholly for my sake. But if thy redeeming
of ten prisoners should make thee Praetor of the Citie, and
there were no moe but ten prisoners of vs in all none of vs
should bee beholding vntoo thee, bycause thou couldest not saie
thou haddest done aught for anie of vs, whiche respected not
thyne owne peculiar profite. I am not a misconstrewer of good
turnes, neither couet I that they should redound too myself
only, but also vntoo thee.
            
            
               The .xiiii. Chapiter.
               
                  BUT (sayeth he) what if I had put your
names intoo a Lotterie, and that thy name
had bin drawen for one of those that should
bee raunsomed: shouldest thou bee nothing
beholden too mée? Yis marie should I, howbee
it verye little. And what that is, I will
tell thee. Thou didest sommewhat for my
sake, in that thou diddest put mee in the lot of raunsoming.
That my name is drawen, I am beholden too fortune: That it
could bee drawen, I am beholding too thee. Thou haste giuen
mée an entrance too thy benefite, the more parte wherof I owe
too good lucke: but yet I am also beholden too thee, for that I
might bee beholden too good fortune. Asfor those that make a

merchandyze of their good turnes, passing not too whom they
doo them, but how muche too their owne aduauntage, so as
they maie alwayes returne home too themselues: I will quite
ouerpasse them. As for example: A man selles mee corne, and
I should starue if I bought it not: yet am I not beholden too
him for my life: bycause I payd for it. Neither recken I how
muche I stoode in neede of the thing wherwithout I could no
                     •
                  
haue liued: but what an vnkyndnesse it was that I had gone
without it, if I had not payd for it: in the bringing in wherof,
the chapman thought not how too releeue mee, but how too
make his owne gayne. Thus am I not beholden for that
whiche I haue bought.
            
            
               ¶The .xv. Chapiter.
               
                  BY this reckening (sayeth he) thou
wilt say thou owest nothing too thy
Phisicion, because thou hast giuen
him a little 
                     •
                  ée, nor too thy Shoolema
                     •
                  ster,
beca
                     •
                  se thou hast payd him
some wages. But among vs there
is greate loue and great reuerence
yeelded vntoo suche. Too this wee
aunswere thus: that some thinges
are more woorth than is payd for them. Of 
                     〈…〉
                  
buyest lyfe and health: and of thy 
                     〈…〉
                  
behauyour and furniture of mynd which are thinges 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
Therefore vntoo these 
                     •
                  ee pay
                     •
                  , not the pryce of the
thing, but the pryce of their paynes, for that 
                     〈…〉
                  
turnes, and for that they were called a
                     •
                  ay from their owne
businesses, too imp
                     •
                  oy their tyme vppon vs. They reape the
reward, not of their desert, but of their trade. Yet may another
thing bee more truely alledged, whiche I will anon declare,
when I haue first shewed how this may bee disproued. Some
thinges (sayeth hee) are woorth more than they cost: and therefore
albeeit that thou 
                     •
                  oughtest them, yet thou owest mée somewhat
what ouer and besides for them.
               
                  
First, what skilles it how muche they bee woorth, seeing
th
                     •
                   pryce was agreed vppon betweene the buyer and the se
                     •
                  
                  ler?
Agein, the buyer did not set the pryce vppon the thing, but
thou thy selfe didst set it. It is more woorth sayeth hee than it
was sold for. But (say I) it could bee sold for no more. The
pryce of thinges ryseth and falleth according too the tyme.
When thou haste praysed them too the vttermost, they are
woorth but asmuchas may be gotten for them. Besydes this,
hee that hath bought good cheape, oweth his Chapman n
                     •
                  
                  thing.
Moreouer although these thinges bee more woorth:
yet is it no Godhamereie too thee, considering that the estimation
of these thinges dependeth not vppon the vse and effect of
them, but vppon the custome and derth of them. What pryce
wilt thou set vppon him, who in passing the Seas (yea euen
through the thickest of the Surges,) when he is out of sight of
the Land, keepeth his course cer
                     •
                  ein, & fore seeing the stormes
at hand, when all men thincke least of it, dooth soodeinly bid
them strike Saile and let doune the Takling, and too stand in
a redines ageinst the sodein comming and brunt of the storme?
None: and yet is the Monney whiche is payd too suche a one
for his Fare, a full recompence for his trauell. How muche
woorth esteeme you a lodging in a Wildernesse, a House in a
showre, and a st
                     ••
                  ue or a fyre when a man is acold? And yet I
knowe we how muche these thinges will coste mee when I come
too myne Inne. How muche doth he for vs, whiche shoreth vp

                     •
                  ur decayed house, and by woonderfull cunning hangeth it vp
like an Ile, from the foundation whiche is riuen? Yet is the
pryce of suche shoring, both certein and 
                     •
                  asie too bee payed. A
wall defendeth vs from 
                     •
                  ur enemyes, and saueth vs from the
sodeine inuasions of Robbers: yet is it knowen what the Mason
that buildeth those Bulwarkes for defence of the common
weale, may earne by the day for his Wages.
            
            
               ¶The .xvi. Chapiter.
               
                  
                  IT would bee an endlesse matter, if I should
raūdge further in alledging the examples,
wherbey it may appeere, how greate thinges
are solde cheape. What then? why owe
I somme further thing to my phisician and
schoolemasters, so as my paying of their
fee dischargeth mee not?
               Bycause that from a phisician and schoolemasters they passe
intoo a freende, and their bynding of vs, is not by their arte
whiche they sell; but by their freendly and familiar good will.
A
                     •
                  d therefore asfor the phisician that dooth no more but feele
my pulse, & reckē mée but as one of those whō he visiteth in his
ordinarie walke, prescrybing what is to bee done or eschewed
without further affection: I am no whit in his Det, bycause
he visited mee not as a freende, but as a customer of his. Neyther
is there anie reason why I should reuerence my schoolemaster,
if he made none other account of mee than as of a comon
scholer, nor thought mee woorthy of any singular and peculiar
care, nor euer set his mynde specially vppon mee, insomuch
that when he powred out the things that he knew amōg
vs, I rather tooke them, than was taught them. What is the
cause then why I should thinke myself muche beholding too
suche as these? Not for that the thing whiche they haue 
                     •
                  olde,
is more woorth than it cost, but bycause they haue done somme
speciall thing too myself. The Phisician did more for mée than
he needed too haue done. He was carefull for mee, & not for the
report of his couning. He was not contented too showe mee
the medicine, but als
                     •
                   ministred it. In the meane whyle he sate
carefully by mee, and resorted too mee at tymes of daunger.
No paynestaking was paynfull too him, no payne was l
                     •
                  thsomme
too him. It greeued him too heere my groninges. Among
a nomber of patie
                     •
                  tes that called vppon him, I was his
chéef cure. He bestowed no more leysure vppon others, than the
tyming of mee would giue him leaue. I am bound too suche a
one, not as too a Phisician, but as too a freende. Ageine, the

                     ••
                  hoolemaster tooke greate labour and payne in teaching mée.

Besides the thinges that he taught in comon too my fellowes
as well as mee, he trayned and instructed mee in certein other
thinges: sommetyme he quickened vp my good inclination by
exhorting mée; and gaue mee corage by commending mée: and
otherwhyles he draue away my flothe by calling vppon mee.
Furthermore hee drewe foreward my dull and lingering wit,
as it were by laying hand vppon it, and he was not nigardlie
in bestowiug his knowledge vppon mee too make mee haue
néede of him the longer, but coueted too haue powred it out intoo
mee all at once, if he had could. Unthankfull were I if I
loued him not as on of the deerest and neerest of my kinne.
            
            
               ¶T .xvii. Chapiter.
               
                  WEE giue somewhat more than couenan
                     •
                  ,
euen too the teachers of the bacest handicraftes.
And if wee find a Pylot, or handicraftes
mā, or a labourer that is hyred by
y• day more earnest & peinfull at his woork
than of ordinarie; wee giue him a sprincling
more than his ordinarie wages. Unthankfull
then is he that in the best artes, whiche either preserue
or adorne mannes lyfe, thinkes himself too owe no more
than hee couenantes for. Ad heereuntoo, that the teaching of
suche artes linketh mennes myndes toogither: in consider ation
whereof, as well too 
                     •
                  he Phisician as too the Schoolemaister,
the reward of their paynes is payd, but the reward of
their good willes is owing still.
            
            
               ¶The .xviii. Chapiter.
               
                  WHen a certein Ferriman had caried Plato ouer
a Riuer, and demaunded nothing of him for his
fare: Plato beleeuing he had doone it for courtesie
too himward, sayd he would keepe his coursie
in store for him. Within a whyle after, when
Plato sawe him ferrye ouer others with like diligence, and of
fre
                     •
                   cost: he denyed that he kept any curtesie of his in store for

him. For if a man will haue me
                     •
                   too bee a detter for the thing
that he dooeth too mee, it behoueth him too doo it, not only too
mee, b
                     •
                  t also for my sake. Thou 
                     〈…〉
                   any one
man, for that whiche thou la
                     ••
                  hest out among a multitude.
What then? is there nothing owing for this? No, nothing,
as at anye one ma
                     •••
                  s hand. For I will pay with all men, that
whiche I owe 
                     〈…〉
                   men.
            
            
               ¶The .xix. Chapiter.
               
                  DEnyest thou (sayeth hee) that that
manne hath befreended mee at all,
whiche hath brought mée vp the Riuer
Po in his Ship for nothing? I
deny it. He dooth mee somme good,
but hee befreendeth mee not. For he
dooeth it for his owne sake, o
                     •
                   at
leastwyse not for myne. Too bee
short, not euen hee himself deemeth
himself too bestowe a benefite vppon mee: but he dooeth it either
for the comon weale, or for the next towneship, or for his
owne vayneglorie, or else in lew thereof he tooketh for somme
further commoditie, than he should haue had by taking euerie
mans fare. But what if the Emperour should make al frenchmen
Fréedenizens, or set all Spanyar
                     •
                  es free from subiection?
should none of them seuerally owe aught in this cace?
yes, why should they not? Notwithstanding▪ they shall owe,
not as for a peculiar benefite, but as for a peece of a publik benefite.
               He neuer thought on mee at all (sayeth he) at the tyme that
he did good too vs all. Hee ment not precysely too make mee
free of the Citie, neyther did hee set his mynd vppon mee. And
so, why should I bee in Dette too him, who purposed not vppon
mee when he intended the thing that he did?
               First when hee purpose too doo good too all Frenchemen,
he purposed too doo good too mee also, for I was a Frencheman:
and although hee marked mée not out by name, yet hee

comprehended mee vnder the generall mark. And therefore I
shalbee his Detter, not as a peculiar persone, butas one of the
whole multitude. And I shall not requyte it as in myne owne
behalf, but I shalbe contributarie too it as in the behalf of my
Country.
            
            
               The .xx. Chapiter.
               
                  IF a man lend Monny too my countrie,
I shall not account myselfe his
detter, neither shall I acknowledge
it as my Det, either too sewe or too
bee sewed: and yet▪ shall I giue my
portion too the payment of it. Euen
so I denye myself too be Detter for
the benefite that is bestowed vppon
all in comon, because that althongh
he bestowed it, yea and vppon mee also: yet did he it not for my
sake, neither knewe he whither he did it too mee or no. Neuerthelesse.
I ought too knowe that my part must bee in the paying
of it, bycause it came by a long circumstaunce euen vntoo
mee also. The thing that should bynd mee, should bee doone peculiarly
for myne owne sake.
               By this reckening (
                     •
                  ayth he) thou art not beholden too the
Moone nor too the Sonne. For they moue not peculiarly for
thy sake.
               No: and yet notwithstanding, forasmuchas their mouing
is too preserue all thinges in generall: they moue for mee too.
For I am a part of the whole. Moreouer, the state of these thinges
& of vs is vnlike. For he that dooth mée good, only to profit
himself therby, hath not benefited mée, because he made mee
but the instrument of his owne profite. But asfor the Sonne
and the Moone, although they doo vs good for their owne sakes:
yet the intent of their dooing good vnto vs, is not too
profite themselues thereby. For what can wee bestowe vppon
them?
            
            
               ¶The .xxi. Chapiter.
               
                  
                  I Myght bee sure (sayeth he) that the Sonne and▪
the Moone are willing too doo vs good, if it laie
in their power too bee vnwilling: But they cannot
but mo
                     •
                  e. Let them stand still a little and rest
from their woork.
               Sée how manie 
                     〈…〉
                  . A man is not
therefore the lesse willing bycause he cannot bee vnwilling.
But it is a greate proof of a stedfast will, that it cannot bee altered.
A good man cannot doo otherwyse than well, for he
should not bee a good man if he did not well. Ergo a good man
bestoweth no benefite, bycause he dooth but as he ought too
doo, and he ca
                     •
                  not doo otherwyse than as he ought too doo.
Besides this, there is greate difference whither you saie, he
cannot but doo this thing bycause he is compelled too doo it:
and whither you sa
                     •
                  e, he cannot bee vnwilling too doo it. For
if he must needes doo it whither he will or no: then am I not
beholden vntoo him for my good turne, but too the partie that
compelled him. But 
                     〈◊〉
                   the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of his willingnesse proceede
of this, that he cannot will but well: then compelleth he
himself. And so, looke for what thing I should not haue bin
beholden too him as compelled by others: for the same shall I
bee beholden too him as too the compeller.
               Yea, but let them cease too bee vnwilling, sayeth he.
               Consider thou heere, who is so farre out of his 
                     〈◊〉
                  , as too
denye that too bee willingnesse, whiche is not in perill of ceassing,
or of altering itself too the contratie: seeing that on the other
side, noman maye of ryght seeme so willing, as he whose
will is so vtterly certeine, that it is euer las
                     •
                  ing? If he bee willing,
whiche maie anon after bee vnwilling: 
                     〈◊〉
                   he bee
thought too bee willing, who is of that nature that he cannot
bee vnwilling?
            
            
               ¶The .xxii. Chapter.
               
                  GO too, (sayeth he) let them doo otherwyse, if they
can.
               This is it that thou méenest: namely, that all these
thinges whiche are seuer
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   waie asunder,

and settled 
                     〈◊〉
                   places for the preseruation of the whole,
should forsake their standinges: that the Starres should rushtogither
through 
                     •
                  oodein confusion: that the heauenly things
should braste their concord and ronne to decay: that the exceeding
violent swiftnesse of the Skyes should stande still in
the middes of their race, and disapoint the interchaunges behighted
for so many ages yet to come: and that the thinges
whithe nowe go and comme interchaungeably in seasonable
course, guyding the world by indifferent sway: should bee burned
vp with sodein fyre, and bee quyte let looce from so greate
varietle, and be confounded all intoo one. Let fyre consume all
thinges, and afterward let droopy night ouerwhelme the fyre,
and consequently let the deepe Gulf of confusion swallowe vp
so manie Gods: And let all this cost bee bestowed, onely too disproue
thée. They can yeeld thee these things euen ageinst thy
will, and kéepe on their course for thy sake, howbeeit that there
is another greater and former cause than these.
            
            
               ¶The .xxiii. Chapiter.
               
                  AD further, that outward thinges compell
not the Goddes: but their owne euerlasting
will is as a Lawe too themselues.
The thinges that they haue decreed, are
such as they ment not too alter. Therfore
they cannot seeme to doo any thing ageinst
their will. For whatsoeuer they cannot
cease too doo, that was it their will too continew. Neither
dooth it euer repent the Goddes of their firste determination.
Doutlesse they can not both bee stable, and starting too the
contrarie. Notwithstanding, albeeit that their owne power
hold them in their determination: yet is not their cōtineweing
in it, of weaknesse: but because it is not for them too step asyde
from the best thinges, and because they haue determined so too
go. At that firste determination of theirs when they disposed
all things, they sawe our affaires also and had regard of man.
Therefore they cannot seeme too keepe their 
                     •
                  ourses, and too

lay out their woorkes for their sakes alone: for euen wee also
are a part of the woork. Then are wee indetted to the Sonne,
and the Moone, and the other heauenly powers for their benefites,
because that although they bee better than the thinges
whereintoo they shine: yet they helpe vs too the atteinement
of greater thinges: And also, that they helpe vs of set purpose:
And therefore wee bee the more bound vntoo them. For wee
stumble not vppon their benefites without their knowledge:
but they wist well wee should receyue these thinges which wee
receyue. And although they haue somme greater purpose and
somme greater frute of their woorke, than the preseruation of
mortall thinges: yet notwithstanding, euen for our wealesake
also, there was a prouidence sent before at the first beginning
of thinges, and there was suche order stablished in the world,
as it may appeere there was no small regard had of vs. Wee
owe deutifulnesse too our Parentes: and yet manie of them
matched not toogither too beget Children. The Gods cannot
séeme too haue doone they wist not what, considering how they
haue prouyded foode and all other thinges aforehande for all
men, neyther begate they vs vnwares for whom they haue
created so many thinges. For nature mynded vs before shee
made vs: and wee are not so slyght a woorke, that wee could
slip from hir vnwares. See how muche shee hath permitted
vs, and how farre mannes dominion fir
                     •
                  t
                     •
                  heth further than
ouer man onely. Sée how farre our bodyes may raundge, and
how Nature hath not restrayned them within the boundes of
any Landes, but hath giuen them frée scope into euery part of
hirself. See how muche mennes myndes dare aduenture, and
how they onely eyther knowe or seeke the Goddes, aspyring
too heauenly thinges, by the mynd whiche is giuen too mount
alost. You may perceyue how man is not an vnaduysed peece
of worke clumpered vp in hast. Among the greatest woorkes
of nature, there is nothing wherein nature more gloryeth, or
at leastwyse wherein shee may more glorie. How great a madnesse
is it too quarell with the Goddes for their owne giftes?
How will he bee thankfull towardes those that cannot bee requyted

without cost: who denyeth himself too haue receyued
aught at their handes, which will euer giue and neuer reciue?
And what a frowardnesse is it for a man not too think himself
beholden too one, euen because he is good to him that denyes
it; and too say that the verie continuance and holding on of his
goodnesse, is but a token that hee could not otherwyse doo
though he would? Say thou, I will none of it, let him keepe it
too himself, who craued it at his hand: and packe thou toogither
all the woordes of a thanklesse mynd: yet shall thou not
therefore fynd the lesse goodnesse in him, whose bounteousnes
commeth vntoo thee, euen whyle thou de
                     •
                  yest it, and of whose
benefites euen this is one of the greatest, that he will giue vnto
thee, euen though thou grudgest ageinst him.
            
            
               ¶The .xxiiii. Chapter.
               
                  SEEst thou not how parentes inforce the
tender chyldhode of their children too the
inurāce of good & wholsom things? With
heedfull care doo they cherish their bodies,
though the children wéepe & stryue ageinst
it. And least vntymely loocenesse might
make them growe awrye: they hynd them
streyt too make them growe right, and anon after instruct
them in liberall sciences, restreyning them with feare if they
bee vnwilling. Moreouer, they frame and apply their headie
youth vntoo Thrist, shamefastnesse, and good manners, if they
folowe them not of themselues. Also whē they be men growen,
and haue somme staye of themselues, if then they reiect their
remedies through sheepishnesse or vnrulinesse: they vse force &
streyt kéeping vnder. Therfore the greatest benefites that wée
receiue of our parentes, are those that wee receiue eyther vnwittingly
or else vnwillingly.
            
            
               ¶The .xxv. Chapiter.
               
                  
                  VNtoo these vnthankfull folk which refuze
good turnes, not bycause they cannot find
in their hartes too haue them, but bycause
they cannot finde in their hartes too bee
beholden for them: they be like on the contrarie
parte, whiche through ouermuche
kyndnesse, are woont too wish somme inconuenience
or aduersitie vntoo those, too whom they bee
moste beholden, therby too shewe how myndfull affection they
beare them for their benefite receiued. Whither they doo this
thing aright and of a good will, it is a question: sith their mynd
is like too theirs, who burning in 
                     〈◊〉
                   loue, doo wish their
louer banishment, too the ende they might accompanie her in
her distresse and departure: or pouertie, too the ende they might
releeue her want: or siknesse, too the end they myght sit by her
too tend her: and finally whiche vnder profession of Loue, doo
wish whatsoeuer her enemie would haue wisshed vntoo her.
Therefore the ende of 
                     •
                  atred and of Frentike loue is welneere
all one. The like thing also betydeth too those that wish
their fréendes harme, too the intent that they maierid them of
it, and make wa
                     •
                  e too benefiting by dooing them wrong: wheras
it were muche better, euen vtterly too leaue of, than too
seeke occasion of benefiting by meanes of wickednesse. What
if a master of a ship should praye the Goddes too sende cruell
stormes and tempestes, too the intent too make his conning
the better liked for the daunger? What if the generall of a féeld
should desire the Goddes, that a greate multitude of enemies
myght beseege his Camp, and with soodein violence fill vp the
trenches and pulldoune the rampyre, and (to the greate torror
of his armie) aduaunce their antesignes in at the verie gates,
too the intent that when thinges were vnder foote and at the
last cast, he himself mightmake all safe ageine too his owne
greater glorie? All these conuey their benefites by a cursed
waie, when they call the Goddes ageinst him whom they themselues
would succor, and desyre too haue him first throwen
doune, that they themselues might rayse him vp. It is an vnnaturall

and vntowarde maner of kyndnesse, too wish misfortune
too suche a one as a man cannot with honestie forsake.
            
            
               The .xxvi. Chapiter.
               
                  MY wish (sayeth he) hurteth him not bycause
I wish the perill and the remedie bothe at
once.
               That is as muche too say, as thou art not
altoogither cleere from offence: but thou
offendest lesse than if thou shouldest wishe
him harme without help. It were but a
leawd part too thrust a man intoo the water too the intent too
pull him out ageine: or too throwe him doune, to the intent
too sette him at libertie. It is no benefiting too make an ende
of dooing wrong: neyther is is a poynt of kyndnesse for a
man too withdrawe that thing from one, whiche hee himselfe
had layd vppon him. I had leuer that thou shouldest not wound
mee, than that thou shouldest heale mee. It is woorth Godhamer
                     •
                  ie
if thou giue mée a Playster because I am wounded, but
not if thou wound mee too giue mee a Playster. A man neuer
liked too haue a Skarre, but in comparison of the wound: and
yet as well as he liketh of the closing of it, he had leuer to haue
bin without it. If thou shouldest wish so too one that thou wart
nothing behold entoo, it were an vnkynd wysh: and much more
vnkynd were it for too wish so vntoo him that hath doone thee
frendship.
            
            
               ¶The .xxvii. Chapter.
               
                  I Wishe therewith (sayeth he) that I may bee able
too su
                     •
                  cour him. First, (for I will cut thee
of in the middes of thy wishe) thou art alreadie
vnkynd. I here not yet what thou wouldest doo
for him: but I knowe what thou wouldest hau
him suffer. Thou wishest him perplexitie, feare, or some greater

                     〈…〉
                   the ende he may haue neede of thy helpe.

This is once ageinst him. Thou wishest hee should haue neede
of thy help. This is for thyself. Thy meening is not too succour
him, but too pay him. He that so posteth, would fayne haue
him payd, but hee would not bee Paymayster himselfe. And so
the only thing that bare a countenance of honestie in thy wish,
(namely the thinking long too bee out of Det) is vnhonest and
vnfrendly. For thou wishest not that it may lye in thy lot to requyte
kyndnesse: but that he may bee inforced too craue thy
succour. Thou makest thyself his superiour, and (whiche is a
wickednesse) thou castest him doune to thy feete, who hath deserued
well at thy hand. Now muche meete
                     •
                   were it too owe
with an honest good will, than to bee discharged by euill meanes.
Thou shouldest haue offended less, if thou haddest forsworne
the thing that thou haste re
                     •
                  eyued. For he should haue
lost no more but his gift. But now thou wilt haue him become
thy vnder
                     •
                  ing with the losse of his goodes, and bee pulled so
low by the alteration of his 
                     〈◊〉
                  , that his owne benefites must
ouermaister him. Shall I 
                     〈…〉
                  
it too his face whom thou 
                     〈◊〉
                   so too pleasure. Termest
thou it a kynd wishe, whiche may as well beseeme a foe as a
freend, and whiche no dout but an 
                     〈◊〉
                   and an enemye
would haue made, the latter pointes excepted? Euen mortall
enemyes haue wished 
                     〈…〉
                   too the intent they
myght saue them: & to ouer
                     •
                  ome some me
                     •
                  , too the intent too
pardon them. And yet were not suche wish
                     •
                  s the lesse enemylyke,
considering how the méekest part of them commeth after
crueltie. Finally what maner of wisshes deemest thou them to
bee, whiche noman would lesse too take, effect, than hee vnto
whom thou wisshest them? Too euill do
                     •
                  st thou deale with
him, whom thou 
                     〈…〉
                  
by thyself: yea and too leawdly 
                     〈◊〉
                   thou with the Goddes,
for thou puttest ouer the crueltie vntoo them, and reseruest
al the kyndnes too thyself. Too the intent that thou mayst
doo good, the Gods must doo harme If thou shouldest suborne
an accusar, and afterward remoue him thyself: or if thou shouldest
intangle him in some sew
                     •
                  e, and afterward rid him out of

it: noman would dout but thou deltest wickedly. And what
skilles it whither suche a thing bee gone about by couin or by
wisshing, sauing that thou wisshest him ouerstrong aduersaries?
Thou canst not saye, what wrong doo I too him? Thy
wish is either needlesse, or wrongfull: nay rather, it is wrongfull
though it wante successe. That thou bringest it not too
passe, it is Gods gift: but thy wisshing of it, is playne wrong.
Thou hast doone inough. And wee ought to bee no lesse offended
with thee, than if thou haddest brought it too full effect.
            
            
               ¶The .xxviii. Chapiter.
               
                  IF my prayers (sayeth he) had preuayled,
they had preuayled too thy safetie.
               First thou wishest mee certeine harme
vnder vncertein help. And secondly, though
bothe were certeine: yet is that first, which
hurteth. Besides this, the condicion of thy
wish is knowen but too thyself: asfor mée I
am surprysed in the meane whyle by the tempest, and wote not
whither I shall finde harborough or succor. What a torment
is it (trowe you) too haue wanted, though I happen too obteyne
releef? or too haue bin in feare, though I fortune too bée
saued? or too haue hilde vp my hande at the barre, though I
chaunce too bee quitte? No ende of feare can bee so well liked
of, but that the sounde and vnappayred quietnesse should bee
better liked of. Wish that thou mayest bee able too requyte
my benefite, if I should stande in neede of thee: but not that I
should stand in neede of thée. If the thing that thou wisshest had
bin in thyne owne power, thou haddest doone it thyself.
            
            
               ¶The .xxix. Chapiter.
               
                  HOW muche more honestie is it too wish
thus? I praye God continew him in suche
state, as he maie alwayes deale benefites,
and neuer neede too receiue. Let suche abilitie
euermore folowe him, as maie suffyze
him too vse bountifull powring out and reléeuing,
so as he maie neuer make nyce too

doo good, nor repent him of that he hath doone. God graunt
that his nature whiche is foreward of itself too all kynde of
courtesie, pitie, and mercie, maie bee stirred vp and prouoked
by the multitude of thankfull persones, of whom God sende
him store, but yet so as he maie neuer haue neede of them. I
would he should bee vnintreatable too noman, nor haue neede
too intreate anie man. I would that fortune might perseue
                     •
                  
with so equall fauor towardes him, as noman might bee able
too bee thankfull too him, other wyse than in hart. How muche
more rightfull are these wisshes, whiche dri
                     ••
                  e thee not of too
wayt for occasion, but make thee thankfull out of hande? For
what should let thee too requyte freendship too him that is in
prospertie? How manie thinges are there wherby wee maie
requite, euen towardes suche as haue the world at will, bée wée
neuer so far in their det? As for example, faithfull counsell,
continewall attendance, gentle talke and pleasant without
flatterie, eares (if he bee mynded too 
                     •
                  ebate thinges) heedfull,
and (if he comunt auie thing too them) trustie, and familiar
conuersation. Prosperitie neuer aduaunced any man so high,
but hee might so muche the more feele the want of a frend, as
he found lesse want of all other thinges.
            
            
               ¶The .xxx. Chapiter.
               
                  THis 
                     ••
                  ksomme wisshing is too bee
banished and driuen far away with
hart and mynd. Canst thou not bee
thankfull, but thou muste haue the
Gods displeased with thy freend?
Or vnderstādest thou not how thou
si
                     ••
                  est in this behalf, that thou dealest
better with him too whom thou
art vnkynd? Let thy mynd ronne
vppon imprisonment, bo
                     •
                  des, 
                     〈…〉
                   b
                     •
                  tell and
beggerie. These are the occasions that thou wishest for: and
they are such, as if a man haue 
                     •
                  ouenanted with thee, they shall
saue him harmelesse of his bond ageinst thee. Why wouldest

thou not rather haue him continew in ablenesse and prosperitie,
too whom thou arte so greatly beholden? for (as I sayd)
what letteth thee too requyte kyndnesse, euen towardes those
that are in happyest state, sith thou mayst fynd wherewith too
doo it aboundantly? What? knowest thou not that men paye
their Dettes euen too the welthie? Too the intent I streyne
thee not ageinst thy will: bée it so that welthy prosperitie haue
excluded all thinges: yet will I shewe thee what thing it is
that greate states haue great scarsnesse of, and what it is that
they want whiche are owners of all thinges. Uerely euen such
a one as speaketh the truthe; who fynding a man in a maze among
flatterers, and brought too vtter ignorance of the truth
by very custome of herkening too pleasant thinges in stede of
right thinges, reclaymeth him from the lyking and allowing

                     •
                  f false felowes. Seest thou not how the losse of their libertie
driueth them headlong into slauishe thraldome through their
fo
                     •
                  d beleef, whyle noman counseleth or disswadefh them as he

                     〈…〉
                   who may flatter most, and all
the feru
                     ••
                  ablenesse and all the labour of all their frendes tendeth
only too this one point, namely by what meanes they may
deceyue them moste pleasantly? They knewe not their owne
strength, and therefore whyle they beleeued themselues too be
as greate as they were borne in hand too bee, they brought vppon
themselues both needlesse warres, and such warres as did
fall out to the perill of all thinges: they brake necessarie and
profitable concord: and folowing vnrestreyned wrathe, they
shed the blud of manie men, & at the last their owne too. Whyle
they renēged vntryed quarrelles for tryed esteeming it no lesse
dishonour too bee perswaded than too bee vanquished, and
thought the thinges too bee durable, which stagger then most
when they bee brought too the hyghest: they ouerthrewe great
kindomes vppon themselues and theirs: neyther perceyued
they that vppon that stage so glistering with goodes that are
both vayne and fightfull, it stoode them in hand too haue looked
for muche aduersitie, specially from that tyme foorth that
they could heere no truthe.
            
            
               
               ¶The .xxxi. Chapiter.
               
                  AT suche tyme as Xerxes proclaymed warre
ageinst Greece, there was noman but he
pricked forewarde his corage whiche of itself
was puffed vp and forgetfull how fick
                     •
                  e
the thinges were that hee trusted too.
One sayed that the Greekes would neuer
tarie the first tydinges of the warre, but
would ronne awaie at the first brute of his arriuall. Another
sayd, there was no dout but his houge multitude was able not
only too conquer, but also too ouer whelme all Greece, and that
it was rather too bee scared, least they should finde the Cities
emptie and desolate, so as his enemies should bee fled awaye,
and nothing bée left for him but wast wildernesse, wherthrough
he should want whervppon too imploy his so greate puissance,
Another bare him in hande that the whole world was s
                     •
                  are
                     •
                  
wyde ynough for him, that 
                     〈…〉
                  
mater for his shippes nor 
                     〈…〉
                  
hostes too incamp in, nor 
                     〈◊〉
                   ynough for his
horse men too marche in nor scope ynough in the ayre too let
fly the arrowes & dar
                     •
                  es that should bee sent out of all handes.
When manie bragges had bin made in this wy
                     •
                  e, too pricke
foreward y• partie that was alredie besides his wittes through
ouerweening: Onely Demaratus the Lacedemonian told him,
that the selfsame disordered and houge multitude wherof hee
had so greate a lyking, was too bee feared of him that should
leade it, bycause it was rather combersomme than strong: for
ouergreate thinges cannot bee ru
                     •
                  ed, and whatsoeuer cannot
bee ruled cannot long dure. The 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   (sayd he) will
incounter thée at the verye foote of the Hill, and giue thee
a trayall of their force. Thréehundred menne will hold tacke
ageinst these so many thousandes of people. They will stand
fast vppon their ground, too defend the 
                     〈◊〉
                   Streigh
                     •
                  es,
clozing them vp ageinst thee wi
                     •
                  h their owne bodies. All Asia
shall not remoue them out of their place. As 
                     •
                  eawe as they be,

they will outstande the rage of the Battell, and the Brunt in
maner of whole mankynd rushing in vppon them. When nature
hath altered hir order too conuey thee ouer, thou shalt bee
graueled at the first step: and when thou haste cast thy Cardes
how much the streytes of Thermopyle 
                     〈◊〉
                   thée in, thou shalt
bee able too make an esttimate of thy further losse thereafter.
Thou shalt then lerne that thou mayst bee vanquished, when
thou shalt perceyue that thou mayst bee encountered. Uerely
they will shunne thee at the first, in manie places, as caryed away
by the hougenesse of some soodein watershot, whose first
streame commeth gusshing with great terrour: but anon after
they will ryse whole toogither ageinst thee on all sydes, and
distresse thee with thyne owne powre. The report is true that
the Furniture for this Warre is greater than can bee receyued
of those Countries whiche thou purposest too assayle. But
this thing makes most ageinst thee. For euen therefore shall
Grée
                     •
                  e vanquish thee, because it cannot receiue thee. Thou

                     〈◊〉
                   not vse thy whole force. Moreouer, (whiche is the onely

                     •
                  afegard of thinges) thou 
                     •
                  anst not bestirre thee too preuent
the first brunt of thinges, thou canst not succou
                     •
                   things at the
pinche, nor releeue and strengthen them when they go too
wreck. Thou shalt bee vanquished a great whyle ere thou shalt
perceyue it. Thou must not thinck
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   cannot
therfore bee withstoode be
                     •
                  ause the Capteine himself knowes
not the nomber of it. Nothing is so greate but it may perishe:
and though other occasions wanted▪ yet would destruction
growe vnto it by it owne ouergreatnesse. The thinges that

                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   fore spake, came too passe. 
                     〈…〉
                   of
all thinges perteyning as well too God
                     •
                  s 
                     〈◊〉
                   man, and bare
doune all thinges that stoode in his waye, was stopped of his
course by threehundred men. And so Xerxes being ouerthbrowen
euerywhere throughout all Gréece, vnderstood how farre

                     〈…〉
                  
gaue him leaue too aske what he
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
that he might enter intoo Sard
                        •
                     s the greatest Citie of Asia, in
a Charyot, with a high Cap of mayntenance vppon his head,
whiche was a thing Lawfull for none but Kynges too doo. He
was worthly of thereward before he sued for it. But how wretched
a Nation was that, where there was noman that would
tel the king the truth, sauing he that told it too his owne losse?
            
            
               ¶The .xxxii. Chapiter.
               
                  THe Emperour Augustus had banished his
Daughter sor steyning of hir honour by
the breache of hir chasti
                     ••
                  e, and had b
                     •
                  azed
abrode the 
                     •
                  launder of the imperial house.
As how shee had admitted Adulterers too
hir by heapes: how shee had gadded ouer
all the Citie, with nightreuelinges: how
shee had haunted the very Iudgement
                     •
                  our
                     •
                   it
                     •
                  elfe with hir
whoredome, yea euen the comon 
                     •
                  all wherein her Father had
made a Lawe ageinst whoredome: and how shee ran dayly too
the Marsia, becomming of a priuie Adulteresse, an open strumpet
and séeking all libertie of licentious loocenesse, by dealing
with vnknowen Adulterers. These thinges, whiche a Priuce
ought sometyme as well too conceale as too punish, (for the
shame of some thinges redoundeth also too the punisher) the
Emperor being vnable too mayster his owne wrath, had published
abrode. Afterward when by continuance of tyme, 
                     •
                  emorse
had succéeded in the place of ange
                     •
                  : then syghing that
be had not suppressed those thinges with silence, whiche he had
bin ignorant of so long till it was a shame too speake of them,
he kryed out oftentymes, none of these thinges had happened
too mee, if either Agrippa or Moec
                        •
                     nas had bin alyue. S
                     •
                   hard
a matter was it for him that had so manie thousand menne, too
supplye the lyke of twoo. His Legins were 
                     ••
                  ayne, and 
                     •
                  yandby
new were leuyed. His 
                     〈…〉
                  
seawe dayes after a 
                     〈…〉
                  
buildinges, and there 
                     〈…〉
                  
that were burnte. But the places of Moecen
                        •
                     s and Agrippa
                  
were emptie all his lyfe long. What should I thincke? That
there wanted the lyke of them to bee taken into their roomes?
or that the faulte was in himselfe, who had rather complayne,
than seeke? It is not too bee thought that onely Agrippa and
Moecenas were woont too tell him the truthe, who if they had
bin alyue, should haue bin dissemblers as well as the rest. It is
the guyse of kyngly natures, too prayse thinges forepast in
derogation of thinges present, and too attribute the vertue of
truethtelling vntoo those, at whose handes they bee past perill
of heering the truthe any more.
            
            
               ¶The .xxxiii. Chapiter.
               
                  BUT too the end I maie bring myself backe
ageine too my purpose, thou see
                     •
                  t how easie
a matter it is too requyte kyndnesse, euen
towardes suche as are in prosperitie, and
settled in the seege of worldly welth. Tell
them, not what they list to heere presently,
but what they maie like too heere euer. A
trew saying may perhappes somme tyme enter intoo the eares
that bee full of flatteringes. Giue thou sounde counsell.
               Askest thou what thou mayst doo for him that is in prosperitie?
Bring too passe that he waie put no trust in his prosperitie,
and let him vnderstande that the same hath néede of manie and
faithfull handes too holde it fast. Is it but a small thing that
thou doost for him, if thou rid him from his fondnesse of beleeuing
that his good fortune shall continew alwayes with him;
and teache him that the thinges are mouable whiche chaunce
hath giuen him, insomuche as they fly awaie faster than they
came, and that men retyre not doune ageine by the same greeces
that they went vp too the top by but [fall so headlong] that
oftentymes there is no distance betwéene chéef prosperitie and
vttermost aduersitie? Thou knowest not of how greate valew
freendship is, if thou vnderstand not y• thou giuest him a great
thing, too whom thou giuest a freend, a thing gezon too bee
founde, not only in howses, but also in whole worldes, whiche

is not anie where more missing, than where it is thought most
too abound. What? supposest thou that these billes whiche
scarcely the rememberance or handes of their Clerkes comprehend,
are the hilles of their freendes? These that stande in
greate thronges knocking at their gates, and are admitted by
now somme and then somme, are not fréendes. It is an old customme
of kinges and of suche as counterfet kinges, too sorte
out the multitude of their freendes. And it is the propertie of
pryde, for a man too make greate account of giuing men leaue
too comme within his howse, and too thinke he dooth men honor
too let them sit at his gate, or too bee the persones that
shall set foote first 
                     〈◊〉
                   his 
                     〈◊〉
                  , where
                     ••
                   afterward there
bee manie m
                     •
                   doores too keepe them out when they bee come
in.
            
            
               ¶T .xxxiiii. Chapiter.
               
                  AMongest vs, the first that made anie sorting
of their companie, by admitting somme intoo
secret familiaritie, somme in companie
of many, and othersome with all men, were
Gracchus, and aftewarde Liuius Dursus.
These men therfore had freendes of a first
sort, and of a second sorte, but neuer any of
the trew sort. Callest thou him a free
                     •
                  de, that must tarie his
turne ere be can salute thee? Canst thou assure thyself of his
faithfulnesse, whiche entereth not in, but crowdeth in at thy
gate half ageinst thy will? Maye that man preace vntoo thee
with full vse of his libertie, whiche may not 
                     〈◊〉
                   God saue thée,
(a common ryfe woorde and ordinarily vsed euen too the vnknowen)
but in his turne? Therfore too whomsoe 
                     〈◊〉
                   of these
thou commest, whose gr
                     •
                  eting shaketh the whole Citie: assure
thyself, that although thou finde the 
                     •
                  ounes pestered with resort
of folke, and eyther sides of the s
                     •
                  reates thronged with
preace of commers and goers: thou commest intoo a place replenished
with people, but voyde of freendes. A free
                     •
                  d is too
bée sought in the hart, and not in the hall. From thence must he

bee interteyned, there must he bee kept, and in the verie intrayles
must he bee lodged. Teache this, and thou art thankfull.
Thou haste an ill opinion of thyself, if thou canst stand in
no stede but in aduersitie, or if thou thinke there is no neede of
thee in prosperitie. According as thou behauest thy self wysely,
bothe in doutfull fortune, and in aduersitie, and in prosperitie,
dealing in doutfull state discreetly, in aduersitie stoutly, and in
prosperitie stayedly: so mayst thou yeeld thyself profitable too
thy freend in all respectes, if thou neyther abandon him in his
aduersitie, nor wish aduersitie too him. In so greate varietie,
manie thinges will fall in by the way, and minister thee matter
too woor
                     •
                  e thy faithfulnesse vppon, although thou wish them
not. In like maner as he that wisheth a man riches too the end
too bee pertaker of them himself, seeketh his owne auayles
though he séeme too wish for the other: Euen so he that wisheth
his freend anie misfortune, too rid him of it by his owne helpe
and faithfulnesse, preferreth himself before his freend, (whiche
is the poynt of an vnkynd persone), and standeth so muche vppon
his owne reputacion, that he would haue his freende in
miserie, too the ende that he himself might bee thankfull, and
therefore in the verie same respect he is vnthankfull. For his
meening is too vnloade himself, and too bee discharged of a

                     〈◊〉
                   burthen. There is greate difference whither a mannes
hasting too requy
                     •
                  e kyndnesse, bee too yeelde 
                     •
                  ne good turne
for another, or bycause he is loth too bee in det. Hee that myndeth
too requite, will apply himself to the others commoditie,
and wish that there maie comme a conuenient tyme for it. But
he that méeneth nothing else but too bée discharged, will couet
too comme too his purpose by anie meanes, whiche is the propertie
of a verye 
                     ••
                  disposed minde.
            
            
               ¶The .xxxv. Chapiter.
               
                  SAyest thou that this ouermuche hastemaking is a
point of vnkyndnesse? I cānot expresse it more pl
                     •
                  ynly,
than by repeting that which I haue spoken alredie.
For Thy meening is not too requyte the good

turne receiued, but too scape from it. Thou séemest to say thus:
when shall I haue rid my handes of it? I must labour by all
meanes possible, that I maie not bee bound too him. If thou
shouldest wish too paie him of his owne, thou mightest seeme
farre wyde from a thankfull man: and yet is this wish of thyne
a greater wrong. For thou cursest him, and with thy cruell
miswishing, dasshest out the Braynes of him whom thou ough
                  
                     •
                  ell
most to honour. I thin
                     •
                  k there is noman that would dout
of the crueltie of thy mynd, if thou shouldest wish him pouerty,
bondage, famin, or feare, openly. And what oddes is there betweene
wishing it in woordes, and wishing it in hart? For if
thou bee well in thy wittes, thou wilt wish none of these thinges.
Go now, and count this too bee a point of thankfulnesse,
which euen the thanklesse persone would not do, so he were not
come too the hating of the partie, but onely too the denyall of
his benefite.
            
            
               ¶The .xxxvi. Chapter.
               
                  WHo would call Aenaeas godly, if he would
haue had his countrie conquered, too the
end he might saue his Father from captiuitie?
Who would thincke anie naturall
loue in the yoongmen of Sicilie, if they had
wished that Mount Ae
                        •
                     na might haue broken
out with abundance of fyre farre beyond
his accustomed wont, too yeelde them occasion too vtter
their duetifull goodwill toward their Parentes, by 
                     •
                  arying
them hastely through the middes of the fyre, too the ende they
might leaue good examples too their Children? Rome is nothing
beholden to Scipio, if he wished the continuance of our
warres with Affrick, too the intent that hee himselfe might
make an ende of them. Rome is nothing beholden too the Deciusses
for sauing their countrie by the death of themselues, if
they first wished that our vtter necess
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   might make place for
theirmost manly vow. It is the greatest shame that can be, for
a Phisicion to make woorke for the Phisicion. Many that had

increased the dizeazes of their Patientes or set them back, to
the ende too purchase themselues the more glorie in curing
them; oftentymes either haue not bin able too driue the diseases
away at al, or else haue martyred the poore Soules in healing
them.
            
            
               ¶The .xxxvii. Chapiter.
               
                  IT is sayed (for surely so reporteth
Hecaton) that when Callistratus fled
his countrie, (the seditiousenesse
and vnbrydled libertie whereof had
banished manie other with him,) at
what tyme one wished that the Athenians
might haue neede too call
home their Outlawes, he mislyked
such maner of returne. But our Rutilius
delt yet more corageously. For when one comforted him
and told him that Ciuill Warres were at hande, by meanes
wherof it would shortly come to passe, that al Outlawes should
returne ageine: What harme haue I doone thee (quoth hee)
that thou shouldest wishe mee a woorse comming home, than
going out? I had leuer that my Countrie should bee ashamed
of my banishment, than bewayle my returne. It is no banishment,
wherof euery man is more ashamed than the partie that
is banished. Like as these men performed the duetie of good
Citizens, in that they would not bee restored to their natyue
soyle with the Domage of the Publik weale, because it was
more reason that twoo should bee greeued vniustly, than that
all should bee greeued for the hurte of the Common weale:
Euen so hee obserueth not the duetie of a thankfull persone,
which would haue his benefactor fall into distresse, too the intent
that he himself might rid him out of miserie. For though
that man meene well, yet wisheth he ill. It is not too bee defended,
and muche lesse too be commended, if a man quenche a
fyre that hee himselfe hath kindled. In some Comon weales a
wicked wish hath bin hilde for a wicked deede.
            
            
               
               ¶The .xxxviii. Chapiter.
               
                  CErtesse at Athens, Demades condemned
one that sould buryallware, vppon proof
that hee had wished greate gayne, whiche
could not happen to him without the death
of muche people. Yet is it woont too bée a
question, whither he were iustly condemned
or no? For peraduenture his wishing
was not too sell vnto manie folkes, but too sell at hygh pryce,
and to buye the things cheape which he sould by retayle. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
that bargayning consisteth of buying and selling: why 
                     〈◊〉
                  
thou his wishe too the one syde, whereas the gayne rys
                     •
                  th by
both? Furthermore thou mayst as well condemne all other
men that vse the same trade of occupiyng: for all of them 
                     〈◊〉
                  
one same thing, and all of them wishe one selfsame thing in
their hartes. Thou shal
                     •
                   condemne the greatest part of men.
For whose gayne ryseth not by another mannes losse? The
Souldier wisheth warre for his owne glory. Derth of Corne
settes vp the Husbandman. The trimmest Lawyers desyre
store of pleas. A contagieus yeere is for the Phisicians aduantage.
Corrupt youth inricheth the Millaners and Haberdashers,
and all suche as sell fyne Wares. Let no fyre nor wether
appayre houses, and the Carpenter may go lye doune and
sléepe. One mannes wish was caught hold on, and all mennes
wishes are alike. Thinkest thou that Aruntius and Aterius,
and the rest that haue professed the art of Executor shippe, wish
not the same thinges in their hartes, which the Heraultes and
Mooruers doe at Funeralles? For these knowe not whose
deathes they wishe: but the other wish the deathes of their néerest
acquaintance, and of those too whom they pretend moste
frendship, for their goodes sake. The one sort haue no losse by
nomans life: but if men liue long, the other sort are vndoone.
And therfore their wishing is, not only too receiue that which
they haue earned by their filthi
                     •
                   trade: but also too bée 
                     ••••
                  harged
of their paymentes. No dout therfore, but that they which

count his life their hinderance by whose death they maie haue
gayne, goe one ae beyonde the other in wishing the thing that
is condemned. And yet are the wisshes of all suche men as well
knowen, as vnpunished. Too bee short, let eche man examine
himself, and enter intoo the secret of his owne harte, and see
there what he hath wisshed too himself. How many wisshes are
there whiche it is a shame for a man too bee acknowen of too
himself? And how feawe bee there whiche wee maie iu
                     ••
                  ifie before
witnesse?
            
            
               ¶The .xxxix. Chapiter.
               
                  YET must not euery thing that is
blame woorthye, bee byandby condemned:
as this wish of the freende
that misuseth his good will, and falleth
intoo the vyce that he shunneth,
wherwith wee bee now in hand. For
in making ouermuch hast too shewe
a thankfull minde, he becommes vnthankfull.
Let my freende fall intoo
my daunger (sayeth he): let him haue néede of my fauor: let him
not bee able too mayntayne his welfare, honestie, and safetie
without mee: Let him bee brought too suche an afterdeele, that
whatsoeuer I do
                     •
                   in recompence of his former freendeship, it
maie bee as a free benefite vntoo him. Let the Gods hem him
in on the oneside, and let the treason of his owne howse hem
him in on the otherside, and let mee only bee able too rid him
out of it. Let a mightie and sore enemie assault him with a rout
of his deadly foes, and not vnarmed. Let his creditor and his
accuser bee feerce and extreme vppon him.
            
            
               The .xl. Chapiter.
               
                  SEE how indifferently thou dealest. Thou wouldest
wish none of these thinges vntoo him if he
had not done thee good. Too letpasse other greeuowser
faultes whiche thou committest in requi
                  
                     •
                  ing
euill for good, certeinly thou offēdest in this,

that thou taryest not the proper tyme of eche thing: the preuenting
whereof is no lesse offence, than the not taking of it when
it commeth. For like as a benefite is not too bee taken at all
tymes: so also is it not too bee requyted at all tymes. If thou
shouldest render it before I haue neede or desyre of it, thou
shouldest bee vnthankfull. And how muche more vnthankfull
then a
                     ••
                   thou, in compelling mee too haue neede of it? Tarye
thy tyme. Wherefore wilt thou not haue my gift too rest with
thee? Wherfore is it a payne too thee too bee beholden too
mee? Wherefore doost thou haste too make an euen reckening
with mee, as if it were with somme nipping vsurer? Why séekest
thou my trubble? Why settest thou the Gods ageinst mée?
After what sort wouldest thou demaunde, that doost so requite?
            
            
               ¶The .xli. Chapiter.
               
                  FIrst and formest then my fréend Liberalis,
Let vs lerne too owe good
turnes quietly, and too wayt for opportunities
too requite, and not too
make them by force. Let vs beare in
minde, that this desyrousnesse of discharging
ones self in poste haste, is
the point of a Carle. For noman is
willing too requyte that whiche he
is vnwilling too owe. Looke what he is loth too haue too rest
with him, he d
                     •
                  emeth it a burthen, and not a benefite. How
muche better and more rightfull is it too beare the desertes
of our freendes in remēberance, and too offer them kyndnesse,
but not too threape it vppon them, nor too think ourselues too
muche in their det? Forasmuche then as a benefi
                     •
                  e is a comonbond,
and linketh cupples toogither: saie thou thus. I wilnot
bee ageinst it that thyne owne should returne vntoo thee: my
desyre is that thou mayest haue it ageine cheerefully: if any of
vs bothe bee ouertaken with necessitie, so as it falles out by
somme destinie, that either thou must bee fayne too receiue thy
good turne agein, or I bee faine too take another at thy hand:

let him giue still that was woont afore. I am redy: there is no
let in Turnus: I will shewe this my willing mynde assoone as
tyme serueth: In the meane whyle let the Goddes bee my witnesses.
            
            
               ¶The .xlii. Chapiter.
               
                  MY Liberalis, I am woont too marke
this affection in thee, and as it were
too grope it with my hand; that thou
fearest and frettest, least thou shouldest
bee too flowe in anie kynde of
courtesie. It beséemeth not a thankfull
mynde too haue anie carefull
misconceyt ageinst the assured confidence
of itself. For the conscience
of trew loue is quyte rid of all carefulnesse. It is as greate a
reproche too receiue that whiche thou oughtest not, as not too
giue that whiche thou oughtest. Let the first bestower of a benefite
haue alwayes this prerogatyue: That he maye as well
choose his tyme too receiue, as hee choze too bestowe. But I
am afrayed (sayest thou) least men will misreport mée. He dealeth
euill, whiche is thankfull for reportes sake; and not for
cōscience sake. Thou hast two iudges of this cace: Him, whom
thou mayest deceiue: and thyself, whom th
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   not deceiue.
               Then what if no occasion happen? shall I bee in his det euer?
               Yea, euer: and that openly, and gladly, and thou must take
greate pleasure too beholde his gage layd vp with thee. It repenteth
that man of the taking of a benefite, whom it greeueth
that he hath not yet requited it. Why shouldest thou think him
vnwoorthie too haue thee long his detter, at whose hande thou
couldest finde in thy harte too take a good turne?
            
            
               ¶The .xliii. Chapiter.
               
                  
                  THey 
                     •
                  ée verie farre euerséene, which
thinke it the propertie of a noble
harte, too laie out, too giue, or too
fill the bosomes and how
                     •
                  es of manie
men; when as oftentymes it is

                     〈…〉
                  , but a greate abilitie
that dooeth these thinges.
They knowe not how muche it is a
greater and harder matter at some
tyme, too take, than too poure out. For too the intent I maye

                     〈◊〉
                   neither of them, for asmucheas either of them is others

                     〈◊〉
                  , as long as it is doo
                     •
                  e vertuou
                     ••
                  y: (I saye) it is no lesse
propertie of a noble harte too owe a benefite, than too bestowe
one. But yet so muche the more laborsomme is this than the other
as the keeping of thinges receiued requyreth more heedfulnesse,
than dooeth the giuing of them. Therefore wee must
not stande in feare least wee should not requyte soone ynough,
nor make haste too doo it out of season. For euen as muche offendeth
he that hasteth too requyte kyndnesse out of dew tyme,
as he that requyteth not in dew season. It is laye
                     •
                   vp with m
                     •
                  e
for him. Neyther in his behalfe, nor in myne owne, am I afrayed.
He hath prouided well for himself. For he cannot lose
this good turne but with the losse of mee, no nor with the losse
of mee nother. I haue thanked him, and that is as muche too
saye as I haue requyted. He that myndeth the requyting of a
benefite too muche, imagineth the other too mynd the receiuing
of it too much. Let a man yéelde himself easie both waies.
If he bee willing too take the returne of his benefite, let vs
render it and requyte it cheerfully. But if he had leuer haue it
too remayne still in our keeping: Why should wee throwe his
treasure out of doores? Why refuze wee too bee his storers?
Hee is woorthie too haue his owne choyce. Assor opinion and
report, let vs so estéeme of them▪ as of thinges that should waite
vppon vs, and not leade vs.
               The end of the sixth booke.
            
         
         
            
            The seuenth and last Booke of Lucius
Annaeus Seneca, concerning Benefites.
            
               ¶The first Chapiter.
               
                  MY Liberalis, take a good hart too thee, euen
in the bottom of hell.
               
                  I will not heere withhold thee long, I will not
beate about
                  The bush, nor yet with Windlasses suspende
thee long in dout.
               
               This booke is but a packet of looce Remnantes.
Now that I haue spent my stuffe, I looke about mee,
not what I haue too saye, but what I haue not sayd. Notwhstanding,
thou must take in good woorth whatsoeuer is of ouerplus,
seeing the ouerplus is for thy sake. If I had ment too
set myself too sale, this woork should haue gowen by little and
little▪ and that part of it should haue bin reserued too come last,
whiche euery man would haue desyred euen though he had bin
glutted. Whatsoeuer was most needefull, that haue I conueyed
intoo the firste beginning. If anie thing haue escaped mee,
that doo I now gather vppe. And in good faith, seeing that the
thinges which direct mennes manners are spoken of already:
If yee should examine mee vppon my conscience, I thin
                     •
                  ke it
not greatly too the purpose, too pursew the rest, whiche are inuented,
not for amendment of lyfe, but for exercyse of wit. For

                     〈◊〉
                   was excellently sayd of dogg
                     •
                  sh Demetrius (a man in myne
opinion right excellent, euen though he were 
                     •
                  ompared to the
excellente
                     ••
                  ) that it is more woorth for a man too knowe a few
Rules of Wisdomme, so he beare them in rememberance and
practize them: than if he lerne neuer so manie, and haue them
not redy at hand. For (sayeth he) lyke as that man is a greate
Wrestler, not whiche hath lerned all 
                     •••
                  ckes and 
                     ••
                  eyghtes,
(whiche hee shall seldome haue occasion too put in 
                     •
                  re ageinst
his 
                     〈◊〉
                  ) but whiche hath well and diligently practized

himself in some one or twoo, and watcheth earnestly too take
the aduauntage of them: (for it skilles not how feawe thinges
he knowe, so he knowe inough too get the maystrie:) Euen so
in this kynd of studie, there bee manie thinges that delyght,
but feawe that profit. Although thou know not the reason why
the mayne Sea dooth ebbe and flowe: or why euery seuenth
yeere imprinteth a sig
                     •
                  e vppon mannes age: or why the wydenesse
of a Churche keepeth not his full proportion in the vewe
of them that behold it a far of, but gathereth his endes or sydes
intoo a narownesse, so as the toppes of the Pillars and Pinacles
grow intoo one: or what it is that separateth the conception
of Twinnes and ioyneth their birth; whither one companying
of the Parentes bee dispersed intoo twayne, or whither
the twoo bee begotten at twoo seuerall tymes: or why
those that bee borne at one burthen haue sundry destinies, and
whereas there is small distance or none betwixt their birthes,
yet they haue as greate difference as may bee in their lyues:
It is no great harme too thee too let such thinges passe, which
are neyther possible nor profitable too bee knowen. Tee truth
lyeth wrapped vp toogither aloft. Yet haue wee no cause too
blame Nature of vnkyndnesse: for nothing is vneasie too bee
found, saue suche as when they bee found, yeeld vs no further
frute than the onely fynding of them. But whatsoeuer may
make vs both better and more blissed, that hath nature set eyther
open too vs, or neere at ha
                     •
                  d too vs. If the mynd can despyse
casualties: if it raūdge not into endlesse desyres through
couetous hope, but haue lerned too seeke hir riches in hirself.
if it haue shaken of the slauishe feare of Gods and menne, and
knowe that menne are not too bee feared muche, and GOD
nothing at all: if it despyse all those thinges wherewith the
lyfe is Racked whyle it is decked with them, and bee come
too that point that hee manifestly perceiueth death too bee the
cause of no euill, but the end of manie euilles: if a man haue v
                     •
                  
                  wed
his mynd vnto vertue, and count the way playne whithersoeuer
she calleth: if he bée a fellowly wyght, and (as one borne
too the behoof of all men) esteeme the whole world but as one

household: if he lay his cōscience open before the Gods, & liue
continually as if all men behild him, standing more in awe of
himself than of othermen: Hee hath withdrawen himself from
all Stormes, and is harbroughed in the calme and sewer Hauen:
he hath atteyned too the necessarie and profitable knowledge.
The residue bee but pleasures too passe away idle tyme.
For when a man hath once withdrawen his mynd intoo safety,
he may then also start out intoo these thinges, whiche garnish
mennes wittes but strengthen them not.
            
            
               ¶The second Chapter.
               
                  THese are the thinges whiche our
fréend Demetrius willeth him that
myndeth his owne profite too take
holde on with both his handes, and
neuer too let them go, but rather
too fasten them too him, and too
make them part of himself, and too
procéede so farre by dayly mynding
of them, that wholsomme thinges
may meete him of their owne accorde, and euerywhere bee
streyght redy at hand with a wishe, and that the distinction of
honest▪ and shamefull may come too his mynde without taryaunce,
assuring himselfe that nothing is euill but that whiche
is vnhonest, nor any thing good but that whiche is honest.
Let this bée his Rule too order his dooinges by: let this bee
his Lawe too doo and demaund all thinges by▪ and let him
count those too bee the miserablest of all men, (glister they neuer
so muche in riches) whiche are giuen too the belly and the
bedde, whose mynd is sot
                     •
                  ed in lazie idlenesse. Let him say too
himself, Pleasure is frayle and short: soone weerie of the thinges
whereon it woorketh: the gredilyer it is haled in, the sooner
it turneth too greef: it is alwayes of necessitie accompanyed
either with repentance, or with shame: and there is nothing
in it either noble or beseeming the nature of man which
resembleth the Goddes. It is a ba
                     •
                  e thing, procéeding from
the seruis of the shamefull and vyle members, and in the ende

filthy. The pleasure that is méete for a man, yea and for a manly
man, is not the examining and pampering of the bodie, nor
the stirring vp of the lustes whiche doo least harme when they
bee moste at rest: but too bee voyd of vnquietnesse of mynd, as
well of that sort whiche the ambitiousenesse of men prouoketh
when they quarell among themselues, as of that sort whiche
cometh of in
                     •
                  olerable loftinesse, when wee deeme of the Gods
by report of fame, and esteeme them as sinfull as our selues.
This pleasure which is alwayes alike, alwayes voyd of feare,
and shall neuer bee weerie of itself, doth the man inioy whom
wee frame; who being (as yee would say) most skilfull both of
Gods Lawe and mannes Lawe, taketh fru
                     •
                  tion of the thinges
present, and hangeth not vppon that whiche is too come. For
he that yeeldeth too vncerteinties, hath neuer auie firmenesse.
Therefore being ridde of greate cares, and suche as racke the
mynd in peeces, he hopeth for nothing, hee coueteth nothing,
neither putteth he himselfe vppon vncerteinties, but is content
with his owne. And thou must not imagin that he is contented
with a little, for all thinges are his. Howbéeit, not so as
they were Alexanders, who, euen when hee was come too the
Shore of the Red Sea, wanted more than he left behynd h
                     •
                  m
from whence he came. Surely they were not his: no not euen
the thinges that he possessed and had conquered. When Onesicritus
the Admirall of his Fléete was sent before him, to roue
abrode in the Ocean lyke a Pyrate too seeke newe warres in
an vnknowen Sea: did it not sufficiently appeere that he was
poore, seing he aduaunced his warres without the boundes of
nature, and thrust himselfe headlong intoo a Sea of houge
depth, of vnmeasurable wydnes, and vnsearched afore, only for
blynd couetousenesse? What matter makes it how many realmes
he wa
                     •
                   by force: how manie Kingdomes he gaue away,
or how manie Countries hee brought vnder tribute? Looke
how muche he coueted, so muche he wanted.
            
            
               ¶The third Chapter.
               
                  
                  AND this is not the fault of Alexander alone,
whom luckie rashnesse draue beyond
the steppes of Liber and Hercules: but it is
the fault of all suche as fortune hath made
eagre by ouerfilling them. Looke vppon
Cyrus and Cambyses, and vpon al the whole
Pedegree of the Persian Kinges through
out: and which of them shalt thou fynd satisfied with the largenesse
of his Empire, or that finished not his lyfe in the purpose
of procéeding still further and further? And no woonder at al.
For whatsoeuer couetousenes catcheth hold on, he swaloweth
it doune and deuoureth it quyte: and it makes no matter how
muche a man cast intoo a thing that cannot be filled. The wyse
man is the only he that is owner of all things, & they put him
not too any trubble in the keeping. He hath no Ambassadours
too sende beyond the Sea, nor Tentes too bee pitched in the
Marches of his enemyes. He hath no neede of Garrisons too
bee placed in conuenient Fortresses, he hath no neede of Legions
nor Bandes of Horsemen. Like as the Goddes immortall
doo gouerne their kingdome, and maynteine their state aloft
in quietnesse, without Armour: euen so the wyseman performeth
his duetie without trubblesomnesse, though he haue neuer
so much too doo. And being himself the mightiest and best,
hee séeth all men else too bee vnderneath him. As much as thou
skornest it, yet is it the propertie of a right high corage, for a
man (when he hath vewed [the whole worlde] from East too
West by sight of mynd, whiche perceth euen the furthest thinges
and suche as are for
                     •
                  lozed with wildernesses, and hath
behild the infinite nomber of liuing Creatures and the greate
abundance of other thinges, whiche nature hath moste bountifully
powred out) too vtter this saying meete for GOD▪ All
these thinges are myne. So commeth it too passe, that he coueteth
nothing, because there cannot bee anie more than all.
            
            
               ¶The .iiii. Chapiter.
               
                  
                  THis is it (saiest thou) that I wisshed
for: I haue thee at aduauntage. I
will see how thou canst ridde thyself
out of these snares whereintoo thou
art falne by thyne owne seekyng.
Tell mee how a man maye giue any
thing to a wise manne, if all thinges
be a wise mans? For the same thing
that is giuen hym, is his owne alredie.
Therefore a Benefite cannot bee bestowed vppon a wise
man, because that whatsoeuer is giuen too a wise man, is but a
Pigge of his owne Sowe. But you saye that a giift maye bee
giuen too a wise man. Thesame question demaund I also concernyng
fréendes, you say, all things are comon emong them:
Ergo no man can giue his fréend any thing, for his fréende hath
as good interest in them, as he hymself.
               Nothyng letteth, but that a thyng maye bee bothe a wisemannes,
and also his that possesseth it, too whom the gifte and
assignement of it belongeth. I saye that all thinges are a wisemannes,
howbeeit in suchewise, as euery manne neuerthelesse
hath his peculiar ownershippe in the thing that is his. By the
Ciuill Lawe, all thynges are the kynges. And yet the same
thynges whereof the vniuersall possession perteineth too the
kyng, are lefte too seuerall owners, and euery thyng hath his
peculiar proprietarie. Therefore wee maye giue the Kyng,
bothe House, and Villaynes, and Monnie, and yet not bee
saied too giue hym of his owne gooddes. For the prerogatiue
of all thynges belongeth too Kynges, and the propertie too
eche seuerall persone. Wee terme it the territorie of Athens,
or Campaine, whiche otherwise the neighbours parte emong
themselues by priuate boundes: and yet is all the whole Territorie
belongyng either too the one comon weale, or too the
other, and afterwarde eche parcell remaineth too his seuerall
owner. Therefore I maye giue my Landes too the Comonweale,
although it hee sayed too belong too the same, because

they bee the Comon weales in one respecte, and myne in another.
Is there any doute but a bondman, and all that he hath is
his Lordes? Yet maye he giue his Lorde a presente. For the
Bondman hath not therefore nothyng because hee should haue
nothyng if his Landlorde lifted. Neither is it therefore the
lesse a gifte, when he hath presented it willyngly, because it
might haue bin taken from hym whither he would or no.
What should wee stande prouyng of all thynges? For it is alredie
agreed betwixte vs, that all thynges are a wisemannes.
Lette vs gather that whiche is in question: namely how there
maye remaine matter of liberalitie towardes hym, whom wee
haue graunted too bee owner of all thynges. All thynges that
Children possesse, are their Fathers: and yet who knoweth not
that the Sonne maye giue somewhat too the Father? All thinges
are the Goddes: yet offer wee giftes too the Goddes, and
cast offerynges intoo their boxe. That whiche I haue is not
therefore none of myne, because myne is thyne: For it maye so
happen that one self same thyng maie bée bothe myne & thyne.
               He (saiest thou) that is owner of Comon Harlottes, is a
Baude: but a wise man is owner of all thynges, and emong all
thynges are also comon Harlottes: Ergo a wise man is a baud
By thesame reason they barre a wise manne from buiyng. For
(saye they) no man buyeth his owne gooddes: but all thynges
are a wise mannes: Ergo a wise man buyeth nothyng. So doo
they also barre hym from borowyng, because no manne payeth
interest for his owne Monney. Innumerable are the thynges
that they quarell about, whereas they vnd
                     ••
                  stand well inough
what our meenyng is.
            
            
               ¶The .v. Chapiter.
               
                  TOO bee flat with you, I vphold that all thynges
are a wise mannes, in suche wise as euery
man hath neuerthelesse his proper ownership
in his owne gooddes: Like as in a good Monarchie,
the Kyng possesseth all thinges by way
of souereintie, and eche ma
                     •
                   seuerally by way of propertie. A

tyme will come to pro
                     •
                  e this matter. In the meane while it is
enough too this question, that I maye giue a wise manne that
thyng, whiche in diuerse respectes is bothe his and myne. And
it is no maruell that somewhat maye bee giuen too hym that
is owner of the whole. Put
                     •
                   the cace I haue hyred a Ferme of
thee. Herein, somewhat is thyne, and somewhat is myne. The
thing it self is thyne, and the occupying of it is myne. Therefore
thou shalt not meddle with the frutes, without thy Fermours
leaue, though they growe vppon thyne owne grounde.
And if there come a derth of Corne, or a tyme of Famine, yet
shall it not boote thee (alas) too beholde his greate store, that
groweth vppon thyne owne grounde, that is layed vp in thyne
owne Bernes, and that shall goe intoo thyne owne Garners.
Thou shalt not enter intoo my Ferme, though thou bee Lorde
of it, nor take awaye thy Bondman that is my hyred seruaunt.
For I will fetche hym from thee ageine, if I haue payed for
hym, and thou shalt accept it as a courtesie, if I giue thee leaue
too ride in thyne owne wagon. Thus thou seest, that a manne
maye receiue a freendly turne, in receiuing his owne goodes.
            
            
               ¶The .vi. Chapiter.
               
                  IN all these thinges whiche I haue rehersed,
bothe the parties are owners of one
self thing. How so? Because the one is owner
of the verie thing, and the other is owner
of the vse or occupying of it. Wée saye
these Bookes are Ciceroes: and Dorus the
Bookeseller saieth they bee his: and bothe
bee true. The one chalengeth them as Authour of them,
and the other as his wares; and so are they rightly sayed too
bee the Bookes of either of them. For they bee so, howbeeit
not after one maner. So maye Titus Liuius take of gifte, or
buye his owne bookes of Dorus. I maye giue a wiseman that
whiche in seueralitie is myne, though otherwise all thynges
bee his. For seeyng that he posse
                     •
                  seth all thinges in comon like
as Princes doo, and yet neuerthelesse the propertie of thinges

is dispersed too euery persone in seuerall: he maye bothe take
a good turne, and owe one, and also bothe buye and hyre. The
Emperour hath all thyngs, and yet none but his priuate gooddes,
and peculiar reuenewes doo come too his Exchequer. All
thinges in the Empire are his: and yet properly he hath no
more of his owne, but his peculiar heritage. What is his, and
what is not his without impeachement of his Empire, that is
the question. For euen that whiche is giuen awaye from hym
by verdit as none of his, is his ageine in another respecte. So
likewise, in mynde a wiseman is owner of all thinges: and by
lawe & possession, he oweth but his proper and priuate goodes.
            
            
               ¶The .vii. Chapiter.
               
                  BY suche maner of reasoning, Bion was
woont too gather, sommetyme that all men
were churcherobbers, and some tyme that
noone were so. When he mynded too put
them all too their nek
                     •
                  erse, He reasoned
thus. Whosoeuer hath stollen aught that
perteyned too the Gods, or spent it, or turned
the same too his owne vse, is a churchrobber. But all thinges
perteyne too the Goddes: Therefore whatsoeuerthing a
man taketh awaie, he taketh it from the Goddes, Forasmuche
as all thinges are theirs: Ergo whosoeuer taketh awaie anie
thing, is a Churchrobber. Ageine when he would haue Churches
broken vp, and the Capitoll spoyled, he would saie there
was no Churchrobberie committed, bycause that whatsoeuer
is taken out of one place that perceyued too the Goddes, the
same is conueyed intoo another place that perteyneth too the
Gods like wyse. Heere it is too bee answered, that all thinges
in déede are the Goddes, but not that all thinges are dedicated
too the Goddes: and that Churchrobbing is in those thinges
that Religion hath dedicated vntoo God. So saie wee that the
whole worlde is the temple of the Goddes immortall, al
                     •
                  nely
beseeming their greatnesse and maiestie: and yet notwithstanding

wee saie there is a difference betweene holie and vnholie,
and that it is not Lawfull too doo all those thinges in the
Nookes that wee terme by the name of Churches or Chappelles,
whiche are Lawfull too bee done vnder the open skye
and in the sight of the Starres. A Churchrobber cannot doo
any harme vntoo God, whom his owne God head hath set out
of mannes reache, but yet is he punished, bycause he hath done
it as it were too God. The opinion of vs and of the offender
h
                     •
                  mself byndeth him too punishment. Therefore looke in what
maner he that taketh awaye anye halowed thing seemeth a
Churchrobber, although the thing that he hath stolne (carye it
whither he will) remayneth still within the boundes of the
wor
                     •
                  de: after the same maner also maie theft bee committed ageinst
a wyse man. For there is sommewhat conueyed from
him, not as he is owner of thinges in vniuersall, but as he is
inty
                     •
                  led too them in particular, and as they belong vntoo him
in seuerall. That other ownership he will acknowledge: But
asfor this, he woulde not haue it though he might, but woulde
burste out intoo this saying whiche the Romane Graund capteine
did cast foorth, when it was decreed, that for his prowesse
and his good seruis too the comon welth, he shoulde haue as
muche Lande giuen him as he could plowgh about in one day.
You haue no neede (quoth he) of anie suche Citizen, as hath
neede of more than one Citizens liuing. How muche more honor
(thinke you) was it for that man too refuze so greate a rewarde,
than too haue deserued it? For manie Capteines haue
remoued the Boundes of other menne, but neuer any did set
boundes too himselfe.
            
            
               ¶The .viii. Chapter.
               
                  THerefore when wee beholde how the wysemannes
minde ouermaystreth all thinges
and passeth through all thinges: wée say all
thinges are his. And if the cace requyre
that he must bee taxed by the powle too this
ordina
                     •
                  ie right: there is greate difference
whither his ownership bée too bée esteemed

by his minde and by his owne greatnesse, or by his substance.
Too haue all these thinges whereof thou speakest, it woulde
lothe him. I will not tell thee of Socrates, Chrisippus, Zeno, and
other Philosophers that were greate in deede, howbeeit so
muche the greater, because enuie withstandeth not the prayse
of those of old tyme. A little afore, I spake of Demetrius, w
                     •
                  om
nature seemeth to haue bred in our dayes, of purpose too shew
how hee was the man that neither could bee corrupted by vs,
nor wee corrected by him: a man (though he himself would not
bee acknowen of it) of perfect wisedome and assured constanc
                     •
                  e
in such thinges as he had purposed: yea and of such eloquence▪
as was most seemely for stout matters, not too gay nor too
precyse in termes, but setting foorth his matters with greate
corage, according as the earnestnesse of his cace occasioned
hym. I dout 
                     〈◊〉
                   but the heauenly prouidence gaue him suche
lyfe and suche abilitie of vtterance, too the intent there should
not want either example, or reproche to our age.
            
            
               ¶The .ix. Chapiter.
               
                  IF somme one of the Goddes would
giue Demetrius the possession of all
thynges in this worlde, vppon condition
that he should not giue aught
awaye: I dare abide by it he would
refuze them, and would saye: I will
not bynde my self too so vnd
                     •
                  schargeable
a burthen, nor caste 
                     •
                  his vncombered
harte of myne intoo that
sincke of thinges. Why presentest thou me with the mischeeues
of all people, whiche I would not receiue, no not euen too
giue awaye, because I see many thinges that are not comely
for mee too giue? Sette thou foorthe in my sight, the thynges
that blere the eyes of whole Nations and Kynges. Lette mee
sée the thinges for whiche m
                     •
                  n 
                     •
                  ell their liues, and their soules.
Laye before mee the cheef thinges whereof Riotte vaunteth:

choose whither thou wilte vnfolde them in order one after another;
or (wh
                     •
                  che is better) deliuer them in one grosse somme
tog
                     •
                  ther. I see roofes of houses cunnyngly wrought with curious
deuises, and shelles of bace and moste vile and sluggishe
beastes, bought at exessiue prices, wherein the self same varietie
that delighteth, is made of counterfette colours, accordyng
too the likenesse of the thinges them selues. I see there tables,
and a peece of woode valewed at an Aldermannes substaunce,

                     •
                  ounted so muche the preciouser, as the warrinesse of the Tree
hath wrythed it intoo mo knurres. I see there Christal glasses
the brittlenesse whereof auaunceth their estimation. For emong
the vnskilfull, euen the verie daungerousnesse of thinges
whiche should cause them too bee eschewed, makes them
too bee the better beliked. I see Cuppes of Mirrhe, as who
would saye that Riot were not costly enough of it self, excepte
they made them greate Boulles of Iewelles, too quaffe vp
that thing one too another, whiche they should bee faine anon
after too vomitte out ageine. I see Per
                     •
                  es mo than one alone
fitted too eche eare (for now womens cares are inured too carie
burthens): and they bee linked together by cupples, with a
thirde hanging vnder them bothe. Menne ha
                     •
                   not bin subiecte
enough too womens madnesse, if they had not hanged twoo or
three mennes substaunces at either of their eares. I see silken
garmentes, if at leastwise a manne maie terme them garmentes,
in whiche there is nothing whereby either the bodie or
womanhod maie bee garnished: whiche when a woman hath
putte on, shee maie safely sweare shee is little better than stark
naked. And these thinges are fetched at greate prises by traf
                  
                     •
                  ike,
euen from vnknowen Nations, too the ende that our Ladies
should not discouer muche more of their bodies too their
paramours in their Chambers, than they shewe openly too all
menne in the 
                     ••
                  reetes.
            
            
               ¶The .x. Chapiter.
               
                  
                  WHat preuailest thou O couetousnesse? How
many thinges are there whiche in valewe
surmount thy golde? All the thinges that
I haue spoken of, are of more estimation,
and of greater price. Now will I peruse
thy riches, I meene the plates of both the
mettalles, at the sight whereof our coueteousnesse
Dazeleth. In good soothe, the yearth (whiche hath
layed foorthe whatsoeuer maye bee for our behoofe) hath delued
these thinges deepe, and sonken them intoo the grounde,
yea, and shee lyeth vppon them with all her whole might, as
vppon noysome thinges that could not comme abrode, but too
the hurte of all Nations. And least there should want either instrument,
or reward of manslaughter: I see Yron fetched forth
of thesame Caues, that Golde and Siluer are digged out of.
Yet haue these thinges somme substanciall matter in them:
there is somewhat in them that maye cause the mynde too bee
ledde by the errour of the eyes. But I see there Patentes, Indentures,
and Obligations, whiche are but emptie Images
of greedinesse, and a certeine shadowe of egre Couetousnesse,
seruyng too beguile the mynde, that delighteth in opinion of
vaine thinges. For what are these thynges? What is interest?
What are Iournalles or Dayebookes? What is Vsurie, but
names of mannes coue
                     •
                  ousnesse, whiche Nature, is not acquainted
with? I could finde fault with Nature, that shee hidde
not Golde and Siluer further out of reache, and that she laied
not a greater weight vppon them than could haue bin remoued.
What are the
                     •
                  e conueyances in writing? What are these
Reckeninges, and the sale of tyme, and these blouddy hundredthes?
Verely they bee wilfull mischeeues, grounded vpon our
owne constitutions, wherein there is not any thing that can
bee discerned by eye, or hilde with hande: Dreames they bee of
vaine couetousnesse. O wretche whosoeuer he is, that delighteth
too haue a greate Inuentorie of substance, or large Demeanes
too bee Tilled by Bondmen, or infinite Herdes and
Flockes that maie require whole Countries and Realmes

too feede them, or a Housholde greater than somme Warlike
Nations; or priuate buildinges, exceeding the wydenesse of
good greate tounes. When he hath throughly vewed these
thinges, whereby he hath laied foorth and spred out his riches
and made himself proude: if he compare that whiche he hath,
too that whiche he cou
                     •
                  teth: he is but a poore man. Let me go,
and restore me agein too those riches of myne owne. I knowe
the kingdo
                     •
                  e of wisedome too bee bothe greate and daungerlesse:
I will haue all thinges in suche wise, as all menne maye
neuerthe
                     •
                  esse haue their owne propertie in them.
            
            
               ¶The .xi. Chapiter.
               
                  WHerefore when Caesar profered the same Demetrius
twoo hundred Talentes, hee smiled
and forsooke them: not deeming it too bee a
somme of suche valewe, as the refuzall thereof
were woor
                     •
                  he the boasling of. O GOD
how silie a somme was that, either too honor
or corrupt so noble a mynde withall? For I must needes yeelde
so singular a man his due commendacion. I haue herd a great
thing reported of him: That when he had wondered at the lack
of discretion of Caius Caesar for imagining that so small a matter
could haue altered him, he sayd thus: if he had ment to trye
mee, he should haue tempted mee with his whole Empire.
            
            
               ¶The .xxii. Chapiter.
               
                  THen may sommewhat bee giuen too the wyse
man, though all thinges bee his. Lykewyse
there is no let but that somewhat may bee giuen
too a fréend, though wee say that all thinges
bee comon among freendes. For I haue
not thinges after suche sort in common with
my freend▪ as with a partner, so as my part and his should bee
both one: but in suche wyse as Children are comon too the Father

and the Moother: who hauing twoo betwixt them, haue
not eche of them one, but twoo a peece. First of al I will bring
too passe, that this man (whatsoeuer he is that chalendgeth copartnership
with mee) shall vnderstand, he hath nothing in comon
with mee. Whyso? Because this kynd of intercomoning
is onely among wysemen, betweene whom there is also frendship.
The rest are no more fréendes, than they bee coparteners.
Ageine, thinges may bee comon diuerse wayes. Thinges belonging
too the degrée of Knighthod are comon too all knightes
of Rome: and yet if I haue takē a place in sitting, the same
is properly myne owne: and if I depart with it too some other
knight, although I depart with a thing that is ours in comon,
yet seeme I to haue giuen him somewhat. Some thinges are
comon too men vppon certein condicions. As, I haue a place
among the knightes: not too sell it, not too let it out, not too
dwell vppon it: but too sit and see thinges. And therefore if I
come intoo the Theatre when the knightes places bee all full
furnished and can haue no roome because the place is taken vp
afore, by those that haue as good right in it as I: I shall make
no lye though I say still that I haue a place among the knightes,
because I haue right too a place there, and because I haue
priuiledge too sit there. Thincke thou that the cace standeth in
lyke wyse among freendes. What
                     •
                  oeuer our frend hath, is comon
vnto vs: and yet is the proprietie of it his that possesseth
it: and therefore may I not occupie it ageinst his will.
               Thou mockest mee, sayest thou. For if the thing that is my
freendes bee myne: is it not lawfull for mee too sell it? No.
For thou mayst not sell the rightes of Knighthod, and yet are
they comon too thee with the residue of the same order. It is
not a proof that a thing should not bée thyne because thou canst
not sell it, or because thou mayst not spende it, or because thou
mayst not chaunge it for better or for woorse. For that is thyne
also, whiche is thyne vppon any condicion: and although I receyue
such a thing of thee, yet haste thou it still neuerthelesse.
            
            
               ¶The .xiii. Chapiter.
               
                  
                  LET mee not hold thee too long. A benefite
itself cannot bée greater or smaller: but the
thinges wherby a benefite or good turne is
performed, maie bee greater or lesser: and
the thinges wherein good will sheweth itself,
mae bée moe or feawer: & so it may fode
itself, according as louers are woont too
doo, whose store of kisses and streight imbracinges, doo exercyse
loue, but not increace it. This question also that inseweth,
is discussed in the premisses: and therefore it shalbee touched
but lightly. For the argumēts that are applyed vnto the other
thinges, maie also bee drawen vntoo this. The question is,
whither he that hath done all thinges towardes the requyting
of a benefite, haue requyted it or no. Too the intent (sayeth he)
that you maie knowe he hath not requyted: he did all that he
could too requyte. Whereby it appeereth that the thing is not
doo
                     •
                  e which he wanted occasion to doo. For that man can not
bee sayed too haue payed a peece of monnie, who hath euerywhere
sought his creditor too paye him, and could not fynde
him. Somme thinges are of that sort, that they requyre a performance
in deede: and in somme thinges it is as muche too
haue doone what a man could, as too haue performed the verie
deede in effect. If a Phisicion haue doone all that he could too
heale, he hath done his part. If an Orator haue vsed as muche
cunning as could bee, he is too bee counted eloquent though
his clyentes cace bee ouerthrowen. Though a Generall or a
Cap
                     •
                  eine be ouercomme: yet are they woorthie of commendacions,
if they haue not wanted diligence, nor prowesse. He hath
doone what he might too requyte thy good turne, and he could
not for thy greate good hap. Nothing could happen more hard
too the tryall of trew freendship. He could not rewarde a man
of welth, he could not tende a man in helth, he could no
                     •
                   reléeue
a man in prosperitie. Yet hath he requyted, though thou haue
receiued no benefite at his hande. For he that hath alwayes
bent himself thereuntoo, wayting opportunitie for the same,
and imploying greate care and diligence there aboutes: hath

doone more in effect; than he whose lucke it was too requyte
betymes.
            
            
               ¶The .xiiii. Chapiter.
               
                  THE* example of the detter is vnlyke,
inasmuche as it is not ynough
for him too haue sought his Creditor,
vnlesse he haue payed him his
monnye. For in that cace the cruell
creditor standeth ouer his head, who
will take the aduantage of his daie.
But in this cace thou art matched
with a most courteouse creditor, who
perceiuing how thou trottest vp and doune carefull and vnquiet,
will saie: awaye with this care out of thy harte: cease
too bee so earnest too thyne owne trubble. I haue all of thee.
Thou dooest mee wrong, if thou thinke I seeke anie more at
thy hande. Thy good will is comme vntoo mee too the full.
               But tell mee (saieth he) wouldest thou saie that hee hath requited
a benefite, whiche hath requited none otherwise than
so? By this reckenyng, he that hath requited, and he that hath
not requited should bee all one.
               Well: then sette this ageinst it. If he had forgotten the benefite
that he receiued, or if he had not once proffered too bee
thankfull: thou wouldest deny hym too haue requited. But this
man hath weeried hym self daie and night, and neglected all other
dewties, yeeldyng hymself whollie too this one, and waityng
narowly that no occasion might escape hym. Now then,
shall the cace bee all one as well of him that neuer had any care
of requityng, as of hym that neuer lefte seekyng how too doo
it? Thou dooest mee wrong if thou chalenge the deede at my
hande, when thou seest I wanted no will too dooe it. Too bee
short, put the cace thou wart taken prisoner, and that I hauing
laied all my goodes too gage too my credito
                     •
                  r, too make money
for thy rauns
                     •
                  mme, dooe sa
                     •
                  le 
                     〈◊〉
                   sore Winter by coastes
all l
                     •
                  ied with Pyrates, and therewith all doo passe through all

perill, that the sea can yeelde besides the annoyances whiche it
hath of it owne, and that afterward hauing iourneyed through
many desertes, and commyng at length too thesame Searouers
whiche all other men shunned and I sought, I finde thee
raunsomed alreadie by another man: wilte thou deny mee too
haue requited kyndenesse? Furthermore, if in that voyage of
myne, I lose the Monney by Shipwrecke whiche I had made
too dooe thee good with, yea, or if I fall intoo captiuitie myself,
while I seeke too rid thee out of captiuitie: wilt thou deny
mee too haue requited thy kyndnesse? Truely, the Athenians
call Harmodius and Aristogiton Tyrantquellers: And Mutiussis
leauyng of his hande vppon the Altar of the enemie, was
asmuche as if he had slaine Porsena: and valeantnesse that wrestleth
ageinst Fortune, dooeth alwaies gette the vpper hande,
though shee bryng not the woorke of her purpose to effecte. He
that hath pursewed occasions fliyng from hym, and euer hunted
after newe, whereby he might requite kyndnesse: hath performed
more than he whom speedie opportunitie hath made
thankfull at the first pushe, without painestakyng.
            
            
               ¶T .xv. Chapiter.
               
                  THy benefactor) sayeth he) hath yeelded thee twoo
thinges: namely his Will and his Déede: and
therfore thou owest him twoo thinges likewyse.
Woorthely myghtest thou saye this to him that
hath yeelded thee an idle will. But thou canst not
say it vnto him, that both is willing and also indeuereth, leauing
nothing vnassayed: for he hath performed both the partes,
as muchas in him lyeth. Agein, it is not alwayes required
that nomber should bee ma
                     •
                  ched with nomber. For some one
thing is woorth twayne. Therefore so 
                     •
                  oreward a will and so
desyrouse to requyte, standeth in sted of the deede dooing. But
if the will without the deededooing bee not auayleable too requyte
kyndnesse: then is noman thankfull to God, vpon whom
nothing is bestowed but the will. Towarde the Gods (sayeth

he) wee can performe nothing else but our will. Well then, if
I bee able too render nothing else vntoo the same man also
whom I owe a good turne vntoo: why should I not bee thankfull
in yeelding that thing too a man, than whiche I can bestowe
no greater vppon the Gods?
            
            
               ¶The .xvi. Chapiter.
               
                  YET thou demaundest what I think of the
matter: and thou wilt haue mée too shape
thee a full answere. I say, let the one thin
                     •
                  
his good turne requyted: and let the other
assure himself he hath not requyted. Let the
giuer hold the receyuer discharged, and let
the receyuer acknowledge himselfe bound
still. Let the one say, I haue it: and let the other say I owe it.
In all matters of controuersie let vs euer sette the welfare of
both parties before vs. The vnthankful must be shet out from
all excuses whereuntoo they might haue recourse too colour
their wrangling withall. I haue doone all that might bee. Yea
and doo so still. What? Thinkest thou our Aunceters were so
vnwyse, that they vnderstoode it not too bee vtter wrong, too
haue put no difference betweene him that hath wasted awaye
the Monnie that he hath borowed, in whoredome or at Dyce:
and him that hath lost both his owne goods and other mennes
too, by Fyre or by Robbing, or by some other heauyer misfortune?
And yet too the intent that men should know, that faithfulnesse
was in any wyse to be performed, they admitted none
excuse at all. For it were better that a feawe sho
                     •
                  ld bee put
euen from their iust excuce, than that all should pretend some
excuce or other. Thou hast doone what thou couldest too requyte.
Let him accept it as sufficient, but think thou it too little.
For like as if hee can fynd in his hart too passe ouer thyne

                     •
                  arnest and diligent indeuer vnregarded, he is vnworthie too
bee requyted with kindnesse: Euen so also art thou a verie
Churle, if thou on the othersyde, in respect that he accepteth

thy good will for payment, bee not so muche the more willingly
beholden too him because thou art released. Thou must not
catche hold of it, nor call witnesse vppon it: but thou must seeke
occasion neuerthelesse too requy
                     •
                  e. Requyte the one because
he claymeth it and the other because he releaseth thée. Requyte
the one because he is euil, and the other because he is not euill.
And therfore there is no cause why thou shouldest thinke thyself
too haue anie interest in this question, namely whither a
man that hath receiued a benefite of a wyseman, ought too requyte
it him if he cease too bee a wyseman, and is becomme an
euill man. For thou oughtest too redeliuer the gage that thou
haste taken of a wyseman, yea and too discharge thycredit too
an euill man: and why shouldest thou not also requyte his good
turne? Bycause he is chaunged, shall he chaunge thee? What
if thou haddest taken a thing of a man in helth? shouldest thou
not restore it too him if he were sick? wee ought alwayes too
beare more with our freendes weaknesse, than that comes to.
Surely suche a man is sick in minde: let him bee helped, let
him bee borne withall. For folie is a disease of the minde. Too
the ende that this maie bee the better vnderstoode, I thinke it
good too make a distinction.
            
            
               ¶The .xvii. Chapiter.
               
                  THere are too kyndes of Benefites or good
turnes. The one a perfect and trew benefite,
which cannot bee giuen but by a wyseman
and too a wyseman: The other a vulgar
and comon benefite, whereof the intercourse
is among vs that haue no skill. Asfor
this latter, there is no dout but I ought
too requyte it too him that I owe it, whatsoeuer he is, whither
he bée becomme a murtherer, a theef, or an adulterer. Felonies
haue their Lawes: and iudgement will better redresse suche
caces than vnthankfulnesse. Let noman make thee euill, bycause
he is euill. Uppon an euill man I will cast awaie a good

turne: and vntoo a good man I will render it. So will I requyte
the good man, bycause I owe it: and the euill man, bycause
I would not bee in his det.
            
            
               ¶The .xviii. Chapiter.
               
                  OF the other kynd of benefite, there is some
dout: as that if I could not take it but beeyng
wise, neither could I render it but too
one that continewed wise. For put the cace
I render: yet cannot he receiue it, because
he is not maister of hymself in this behalf,
but hath forgone the knowledge how too
vse it. It is all one as if yee should bid mee, strike the ball backe
too a maimed hande. It is a follie too giue a manne the thing
that he cannot take.
               That I maie begin too answere thee from this last pointe:
I will not giue him that whiche he cannot take, but I will restore
though he cannot receiue it. For I can bynde no manne
but him that taketh: but I maie discharge my self, if I doo but
onely deliue. What if he cannot vse it? Let him looke too that.
The fault shalbee in hym, and not in me.
            
            
               ¶The .xix. Chapiter.
               
                  TOO redeliuer (saieth he) is too deliuer agein
too suche a one as shall receiue. For what if
you owe a man Wine, and he hidde you powre
it into a Racket or a Sine? Will you saie you
haue deliuered it ageine? Or will you deliuer
that ageine, whiche shalbe spilt betwixt you in
deliueryng?
               Too redeliuer, repaye, re
                     •
                  der, or restore, is too yeeld agein
the thing that a man owes, vntoo hym that hath interest in it,
when he listeth too haue it. And that is the onely thing too bee
performed on my behalfe. Too owe hym the keepyng of the
thyng when he hath taken it ageine of mee, that is now a further

charge. I owe hym the performaunce of it, but not the kepyng
of it: And I had muche leuer that he should so go it, than
that I should not restore it. I must pare my 
                     〈◊〉
                   that which
I haue had of hym, though he will go
                     •
                   w
                     ••
                  h it by and by intoo
the Stewes. Although he would sende mee a harlotte too receiue
it, yet should I paie it hym: and albee it that he would put
the monney that he receiueth of mee into his looce bosome, yet
shall I paie it. For I muste yeelde it agein: but when I haue
once yeelded it, I am not bounde too stand still too the keeping
and sauyng of it. I am bounde too keepe his benefite while it
is in my hande vnrestored. As long as it is with mee, reason
would I should saue it. But if it bee called for, it must bee deliuered
though it should bee spilte in the handes of the receiuer.
I will render it too a good man, when it shalbee expedient for
hym: and too an euill man when he calleth for it.
               Thou canst not (saieth he) render hym his benefite after
suche forte as thou receinedest it. For thou receiuedest it of a
wiseman, and thou renderest it too a foole.
               I render now vntoo hym, in suche wise as he is now able
too receiue: and it is not made the woorse by mee, but by hym:
and therfore I will restore that whiche I haue receiued. Loke
too whom I would render suche a maner of benefite as I receiued,
if he came too wisedome ageine too him will I (as long
as he is euill) render suche a one as he can receiue. But (saieth
he) what if he bee become, not onely euill, but also 
                     〈◊〉
                   and
outrageous, as Appol
                        •
                     odorus and Phalaris were? Wille th
                     ••
                  
also render too suche a one the benefite that thou receiuedest
of hym?
               Nature su
                     ••
                  ereth not so greate an al
                     •••
                  ation in a wiseman.
For in fallyng from the beste too the woorste, it cannot bee but
some printes of goodnesse must remaine in hym, euen when he
is become euill. Vertewe is neuer so vtterly wyped out, but
that she leaueth somme furer markes in the mynde, than any
chaunge can scrape quite and cleane out. When the wild beastes
that haue bin brought vp emong vs, doo breake awaie intoo
the wooddes, they keepe still somme parte of their former

tamenesse: and looke how muche they bee wilder than the tamest
beastes, so muche are they tamer than the wildest beastes,
and suche as neuer were vsed too mannes hande. No man that
euer stacke vnto wisedome, hath falne intoo extreme wickednesse.
He is died of a deeper hewe, than maie bee vtterly washed
out, or altered quite into another colour. Agein I demaunded
of thée, whither this wilde man bée become so too hymself onely,
or whither his woodnesse bursteth out too the hurt of all the
common weale? For thou tellest me of Apollodorus and Phalaris
the tyrant, whose nature if a man haue, and kepe his naughtinesse
too himself, why should I not render suche a one his benefite,
too the ende I may quite and cleane ridde my handes of
hym for euer? But if he not onely delight and take pleasure in
mannes bloud, but also execureth vnsaciable crueltie in murtheryng
folke of all ages, and rage not for anger, but of a certaine
geeedinesse 
                     〈◊〉
                   bée cruell: If he cutte the throtes of children
before their Parentes faces: if he bée not contented with
simple Death, but dooth torment folke, and not onely burneth
those that must dye, but also broyleth them: if he make an arte
of murder, and bée alwaies in gore bloud: the nonrendering of
a benefite is too small a punishment for suche a one. Whatsoeuer
it was whereby he and I were linked togither, that hath
he quite cutte or by breaking the bondes of the Lawe of Na
                  
                     •
                  ure.
If a manne haue doone 
                     〈◊〉
                   for mee, and a
                     ••
                  erward maketh
warre againste my C
                     •
                  untrie: In so dooyng he hath loste
whatsoeuer he had de
                     •
                  erued, and it were a wickednesse to ren
                  
                     •
                  er
any 
                     •
                  yndnesse vntoo hym. Agein, if he assaile not my countrey,
but yet is noysomme too his owne, and beeyng separated
from my countrey, troubleth his owne: That so greate leawdnesse
of his harte hath neuerthelesse cutte hym of: and though
it haue not made him an open enemie too mée, yet hath it made
hym hatefull too mee: and I must haue a former and a more
speciall regard of that dewtie which I owe too all mankynde,
than of that whiche I owe too any 
                     •
                  euerall persone.
            
            
               ¶The .xx. Chapter.
               
                  
                  BUT although this bée so, and that I
stand free in all respectes from that
tyme foorth that he by violating all
Lawe hath brought too passe that
nothing may bee vnlawfull ageinst
hym: yet I beléeue there is this measure
too bee obserued on my behalf,
that if my benefite shall neyther augment
his power to the destruction of
the comon state, nor stablishe that whiche he hath alreadie, and
so consequently may bee rendered without preiudice of the comon
weale▪ I shall render it. I shall saue his child lying in the
Cradle. For what doth this benefite hurt any of those whom
his crueltie teareth in pecces? But I shall not feede him with
Monnye to maynteyne his Gard in wages. If he desyre Marble
or fyne cloth of mee: my furnishing of his supersluetie can
hurt noman. But affor men & Armour, I shal not help him with
them. If he desyre as a great gift, to haue cunning Players of
Enterludes, Lemans, and such other thinges as may tame his
feercenes: I will willingly offer them. Though I would not
send him Galyes and Shippes: yet would I sende him Rowbarges
and Chambershippes vppon the water. And though he
bee vtterly past all hope: yet shall I render vnto him, with the
same hande that I bestow benefites vppon others. Howbeeit
(too say the truthe) the best remedie for suche dispositionsis
the shortening of their lyfe. And the be
                     •
                  thing that can bee for
him that will neuer bee reclaymed, is too bee dead. But it is
a rare thing too lynd one so farre gone; and it hath alwayes

                     〈◊〉
                   counted a woonder, like as the opening of the Earth, and
breaking forth of fyre out of the Caues of the Sea. Therfore

                     〈◊〉
                   withdraw ourselues from it, and speake of suche things
as wee may mislyke without terrour. Too the ordinarie euill
persons whom a man may fynd in euery Market, and of whom
euery man is afrayd, I shall render the good turne that I haue
receyued. I must not make my gayn of his naughtines. Looke
what is not myne, let it returne too the owner, bee he good or

bad. How diligently would I sift this thing if I should not
render, but bestowe? This place craueth a merrie tale.
            
            
               ¶The .xxi. Chapiter
               
                  ACerteine Philosopher of Pythagoras sect,
hauing bought a cupple of Ragges of a
Taylour vppon trust (a greate matter)
came ageine within a feawe dayes after to
his shop too pay hym, and found it shet vp.
And when hee had knocked a good whyle,
one being disposed to 
                     •
                  est at the Pythagorin
                        •
                     
                  
sayd; wherefore losest thou thy labour? The Taylour whom
thou séekest is dead and buryed, whiche thing is a gréef vntoo
vs that forgo our freendes for euer, but peraduenture not
vntoo thee that knowest hee shalbee borne ageine. Hereuppon
this our Philosopher caryed home his three or sower Pence
verie glad, shaking them diuers tymes in his hand as he went.
Afterward fynding fault with this his secret pleasure of nonpayment,
and perceyuing his owne ouerliking of that simple
gayne: he returned too the Shop, and sayd too himself: he liueth
to theeward, and therfore pay that thou owest him. With
that woord he thrust the fower Pence intoo the Shop at a cranie
of the wall where the closing of the panel was shroonk, and
there left them, laying punishment vppon himself for his fond
desire, least hee myght acqu
                     •
                  y
                     •
                  t himself with the coueting of
other mennes goodes.
            
            
               ¶The .xxii. Chapiter.
               
                  IF thou owe a man any thing, seeke too pay
it. And if noman demaund it, call thou vppon
thyself. Bee he good or bee he bad, it
makes no matter too thee. For his naughtinesse
ought not too vauntage thee. Render
and blame thyselfe, and forget not in
what maner the duetyes bee diuyded beetw
                     •
                  xt
you. Unto him wee haue inioyned forgetfulnesse, and vntoo

too thee wee haue commaunded myndfulnesse. Notwithstanding,
when wee saye that hee whiche hath doone a good turne
should forget it: that man mistaketh vs, which imagineth that
wee would haue 
                     〈…〉
                   of the thing (specially
being a most honest thing) quyte out of his head. Wee
inioyue some thinges aboue measure, too the end they may returne
too their true & proper measure. When wee say he must
not remember it: our meening is, that he must not proclayme
it, nor brag of it, nor gréeue the partie with it. For if some folke
doo a man a pleasure: they make al the wold priuie to it. Their
talke is of it in their sobernesse, and they cannot holde it in in
their dronkennesse. They blab it out too straungers, and they
tell it in counsell too their freendes. Too alay this ouerfreshe
and vpbrayding myndfulnesse: wee willed him that had doone
the good turne, too forget it: and by inioyning him more than
could bee performed, wee counselled him too keepe silence.
            
            
               ¶The .xxiii. Chapiter.
               
                  AS oft as thou haste too deale with suche as
are of smal trust, thou mayst exact more than
inough, too the ende that inough may bee
performed. To this end serue the ouerreaching
spéeches, y• by an vntruthe, men may
come too the very truthe. Therfore he that
sayd there were some that were whyter thā
snowe, and wyghter than the wynd (which is impossible to be)
sayd it too the end that the most which could bee, should bee deléeued.
And he that sayd: more vnmouable than these Rockes,
and more violent thā this streame: ment to perswade no more,
but that some man is as vnmouable as a Rock. An ouerreach
neuer requyreth so muche as it pretendeth. But it aduourheth
thinges incredible, that it may atteyne too the credible. When
wee say, let him that hath bestowed a benefite forget it: our méening
is hee should bee as one that had forgotten it. Lee not the
remembering of it appeare, nor thy mynd ronne vppon it. And
when wee say that a benefyte must not be chalenged agein, wée

doo not wholly take away the demaunding of it agein: for oftentymes
euill men haue neede of a chalendger, and good men
haue neede of a rememberancer. For why? If a man bee ignorant
of the opportunitie, may I not shewe it him? may I not
discouer my neede vntoo him? Why should he beelye himself,
or bee sorie that he knew it not? Let a watchewoord bee now
and then vsed, howbeeit after a modest sort, not with exacting
nor with clayming of dewtie.
            
            
               ¶The .xxiiii. Chapiter.
               
                  
                     SOcrates sayed in audience of his freendes:
I would fayne buye mee a Cloke if I had
monnye. He craued of noman, yet admonished
he them all, and euery man demed that
he woulde take it of him. And why should
they not? For how small a thing was it
that Socrates receiued? But it was a greate
matter too haue deserued too bee the man of whom Socrares
would receiue. He could not haue giuen them any incling more
meeldly. I had bought mee a Cloke (quoth he) if I had had
monnye. After this, whosoeuer made most haste, gaue too late.
For Socrates had wanted alredie. Thus for the bitter chalen
                     •
                  
                  gers
sakes, wee forbid clayming: not that it should neuer bee
vsed: but that it should bee vsed verie sildomme.
            
            
               ¶The .xxv. Chapiter.
               
                  
                     ARistippus being on a tyme delighted with an
oyntment, sayed: euill comme too these effeminate
fellowes that haue disfamed so trim
a sauour. The same Euill comme too them,
is too bee sayed too these leawd and importunate
huddlers vp of benefites, who haue
barred so goodly a thing as the admonishment
of freendes. Yet notwithstanding, I will vse the Lawe of
freendship, and will clayme a good turne at his hande, of whom
I would haue craued one: and he shall accept it as another benefite,

that he might requyte it. I shall neuer saie in waie of
complaynt,

                     I tooke him vp poore sillie soule by shipwreke cast on shore,
                     And made him partener of my Realme: More foole am I therefore.
                  
This is not an admonishing, but rather a reuyling. This is
euen too bring benefites intoo hatred. This is euen the hyghwaie
too make it eyther lawfull or delightfull too bee thanklesse.
It is ynough and too muche, too call a man too rememberance
with suche lowly woordes as these. If euer I haue
pleasured you, or if euer you haue had lyking of anie thing of
myne. And let him saie ageine on the other side:

                     Yea truly, you haue pleasurde mee: you tooke mee vp right poore
                     And needy when that I was cast by shipwrecke on your shore.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶The .xxvi. Chapter.
               
                  BUt (sayth he) this kynd of dealing booteth
vs not. For he dissembleth, and hath forgotten
it. What should I doo? Thou demaundest
a thing most necessarie, and wherein it
becommeth this matter too bee finished:
namely after what sort thanklesse persones
are too bee borne with. Truly euen with a
quiet, meeke, and stout minde. Let neuer vnkinde, vnmyndfull,
and vnthankfull persone so muche offende thee, but that neuerthelesse
it maie still delight thee too haue giuen. Let neuer
any wrong compell thee to saie, I would I had not doone it.
Let euer the vnluckynes of thy benefite like thée. It shall repēt
him euer, if thou repent neuer. Thou must not bee gréeued, as
though some strange thing had happened 
                     〈◊〉
                   thou mightest
rather wonder if it had not happened. Some are 
                     •
                  eared awaie
with paines, some with cost, some with perill, some with shamefull
shamefastnesse, least by requityng thei might acknowledge
themselues to haue receiued; some through ignorance of their
duetie, some through flothe, and othersome by beeing ouer buzied.
See how the vnmeasurable lustes of menne bee alwaies
gaping and alwayes crauing. Thou canst not wo
                     •
                  nder too sée

noman requyte where noman receyueth inough. Whithe of
these is of so stedy and sound a mynd, that a man may safely put
him in trust with a benefite? One outrageth in Lecherie: another
serueth his Paunche: onother is giuen all too gayne, and
yet hee hath the Diuell and all alredie: another is atteynted
with enuye: and another is redy to ronne vppon the Swordes
point through ambition. Hereunto ad dulnesse of wit and do
                  
                     •
                  ing
old age, and contrariwyse the turmoyling and continewall
vnquietnesse of a restlesse mynd. And heervnto the ouerregarding
of a mannes owneself, and his straunge swelling for
whiche he is too bee despysed. What shall I speake of the frowardnesse
of suche as stryue too bee ouerthwarting, or of the
lyghtnesse of suche as are euer fisking too and fro? Put vnto
                     •
                  
these, headie rashuesse, and fearfulnesse whiche neuer giueth
faithfull coūsell, and a thousand other errours that we tumble
intoo: as the malapert bragging of them that be most towardly,
the discord of them that bee most familiar, and (whiche is a
comon maladie) the trusting of those that bee most vnsuer, the
despyzing of thinges that men haue in possession, and the wisshing
for suche thinges as there is no hope too obteyne.
            
            
               ¶The .xxvii. Chapiter.
               
                  SEekest thou faithfulnesse whiche is
a thing most quiet, among the affections
whiche are thinges most vnquiet?
If thou set the trewe Image
of our lyfe before thee, thou wilte
thinke thou beholdest the Portrayture
of a greate Citie that is taken,
where al regard of shame and right
is shaken of, & force reigneth insted
of sage aduyce, as though a trumpet were blowen to make hanocke
of al things. Neyther fire nor swoord is spared; mischéef
is broken looce from law: and religion itself, which hath sheelded
Supplyantes euen amid the weapons of their enemies,

cannot stop them awhit from their ronning to the spoyle. One
snatches out of a pryuate place, another out of a publik place,
the third out of an vnhalowed place, and the fourth out of a halowed
place. This mam breakes vppe, that man leapes ouer,
another man mislyking the narrownes of his waie, ouerthroweth
the thinges that stop him, and commeth too his luker by
casting doune of thinges. One wasteth without bludshed, another
beares his bootie in bluddie hande, and there is noman
but he catches sommewhat from another man. In this greedinesse
of mankinde, verely thou art tootoo forgetfull of the
comon cace, whiche seekest a soberman among snatchers. If
thou bee greeued at thanklesse persones, bee greeued also at
ryottous persones, bee greeued at nigardes, bee greeued at
vnchaste folkes, bee greeued at sikfolke, at mishapen folke, and
at palefolke. It is in deede a greeuouse fault, an intolerable
fault, a fault that breaketh the felowship of mankinde, and a
fault that cutteth asunder the concorde wherwith our weakenesse
is vnderpropped, and throweth it too the grounde. Neuerthelesse,
it is so comon a thing, that not euen he that complayneth
most of it, can cleere himself of it.
            
            
               ¶The .xxviii. Chapiter.
               
                  EXamine thyself whither thou haste rendered
kindnesse too euery man that des
                     •
                  rued
it at thy hande: or whither there was euer
anie good turne lost vppon thee: or whither
thou beare in minde 
                     〈◊〉
                   the good turnes
that euer were doone thee: and thou shalt
see that the thinges whiche were giuen
in thy childhoode, were forgotten ere thou wast a strippling:
and that the thinges whiche were bestowed vppon thee in thy
youth, continewed not stil in minde vnto thyne old age. Some
thinges wee haue lost, somme wee haue cast from vs, somme
haue krept out of our sight by little and little, and from some
wee ourselues haue turned our eyes. Too the ende I maie excuse

thy weaknesse for thee: first memorie is brittle, and not
sufficient for the nomber of thinges. It must needes sende out
as muche as it taketh in, and ouerlay the formest thinges
with the newest. So commeth it too passe that thy Nurce can
beare no sway with thee, bycause the age insewing hath layed
her benefite far of from thy hande. So commeth it too passe
that thou haste no regarde of thy schoolemaister. So commeth
it too passe, that whyle thou art buzie in sewing for the Consulship,
or standest for the preestod, he that gaue thee his voyce
for the Treasurership is forgotten. Peraduēture, if thou serch
thyself throughly, the fault that thou lookestfor, wilbee founde
in thyne owne bosomme. Thou doost wrong too bee angrie
with a generall fault, and thou dooest foolishly in not being
angrie with thyne owne fault. Too the ende thou mayst bée acquitted
thyself, beare with others. Thou mayest perchaunce
make him better by forbearing him, but thou shalt doutlesse
make him woorse by vpbrayding him. There is no reason that
thou shouldest harden his harte: If there bee anie shame left in
him, giue him leaue too keepe it. Oft tymes where as shame
was but sommewhat crazed, the oueropen reprouing of it defaceth
it altoogither. Noman is ashamed too bee that, whiche
he is seene to bee. A man groweth past shame when he is openly
detected.
            
            
               ¶The .xxix. Chapiter.
               
                  I Haue lost my good turne*. Doo we
terme the thinges lost whiche wee
haue consecrated too a holie vse? A
benefite is of the nōber of y• thinges
that are halowed, yea though it haue
ill successe whereas it was well bestowed.
*He is not the manne wee
tooke him for. *Let vs continewe
suche as wee were, vnlike too him.
The losse was euen then, but it appeered not till now. A thāklesse
persone is not brought to light without our owne shame,

because our fynding of fault with the losse of our bene
                     ••
                  te, is a
token wee looked not well too the bestowing of it. As muche
as we can, let vs pleade his cace with ourselues, th
                     •
                  s: peraduenture
he wist it not, peraduenture hee will doo it hereafter.
The patient and wyse Creditor hath made some Detters too
become g
                     •
                  od, by bearing with them and by tendering their
cace with respit. The same thing must wee doo. Wée must cherishe
the fainting faith.
            
            
               ¶The .xxx. Chapiter.
               
                  I Haue loste my good turne *. Thou
foole, thou discernest not the tymes
of thy losse. Thou hast lost it in déed:
but that was at thy first bestowing
of it, and now it is come too light.
Discretion hath greatly preuayled
euen in those thinges that seemed
as good as lost. As the diseases of
the bodie are too bée handled softly,
so are the diseases of the mynd also. Oftentymes the thing
that would haue bin vnwound with leysure, is broken of by
the roughnesse of him that pulles it out. What neede euill
woordes? what needes complaint? what needeth brawling?
Why doost thou discharge him? Why doost thou let him go?
If he bee vnthankfull, now oweth he thee nothing. What reason
is it too set him on a chafe, vppon whom thou hast bestowed
manie thinges, that of a doutfull freend hee may beecome an
vndouted enemie, and seeke, too excuse himselfe by raysing a
slaunder vppon thee? There are inow t
                     •
                  at will say, I am sure
there is some greate matter in it, that he could not beare with
him too whom he was so much beholden. Somewhat there is
in it. There is noman but hee may stayne the estimation of his
better by complayning of him, although he vtterly deface him
not. Neyther will a manne bee contented too surmyze lyght
thinges, when hee seeketh credit by the great
                     •
                  esse of his vntruthes.
            
            
               
               ¶T .xxx. Chapiter.
               
                  HOw much is the other way better, wherby
the hope of frendshippe is reserued to him,
yea and the verie frendship itself, if he will
returne too his right mynd? wilfull goodnesse
ouercommeth euill men. And there is
not any man so hard harted, nor so deadly
an enemy in his mynd ageinst things that
are worthie too bee loued, but he loueth good men euen when
he is at his worst, specially fynding himself beholden too them
euen in this respect also, that hee susteyneth no displeasure at
their handes for not requyting. Therefore bende thyself too
thincke thus: My kyndnesse is vnrequyted: what shal I doo?
Euen as the Gods the best Patternes of all thinges doo, who
begin too benefite man when he knowes it not, and continew
it towardes him when hee is vnthankfull for it. One chargeth
them with carelessenesse of vs, another with vnindiffe
                  
                     •
                  entnesse,
and the third thrustes them out of this world, and
le
                     •••
                  s them alone, slothfull & dumpish, without light or without
woorking. And whereas wee bee beholden too the Sonne
for our distinction betweene the tyme of Labour and Rest: for

                     •
                  scaping the confuzion of endlesse nyght so as wee bee not
drowned in darknesse: for gouerning the yere by his course, for
nourishing of our bodyes, for making séedes too sprout foorth
and for rypening of our frutes: Yet there are that terme him
some fyrie stone, or a ball of fyre packed togither by chaunce, &
what yee else will rather than a God. And yet for all that, the
Gods, lyke good parentes that smyle at the ill language of
their young Children, cease not too heape benefites vppon
those that dout of y• Authors of them: but holding on with their
goodnesse in equall rate, doo distribute them too all Nacions,
hauing this one propertie peculiar too themselues, namely to
doo good. They besprin
                     •
                  le the earth with seasonable showers:
they moue the Seas with the windes: they disseuer the tymes
by the course of the Starres: they me
                     •
                  ken both the Winter

and the Somer with the intercours
                     •
                   of a
                     •••
                  lder aire: & quietly
and mercifully doo they beare with the e
                     ••
                  our of our drerye
soules. Let vs folow their exāple. Let vs gi
                     •
                  e still, though wée
haue giuen many thinges in vayne afore. Let vs giue neuerthelesse
vntoo others: yea and let vs giue ageine too the same
parties by whom we haue sustey
                     •
                  ed losse. The falling doune of
a House neuer made man afrayd too build. When our dwelling
is consumed by Fyre, wee lay foundacion ageine ere the
floore bee through cold: and when Cities are destroyed, wee
oftentymes reere them agein on the same Plot. So stubborne
is the mynd toward good hope. Mennes woorkes would bee
at a point bothe by Sea and by Land, if they listed not too ad
                  
                     •
                  enture
agein vppon thinges misdecayed.
            
            
               ¶The .xxxii. Chapiter.
               
                  HE is a man vnthankful. He hath not
hurt mee, but himselfe. When I bestowed
my Benefite, I vsed it as I
thought good. And I wilnot therefore
bee the 
                     •
                  lower, but the warer in
giuing. Looke what I haue lost in
this man, I will recouer in another.
Yea I will doo the same man good
still: and lyke a good husbandman, I
will ouercome the barrennesse of the soyle, with composte and
tilth. I haue lost my good turne, and hee hath lost all mennes
hartes. It is no point of noble corage too giue and loze, but
too loze and giue.
               FINIS.
               All honour, thankes, and prayse
bee giuen too God alwayes. AMEN.
               
            
         
      
   