
      
         
            
            
            
               The ninth
Tragedie of Lucius
Anneus Seneca
called Octauia.
            Translated out of Latine
into English, by T. N.
Student in Cambridge.
            Imprinted at London,
by Henry Denham.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HOnorable,
the Lorde Robert
Dudley, Earle of Lecester,
Baron of Dinghby, of the most royall
order of the Garter Knight, one
of the Queenes Maiesties most honorable
priuie Counsell,
and Maister of hir Maiesties
Horsse.
T. N. wisheth health, with increase of
honor and vertue.
            
               AFTER THAT I
had waded, right honorable,
in the translating
of this Tragedy
called Octauia, written
first in Latine by
that notable and sententious
Poet Seneca,
& desired, as the common
custome is, some
Patron, that myght
both bring aucthoritye
to thys my little
Booke, and also, if neede should be, defend it from
the bitter taunts of enuious tongs, I haue not espied
right honourable, any one, either for his bountiful
goodnesse towardes my friends (which cōmonly
men respect) or else for his fauourable, and gracious
humanitie toward schollers (in whose numbre

I am) vnto whome I might so iustly giue this smal
combroustrifle, and especiall token of good wyll,
as to your Lordship: whose honourable goodnesse
or rather magnificence, both your honours nurcerie
of learning, and, as I can boldely say, the vniuersitie
of Cambridge, with my pore friends, haue
most abundantly tasted of: which your Lordships
most honourable curteousnesse, not to recōpence
in any one iote or tittle therof (which is not in our
small and slender power) but with a well meaning
heart, in some parte to gratefie your honour, I haue
among al other most vnmeete, presumed, both to
employ my trauayle on this trim Tragedie, before
others muche better able, and also to salute your
curteous Lordship, with these rude and vnsauorie
first fruits of my yong study: most hūbly beseching
your honor to accept my good will and trauayle.
            Your honours to commmaund.
            
               
                  
                     HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               IF thou (gentle
Reader) hast any thing
in this small Uolume
which may commende
vnto thée, the trauaile
and paines of the Aucthor
of thys Englishe
Tragedie, surely I am
much the gladder: but
if all doe not aunswere
thine expectation (as it
muste needes so bèe bycause,
there is nothing
harder than to please all men) sith that thou art not priuy
to all things, disclose not rashly thy foolish iudgement. If
the translating of Latine, or other Bookes of other languages,
into our mother tong, doth eyther profite the cō
               mon
wealth, or the wryter at all, do not then condemne
the yong sprong writers, if that in all pointes they please
not thée which may by the grace of God, through thy gē
               tle
and curteous accepting of a little toye, hereafter employ
their labour to more serious and weyghty matters,
both to their owne commoditie and thy learning, and especially,
to the profit of our natiue countrie. Wey therefore
wisely, what thy friendly good will may do, not vnto
me onely, which am like to doe very little, but vnto others,
whose hearts with fauour thou maist easly win, to
the vndertaking of greater matters: and then willingly
embrace both my good will, and trauaile.
            Farewell.
         
         
            
            ¶The Argument of the Tragedie
            
               OCtauia daughter to prince Claudius grace,
            To Nero espousde, whome Claudius did adopt
            (Although Syllanus first in husbandes place
            She had receyu'd, whome she for Nero chopt)
            Hir parents both, hir Make that should haue bene,
            Hir husbands present tirannie much more,
            Hir owne estate, hir case that she was in,
            Hir brothers death, poore wretch lamenteth sore.
            Him Seneca doth persuade his latter Loue,
            Dame Poppie, Crispynes wife that sometime was,
            And eke Octauias maide, for to remoue.
            For Senecks counsell he doth lightly passe:
            But Poppie ioynes to him in mariage rytes.
            The people wood into his pallace runne,
            Hir golden fourmed shapes which them sore spytes,
            They pull to ground: this vprore nowe begunne,
            To quench, he some to griesly death doth sende.
            But hir close cased vp in dreadfull barge,
            With hir vnto Campania coast to wende,
            A band of armed men, he gaue in charge.
            
               ¶The speakers in this Tragedie.
               Octauia
               Nutrix.
               Chorus Romanorum.
               Seneca
               Nuntius.
               Agrippina
               Poppea
               Nero.
               Praefectus.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               ¶The fyrst Sceane.
               Octauia.
               NOw that Aurore with glittering streames,
               The glading starres from skye doth chase,
               Sir Phoebus pert, with spouting beames,
               From dewye neast doth mount a pace:
               And with hys cheerefull lookes doth yéelde,
               Unto the worlde a gladsome daye.
               Go to, O wretch, with ample fielde
               Of heauy cares, oppressed aye,
               Thy grieuous wonted playntes recount:
               Doe not alone with syghes and howles,
               The seaysh Alcyones surmount,
               But also passe the Pandyon fowles:
               More irksome is thy state than theirs.
               O mother deare, whose death by fittes
               I nyl lament, but styll shedde teares,
               My grounde of griefe in thée it sittes.
               If that in shades of darksome denne,
               Perceyuing sense at all remayne,
               Heare out at large, O Mother, then,
               My great complayntes, and grieuous payne.
               O that immortall Clothos wrist,
               Had torne in twayne my vitall thredde:
               Ere I, vnto my griefe, had wist
               Thy woundes, and face of sanguine redde.
               O daye, which aye doth mée anoy:
               Since that tyme, did I more desire,
               The fearefull darkenesse to enioy,
               Than Phoebus freshe with faire attire.
               I haue abode the bitter hest
               Of stepdame dire, in Mothers place,
               I haue abode hir cruell brest,
               Hir stomake stout, and fighting face.
               
                  She, she for spyte vnto my case,
               A dolefull, and a graue Eryn,
               To Bridegromes chamber spousall space,
               The Stygian flashing flames brought in.
               And thée, alas, most pitious syre,
               With traytrous traynes hath shée bereft
               Of breathing soule with poysoned myre:
               To whome ere whyle, the worlde all left
               Unvanquisht from the Ocean Seas,
               By martiall feates did fréely yelde:
               And didst subdue with wondrous ease,
               The Brittaine brutes that fled the felde:
               Whome liuing at theyr propre swaye,
               No Romaine power did erst inuade.
               Now lo (full well lament I may)
               Thy spouse deceyt thy prowes hath lade:
               And now thy court, and chylde of yore,
               With homage serue a Tyrants lore.
            
            
               The seconde Sceane.
               Nutrix.
               WHom so the glistering pompe of royall place,
               With soden sight ynumd doth quite disgrace,
               Who so at courtly fléeting ebbing blase,
               Astonied sore, himselfe doth muche amase:
               Loe sée of late the great, and mighty stocke,
               By lurking fortunes sodaine forced knocke,
               Of Claudius quyte subuert and cleane extinct:
               Tofore, who helde the worlde in his precinct:
               The Britaine Ocean coaste that long was frée,
               He rulde at will, and made it to agrée
               Their Romaine Gallies great for to embrace.
               Lo he that Tanais people first did chase,
               
                  And Seas vnknowne to any Romaine wight,
               With lusty sheering shippes did ouerdight,
               And safe amyd the sauage freakes did fight,
               And rufling surging Seas hath nothing dread,
               By cruell spouses gylt doth lye all dead.
               Hir sonne lykewise more fiende than Tygre fierce,
               Of naturall Mother makes a funerall herse.
               Whose Brother drenched déepe, with poysoned cup
               Poore Britannick, his senselesse soule gaue vp.
               
                  Octauia syster, and vnhappy make,
               Doth sore lament hir case for Britanus sake:
               Ne can hir ruthfull pyteous sorrow slake,
               Though Neros wrath do sore constraine hir grace.
               Shée nill esteemes the secret closset place:
               But boyling still with equall peysde disdaine,
               With mutuall hate gainst him doth burne againe.
               My true and trustye loue, that I do beare,
               In vaine I sée doth striue to comfort her.
               Reuenging gréedie griefe doth streight repriue,
               T'appease hir smarte, the counsell that I giue.
               Nor flame of worthie brest doth once relent:
               But heaps of griefe, hir corage do augment.
               Alas, what griefly déedes for to ensue
               My feare foreséeth: God graunt it be not true.
            
            
               The thyrde Sceane.
               Octauia. Nutrix.
               O Staggering state, O peerelesse yll:
               With ease Electra I repeate,
               And call to minde thy mourning will.
               With watred eyes, lyke smartiug sweate,
               Thou mightst lament thy father slaine,
               Still hoping that thy brother might,
               
                  That deadly déede reuenge agayne.
               Whome thou O tender louing wight,
               Didst safely shielde from bloudy foe,
               And naturall loue did closely kéepe:
               But Neroes dreaded visage loe,
               Doth feare me that I dare not wéepe,
               Nor wayle my parents ruthfull case,
               By cruell lot to slaughter cought:
               Ne suffers me this geniall face,
               To dash with teares, too dearely bought
               With brothers bloud: who onely was
               Mine onely hope in all my griefe,
               And of so many mischieues, as
               My comforte great, and sole reliefe.
               Nowe loe reserude for greater care,
               And to abide more lingring payne,
               Of noble famous lynage bare,
               A drouping shade I doe remayne.
               
                  Nutrix.
                  My Ladies heauy voyce me thought,
                  Within my listning eares gan sounde.
                  And snaylish age in going soft,
                  Unto hir thews is not ybounde.
               
               
                  Octauia.
                  O Nurse our dolours witnesse sure,
                  By curroll chéekes dystilling rayne,
                  And heauy hearts complaynt, endure.
               
               
                  Nut.
                  Alas what day shall rid of payne,
                  With care your well nie wasted hart?
               
               
                  Oct.
                  That sends this giltlesse ghost to graue.
               
               
                  Nut.
                  This talke good Madame set apart.
               
               
                  Oct.
                  In rule my state the destnies haue,
                  And not thy prayers, O Matrone iust.
               
               
                  Nut.
                  The doune soft easy God shall giue,
                  Your troubled minde, a time, I trust,
                  More swéete than euer you did liue.
                  
                     With feuell faire, as one content,
                  And glosed face, but onely please
                  Your man, and make, he will relent.
               
               
                  Oct.
                  The Lion fierce I shall appease,
                  And sooner tame the Tygre stout,
                  Than mankinde tyrants brutish breast.
                  He spites the noble raced route,
                  Contemnes high powers, dysdaynes the least:
                  Ne can well vse that princely wéede,
                  Which venomous parent wrapt him in
                  By huge vnspeakeable griesly déede.
                  Although that wight vnthankfull, grin
                  In Kingly throne, that he doth raigne,
                  Through cruell curssed mothers ayde:
                  Although he pay with death againe
                  So great a gyft, it shall be sayde,
                  And after fates in long spent age,
                  That woman wyght shall haue alway,
                  This eloge yet, and saying sage,
                  That he by hir doth beare the sway.
               
               
                  Nut.
                  Let not your ragious minde so walke,
                  But doe compresse your moodie talke.
               
            
            
               The fourth Sceane.
               Octauia. Nutrix.
               THough much I beare ye boiling brest do beate,
               And tollerably take deuorcements threate,
               Deathes only deadly dart, I sée an ende,
               Of all my broyle & pinching payne can sende.
               What pleasant light to me, O wretch is left,
               My naturall Mother slayne, and Sire bereft,
               Of breathing life, by treason, and by gilt:
               Of Brother eke depriude: with miseries spilt:
               
                  And wayling ouercome: kept downe with care,
               Enuied of Make, which I dare not declare.
               To mayden subiect nowe, and nowe defied:
               What pleasant light can me, O wretch, abide
               With fearefull heart suspecting alwayes ought:
               Bicause I woulde, no wicked déede were wrought:
               Not that I feare Deathes griesly girning face,
               God graunt I doe not so reuenge my case?
               A better déede to dye: for, to beholde
               The Tyrantes visage grimme, with browes vprolde,
               And with soft tender lippes, my foe to kisse,
               And stande in awe of becks, and noddes of his,
               Whose will to please, my griefe with cares yfirde,
               Since brothers death by wicked wyle conspirde,
               Could neuer once vouchsafe for to sustaine,
               Lesse griefe to die, than thus to lyue in payne.
               His Empire Nero rules, and ioyes in bloud:
               The cause and grounde of death that tirant wood.
               Howe ofte alas, doth fansie fondly fayne,
               When slumber swete in pensiue parts doth raygne,
               And sléepe in eyes, all tyrde, wyth teares doth rest,
               I apprehende deare Brittans liuely brest?
               Ere whyle me thinks, his féeble shiuering hands
               He fenseth sure, with deadly blasing brands,
               And fiercely on his brother Neros face,
               With sturdy stinging strokes, he flyes apace.
               Ere while thilke wretch recoyleth backe againe,
               And to my thews for ayde retyres amaine:
               Him foming foe pursues with hast to haue:
               And whyle my brother I desire to saue,
               And in my clasped armes to shield him frée,
               His goarie bloudyed faucheon kéene, I sée
               The boysterous raumping fiende to tugge, and hale
               Through out my shiuering limmes, as ashes pale.
               
                  Forthwith a mightie trembling chattering quake,
               From wearie limmes, all souple sléepe doth shake,
               And makes me, wofull wretch, for to recount,
               My wailing sobbing sorrowes that surmount.
               Hereto, put to that gorgeous stately mouse,
               All glistring bright, with spoyles of Claudius house.
               His parent deare in bubbling boate did douse.
               That wicked sonne, this fisking dame to please.
               Whome yet escaping daungers great of Seas,
               He fiercer freake than waues that scantly rest,
               With bloudy blade hir bowels did vnbrest.
               What hope of health, can me, O wretch, abyde,
               That after them thilke waye I shoulde not ryde?
               My speciall foe, triumphant wise doth weight,
               With naked nates to presse, by louers sleyght,
               Our spousall, pure, and cleane vnspotted bed:
               Gainst whome, she burns, with deadly foode bloud red.
               And, for a meede of filthy strumpets sport,
               She causeth Make from spouse for to diuort.
               O auncient Syre, steppe forth from Limbo lake,
               Thy daughters heauie troublous cares to slake:
               Or your twygated hellysh porche vnfolde,
               That down through gaping ground I may be rolde.
               
                  Nutrix.
                  O pitious wretch, in vaine, alas in vaine
                  Thou calst vpon thy fathers senselesse sprite:
                  In whome, God wotte, there doth no care remaine
                  Of mortall broode, that here doth take delight.
                  Shall he, thinke you, asswage your sorie chéere,
                  Or shape you forth some sleight, t'appall your paine,
                  That could preferre, before his Brittan déere,
                  T'imperiall throne, a straunge begotten swaine?
                  And with incestiall loue benummed quyte
                  His brother Germanicks daughter that could plyght,
                  
                     And ioyne to him in solemne mariage rites,
                  With wofull, and vnluckye louers lightes?
                  Here sprang the roale of hurly burly great,
                  Here beastly venomous slaughter gan to sweate,
                  Here wylie treasons traines appeared first,
                  Here rules desyre, and brutyshe bloudie thirst.
                  
                     Sillanus first Prince Claudius sonne in lawe,
                  A bloudye mangled offring fall we sawe,
                  That in your graces Hymaeneal bedde,
                  Y matcht with you, he might not couche his hedde.
                  O monstrous slaughter, worthy endlesse blame:
                  In steade of gift vnto that wanton dame,
                  A Carcasse colde poore soule, and curelesse corse,
                  
                     Sillane was giuen against his will perforce.
                  And falsly then attacht of traytors cryme
                  As one conspyring death in Claudius tyme,
                  With lothsome streakes spewde out vpon the wall,
                  He all bedasht your fathers princely hall.
                  Eft stepped into seruile Pallace stroke,
                  To filthie vices lore, one easlye broke.
                  Of Diuelishe wicked witte this Princocks proude:
                  By stepdames wyle prince Claudius Sonne auoude.
                  Whome deadely damme did bloudie match ylight:
                  And thée, against thy will, for feare did plyght.
                  Through which successe this Dame of corage fine,
                  Durst venture, mighty Ioue to vndermine.
                  Who can so many cursed kindes report
                  Of wicked hopes, and actes, in any sort,
                  Or such a womans glosed guyles can name,
                  That raumpes at rule, by all degrées of shame?
                  Then holy sacred zeale put out of grace,
                  Hir stagring steppes, directed forth apace.
                  And stern Erinnis in with deadly steps,
                  To Claudius Court, all desert left yleps.
                  
                     And with hir dririe drakes of Stygian fort,
                  Hath quite distainde the sacred princely port.
                  And raging riuen in twaine both natures lore,
                  And right to wrongs misseshapen fourme hath tore.
                  That hautie minded dame first gaue hir make,
                  A deadely poysoned cup, his thyrst to slake.
                  Straight wayes againe through vyle vnkindly touch,
                  Hir Nero causde with him in hell to couch.
                  And thée, vnhappy Britt, in all that broyle,
                  Till that of breath, and lyfe he did dispoyle,
                  Thilk gréedie bloudie tyraunt neuer stent:
                  Whose dolefull death, for aye we may lament.
                  Ere whyle, vnto the worlde the starre that shone,
                  And was the staye of princely court alone,
                  Now loe, light ashes easly pufte aforne,
                  And griesly goast to graue with Torche yborne.
                  Whome blessed Babe, thy stepdame did lament:
                  Nor from hir gusshing teares, did scarce relent,
                  When as shee gaue eche trimme appointed parte,
                  And goodly portraide limmes with natures arte,
                  Of flaming stacke to be deuoured quite,
                  And sawe the scortching feruent fyre in sight
                  Thy naked ioynts to rauyne vp a pace
                  And like the flittering God thy comely face.
               
               
                  Oct.
                  Dispatch he me least with this hande he fall.
               
               
                  Nut.
                  That power you, nature graunted not at all.
               
               
                  Oct.
                  But wondrous dolor, great and wrathfull yre,
                  And miseries will it graunt without desyre.
               
               
                  Nut.
                  Nay rather cause your angry moody make,
                  With souple chéere his fury for to slake.
               
               
                  Oct.
                  What, that he will by guylte once slaine before,
                  Aliue againe my brother mée restore?
               
               
                  Nut.
                  Nay, safe that you may liue and issue beare:
                  Your fathers auncient court for to repaire.
               
               
                  
                  Oct.
                  That court doth wayte another broode they say.
                  And poore Britts death tugges me another way.
               
               
                  Nut.
                  Yet let the cities loue vnto your grace,
                  Your troubled minde confirme but for a space.
               
               
                  Oct.
                  Their mindes so prest to pleasure me, I knowe
                  Great comfort bring: but do not slake my woe.
               
               
                  Nut.
                  Of mightie power the people haue bene aye.
               
               
                  Oct.
                  But princes force doth beare the greater sway.
               
               
                  Nut.
                  He will respect his lawfull wedded wyfe.
               
               
                  Oct.
                  Hys minion braue can not so leade hir lyfe.
               
               
                  Nut.
                  Of no man she estéemde.
               
               
                  Oct.
                  But deare to make.
               
               
                  Nut.
                  She can not truely yet of wyfehoode crake.
               
               
                  Oct.
                  Ere long shée shall a mother eke be made.
                  So farre therein I dare most boldly wade.
               
               
                  Nut.
                  His youthfull heate at first in filthy loue,
                  With lusty, crusty pangs doth boyle aboue:
                  Thylke corage quickly coolde in lust apace
                  As vapour sone extinct in flame, giues place.
                  But holy, louing, chaste vnspot
                        •••
                      spouse,
                  Hir loue endureth aye with s
                        •••
                     d vowes.
                  That wanton first that there durst couch hir hed,
                  And tumbling stayned quite your spousall bed,
                  And being but your mayde hath ruled long,
                  Hir soueraigne Lorde, with beauties grace bestong,
                  That pranked Paramour pert shal croutch with pain,
                  When she your grace shall sée preferd againe.
                  For Poppie subiect is, and méeke of spright,
                  And now begins hir goastly tombs to dight:
                  Whereby she closely graunting doth bewray,
                  Hir secret hidden feare eche other day.
                  That swift, vnconstant, double wynged lad,
                  With cloute, before his blinded eyes, yclad,
                  That fickle brayned God, th'vnhappy boy,
                  Shall leaue hir in the midst of all hir ioy:
                  
                     Although for beautie bright the bell shée beare,
                  And goodly glistring garments new shée weare,
                  And now do vaunt hir selfe in gorgeous géere,
                  Shée shall not long enioy this gladsome chéere.
                  Be not dismayde, Madame, for such like paine,
                  The quéene of Gods was forced to sustaine,
                  When to eche pleasaunt shape the heauenly guyde,
                  And syre of Gods yturnde, from skyes dyd glyde.
                  The swannes white wings, to se how they could fadge
                  He did on him, and cuckoldes bullysh badge.
                  That God shone bryght in golden raynie showre,
                  To Danaes brest through top of fortred towre.
                  The twinckling starres, the twins of Laeda bright,
                  Whome Pollux some, and Castor call aright,
                  In large and ample space of starry scope,
                  With cristall glimmering faces shyne wide ope.
                  An Semeles sonne, whome Bacchus we do call,
                  In heauenly byrthright doth himselfe ystall.
                  And, Hercules that puissant champion stoute,
                  His sturdy brawnes his Hebe wyndes aboute.
                  Nor once regardes how goddesse Iuno fare:
                  Whose lowring stepdame nowe she is yframde,
                  That whyle on earth his prowes he did declare,
                  Against that mariage, aye, was sore inflamde.
                  Yet loe hir wise, and closely couched gréefe,
                  Debonaire face, obeysaunce to hir léefe,
                  Causde him, at length his minde for to remoue,
                  Through mortall féeres estraungde from Iunos loue.
                  And nowe that mighty heauenly goddesse great,
                  No more adred of mortall strumpets feat,
                  Aloft alone in clowdy bowre contents
                  The thundering Lorde which now to hir relents.
                  Nor now with earthly ladyes beawtie bright
                  Y fired, leaues his starry specked right.
                  Now Madame, sith on earth your powre is pight,
                  
                     And haue on earth quéene Iunos princely place,
                  And sister are, and wife to Neros grace,
                  Your wondrous restlesse dolours great appease.
               
               
                  Oct.
                  Nay, sooner shall the roaring frothy seas,
                  And mounting, flashing flawes ymatch the skie,
                  And smoking, stiffling parching fyer drye,
                  With danckish pooles agrée, and watrie fenne.
                  And griefly Plutos filthie feltred denne,
                  With starbright heauen shall sooner coupled bée,
                  And shining light, with glomie shades agrée,
                  And with the cleare drye daye, the dewy night,
                  Than vnto seruile lore of husband wyght,
                  That brutishwise in bloud takes his delight,
                  My heauy wofull mynd can I addresse,
                  Whyle brothers death my heart doth still possesse.
                  O that of heauenly powers the prince, and syre,
                  That shogges & shakes the earth, with thundering fyre
                  And, with his wondrous fearefull, curssed crackes,
                  And straunge misseshapen monsters which he makes,
                  Our fearefull musing mindes doth sore amase,
                  Would coyne some curelesse burning wyldefyre blase,
                  To pelt, and pashe with thumpping fyer bright,
                  That diuelish pate, that cruel curssed wyght.
                  We saw frō heauen, with beames forthshooting farre,
                  Doubtlesse a dreadfull hearie, blasing starre:
                  That spouted forth a mortall fyerie flake,
                  Whose force a princes bloude can onely slake:
                  Euen where that hayting carman sloe Boote
                  
                  With chilling colde all starck, of frosen pole,
                  Doth guide aright Charles whirling running rote,
                  In steade of nyght that neuer away doth role.
                  Loe, now the open ayre in euery streate,
                  With doggish tyrantes breath, is poysoned quite,
                  And dreadfull starres soone sodayne death doth threate.
                  To people, rulde by wicked Neros sprite.
                  
                     So sterne a freake, or mankinde tyrant stout,
                  Not Tellus with the Gods displeasde brought out,
                  When mightie Ioue neglected, she vp horlde,
                  Huge, vgly, monstrous Typhon to the worlde.
                  A sorer plague, a cleaner scouring scourge,
                  With bloudye pawes that cities bounds doth purge,
                  Is Nero dyre, this cruell, curssed wyght,
                  That doth him selfe gainst God, and man ydyght:
                  And thrusts from sacred shrynes, their quiet port,
                  And goodly temples gaye, the sancted sort:
                  That cities dwellers puts from countries fort:
                  That hath hereft his brother of his lyfe,
                  And launcht his mothers sides with goarie knyfe:
                  Yet doth this present lightsome day enioy,
                  And leades his lyfe, that doth vs sore anoy.
                  O father of heauen, in vain why doest thou throwe
                  Thy great vnvanquisht ratling thunder blowe
                  Upon the whistling woods, and ample seas,
                  With force of princely power thy wrath t'appease?
                  On such an hurtfull, and pernicious freake,
                  Thy due and iust conceaued yre to wreake.
                  Why stay thy mightie puissaunt braunes so long,
                  Ere thou fling downe, thy ratling cracking throng?
                  O Lorde that Nero once might paye the pryce,
                  Of all his diuelish déedes, and euery vyce,
                  Th'whole wide worlds tirant stern, where he a stroke
                  Doth beare: which he ouer lades with burdnous yoke:
                  Of princely syre yborne, but doth defame,
                  With beastely manners vyle his princely name:
               
               
                  Oct.
                  Unworth he is, your spousall chamber place:
                  But yet your destnies force, you must imbrace:
                  And well, abyde your fortunes crooked race:
                  Nor moue vnkindly Neros gauly yre.
                  One daye perchaunce, there wil, as I desyre,
                  
                     Some God reuenge your lamentable case:
                  And once, I trust, a gladsome daye shall be,
                  When you shall ioy a freshe in wonted place.
               
               
                  Oct.
                  Ah, no, now, long this court alas, we see
                  With heauie wrath of Gods displeased yre
                  Hath ouercharged bene: which Venus dyre
                  With Messalinas monstrous, ramping lust,
                  She first hath brought adown into the dust.
                  Who madly maryed to prince Claudius grace,
                  But little myndefull then of that same case,
                  And not regarding much th'appointed payne,
                  With curssed cressets maryed once agayne.
                  To which vnlucky 'incestuall bridall bed,
                  That drosell dyre that furious slut Erin,
                  
                  With hanging haire about hir hellish hed,
                  And gyrt with snakes with deadly step went in.
                  And flaming broandes from spousall chamber cought,
                  In both their blouds ybathde, hath quentched cleane:
                  And hath incenst prince Claudius burning thought,
                  In bloudy thratling stroke to passe all meane.
                  My mother first of wretches all the most,
                  With strype of deadly sworde gaue vp hir gost.
                  And nowe extinguisht quite left me forlorne,
                  With dolours pyning pangs and mourning worne.
                  And after hir in hellishe teame doth hayle,
                  Unto the senslesse soules of Plutos iayle
                  Hir make, and Britannick hir sonne that way:
                  And first this ruinous courte did she betray.
               
               
                  Nut.
                  Let be, Madame, with teares your face to dight:
                  Ne so renewe your bitter wayling iust:
                  Ceasse troubling now, your parentes pyteous spright,
                  That payed hath the price of raging lust.
               
            
            
               
               The fift Sceane.
               Chorus.
               GOd graunt the talke we heard of late,
               To rashly trusted euery where,
               And blowne abrode through eche estate,
               No badge of truth, that it may beare.
               And that no freshe espoused dame,
               Our princes thews doe enter in,
               But that Octauia kéepe the same.
               And that the séede of Claudius kin,
               May once bring forth some pledge of peace:
               That to the worlde rest may redowne,
               And wrangling strife may easly cease,
               And Rome retayne hir great renowne.
               The péerlesse princesse Iuno hight,
               Hir brothers wedlocke yoke retaynes:
               Why is Augustus sister bright,
               Where like betrouthed league remaynes,
               From stately pompe of court reiect?
               What doth deuoutnesse hir auaile?
               To saincted syre, who hath respect?
               What doth hir Virgins life preuaile?
               And, Claudius now in ground ylayed,
               Euen we to much vnmindefull bée:
               Whose worthy stem we haue betrayed
               Through feare, that made vs to agrée.
               In brest our elders did embrace,
               The perfect Romaine puissaunce,
               The true vnstained worthy race,
               And bloude of Mars they did aduaunce.
               The proude, and lofty stomackt traine
               Of lustie hautie minded kings,
               
                  They could not suffer to remaine
               Within this noble Cities wyngs.
               And iustly they reuengde thy death,
               O virgin chaste, Virginia pure,
               Depryude by syre of vitall breath,
               That bondage thou mightest not endure.
               And that his shamelesse brutishe lust,
               So good a méede might not enioy:
               Although by filthie force vniust
               Thy chastitie he would anoy.
               Thée likewise whome thine owne right hande,
               With sworde did pearce Lucretia true,
               Who tyrants rape couldst not withstand,
               Did bloudie broyles and warres ensue.
               And with thy proude disdainefull make
               Lorde Tarquin ympe of curssed séede,
               Correction due doth Tullia take
               For hir vnkindly shamelesse déede.
               Who on hir fathers mangled corse,
               To mischiefe bent, and wicked bane,
               The carman she to driue did force,
               His cruell brusing wombling wane.
               And quyte against all natures lawe,
               Euen from hir owne dismembred syre,
               The sacred rytes shée did withdrawe,
               Denaying wonted buriall fyre.
               This griefe or woful age doth féele,
               Through monstrous act against all kynde,
               When as in deadly craftye kéele,
               To Tyrrhen seas, and wrastling wynde,
               The proude presuming prince did put,
               His mother trapt in subtill sorte.
               The maryners appointed cut,
               The swelling seas from pleasaunt porte.
               
                  The clash resoundes with stroke of ores,
               The ship, out launcht, a pace doth spin,
               In surging froth aloofe from shores,
               And ample course of seas doth win.
               Which glyding forth with leusned planks,
               In pressed streames with peised weight,
               The riftes do open closed cranks,
               That hidden were, with secret sleight:
               And gulpeth vp the leaking wane:
               The wofull, roring noyse, and crye,
               With womans shryks themselues to saue,
               Doe reache, and beate the starrie skye.
               Then griesly present death doth daunce
               Before their eyes with pyning chéekes:
               Whose deadly stroke and heauy chaunce
               For to auyde, then eche man séekes:
               On ryuened rybs some naked lye,
               And cut the beating waues in twayne:
               And some their skilfull swymming trye,
               To get vnto the shore agayne.
               The greatest part that sayled there,
               By destnies dyre to men prefixt,
               In whirling swallowes drowned were,
               The brinks of seas and grounde betwixt.
               Quéene Agryppine hir garments rendes,
               She teares hir ruffled locks of heare,
               Abundant blubbring teares she spendes,
               Through déepe distresse of fainting feare.
               Who, when no hope of health she spies,
               Enflamde with wrath, which woes appeasde,
               O sonne, for so great gyftes, she cryes,
               Hast thou with such rewarde me pleasde?
               This kéele I haue deserued sure,
               That bare and brought thée first to light:
               
                  Who empyre witlesse did procure,
               And Cesars title for thy right.
               Shew forth thy fearefull spritish face,
               O Claudius now from Limbo lake,
               And of thy wife in wretched case,
               Reuenge and due correction take.
               Thy death I causelesse did conspyre,
               Which now I rue with wofull hart:
               I dressed eke a funerall fyre,
               Into thy sonne by deadly smart.
               Loe, now as I deserued haue,
               Untomde go to thy guiltlesse goast,
               Enclosde in seas in steade of graue,
               And wrestling waues of Romaine coast.
               The flasshing flawes do flap hir face,
               And on hir speaking mouth do beate,
               Anone shée synkes a certaine space,
               Depressed downe with surges greate:
               Anone shée fléetes on weltring brim,
               And pattes them off with tender handes:
               Through fainting feare then taught to swim,
               Approching death, and fates withstandes.
               At length on troubled seas displayde,
               Shée giuing ouer working vaine,
               And tyrde with streames is weary layde,
               Not able toyling strength to straine.
               In close, and secret silent brestes
               Of mates with hirto sea that yode,
               In whome no feare of death there restes,
               True faith vnto their quéene abode.
               Their ladies weather heaten lyms
               To helpe some fréely venter dare,
               Some in the coombrous waters swyms,
               And desperate daunger do not spare.
               
                  With cheerfull voyce they comfort hir,
               Though drawlyng draggling lims she drewe,
               To lyft hir vp with helpe they stirre,
               And nummed corps to strength renewe.
               What bootes it thée the death to shonne
               Of roaring raging rauening waues,
               From deadly sworde of wycked sonne,
               Alas poore wretch thée nothing saues?
               Whose huge and heinous curssed rage,
               Against all course of natures lore,
               Our after slow beléeuing age,
               Will scarce beléeue it done before.
               The diuelish man repynde with griefe
               When he his mother saued sawe,
               From swallowing seas haue safe reléefe
               And that she vitall breath did drawe,
               He grudgde with griefe: and in his heate,
               He huger mischiefe heapes to thys:
               He doth not once delay his feate,
               But hedlong rashly caried is
               Upon her death. A souldiour sent,
               Dispatchesh that he had in charge,
               His ladies brest his blade doth rent:
               Shée yéelding vp hir soule at large,
               From wretched corps for to entomb
               Hir slaughter man, she then besought,
               That bloudy blade within her womb,
               That first this woe to hir had brought,
               This, this accurssed breast (ꝙ shée)
               Which this vnkindly monster bare,
               From pinching paine may not be frée:
               Digge, slash the same, no mischief spare.
               When this with foultring tong was saide,
               At last hir sad and trembling goast,
               With latter sobbing sighes, vnstayde,
               Through goryd woundes leaues vitall coast.
            
         
         
            
            The second Act.
            
               The fyrst Sceane.
               Seneca.
               IN me with like cōsent, why didst thou smyle,
               With glosed lookes deluding mee a whyle,
               O fortune much of might & princely powre?
               To lift alofte to noble royall bowre?
               To th'ende that I to honours court extolde
               From stately seate might haue the greater fall,
               And rownde about in euery place beholde,
               Such dreadfull, threating daungers to vs all?
               I safer lay aloofe from enuies knockes,
               Remou'd among the craggy corsick rockes:
               Where as my minde there frée at propre swaye,
               With leysure did repeate my studies aye.
               A gladsome ioy alone it was to viewe,
               And earnestly to marke the heuens so blewe:
               And sacred Phoebus double whéeled wayne:
               And eke the worldes swift whyrling motion mayne.
               The Sunne so euen his second course to kéepe:
               And Phebes glyding globe so swiftly swéepe:
               Whom wondrous starting starres encompasse round.
               And to beholde, that shines in euery stound,
               The glystring beawtie bright of welkin wyde:
               Than which in all the worlde, nothing besyde,
               Of all this huge and endlesse worke, the guyde,
               More wondrous, nature, framde that I espyde.
               For all the bumping bygnesse it doth beare,
               Yet waxing olde is like againe to weare,
               And to be chaungde to an vnwyldie lumpe.
               Now prest at hand this worldes last day doth iumpe,
               
                  With boystrous fall, and tumbling rush of skie,
               To squease, and make this curssed kinde abie.
               That springing once againe, it may yéelde out,
               An other straunge renued vertuous route.
               As once before, it did, new sprong againe,
               What time Saturnus held his golden raigne.
               That blamelesse, chaste, vnspotted virgin cléere,
               A goddesse much of might, clept Iustice heere,
               With sacred sooth sent downe from heauenly space,
               At ease on earth did rule the mortall race.
               That people plaine knew not of warlick feates,
               Nor trembling trumpets tune, that rends, & beates,
               The souldiours eares: nor chasshing armour bright,
               That warring wyghts defend in field, and fight.
               Nor wonted was with walles to raumpire rounde,
               Their open Cities set in any stounde.
               To eche man passage free lay opened than:
               Nothing there priuate was to any man.
               And then the ground it selfe, and fertile soyle,
               Hir fruitfull bosome baarde all voyde of toyle,
               Into such bounden barus, a Matron good,
               And peaceable vnto so iuste a broode.
               But then, an other second race arose,
               Perceyued not to be so méeke as those.
               A third more wise, and witty sort vp starts,
               Of nature forged fit t'inuent new arts:
               As yet vnspotted quite with filthy vice.
               Soone after tho, they raundge with new deuice,
               That boldly venture dare in scudding race,
               Vnweldie beasts for to pursue apace.
               And mighty weying, struggling fisshes great,
               With watrie coates yclad, with fisshers feat,
               With net in window wise draw forth: and stréeke
               With craft of quill, the nibbling fysshes chéeke.
               
                  And silly byrdee begylde with pyning traine:
               And light foote déere, for lyfe that fling amaine
               In tangling gins entrapt, that safely holde.
               And sturdy scouling visagde buls controlde,
               On flesshie fillet necks, make weare the yoake:
               And erth ere that vngrubbed vp that broake:
               Which thē turnde vp, with plowmans shining share,
               In sacred bosome déepe, hir fruits kept thare.
               But now this age much worse than all the rest,
               Hath lept into hir mothers broken brest:
               And rustye lumpishe yron, and massie golde,
               Hath digged out, that was quite hidde with molde.
               And fighting fists haue armde without delaye:
               And drawing forth their bonds for rule to staye,
               Haue certayne seuerall ioyly kingdoms made,
               And cities new haue raside now rulde with blade,
               And fenseth, eyther with their propre force
               Straunge stounds, or them assaults, the which is worse.
               The starrie specked virgine floure of skyes,
               Which Iustice hight, that guiltie folke dis
                     ••
                  ies,
               Now lightlie estée
                     〈…〉
                  e of mortall people here,
               Ech erthly stound is fled, and comes not néere
               The sauage manuerd rout, and beastly rude,
               With dabbed wrists in goarie bloud embrued.
               The great desyre of grieflie war is sprong:
               And raping thurst of gold, it is not yong.
               Throughout the world, a mightie monstrous vice,
               Fowle, filthie, monstrous iust hath got the price,
               A pleasaunt tickling plague: whome longer space,
               And errour déepe haue fostred vp a pace.
               The heaps of vice, 
                     •…
                  akte vp in yeares long past,
               Abounding flowe in these out dayes at last.
               And this same troublous tyme, and combrous age,
               Oppresseth all m
                     ••
                   sore, both yong and sage.
               
                  Wherein those wicked waies that be, do raigne,
               And cruell, raumping woodnesse boyles againe.
               Lust strong in filthie touch, doth beare a swaye:
               And princes, ryot, now doth catch awaye
               With gréedie pawes, to bring it to decaye,
               Th'whole worlds vncredible welth, without delay,
               But loe, which staggring steps where Nero flings,
               And visage grim, I feare what newes he brings.
            
            
               The second Sceane,
of the second Act.
               Nero. Prefectus. Seneca.
               DIspatch with spéede, that we cōmaūded haue:
               Go, send forthwith some one, or other slaue,
               That Plautius cropped scalp, & Sillas eke,
               May bring before our face: go some man seke.
               
                  Prefectus.
                  I nill protract your noble graces hest:
                  But to their camps to goe am ready prest.
               
               
                  Seneca.
                  Gainst lynage, nought should rashly pointed be.
               
               
                  Nero.
                  A light thing 'tis for to be iust, I sée
                  For him, whose hart is voyd of shrinking feare.
               
               
                  Se.
                  A soueraigne salue for feare, is for to beare,
                  Your selfe debonair to your subiects all.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  Our foes to slea, a chefetaines vertue call.
               
               
                  Se.
                  A worthier vertue 'tis, in countries syre,
                  His people to defend with sword, and fyre.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  It well beséems such aged wights, to teach,
                  Unbrideled springolls yong, and not to preach,
                  Both to a man, and prince of ryper yeares.
               
               
                  Se.
                  Nay rather frolick youthfull bloud appeares,
                  To haue more néede of counsell wise, and graue.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  (This age sufficient reason ought to haue.)
               
               
                  
                  Se.
                  That heauenly powers your doings may alow.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  A madnesse't were to Goddes for me to bow,
                  When I my selfe can make such Goddes to be:
                  As Claudius nowe ycounted is we se.
               
               
                  Se.
                  So much the more, bycause so much you may.
               
               
                  Nc.
                  Our power permits vs all without denay.
               
               
                  Se.
                  Giue slender trust to fortunes flattering face:
                  She topste turuie turnes hir whéele a pace.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  A patch he is that knoweth not what he may.
               
               
                  Se.
                  A princes prayse I counted haue alway,
                  To do that same which with his honor stood,
                  Not that which frantike fansie counteth good.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  If that I were a mecock, or a slouch,
                  Eche stubborne, clubbish daw woulde make mée couch.
               
               
                  Se.
                  And whome they hate with force they ouerquell.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  Then, dynt of sworde the prince defendeth well.
               
               
                  Se.
                  But faith more sure defence doth seeme to me.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  Full méete it is that Caesar dreaded be.
               
               
                  Se.
                  More méete of subiects for to be belou'd.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  From subiects mindes feare must not be remou'd.
               
               
                  Se.
                  What so by force of armes you do wring out,
                  A grieuous worke it is to bring about.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  Well hardly then our will let them obay.
               
               
                  Se.
                  Will nothing then but that which well you may.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  We will decrée what we shall best suppose.
               
               
                  Se.
                  What peoples voyce doth ioyntly bynde or lose,
                  Let that confirmed stand. Ne. Swordes bloudy dynt
                  Shall cause them else at me to take their hynt.
               
               
                  Se.
                  God shéeld, and far that fact from you remoue.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  What then, why Seneck do you that approue,
                  That we contemnde, despysde, and set at nought,
                  With fynger put in hole (full wysely wrought)
                  Our bodyes bloude to seke should them abide,
                  That they might vs sometime destroy vnspide?
                  
                     Their natiue country boundes to bannisht bée,
                  Nor Plautius brest nor Syllas eke we sée
                  Hath broke, or tamde: whose cankred churlish yre,
                  Shapes bloudy freakes to quench our bodies fyre.
                  And chiefly when these trayterous absent clownes,
                  Such wondrous fauour finde in cities bownes,
                  Which those same exiles lingring hope doth féede:
                  Suspected foes with sworde we will out wéede.
                  And so Octauia shall that ioyly dame,
                  Continue after them their bloudy game.
                  And wend that way her nowne white brother went,
                  Such hye mistrusted things must néedes be bent.
               
               
                  Se.
                  It is, O prince, a worthy famous thing,
                  Amyds redoubted Lordes alone to ring:
                  And wisely worke your countries praise to saue:
                  And well your selfe to captiue folke behaue:
                  From cruell brutish slaughter to abstaine:
                  And voyde of moode to wreake your angry paine:
                  And, to the worlde a quiet calme to giue,
                  That all your age in peace their liues may liue.
                  This is a Princes praise without all cryme:
                  This is the path to heauen whereby we clyme.
                  So is Augustus prince and father cald
                  Of country first, in starbright throne ystald.
                  Whome as a God in minsters we adorne,
                  Yet troublous fortune tossed him beforne,
                  A great while long on lands, and ruffling seas,
                  Vntyll his fathers foes he could appease,
                  And through wars diuers course could quel thē quite.
                  To you did fortune yelde hir power, and might,
                  And raynes of rule without all bloud, and fyght.
                  And to your beck both land, and seas hath bent.
                  Grim deadly enuy daunted doth relent.
                  The Senate Lordes gaue place with frée consent:
                  
                     The battaylous route of knightes with willing hearts
                  (That same decre from sager syres departes)
                  Vnto the lay mens choyse doe well agrée.
                  Your grace the spring of peace they count to be.
                  And chosen Iudge, and guyde of mortall stock.
                  Your grace, your countries sacred syre, doth rock,
                  And rule with princely gorgeous tytle bryght,
                  The cyrcled worlde in rundell wysely ydight.
                  Which myghty mounting name to kéepe so great,
                  This noble city Rome, doth you entreate:
                  And doth commend vnto your royall grace,
                  Hir liuely lyms in charge for your lyues space.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  The gyft of Goddes it is, as we discus,
                  That Rome with Senate sort doth honour vs.
                  And that the feare of our displeasure great,
                  From cankred enuious stomaks maketh sweat
                  Both humble talke, and supplications méeke.
                  And were not feare all these would be to seeke.
                  Vnweldy, combrous cities members ill,
                  That prince, and cuntrie both doe seeke to spill,
                  To leaue alyue (which swell, and puffed bée,
                  Bycause of lynage greate, and hye degree)
                  What madnesse meere is it when as we may,
                  Euen with a word, such freakes dispatch away?
                  Sir Brutus stern, his brawns and armes did dight.
                  His soueraigne liege to slayne by force and might,
                  That erst had holpen him, and giuen him health,
                  And had endued him with princely wealth.
                  In brunt of raging war, vndaunted out,
                  That vanquisht many people strong, and stout,
                  Prince Cesar, mateht, by great degrées of power.
                  To Ioue, in stately chayre of starrie bower,
                  By diu'lish citizens wicked wyle, was slayne.
                  What store of bloudie, stiffling streames on molde
                  Did tattred Rome, of hir owne lims, behold?
                  
                     He by his noble vertues worthy praise,
                  Whome peoples common brute to heauen doth raise,
                  
                     August, among the Gods ysaincted well,
                  How many noble brests did he compell,
                  How many springolds yong, and hoarie heds,
                  Eche where disperst, to ligge in moulded beds?
                  How many men did he bereaue of breth,
                  Tofore proscript, that were condemnd to death?
                  When for the griesly feare of deadly dart,
                  From propre home they were constraind to part,
                  And flye Octauius force, and Lepidus might,
                  And not abyde sterne Marke Antonius sight,
                  Which then the ample worlde at once did guyde,
                  That into kingdomes thrée they did deuide.
                  To dumpish sadded syres, with heauy chéere,
                  Their childerns griesly cropped pates appéere,
                  Hong out beforne the Senates iudgement seat,
                  For eche man to beholde in open streat:
                  Ne durst they once lament their piteous case,
                  Nor inward séeme to morne to Claudius face.
                  The market stead, with bloud from bodies spued,
                  And lothsome mattrie streames, is all embrued:
                  And, quite throughout, their faces foule arayde
                  The pitcous gubs of bloud drop downe, vnstayde.
                  Nor here did this same slaughterous bloudshed stay:
                  
                     Phyllips, Pharsalia gastly fields eche day
                  The cromming rauening foules, and cruell beasts,
                  Long fed, with gobbets bigge of manly breasts.
                  Beside all this, the coast he scoured quyte
                  Of Sicill sea, and ships to warre yoyght
                  With force of armes did win: and hauock made
                  Of propre subiects, slaine with his owne blade.
                  The rundle round of lands with mightie maine
                  Of noble chieftaines stroake, reboyles againe.
                  
                     
                     Antonius ouercome in nauale fight,
                  To Egipt poasts in ships preparde to flight:
                  Not looking long to liue, nor hoping life.
                  Incestuous Egipt (through Antonius wife)
                  That worthy Romaine princes bloud, did sucke:
                  And couerd lye their goasts with durtie mucke.
                  Long wicked, waged ciuile warre, there stayed,
                  In Marke Antonius graue, with him ylayed.
                  
                     Augustus at the last, of conquest great
                  His dulled swords, that wounded soules did beat
                  In peaceable sheaths reposde, hath layde at rest:
                  And feare doth rule, and guide his kingdome best.
                  By readie force of armes at all assayes,
                  And Captaynes sayth he shéeldes himselfe alwayes:
                  Whome now his sonnes most worthy vertues prayse,
                  To heauen a consecrated God doth rayse,
                  And causeth all, in Churches for to place
                  The sacred Picture of prince Claudius grace.
                  And vs, the starrie raigne of Gods shall byde
                  If first, with dreadfull sword about vs wyde,
                  We wype away, what so our person staine:
                  And found our court with worthy stem againe.
               
               
                  Se.
                  Your noble spouse, sprong forth of saincted péere,
                  Of Claudius stock, the starbright Diamond cleere,
                  That goddesse Iuno wise hir brothers bed
                  Partaking, pressed downe with buttocks red,
                  Your graces princely court shall garnish gay,
                  With wondrous heauenly faire descended stay.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  Incestuous maried dames, from stock, and stem,
                  Detract all hope, that we should haue of them.
                  Nor vs, could she once loue, that we could sée,
                  Nor with our person once at all agrée.
               
               
                  Se.
                  In tender budding yeres, when loue supprest
                  With blusshing, hydes the flames of burning brest,
                  
                     Scant plaine appeares the loue they beare in déede.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  Thus we our selfe with hope in vaine did féede:
                  Although vndoubted signes, as body wryed,
                  And frowning lookes, which we haue oft espyed,
                  Hir spitefull, hating stomack did bewray
                  Which shee doth beare, whome duety byndes t' obay.
                  Which yet at last, bigge, boyling, gréeuous paine
                  With death determinde hath t'auenge againe.
                  We haue found out, for byrth, and beauties grace
                  A worthy make, for such an Empresse place:
                  To whome, that louely goddesse, Venus bright,
                  And mightie Ioue his spouse that Iuno hight,
                  And goddesse fierce in boysterous warlike artes,
                  Giues place for bodies séemely portraid partes.
               
               
                  Se.
                  Faith, meekenesse, maners mylde, & hashfull shame
                  Of spouse, those ought an husbande to reclame.
                  The perls of iudging minde, alone remaine,
                  Not subiect once to any rulers raigne.
                  The passing pryde of beawties numming grace
                  Eche day appals, and bleamisheth a pace.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  What praises woman wights haue in thē closde?
                  All those, in hir alone hath God reposde.
                  And such a péerelesse péere, the guides of life,
                  The destnies would haue borne to be our wife.
               
               
                  Se.
                  O noble prince such blinde, unlawfull loue,
                  (Do rashly credit nought) from you remoue.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  Whom Ioue can not repell that rules the clouds,
                  And pearcing raging flouds, therein him shrouds,
                  And raungeth through the raigne of Plutos pit,
                  And pulleth down in welkin hie that sit
                  The mightie powers of heauen, the God of loue?
                  And can I then his force from me remoue?
               
               
                  Se.
                  Swift winged loue, mens fanste fond, in vaine
                  A mercy wanting God to be, doth fame:
                  
                     And armes his hands with wounding weapons kéene
                  And bowes with burning bronds, for louers gréene:
                  Of Venus to be sprong, they all accord,
                  And blyndly forgde, of thunders limping Lorde.
                  Bland loue the minds great torment sore, appeares,
                  And buddeth first, in frollick youthfull yeares.
                  Who, while we drinke of fortunes pleasaunt cup,
                  With laysie pampring ryot, is nestled vp:
                  Whome if to foster vp, you leaue at length
                  It fleting, falles away with broken strength.
                  This is, in all our life, as I suppose
                  The greatest cause, how pleasure, first arose.
                  Which sith mankinde by brooding, bydeth ayt,
                  Through gladsome loue, that fierce wilde beasts doth sway
                  It neuer can, from manly breast depart.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  This selfe same God, I wish with all my harte
                  The wedlock lights to beare before our grace,
                  And fasten Poppie, sure, in our bed place.
               
               
                  Se.
                  The peoples griefe might neuer yelde to it:
                  Nor vertue can, the same at all, permit.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  Shall I alone to do, forbidden bée,
                  That euery patch may do? that gréeueth mée.
               
               
                  Se.
                  No tryfling toyes, the people lookes to haue
                  Of him, that ought to rule with wisedome graue.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  It pleaseth vs, with daunted power, to trye,
                  If peoples rashe conceyued rage, will flye.
               
               
                  Se.
                  Seeke rather for to please, and calme their mood.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  Ill ruled is that raigne where people wood,
                  Their subiect prince doth weld, as they thinke good.
               
               
                  Se.
                  When nought that they require they can obtaine,
                  They iustly then agrieued are againe.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  That gentle prayers can not win with ease,
                  By force to wring it out, it doth vs please.
               
               
                  
                  Se.
                  An hard thing 'tis the people not to haue
                  That of their Prince, which they do iustly craue.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  And horrible 'tis a Prince to be constraind.
               
               
                  Se.
                  Let not your subiects then so sore be raind.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  Why then the common brute abroade wil be.
                  How that the people haue subdued mee.
               
               
                  Se.
                  That no man trusts, that is of credit light.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  Be it so, yet many it marks with deadly spight.
               
               
                  Se.
                  With countrie péeres to meddle, it is afraid.
               
               
                  Nc.
                  To quippe and frump, 'tis nothing lesse dismaid.
               
               
                  Se.
                  Your grace may easly couch that budding brute.
                  Let saincted syres deserts with pliant sute,
                  Your graces mynde, remoue: let spouses age,
                  And curteous bashfull shame disrump your rage.
               
               
                  Ne.
                  Leaue off, I say, that we entend, to grutch.
                  For now your talke, our patience moueth much:
                  I pray you let it lawfull be to do,
                  That Seneck giueth not aduise vnto.
                  And we, our peoples wishes do defer,
                  While Poppie féele in wombling womb to ster,
                  The pledge of faithfull loue to me, and her.
                  Why do we not appoint the morrowe next,
                  When as our mariage pompe may be context?
               
            
         
         
            The third Act.
            
               The fyrst Sceane.
               Agrippina.
               THrough paunch of riuened earth, from Plutos rain
               With goastly steps, I am returnd again.
               In writhled wrists that bloud do most desyre,
               Forguiding wedlock vile, with Stygian fyre.
               
                  Let Poppie 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   these 
                     〈◊〉
                   coupled sure,
               Vnto my soune be ioynde in mariage pure:
               Whome mothers griefe, and hand reuenging wracks,
               Shall send with heaue and hoe, to funerall stacks.
               I alwayes doe remember well beneath,
               Where piteous, ghostly, crauling souls doe breath,
               Th' vnkindly, slaughterous déede, which to our spright
               Yet vnreuengde, is gréeuous, and of ryght.
               And, for the good I did, a cruell pryse,
               That deadly framed ship in crafty wise:
               And due reward, that he gaue me agayne,
               For helping him to rule of Empyres raigne:
               And eke that night, when as I did bewayle,
               Both lesse of ship, wherin we then did sayle,
               And mates vnhappy beath: and while I thought,
               For this accuessed d
                     •
                  ede, to haue besought
               The Gods, to trickling teares he gaue scant tyme,
               But twice encreased hath his diuelish crime.
               Quyte slaine wt sword, thrust through my bodies bosids
               And 
                     〈◊〉
                   layed through goa
                     ••
                  e mat
                     〈…〉
                  ing wounds,
               Deliuered safe, from seas 
                     〈…〉
                  ing sup,
               In antique court, my goast I yeelded vp.
               Nor yet his cancred, and vnfatiate hate,
               For all this bloud, doth Nero once abate.
               That tyrant dyre doth rage at mothers name,
               And séeketh wayes, my déedes for to defame.
               Who threating death to them that doe withstand,
               My shapes he dingeth downe, in euery land:
               My princely tyties large he scrapeth out
               In euery place, the whole wyde worlde about,
               Which my 
                     〈◊〉
                   parents loue did giue,
               To much vnto my 
                     〈◊〉
                  , while I did liue,
               
                  
                     ••
                  th a boy to g
                     •
                  yde, which nowe Irue.
               My poysoned Make, my ghost doth oft pursue:
               
                  And in my face, with burning bronds, doth flye.
               He stayes a space with earnest talke hard by,
               And threatneth sore, and doth impute his death
               And tombe he should haue had, to me beneath.
               And now desyres to haue some factious wight,
               That dare dispoyle my sonne of breathing spright.
               Let be, you shall haue one to worke this crime,
               I do require no long delaied time.
               Reuenging sprit Erin, a death doth coyne,
               Of life, that wicked tyrant, to purloyne.
               Sore smarting leaden strypes, and shamefull flyght,
               And pyning panges, with thurst and hunger dyght:
               That Tantalus spungelyke thurstie mouth befurd,
               And Sisyphus toyle shall passe, and Tityus hurd,
               And Ixions painefull, wombling whéele about,
               That teareth all his bodies parts throughout.
               Although that tyrant proud and scornefull wyght,
               His court with marble stone do strongly dyght,
               And princelike garnish it with glistring gold:
               Though troupes of souldiours shielded sure, vphold
               Their chieftaines princely porch: & though yet still
               The world drawne drye with taskes euen to his will,
               Great heapes of riches yéelde them selues to saue,
               Although his bloudie helpe, the Parthians craue,
               And kingdomes bring, and goods all that they haue,
               The time, and day shall come, when as he shall
               Forlorne, and quite vndone, and wanting all,
               Vnto his curssed déedes, his life, and more,
               Vnto his foes, his baared throat restore.
               Alas, vnto what end is all my paine,
               Or in what case, do now my vowes remaine?
               Whereto doth now thy rage, and destnies spyte
               Draw thée, O sonne, with braine benummed quyte?
               That to such monstrous heaps of ylls thy dame
               (Whō thou, with curssed mischiefe ouercame)
               
                  Hir wrath should yéeld? O that, ere to the light
               A sucking babe I brought thée forth in sight,
               And fed thée fyne with pappe, as princely borne,
               The fierce, wylde, sauage beasts had rent and torne
               My wombe, and bloudie entrells all beforne.
               Without all cryme, and wanting reasons pryde,
               Mine owne déere dandling childe yu shouldst haue dyde.
               And fastned sure to me shuldst aye beholde,
               The quiet place, where ghostlie soules be rolde:
               And sée thy graund syres great of worthy same,
               And syre Domitius eke of princely name,
               Whome nowe, both shame, and wayling doth abyde,
               That whyle they dure, from them shall neuer slyde.
               For which, both thée, O curssed barne, they may,
               And mée, that thée haue borne giue thankes for aye.
               But why ceasse I, with Hell to hide my face,
               Wyfe, stepdame, mother dire, in my life space?
            
            
               The seconde Sceane
of the thirde Act.
               Octauia. Chorus.
               DO not, alas, thus sore lament,
               But rather yet your mourning stay,
               Sith that the citie whole is bent
               To celebrate this ioyfull day:
               Least your great loue, and fauour both,
               Which I do count to be most sure,
               The more cause Nero me to loth,
               And eke his bitter wrath procure:
               And I fall out to be the ground
               To you of many mischieues vile,
               This same is not the first déepe wound,
               That I haue felt now this good while:
               
                  Farre worsse than this haue I abode:
               But of these troublous cares, this day
               Shall make an ende, I trust in God,
               Although with death he doe me pay.
               No man to sée shall mée constraine
               His bended browes knit furrowise,
               Nor step within the chamber raigne
               Of maide drest vp in brydall guyse.
               
                  Augustus sister I will bée,
               And not his wife, as wont I was:
               But onely paines remoue from mée,
               And feare of death, I will not passe.
               Yet canst thou, piteous wretch, once trust,
               Thy cruell husbands father law,
               Or these fewe things to haue so iust
               Whyle mischiefs yet in minde are raw?
               Now long reseru'd, vntill this day,
               And these same mariage rytes be past,
               Thou shalt poore wretch, without delay,
               A bloudie offring dye at last.
               Why thus with teares disfigured sore
               Thy wonted home doest thou beholde?
               Make haste, to shunne this deadly shore,
               And leaue this straughtrous Princes folde.
               
                  Chorus.
                  Loe se that day suspected long,
                  And whispered fame in all mens eares,
                  With glistring pomp of brydall throng,
                  To vs poore wretches, now appeares.
                  And Claudius broode, Octauias grace,
                  From Neros wedlock place expeld,
                  Departed is, whose spousall space,
                  Hath Poppie conquerour long tyme held.
                  The whyle, our pietie couched lyes
                  Kept downe with heauie, combrous feare,
                  
                     And slow reuenging griefe likewise:
                  Where doth the peoples power appeare,
                  That brake the force of princes great,
                  That conquerous citie lawes hath framde,
                  That worthy men to honors seat
                  Preferd, that warre and peace proclaimde,
                  That sauage people straunge did tame
                  That kyngs and princes caught in fyght,
                  Shut surely vp in prison frame,
                  To kéepe them close from all mens syght?
                  Loe, which we can not once abyde,
                  To see, where Poppies ymage trim,
                  Conioyned vnto Neros syde
                  All glistring bright, shines very brim.
                  Let force of armes pull downe that frame
                  And match with ground that ladies face
                  Too likely carued to his name,
                  And snatch hir downe from bedding place,
                  And let it forthwith flye with brandes
                  With Darts and Iauelins fiercely flong,
                  From pythie brawnes and sturdy handes,
                  Unto the princes courtly throng.
               
            
         
         
            The fourth Act.
            
               The fyrst Sceane.
               Nutrix. Poppea.
               FRom out of spousall bower dismaied wt feare,
               Whither go you? what secrets daughter deare
               Unknowen, maks you to looke so drouselye?
               Why spungelike lokes your face wt teares frō eye
               That fell? of truth, the tyme desired long,
               And wisshed for by prayers, and vowes among
               
                  Hath shined bright. Caesars wedlock are you:
               Your golden grace, whereof he toke the view.
               Him prisoner caught, and did him surely binde,
               So much the more, how much Seneck his minde
               Did seeke to chaunge, and wild from loue to wéeld.
               And Venus chiefe in loue hath made him yéeld.
               O in beautie passing all, what beds than downe
               More soft, haue borne thy weght: when yu with crowne
               Didst sit in middes of court, the Senate all
               At thy great beautie agast, thou didst appall:
               Whylst thou the Goddes with perfume sensedst fyne,
               And sacred altars drencht with thankfull wyne,
               Thy hed attyrde with veyle of yellowe hiewe.
               By Cesars syde thou wentst as princesse newe:
               When he aloft extolde aboue the reast,
               With hautie courage meryly went to feast.
               Like as King Peleus went some tymes to take
               Quéene Tethis, whom salt seas some bredde, his make
               Whose briding chambers, banquetwise ydrest,
               The Gods vouchsaaft to hallow with their hest,
               Both they that rule in skies, and eke in seas.
               But tell, O Ladie, tell, if it you please,
               What sodaine chaunce doth shade your beauties light?
               What meanes your colour chaunge from red to white?
               What moues those trickling teares, how standes your plighte?
               
                  Poppea.
                  With dreames, and griesly sights, this last night nurse,
                  My minde was troubled sore, but frayd much worse.
                  For when sir Phoeb his werie course had rid,
                  Whyle quiet resting night eche thing shadid,
                  My senses wearie fell in slumber déepe,
                  Whyle Nero me within his armes did cléepe.
                  Resoluing lims, at length gan sléepe discharge,
                  And long I rest not vnder quiets targe.
                  
                     For loe, I saw a rout, that brought me feare,
                  Come to my chamber with disheueled heare:
                  The Matrons sage of Latin lande did mourne,
                  And sounded shrycking syghes as though forlorne
                  They were, the dolefulst wights that liue on grounde.
                  And oft among the warlike trumpets sounde,
                  I sawe my husbandes mother terribly stande,
                  With threatning looke berayed with bloud, in hande,
                  A light fyre brand shée bare which oft shée shooke,
                  And made me goe with hir, through fearefull looke.
                  When downe we came through op'ned earth, she led
                  The way, I after went with bowing hed,
                  And musing much thereat, marke what I say,
                  My bed, me thought I saw, wherein I laye,
                  When first espousde I was to Rufe Cryspine:
                  
                  And he me thought, with first sonne of his line,
                  With many following them, against me fast
                  Did come, and me to cléepe did swift his hast,
                  And as he wouted was, he kisse me oft.
                  Then rusht into my house, with pace not soft
                  Amased Nero sore, in Crispines brest
                  That hidde his fauchion kene: feare shakte of rest
                  From me: I trembling stoode with quiuering feare,
                  And brest dismaide to speake made me forbeare.
                  Tyll now O 
                        ••
                     rse I met with thée, whose trust,
                  And faith into these words haue made me brust.
                  Alas what threatneth me eche griesty sprite?
                  What meanes of husbands bloude that dolefull sight?
               
               
                  Nutrix.
                  The hidden sacred vaine that moueth swift,
                  Which fantasie we call by secrete drift,
                  When we do take our rest, doth shew againe,
                  The things both good and bad that broyle in braine.
                  You maruel that you saw your make, and bower,
                  His goastly funerall stacks, at that same hower,
                  
                     Round clasped close in armes of husband new:
                  Hereto, the beaten brests with hands mou'd you,
                  And maidens heare, on mariage day displayed:
                  
                     Octauias friends with heauie harts, bewrayed,
                  Amids hir brothers booth, and fathers hall
                  Their heauie chéere, for hir vnlucky fall.
                  That dreadfull blasing flame of fyre foreborne
                  In Agryppinas hands, your grace beforne,
                  Which you did follow streight, declares renowne
                  To you, though enuy striue to kepe it downe:
                  The seat you saw beneath, doth promise you
                  Your state to stand full sure, not chaunging new:
                  That Nero prince in Crispins throat did hyde
                  His swerd, it tels that he in peace shall byde,
                  Unknowen to bloudie ruthfull warre for aye.
                  Therefore, madame, plucke vp your hart, I pray:
                  Receyue bothe mirth, and glée, cast feare asyde,
                  With ioye, and ease you may in bower abyde.
               
               
                  Pop.
                  To temples hie, where mightie Gods do dwell,
                  I will repaire, and offrings to them fell
                  In humble wise, their heauie wrath t'appease,
                  And me of mighty sight, and dreames to ease,
                  My second with shal be, that this feare all,
                  Upon my foes as sodaine chaunce may fall.
                  O nurse, pray thou for me, some vowes do make
                  Toth' Gods, that gostly feare his flight may take.
               
            
            
               The second Sceane
of the fourth Act.
               Chorus.
               IF stelth disclosde by blabbing fame,
               And lustie, pleasaunt, thankfull loue,
               Of Ioue be true: who fou
                     ••
                  ne did frame
               Of Swan, to come from skies aboue,
               
                  And did enioye the swéet consent,
               Of Ladie Laedas loues delight:
               Who like a Bull his labour spent,
               Through flowing fluds to carie quite.
               
                  Europa sliely stolne away:
               He will no doubt, leaue raigne of skye
               And Poppies loue disguisde, assaye.
               If he hir soueraigne beautie spie.
               Which he might well prefer before
               Faire Laedas sugred swéete delight:
               And Danaë whome he won of yore
               Amasde with golden shower so bright:
               Let Sparte now for Helens sake
               Of beautie, bragging fame vpraise:
               Admitte the Troian heardman make
               Of gayned spoyle triumphant praise:
               Faire Helen here is stained quite:
               Whose beautie bredde such boyling yre,
               That earth was matched euen in sighte
               With Troian towers consumde with fyre.
               But who is this that runs with feare opprest?
               Or els what newes brings he in panting brest?
            
            
               The thirde Sceane
of the fourth Act.
               Nuntius. Chorus.
               WHat sturdie champion stout doth ioy with glee
               Our chieftaines royall bower safe to sée,
               Then to his court, I counsell him to wend,
               Gainst which the populus rout their force doth bend.
               The rulers runne amasde to fetch the garde,
               And armed troupes of men, their towne to warde.
               
                  Nor woodnesse rashly cought through feare, doth ceasse,
               But more and more, their power doth increase.
               
                  Cho.
                  What sodain rage doth beat their broyling brain?
               
               
                  Nunt.
                  The garisons great with fury astonde againe,
                  And sturred vp for Quéene Octauias sake
                  With monstrous myschiefe vile, their rage to slake,
                  They rumbling rushe into the Pallace farre.
               
               
                  Chor.
                  What dare they do, their counsailers who are?
               
               
                  Nunt.
                  Aduaunce their Empresse old, subuert the new:
                  And graunt hir, brothers beds, as is hir due.
               
               
                  Chor.
                  Which Poppie now, with hole consent doth hold?
               
               
                  Nunt.
                  Yea that vnbrideled rage in brest vprold,
                  Sets them agog, and maks them wondrous wood.
                  What euer ymage grauen in marble stood,
                  If Poppies badge it bare, or if in sight,
                  It tended for to shewe hir beautie bright,
                  Though it on heauenly altares braue did stand,
                  They breake, or pull it downe, with sword or hand.
                  Some parts with ropes sure tyde, they trayle thē forth,
                  Which spurnd wt durtie f
                        •
                     ete, as though naught worth
                  With filthy stinking myre, they it all beray.
                  And with their déedes their talke doth iumpe agrée,
                  Which mine amased minde, thinks true to bee.
                  For fierie flames they threat for to prepare,
                  Wherewith to waste, the princes Pallace faire,
                  Unlesse, vnto their furious moode he giue
                  His second wife, and with Octauia liue,
                  But he by me shall know in what hard staie
                  The Citie stands: the rulers Ile obaie.
               
               
                  Chor.
                  Alack, what made you cruell warres, in vaine
                  To moue, sith prisoner loue you can not gaine?
                  You can not him ouercome, your fierie flame
                  He recketh not: his syrs ouercomes the same.
                  
                     He darkned hath those thundring things that shake
                  Heauen, Earth, Hel, Sea, al things yt makes to quake.
                  Yea mighty Ioue, in heauen that weares chief crowne
                  His flames from welkin hie hath brought adowne.
                  And you, not victors now, but vanquisshed,
                  Shall raunsome pay, the price of hearts bloud red.
                  Loue, pacient can not be, but hote in rage,
                  No easie thing it is, his wrath t'asswage.
                  
                     Achilles worthy wight, that was so stout,
                  To twang the Harpe he made in Ladies rout,
                  Prince Agamemnon sterne that boy benumd,
                  And rable rude of Gréekes with loue bronds bumd.
                  King Priams raigne he topsie turuis tost,
                  And goodly Cities great he chiefly lost.
                  And now my minde sore frighted stands agast,
                  What Cupides furious force brings vs at last,
               
            
            
               The fourth Sceane
of the fourth Act.
               Nero.
               AH, ah, our captaines sloe dispatching coyle,
               And our long suffring yre in such a broyle,
               That streames of bloud yet do not quench their rage
               Which they against our propre person wage.
               And that all Rome, with corses strewd about,
               Those cruell villaines bloud, doth not sweat out.
               But déedes already done, with death to pay
               A small thing 'tis, a greater slaughtrous day
               The peoples curssed crime, and eke that dame,
               Whome I did aye suspect, deserues the same.
               To whome, to yelde those peasaunts would me make:
               At last she shall, with life our sorow slake,
               
                  And with hir bodies bloud shall quench our yre.
               Then, shall their houses fall by force of fyre:
               What burning both, and buildings fayre decay,
               What beggerly want, and wayling hunger may,
               Those villaines shal be sure, to haue eche day.
               Ah Prouender pricks that vyle rebellious race,
               Ne can they once our fauour well embrace,
               Nor be content, with peace in quiet state,
               But broyling raumpe about with troubled gate.
               Hereon with boldnesse straight hereon they flie,
               With harebraind rashnesse hedling by and by.
               Well, they must tamed be with heauy stroke,
               And downe be kept with peise of weightie yoke:
               That they, with like attempt, doe not arise,
               Nor once cast vp their deadly peasaunts eyes,
               Against our louing spouses golden lookes:
               First punish them sure, then feare shal be their bookes,
               To teache them, at their Princes beck t'obaye.
               But sée at hand, whome fayth, and vertue rare,
               Lieutenant chiefe of camps, appointed thare.
            
            
               The fyft Sceane
of the fourth Act.
               Praefectus. Nero.
               THe vulgare peoples rash vnruly rage,
               The slaughter of a fewe did sone asswage,
               Which long wtstode our valiant force in vain,
               To tel your grace this newes, I come againe.
               
                  Nero.
                  And is this then ynough, doest thou so well,
                  O souldiour marke what doth thy captaine tell?
                  Hast thou with held thy hand from bloudie yre?
                  Is this the due reuenge that we requyre?
               
               
                  Prae.
                  The captaine guides of treason payd their hyre,
                  
                     By desperate death of bloudie sworde in fight.
                  The rout which sought with flaming fyre to light,
                  Our royall Pallace great, who would assigne
                  Their Prince what he should doe: and pull in fine
                  Our mate from vs dissoluing wedlocke bandes:
                  Whose hardie slaunderous tongs, & wicked handes,
                  Hir princely grace reprochfully withstandes,
                  From due reuenge, are they dysmissed frée?
               
               
                  Praef.
                  Shall subiectes payne, by griefe assigned bée?
               
               
                  Ner.
                  It shall assigne which time shall neuer weare.
                  Which neyther wrath may ende, nor yet our feare?
                  Shée shall appease our hie displeased minde,
                  Who first, our wrath deserued due to finde.
               
               
                  Praef.
                  Declare whose death your mood doth most require
                  Let not my hande be stayde from your desire.
               
               
                  Ner.
                  It seekes our sisters death, and trayterous hed.
               
               
                  Praef.
                  Those wordes through all my lims, hath stifnesse spred,
                  Opprest with griesly feare:
               
               
                  Ner.
                  Us to obay
                  Stands thou in doubt?
               
               
                  Praef.
                  On fayth why do you lay
                  So great a fault?
               
               
                  Ner.
                  Bycause thou sparedst our foe.
               
               
                  Praef.
                  Deserues a woman to be termed so?
               
               
                  Ner.
                  If treason she begin.
               
               
                  Praef.
                  Is any man
                  So sure, that hir accuse of treason can?
               
               
                  Ner.
                  The peoples rage:
               
               
                  Praef.
                  Those madde vnweldie wights
                  Who ordre could?
               
               
                  Ner.
                  Who could stir vp their sprits?
               
               
                  Praef.
                  No creature as I thinke.
               
               
                  Ner.
                  A woman could,
                  In whome a mind Dame nature hath vpfould,
                  To mischiefe prone: shée armed hath hir hart,
                  To hurt by myles: yet strength shée set a part,
                  Least shée vndaunted force with hir should beare:
                  But now hir slender power with doubting feare,
                  Is quickly quaylde, or else with punishment,
                  Which hir condemned state to mischiefe bent,
                  
                     To late doth ende: away with graue aduise,
                  Us with entreating séeke not to entyse.
                  Dispatch that we commaund on shipboorde borne,
                  Farre off to shore aloofe with dashing worne,
                  Commaund she be: that tunlike swelling brest
                  At length in storming stomack may take rest.
               
            
            
               The sixt Sceane
of the fourth Acte.
               Chorus. Octauia.
               A Lack the peoples bitter loue,
               And dyre good will to many one,
               Which, when they hoysted sayles aboue,
               With pleasaunt blastes it made to grone,
               And caried them farre from quiet shore,
               That faynting, leaues them in the déepe,
               And tombling, raging waters rore.
               
                  Cornelia piteous wretch, did wéepe,
               And sore bewayle hir sonnes estate:
               The peoples loue did vndoe them,
               And wondrous fauour, bred them hate:
               Great worthy péeres of noble stem:
               Of high renowne for vertues prayse:
               In faith and eloquence both did pas
               Their stomacks stout their fame did rayse:
               Ith lawes eche one most excellent was.
               And Scipio, thée did fortune yéelde
               Unto lyke death, and curssed wracke,
               Whome neyther honours pompe could shéelde,
               Nor fenced house thy foes kepe backe.
               Moe to repeate, although I could,
               Pure present griefe forbiddeth sore:
               
                  Ere whyle to whom the people would,
               Hir Fathers antique court restore,
               And Brothers wedlock once againe,
               Now wéeping, wringing hands poore wretch,
               Unto hir cruell, deadly paine,
               The armed souldiours do hir fetch.
               How safe doth pouertie lye content,
               In thetched house safe shrouded theare?
               Hie raysed towers with blasts are bent,
               Which often times them ouer beare.
               
                  Oct.
                  Where pull you mee poore wretche? alas,
                  Into what bannisht exiles place,
                  Would Nero haue mée for to pas,
                  Or fortune bids, with frowning face?
                  If now with fainting strength quite coolde,
                  And with my broyles all weried ceasse,
                  And longer life shée graunt me woolde,
                  If that shée work for to increase,
                  My sorrowes great with deadly dart,
                  Why is shée then so muche my foe,
                  In countrie that I maye not part,
                  And leaue my life before I goe?
                  But now no helpe of health I feele,
                  Alas I sée my Brothers boate:
                  This is the same, whose vaulted kéele,
                  His Mother once did set a floate.
                  And now his piteous Sister I,
                  Excluded cleane from spousall place,
                  Shall be so caried by and by:
                  No force hath vertue in this case,
                  No Gods there be my woes to wrecke.
                  The griesly, dreadfull drabbe Erin,
                  
                  Doth weld the worlde at nod and becke,
                  Who can lament my state, wherein
                  
                     I am, alas, sufficientlie?
                  How can Aëdon duely plaine,
                  My smarting streames of teares that I
                  Do shedde? whose wings I would be faine,
                  If destnies would them graunt, to weare.
                  Then would I leaue my mourning mates,
                  As swiftly fled, as wings could beare,
                  And so auoyde these bloudie pates.
                  Then sitting sole in shirwood shirle,
                  And hanging sure, by dandling twigge
                  With plaintiue pype I might out twirle
                  My heauye tuned note so bigge.
               
               
                  Chor.
                  The mortal broode the destnies guide:
                  Them selues they nothing can assure,
                  That certainly doth stedfast bide:
                  Which our last day of life, procure,
                  (Whereof we alwayes should beware,)
                  Much daungerous chaunces for to try:
                  Unto your troubled minde with care,
                  Now many saumples doe apply,
                  Which your accursed court hath brought,
                  To bolden you in all your broyle:
                  For what hath more your troubles wrought,
                  What doth against you sorer toyle,
                  Than fortune doth? thee first of all,
                  
                     Agrippas childe brought forth to life,
                  Whome we Tyberius daughter call,
                  By lawe, and eke Prince Cesars wyfe,
                  Of many sonnes a carefull dame,
                  I cannot choose but nowe recount,
                  Whose worthie, glorious, ample name,
                  Throughout the world doth much surmount.
                  So oft with bellie bolne that bare
                  Desyred fruits, and peaces pledge,
                  
                     Ere long thou suffredst exiles care,
                  Strypes, chaines, and bolts of yron wedge,
                  And mourning much, which so did frame,
                  That death they causde thée to abyde.
                  So Liuia, Drusus luckie dame
                  In male kinde babes, did hedling slyde,
                  Into a cruell monstrous déede,
                  And death sore pearcing deadly dart.
                  Hir Mothers fates doth Iulia speede,
                  To folow streight with all hir hart,
                  Who after longer wasted time
                  With bloudie fauchion kene, was slaine,
                  Although for no iuste cause, or crime.
                  Your Mother eke that once did raigne,
                  Who then estéemd of Claudius well,
                  Did wisely weld his court at will,
                  And fruitfull was, as you can tell,
                  What could not hir desire fulfill?
                  Shée sometime subiect to hir slaue,
                  To death was put with souldiours blade.
                  What shée, that casly hope might haue,
                  Toth skies, hir raigne to rise haue made,
                  Prince Neros lustie parent great?
                  First tost with shipmans boysterous force,
                  Then torne with sword in Princes heat,
                  Did shée not lye a senseles corse?
               
               
                  Oct.
                  Lo me the tyrant stern will send
                  To yrcksome shades, and hellish sprits.
                  Why wretch do I the tyme thus spend?
                  Draw me to death you to whose myghts,
                  False fortune hath bequeathed mée.
                  I witnesse now the heauenly powre.
                  What doest thou bedlame? leaue to flée,
                  With prayer to Gods, who on thée lowre.
                  
                     I call to witnesse Tartar déepe,
                  And sprytes of Hell reuenging freaks
                  Of hainous facts, in dongeon stéepe,
                  And Syre whome death deserued wreakes.
                  I do not now repyne to dye,
                  Deck vp your ship, and hoyse your saile,
                  On frothing seas to windes on hie:
                  Let him that guydes the helm not fayle,
                  To séeke the shore of Pharian land.
               
               
                  Cho.
                  O pippling puffe of western wynde,
                  Which sacrifice didst once withstand,
                  Of Iphigen to death assignde:
                  And close in cloude congealed clad,
                  Did carie hir from smoking ares,
                  Which angrie, cruell Uirgine had:
                  This prince also opprest with cares,
                  Saue from this painefull punishment,
                  To Dians temple safely borne:
                  The barbarous Mores to rudenesse bent,
                  Then Princes courts in Rome forlorne,
                  Haue farre more ciuile curtesie:
                  For there doth strangers death appease
                  The angrie Gods in heauens on hie,
                  But Romaine bloud, our Rome must please
               
               FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶Imprinted at London, by
Henry Denham, dwelling
in Pater noster rowe, at the
signe of the Starre.
         
         
            
            ¶Faultes escaped.
            In C. ij. page. 2. line. 32. for soone reade some, and in the
same line, for doth reade do
            In the last leafe of C. page. 2. line. 15. for thy reade hir
            In D. i. page. 2. line. 10. for Into reade Unto
            In E. j. page. 2. line. 8. for wysely reade wyse
            In G. j. page. 2. line. 1. for things reade thumps
            In G. ij. page. 2. line. 11. for Which reade Praef. Which
            In ye next line of ye same page, for Shée reade Ner. Shée
            
         
      
   