
      
         
            
            
               
THE RAPE OF LVCRECE.
            
            By Mr. William Shakeſpeare.
            
            Newly Reuiſed.
            LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Roger Iackson, and are to be ſolde at his ſhop neere the Conduit in Fleet-ſtreet. 1616.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONOVrable, HENRY WRIOTHESLEY, Earle of South-hampton, and Baron of Tichfield.
            
            
               THE Loue I dedicate to your Lordſhip is without end: wherof this Pamphlet without beginning is but a ſuperfluous Moity. The warrant I haue of your Honourable diſpoſition, not the worth of my vntutord lines makes it aſſured of acceptance. What I haue done is yours, what I haue to doe is yours, being part in all I haue, deuoted yours. Were my worth greater, my duty ſhould ſhew greater, meane time, as it is, it is bound to your Lordſhip; To whom I wiſh long life ſtill lengthned with all happineſſe.
            
               Your Lordſhips in all duety, William Shakeſpeare.
            
         
         
            
            The Argument.
            
               
                  LVcius Tarquinius (for his exceſſiue pride ſurnamed Superbus) after he had cauſed his own father in law Seruius Tullius to be cruelly murthered, and contrary to the Romane lawes and cuſtomes, not requiring or ſtaying for the peoples ſuffrages, had poſſeſſed himſelfe of the kingdome: went accompanied with his ſonnes and other noble men of Rome to beſiege Ardea; during which ſiege, the principall men of the Army meeting one euening at the Tent of Sextus Tarquinius, the Kings ſonne, in their diſcourſes after ſupper, euery one commended the vertues of his owne wife: among whom Colatinus extolled the incomparable chaſtity of his wife Lucretia. In that pleaſant humor they alpoſted to Rome, and intending by their ſecret and ſodaine arriuall, to make triall of that which euery one had before auouched, onely Colatinus finds his wife (though it were late in the night) ſpinning amongſt her maids, the other Ladies were all found dancing and reuelling, or in ſeuerall diſports. Whereupon the Noble men yeelded Colatinus the victory, and his wife the fame. At that time Sextus Tarquinius being enflamed with

               Lucreces beauty, yet ſmothering his paſſions for the preſent, departed with the reſt backe to the Campe, from whence he ſhortly after priuily withdrew himſelfe, and was (according to his ſtate) royally entertained and lodged by Lucrece at Colatium. The ſame night, he trecherouſly ſtealeth into her Chamber, violently rauiſht her, and early in the morning ſpeedeth away. Lucrece in this lamentable plight, haſtely diſpatcheth meſſengers, one to Rome for her father, another to the Campe for Colatine. They came, the one accompanied with Iunius Brutus, the other with Publius Valerius: and finding Lucrece attired in mourning habite, demanded the cauſe of her ſorrow. She firſt taking an oath of them for her reuenge, reuealed the actor, and whole manner of his dealing, and withall ſuddenly ſtabbed her ſelfe. Which done with one conſent, they all vowed to root out the whole hated family of the Tarquins: and bearing the dead body to Rome, Brutus acquainted the people with the doer and manner of the vile deed: with a bitter inuectiue againſt the tyranny of the King, wherewith the people were ſo mooued with one conſent, and a generall acclamation, that the Tarquins were all exiled, and the ſtate gouernment changed from Kings to Conſuls.
         
         
            
            The Contents.
            
               1 LVCRECE praiſes for chaſte, vertuous, and beautifull, enamoreth Tarquin.
               
               2 Tarquin welcomed by Lucrece.
               
               3 Tarquin ouerthrowes all diſputing with wilfulneſſe.
               4 He puts his reſolution in practiſe.
               5 Lucrece awakes and is amazed to be ſo ſurpriſed.
               6 She pleads in defence of Chaſtity.
               7 Tarquin all impatient interrupteth her, and rauiſheth her by force.
               8 Lucrece complaines on her abuſe.
               9 She diſputeth whether ſhe ſhould kill her ſelfe or no.
               10 She is reſolued on her ſelfe-murther, yet ſendeth firſt for her Husband.
               11 Colatinus with his friends returne home.
               12 Lucrece relateth the miſchiefe: they ſweare reuenge, and ſhe to exaſperate the matter killeth her ſelfe.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE RAPE OF LVCRECE.
            
               
                  1 The praiſing of Lucrecia as chaſt, vertuous and beautifull, maketh Tarquin enamored.FRom the beſieged Ardea all in poſt, 
               Borne by the truſtleſſe wings of falſe deſire,
               
               Luſt-breathed TARQVIN leaues the Romane hoſt,
               And to Colatium beares the lightleſſe fire,
               
               Which in pale embers hid, lurkes to aſpire
               And girdle with embracing flames the waſt,
               
               Of Colatines faire lone, Lucrece the chaſt.
            
            
               Haply that name of chaſt, vnhaply ſet
               This bateleſſe edge on his keene appetite:
               
               When Colatine vnwiſely did not let
               To praiſe the cleare vnmatched red and white,
               
               Which triumpht in that skie of his delight,
               VVhere mortall ſtar as bright as heauens beauties,
               
               VVith pure aſpects did him peculiar duties.
               
            
            
               For he the night before in Tarquins tent,
               Vnlockt the treaſure of his happy ſtate:
               What priſeleſſe wealth the heauens had himlent,
               In the poſſeſſion of his beautious mate.
               
               Reckoning his fortune at ſo high a rate
               That Kings might be eſpowſed to more fame,
               
               But King nor Prince to ſuch a peereleſſe dame.
               
            
            
               O happineſſe enioyd but of a few,
               And if poſſeſt as ſoone decayde and done:
               As if the mornings ſiluer melting dew,
               Againſt the golden ſplendor of the Sunne,
               
               A date expir'd: and canceld ere begun.
               
                  Honour and beauty in the owners armes,
               Are weakly fortreſt from a world of harmes.
            
            
               
               
                  Beauty it ſelfe, doth of it ſelfe perſwade
               The eies of men without an Orator,
               
               What needeth then Apologies be made
               To ſet forth that which is ſo ſingular?
               
               Or why is Colatine the publiſher
               Of that rich Iewell he ſhould keepe vnknowne,
               From theeuiſh eares becauſe it is his owne?
            
            
               Perchance his boaſt of LVCRECE Sou'raignty,
               
               Suggeſted this proud iſſue of a King:
               
               For by our eares our hearts oft tainted be,
               Perchance that enuy of ſo rich a thing
               Brauing compare, diſdainfully did ſting
               His high pitcht thoughts that meaner men ſhould vant
               That golden hap which their ſuperiors want.
            
            
               But ſome vntimely thought did inſtigate,
               His all too timeleſſe ſpeede, if none of thoſe,
               His honor, his affaires, his friends, his ſtate,
               
               Neglected all; with ſwift intent he goes,
               To quench the coale which in his liuer glowes.
               O raſh falſe heat, wrapt in repentant cold,
               Thy haſty ſpring ſtill blaſts and n'er growes old.
            
            
               
                  2 Tarquin welcomed by Lucrece.
                  When at Colatia this falſe Lord ariued, 
               Well was he welcom'd by the Romane dame,
               
               Within whoſe face beauty and vertue ſtriued,
               Which of them both ſhould vnderprop her fame,
               When vertue brag'd, beauty would bluſh for ſhame,
               When beauty boaſted bluſhes, in deſpight
               Vertue would ſtaine that o're with ſiluer white.
               
            
            
               But beauty in that white intituled,
               From Venus doues doth challenge that faire field,
               
               Then vertue claimes from beauty, beauties red,
               Which vertue gaue the golden age to guild
               Their ſiluer cheekes, and cald it then their ſhield
               
               
                  
Teaching them thus to vſe it in the fight,
               When ſhame aſſail'd, the red ſhould fence the white.
            
            
               This Herauldry in LVCRECE face was ſeene,
               Argued by beauties red and vertues white,
               
               Of eithers colour was the other Queene:
               
               Prouing from worlds minority their right,
               Yet their ambition makes them ſtill to fight:
               The ſou'raignty of either being ſo great,
               That oft they interchange each others ſeat.
               
            
            
               This ſilent warre of Lillies and of Roſes,
               
               Which Tarquin viewd in her faire faces field,
               
               In their pure rankes his traytor eye encloſes,
               Where leaſt between them both it ſhould be kild,
               The coward captiue vanquiſhed doth yeeld
               To thoſe two armies that would let him goe.
               Rather then triumph in ſo falſe a foe.
               
            
            
               Now thinks he that her husbands ſhallow tongue,
               The niggard prodigall that praiſde her ſo,
               In that high taske hath done her beauty wrong.
               Which farre exceeds his barren skill to ſhow.
               Therefore that praiſe which Colatine doth owe,
               Inchanted Tarquin anſwers with furmiſe,
               In ſilent wonder of ſtill gazing eyes.
               
            
            
               This earthly Saint adored by this Diuell,
               
               Little ſuſpecteth the falſe worſhipper:
               
               "For thoughts vnſtain'd do ſildome dreame on euil.
               
               
                  "Birds neuer limb'd, no ſecret buſhes feare:
               So guiltleſſe ſhe ſecurely giues good cheare,
               And reuerend welcome to her princely gueſt,
               
               Whoſe inward ile no outward harme expreſt.
            
            
               For that he colourd with his high eſtate,
               
               Hiding baſe ſinne in pleats of Maieſty:
               
               That nothing in him ſeemd inordinate,
               
               
                  
Saue ſometime too much wonder of his eye,
               
               Which hauing all, all could not ſatisfie;
               But poorely rich ſo wanteth in his ſtore,
               
               That cloyd with much, he pineth ſtill for more.
               
            
            
               But ſhe that neuer copte with ſtranger eies,
               
               Could pick no meaning from their parling lookes,
               
               Nor read the ſubtile ſhining ſecrecies
               
               Writ in the glaſſie margents of ſuch bookes,
               
               She toucht no vnknowne baits, nor fear'd no bookes;
               
               Nor could ſhe moralize his wanton ſight,
               More then his eies were opend to the light.
               
            
            
               He ſtories to her eares her husbands fame,
               Wonne in the fields of fruitfull Italie:
               
               And decks with praiſes Colatines high name,
               Made glorious by his manly chiualry,
               
               
                  With bruiſed armes and wreaths of victory;
               
               Her ioy with heaued-vp hand ſhe doth expreſſe,
               And wordleſſe ſo greets heauen for his ſucceſſe.
            
            
               Far from the purpoſe of his comming thither,
               He makes excuſes for his being there;
               No cloudy ſhow of ſtormy bluſtring wether
               Doth yet in his faire welkin once appeare,
               Till ſable night ſad ſource of dread and feare,
               Vpon the world dim darkneſſe doth diſplay,
               And in her vaulty priſon ſhuts the day.
            
            
               For then is Tarquin brought vnto his bed,
               
               Intending wearineſſe with heauy ſprite:
               
               For after ſupper long he queſtioned
               With modeſt Lucrece, and wore out the night:
               
               Now leaden ſlumber with liues ſtrength doth fight,
               And euery one to reſt themſelues betake,
               Saue theeues, and eares, and troubled minds that wake.
            
            
               As one of which doth Tarquin lie reuoluing
               
                  
The ſundry dangers of his wils obtaining:
               Yet euer to obtaine his will reſoluing.
               Though weake-built hopes perſwade him to abſtaining;
               
                  Deſpaire to gaine doth traffique oft for gaining,
               
               And when great treaſure is the meed propoſed,
               Though death be adiunct, ther's no death ſuppoſed.
            
            
               Thoſe that much couet are with gaine ſo fond,
               That oft they haue not that which they poſſeſſe,
               They ſcatter and vnlooſe it from their bond,
               
               And ſo by hoping more they haue but leſſe,
               
               Or gaining more the profit of exceſſe
               
               Is but to ſurfet, and ſuch griefes ſuſtaine
               That they proue banckrout in this poore rich gaine.
               
            
            
               The ayme of all, is but to nourſe the life
               
               With honor, wealth, and eaſe, in wayning age:
               And in this ayme there is ſuch thwarting ſtrife,
               
               That one for all, or all for one we gage:
               As life for honor, in fell battails rage,
               
                  Honor for wealth, and oft that wealth doth coſt
               The death of all, and altogether loſt.
            
            
               So that in ventring ill, we leaue to be
               
               The things we are, for that which we expect:
               And this ambitious foule infirmitie,
               
               In hauing much torments vs with defect
               Of that we haue: ſo then we doe neglect
               The thing we haue, and all for want of wit,
               
               Make ſomething nothing, by augmenting it.
            
            
               Such hazard now muſt doting Tarquin make,
               Pawning his honor to obtaine his luſt:
               
               And for himſelfe, himſelfe he muſt forſake:
               Then where is truth if there be no ſelfe-truſt?
               
               When ſhall he thinke to finde a ſtranger iuſt,
               When he himſelfe, himſelfe confounds, betraies
               
                  
To ſlanderous tongues and wretched hatefull daies?
            
            
               Now ſtole vpon the time the dead of night,
               
               When heauy ſleep had cloſd vp mortall eye,
               
               No comfortable ſtarre did lend his light,
               No noiſe but Owles and Wolues death boding cries: 
               Now ſerues the ſeaſon that they may ſurprize
               
                  3 Tarquin diſputing the matter at laſt reſolues to ſatiſfie his luſt.The ſilly Lambs, pure thoughts are dead and ſtill: 
               
               While luſt and Murder wakes to ſtaine and kill.
               
            
            
               And now this luſtfull Lord leapt from his bed,
               
               Throwing his mantle rudely ore his arms,
               
               Is madly toſt between deſire and dread;
               
               Th'one ſweetly flatters, th'other feateth harme,
               But honeſt feare, bewitcht with luſts foule charme,
               Doth too too oft betake him to retire,
               Beaten away by brainſicke rude deſire.
               
            
            
               His Fanchion on a flint he ſoftly ſmiteth,
               That from the cold ſtone ſparkes of fire doth flie,
               Whereat a waxen torch forthwith he lighteth,
               Which muſt be lode-ſtar to his luſtfull eie,
               
               And to the flame thus ſpeakes aduiſedly;
               As from this cold flint I enforct this fire,
               So LVCRECE muſt I force to my deſire.
               
            
            
               Here pale with feare he doth premeditate
               The dangers of his lothſome enterpriſe,
               And in his inward minde he doth debate,
               What following ſorrow may on this ariſe.
               Then looking ſcornfully, he doth deſpiſe
               His naked armour of ſtill ſlaughtered luſt,
               And iuſtly thus controlls his thoughts vniuſt.
            
            
               Faire torch burne out thy light, and lend it not
               To darken her whoſe light excelleth thine:
               And die vnhallowed thoughts before you blot
               With your vncleanneſſe that which is diuine:
               
               
                  
Offer pure incenſe to ſo pure a ſhrine;
               
               Let faire humanity abhor the deed,
               
               That ſpots and ſtaines loues modeſt ſnow-white weed.
               
            
            
               O ſhame to knighthood, and to ſhining armes,
               
               O foule diſhonor to my houſholds graue:
               
               O impious act including all foule harmes,
               
               A martiall man to be ſoft fancies ſlaue,
               True valour ſtill a true reſpect ſhould haue:
               Then my digreſſion is ſo vile, ſo baſe,
               That it will liue engrauen in my face.
               
            
            
               Yea though I die the ſcandall will ſuruiue,
               And be an eie-ſore in my golden coate:
               
               Some loathſome daſh the Herald will contriue,
               To cipher me how fondly I did dote:
               That my poſterity ſham'd with the note
               Shall curſe my bones, and hold it for no ſinne,
               To wiſh that I their father had not been.
            
            
               What win I if I gaine the thing I ſeeke?
               A dreame, a breath, a froth of fleeting ioy,
               Who buies a minutes mirth to waile a weeke?
               
               Or ſels eternity to get a toy?
               
               For one ſweet grape who will the vine deſtroy?
               Or what fond beggar but to touch the crowne?
               
               Would with the ſcepter ſtraight be ſtroken downe?
            
            
               If Colatinus dreame of my intent,
               Will he not wake; and in a deſperate rage
               Poſt hither, this vile purpoſe to preuent?
               This ſiege that hath ingirt his marriage,
               This blur to youth, this ſorrow to the ſage,
               This dying vertue, this ſuruiuing ſhame,
               
               Whoſe crime will beare an euer-during blame.
               
            
            
               O what excuſe can my inuention make
               When thou ſhalt charge me with ſo blacke a deed:
               
               
                  
VVill not my tongue be mute, my fraile ioyuts ſhake?
               Mine eies for goe their light, my falſe heart bleed?
               The guilt being great, the feare doth ſtill exceede,
               And extreame feare can neither fight nor flie,
               
               But cowardlike with trembling terror die.
            
            
               Had Collatinus kild my ſonne or ſire,
               Or laine in ambuſh to betray my life,
               
               Or were he not my deare friend, this deſire
               Might haue excuſe to worke vpon his wife;
               
               As in reuenge or quittall of ſuch ſtrife:
               
               But as he is my kinſman, my deare friend,
               The ſhame and fault finds no excuſe not end.
            
            
               Shamefull it is, if once the fact be knowne,
               Hatefull it is: there is no hate in louing,
               
               Ile beg her loue: but ſhe is not her owne:
               
               The worſt is but deniall, and reprouing.
               
               My will is ſtrong, paſt reaſons weake remouing.
               VVho feares a ſentence or an old mans ſawe,
               Shall by a painted cloth be kept in awe.
            
            
               Thus (graceleſſe) holds he diſputation,
               Tweene frozen conſcience and hot burning will.
               And with good thoughts makes diſpenſation,
               Vrging the worſer ſence for vantage ſtill.
               VVhich in a moment doth confound and kill
               All pure effects, and doth ſo farre proceed,
               That what is vile, ſhewes like a vertuous deed.
               
            
            
               Quoth he, ſhe tooke me kindely by the hand,
               
               And gaz'd for tidings in my eager eies,
               
               Fearing ſome hard newes from the warlike band
               
               VVhere her beloued Colatinus lies.
               O how her feare did make her colour riſe?
               Firſt red as Roſes that on Lawne we lay,
               Then white as Lawne the Roſes tooke away.
            
            
               
               And now her hand in my hand being lockt,
               Forſt it to tremble with her loyall feare:
               
               Which ſtrooke her ſad, and then it faſter rockt,
               Vntill her husbands welfare ſhe did heare,
               Whereat ſhe ſmiled with ſo ſweet a cheare
               
               That had Narſiſſus ſeen her as flie ſtood,
               Selfe-loue had neuer drown'd him in the flood.
               
            
            
               Why hunt I then for colour or excuſes?
               All Orators are dumbe when beauty pleads,
               Poore wretches haue remorſe in poore abuſes,
               Loue thriues not in the heart that ſhadowes dreads,
               
                  Affection is my Captaine and he leades:
               And when this gaudy banner is diſplaide,
               The coward fights and will not be diſmaide.
            
            
               Then childiſh feare auant, debating die,
               Reſpect and Reaſon waite on wrinkled age:
               
               My heart ſhall neuer countermand mine eye,
               
               Sad Pauſe and deepe Regard beſeems the ſage,
               My part is youth, and beats theſe from the ſtage.
               
                  Deſire my pilot is, Beauty my priſe,
               
               Then who feares ſinking where ſuch treaſure lies.
            
            
               As corne ore-growne by weeds, ſo heedfull feare
               Is almoſt cloakt by vnreſiſted luſt,
               
               Away he ſteales with open liſtning eare,
               
               Full of foule hope and full of fond miſtruſt:
               Both which as ſeruitors to the vniuſt
               So croſſe him with their oppoſit perſwaſion,
               That now he vowes a league, and now inuaſion.
            
            
               Within his thought her heauenly image ſits,
               And in the ſelfe ſame ſeat ſits Colatine,
               
               That eye which looks on her confounds his wits,
               
               That eye which him beholds, as more diuine
               Vnto a view ſo falſe will not incline:
               
                  
But with a pure appeale ſeeks to the heart,
               
               Which once corrupted, takes the worſer part,
            
            
               And therein hartens vp his ſeruile powers,
               
               VVho flattered by their leaders iocond ſhow,
               Stuffe vp his luſt, as minutes fill vp howres.
               
               And as their Captaine ſo their pride doth grow,
               Paying more ſlauiſh tribute then they owe.
               By reprobate deſire thus madly led
               The Romane Lord doth march to Lucrece bed.
            
            
               The lockes between her chamber and his will,
               Each one by him enforſt, recites his ward,
               
               But as they open they all rate his ill,
               
               VVhich driues the creeping theefe to ſome regard.
               The threſhold grates the dore to haue him heard.
               Night-wandring Weezles ſhreeke to ſee him there,
               They fright him, yet he ſtill purſues his feare.
               
            
            
               As each vnwilling portall yeelds him way,
               Through little vents and crannies of the place,
               The winde wars with his torch to make him ſtay,
               And blowes the ſmoke of it into his face,
               
               Extinguiſhing his conduct in this caſe.
               But his hot heart, which fond deſire doth ſcorch,
               Puffes forth another winde that fires the torch.
               
            
            
               And being lighted by the light he ſpies
               
                  Lucreciaes gloue, wherein her needle ſtickes,
               He takes it from the ruſhes where it lies,
               And griping it, the needle his finger pricks:
               As who ſhould ſay this gloue to wanton trickes
               
               Is nor inur'd, returne againe in haſt,
               Thou ſeeſt our Miſtreſſe ornaments are chaſt.
            
            
               But all theſe poore forbiddings could not ſtay him,
               He in the worſt ſence conſtrues their deniall:
               
               The dores, the wind, the gloue that did delay him,
               
                  
He takes for accedentall things of triall,
               
               Or as thoſe barres which ſtop the hourely diall,
               
               Who with a lingring ſtay his courſe doth let,
               Till euery minute payes the houre his debt.
               
            
            
               So, ſo, quoth he, theſe lets attend the time,
               
               Like little froſts that ſometime threat the ſpring,
               
               To adde a more reioycing to the prime,
               
               And giue the ſneaped birds more cauſe to ſing,
               
                  Paine paies the income of ech precious thing,
               
               Huge rocks, high winds, ſtrong pirates, ſhelues and ſands,
               
               The marchant feares, ere rich at home he lands.
            
            
               Now is he come vnto the chamber dore,
               
               That ſhuts him from the heauen of his thought,
               
               Which with a yeelding latch and with no more,
               Hath bard him from the bleſſed thing he ſought,
               So from himſelfe impiety hath wrought
               That for his Prey to pray he doth begin,
               As if the heauens ſhould countenance his ſinne.
               
            
            
               But in the midſt of his vnfruitfull, prayer,
               Hauing ſollicited th'eternall power,
               
               That his foule thoughts might compaſſe his fair, faire,
               
               And they would ſtand auſpicious to the howre,
               
               Euen there he ſtarts, quoth he, I muſt defloure:
               The powers to whom I pray, abhor this fact
               How can they then aſſiſt me in the act?
               
            
            
               Then loue and fortune be my Gods, my guide,
               
               My will is backt with reſolution:
               
               
                  Thoughts are but dreames till their effects be tried,
               Blacke ſinne is cleard with abſolution,
               Againſt loues fire, feares froſt hath diſſolution.
               The eye of heauen is out, and miſty night
               
               Couers the ſhame that followes ſweet delight.
               
            
            
               This ſaid his guilty hand pluckt vp the latch,
               
                  
And with his knee the dore he opens wide,
               The Doue ſleeps faſt that this night Owle will catch.
               Thus treaſon works ere traitors be eſpied:
               VVho ſees the lurking ſerpent ſteps aſide;
               But ſhe ſound ſleeping, fearing no ſuch thing,
               Lies at the mercy of his mortall ſting.
               
            
            
               Into the chamber wickedly he ſtalkes,
               And gazeth on her yet vnſtained bed:
               
               The curtaines being cloſe, about he walkes,
               Rouling his greedy eye-bals in his head,
               
               By their high treaſon is his heart miſled.
               Which giues the watch-word to his hand too ſoone,
               To draw the cloude that hides the ſiluer Moone.
               
            
            
               Looke as the faire and fiery pointed Sunne,
               
               Ruſhing from forth a cloud, bereaues our ſight:
               
               Euen ſo the curtaine drawne his eies begun
               To winke, being blinded with a greater light.
               
               Whether it is that ſhe reflects ſo bright
               That dazeleth them, or elſe ſome ſhame ſuppoſed,
               But blind they are, and keep themſelues incloſed.
            
            
               O had they in that darkſome priſon died,
               Then had they ſeen the period of their ill;
               Then Colatine againe by Lucrece ſide,
               In his cleare bed might haue repoſed ſtill:
               But they muſt ope this bleſſed league to kill:
               And holy-thoughted Lucrece to their ſight,
               Muſt ſell her ioy, her life, her worlds delight.
               
            
            
               Her lilly hand her roſie cheekes lies vnder,
               Cooſening the pillow of a lawfull kiſſe.
               Who therefore angry, ſeems to part in ſunder,
               Swelling on either ſide to want his bliſſe,
               Between whoſe hils her head intombed is.
               Where like a vertuous monument ſhe lies.
               
                  
To be admir'd of lewde vnhallowed eies.
               
            
            
               Without the bed hir other faire hand was,
               On the greene couerlet, whoſe perfect white
               
               Showed like an Aprill dazie on the graſſe,
               
               With pearly ſwet, reſembling dewe of night.
               
               Her eyes like Marigolds had ſheathd their light,
               And canopied in darkneſſe ſweetly lay,
               Till they might open to adorne the day.
               
            
            
               Her haire like golden threeds plaid with her breath,
               
               O modeſt wantons, wanton modeſty!
               
               Showring lifes triumph in the map of death,
               
               And deaths dim looke in lifes mortality.
               Each in her ſleepe themſelues ſo beautifie,
               As if between them twaine there were no ſtrife,
               But that life liu'd in death, and death in life.
               
            
            
               Her breaſts like iuory globes cirdled with blew,
               
               A paire of maiden worlds vnconquered:
               Saue of their Lord no bearing yoke they knew,
               And him by oath they truly honoured.
               Theſe worlds in Tarquin new ambition bred.
               Who like a foule vſurper went about,
               From this faire throne to heaue the owner out.
            
            
               What could he ſee but mightely he noted?
               
               What did he note, but ſtrongly he deſired?
               
               What he beheld, on that he firmly doted,
               
               And in his will his wilfull eye he tired.
               With more then admiration he admired
               Her azure vaines her alablaſter skinne,
               Her corall lips her ſnow white dimpled chin.
            
            
               As the grim Lion fauneth ore his pray,
               
               Sharpe hunger by the conqueſt ſatisfied:
               So ore this ſleeping ſoule doth TARQVIN ſtay,
               His rage of luſt by gazing qualified.
               
                  
Slackt, not ſuppreſt, for ſtanding by her ſide,
               His eye which late this mutiny reſtraines,
               Vnto a greater vprore tempts his vaines.
            
            
               And they like ſtragling ſlaues for pillage fighting,
               Obdurate vaſſals fell exploits effecting:
               In bloudy death and rauiſhment delighting,
               Nor childrens teares nor mothers grones reſpecting,
               Swell in their pride, the onſet ſtill expecting.
               Anon his beating heart alarum ſtriking,
               Giues the hot charge and bids them doe their liking.
            
            
               His drumming heart cheares vp his burning eye,
               
               His eye commends the leading to his hand:
               His hand as proud of ſuch a dignity,
               
               Smoking with pride, marcht on to make his ſtand
               
               On her bare breaſts, the heart of all her land,
               VVhoſe ranckes of blew vaines as his hand did ſcale,
               Left their round turrets deſtitute and pale.
            
            
               They muſtring to the quiet Cabinet,
               
               Where their deare gouerneſſe and Lady lies,
               Do tell her ſhe is dreadfully beſet,
               And fright her with confuſion of their cries.
               
               She much amaz'd breakes ope her lockt vp eies.
               
               Who peeping foorth this tumult to behold,
               Are by his flaming torch dim'd and controld.
            
            
               Imagine her as one in dead of night,
               
               From forth dull ſleepe by dreadfull fancy waking,
               That thinks ſhe hath beheld ſome gaſtly ſprite,
               
               
                  5 Lucretia wakes amazed and confounded to be ſo ſurpriſedWhoſe grim aſpect ſets euery ioynt a ſhaking, 
               What terrour tis: but ſhe in worſer taking,
               From ſleepe diſturbd, heedfully doth view,
               The ſight which makes ſuppoſed terror rue.
            
            
               Wrapt and confounded in a thouſand feares,
               
               Like to a new-kild bird ſhe trembling lies:
               
                  
She dares not looke, yet winking there appeares
               Quicke ſhifting Antiques vgly in her eyes,
               
               Such ſhadowes are the weake braines forgeries,
               
               Who angry that the eyes flie from their lights,
               In darkneſſe daunts them with more dreadfull ſights.
               
            
            
               His hand that yet remaines vpon her breſt,
               
               (Rude Ram to batter ſuch an Iuory wall:)
               May feele her heart (poore Citizen) diſtreſt,
               Wounding it ſelfe to death, riſe vp and fall:
               Beating her bulke, that his hand ſhakes withall.
               This moues in him more rage and leſſer pitty,
               
               To make the breach, and enter this ſweet City.
               
            
            
               Firſt like a trumpet doth his tongue begin,
               To ſound a parly to his hartleſſe foe,
               
               Who ore the white ſheet peeres her whiter chin,
               
               The reaſon of this raſh alarme to know,
               Which he by dumbe demeanor ſeekes to ſhow:
               But ſhe with vehement prayers vrgeth ſtill,
               Vnder what colour he commits this ill?
               
            
            
               Thus he replies the colour in thy face,
               
               That euen for anger makes the Lilly pale,
               And the red Roſe bluſh at her owne diſgrace,
               Shall plead for me, and tell my louing tale.
               
               Vnder that colour am I come to ſcale
               Thy neuer conquered Fort, the fault is thine,
               For thoſe thine eyes betray thee vnto mine.
               
            
            
               Thus I foreſtall thee: if thou meane to chide,
               Thy beauty hath inſnar'd thee to this night,
               
               Where thou with patience muſt my will abide,
               My will that markes thee for my earths delight,
               
               Which I to conquer ſought with all my might.
               But as reproofe and reaſon beat it dead,
               By thy bright beauty it was newly bred.
            
            
               
               I ſee what croſſes my attempts will bring,
               I know what thornes the growing Roſe defends,
               I thinke the hony garded with a ſting,
               
               All this before hand counſell comprehends.
               But will is deafe, and heares no heedfull friends.
               Onely he hath an eie to gaze on beauty,
               
               And dotes on what he lookes, gainſt law or duty.
               
            
            
               I haue debated euen in my ſoule,
               
               What wrong, what ſhame, what ſorrow I ſhall breed.
               But nothing can affections courſe controle
               Or ſtop the headlong fury of his ſpeed,
               
               I know repentant teares inſue the deed.
               Reproch, diſdaine, and deadly enmity,
               
               Yet ſtriue I to imbrace mine infamy.
               
            
            
               This ſaid, he ſhakes aloft his Romane blade,
               Which like a Faulcon towring in the skies,
               
               Coucheth the fowle below with his wings ſhade,
               Whoſe crooked beake threats, if he mount he dies.
               So vnder his inſulting Fauchion lies
               Harmeleſſe Lucretia, marking what he tels,
               With trembling feare, as fowle heare Faulcons bels.
            
            
               
                  Lucrece, quoth he, this night I muſt enioy thee;
               If thou deny, then force muſt work my way:
               For in thy bed I purpoſe to deſtroy thee.
               That done, ſome worthleſſe ſlaue of thine ile ſlay,
               To kill thine honor with thy liues decay.
               And in thy dead armes doe I meane to place him,
               Swearing I ſlew him ſeeing thee imbrace him.
            
            
               So thy ſuruiuing husband ſhall remaine,
               The ſcornefull marke of euery open eye,
               
               Thy kinſmen hang their heads at this diſdaine,
               Thy iſſue blurd with nameleſſe baſtardy:
               
               And thou the Author of their obloquy.
               
               
                  
Shall haue thy treſpaſſe cited vp in rimes,
               And ſung by children in ſucceeding times.
            
            
               But if thou yeeld, I reſt thy ſecret friend,
               
               The fault vnknowne is as a thought vnacted,
               
               A little harme done to a great good end,
               Fot lawfull policy remaines enacted.
               The poiſonous ſimple ſometime is compacted
               In pureſt compounds; being ſo applied,
               His venome in effect is purified.
            
            
               Then for thy husband and thy childrens ſake,
               Tender my ſuit, bequeath not to their lot
               
               The ſhame that from them no deuice can take,
               The blemiſh that will neuer be forgot:
               Worſe then a ſlauiſh wipe, or birth-houres blot:
               
               For markes deſcried in mens natiuity,
               Are Natures faults, not their owne infamy.
            
            
               Here with a Cocka-trice dead killing eye,
               He rowſeth vp himſelfe, and makes a pauſe,
               While ſhe the picture of pure piety,
               Like a white Hinde beneath the gripes ſharpe clawes,
               
               Pleads in a wilderneſſe where are no lawes.
               
               To the rough beaſt, that knowes no gentle right,
               
               Nor ought obeyes but his foule appetite.
               
            
            
               But when a blacke-fac'd cloud the world doth threat,
               In his dim miſt the aſpiring mountaine hiding,
               From earths darke wombe ſome gentle guſt doth get,
               Which blow theſe pitchy vapours from their biding,
               Hindring their preſent fall by this diuiding.
               So his vnhallowed haſte her words delaies,
               And moody Pluto winkes while Orpheus plaies.
            
            
               Yet foule night waking Cat he doth but dally,
               VVhile in his hold-faſt foot the weake mouſe panteth.
               Her ſad behauiour feeds his vulture folly.
               
               
                  
A ſwallowing gulfe that euen in plenty wanteth.
               His eare her prayers admits, but his heart granteth
               No penetrable entrance to her plaining,
               
                  Teares harden luſt, though marble weares with rayning.
            
            
               Her pitty-pleading eyes are ſadly fixed
               In the remorſeleſſe wrinckles of his face:
               
               Her modeſt eloquence with ſighes is mixed,
               Which to her Oratory ads more grace.
               She puts the period often from his place,
               And midſt the ſentence ſo her accent breakes,
               That twice ſhe doth begin ere once ſhe ſpeakes.
            
            
               
                  6 Lucrece pleadeth in defence of chaſtity and exprobateth his vnciuill luſt.She coniures him by high Almighty Ioue, 
               By Knighthood, Gentry, and ſweet friendſhips oath,
               By her vntimely teares, her husbands loue,
               
               By holy humane law, and common troth,
               
               By heauen and earth, and all the power of both,
               That to his borrowed bed, he make retire,
               And ſtoope to Honor, not to foule deſire.
               
            
            
               Quoth ſhe, reward not Hoſpitality
               
               With ſuch blacke paiment as thou haſt pretended,
               
                  Mudde not the fountaine that gaue drinke to thee,
               Marre not the thing that cannot be amended:
               End thy ill ayme, before thy ſhoot be ended.
               He is no Wood-man that doth bend his bow
               
               To ſtrike a poore vnſeaſonable Doe.
               
            
            
               My Husband is thy friend, for his ſake ſpare me,
               Thy ſelfe art mighty, for thine owne ſake leaue me:
               My ſelfe a weakeling, doe not then inſnate me.
               Thou look'ſt not like deceipt, do not deceiue me.
               My ſighes like whirlewinds labour hence to heaue thee:
               If euer man were mou'd with womans mones,
               Be moued with my teares, my ſighes, my grones.
               
            
            
               All which together like a troubled Ocean,
               
               
                  
Beat at thy rocky, and wrack-threatning heart,
               
               To ſoften it with their continuall motion:
               
               For ſtones diſſolu'd, to water doe conuert.
               O if no harder then a ſtone thou art,
               Melt at my teares and be compaſſionate,
               Soft pitty enters at an yron gate.
            
            
               In TARQVINS likeneſſe I did entertaine thee,
               Haſt thou put on his ſhape to doe him ſhame?
               To all the hoſte of heauen I complaine me.
               Thou wrongſt his Honor, woundſt his princely name,
               
               Thou art not what thou ſeemſt, and if the ſame,
               Thou ſeem'ſt not what thou art, a God, a King,
               
               For Kings like Gods ſhould gouerne euery thing.
            
            
               How will thy ſhame be feeded in thine age,
               When thus thy vices bud before thy ſpring?
               
               If in thy hope thou darſt do ſuch outrage.
               What dar'ſt thou not when once thou art a King?
               
               O be remembred, no outragious thing
               From vaſſall actors can be wipt away
               Then Kings miſdeeds cannot be hid in clay.
            
            
               This deed ſhall make thee only lou'd for feare,
               But happy Monarchs ſtill are feard for loue:
               With foule offenders thou perforce muſt beare,
               When they in thee the like offences proue:
               If but for feare of this, thy will remoue.
               For Princes are the glaſſe, the ſchoole, the booke,
               
               VVhere ſubiects eies doe learne, doe read, doe looke.
               
            
            
               And wilt thou be the ſchoole where luſt ſhall learne?
               Muſt he in thee read lectures of ſuch ſhame?
               VVilt thou be glaſſe wherein it ſhall diſcerne
               
                  Authority for ſinne, warrant for blame?
               To priuiledge diſhonor in thy name.
               Thou back'ſt reproch againſt long liuing laud,
               
               And makſt faire Reputation but a baud.
               
            
            
               
               Haſt thou command? by him that gaue it thee
               From a pure heart command thy rebell will:
               
               Draw not thy ſword to gard iniquity,
               
               For it was lent thee all that brood to kill,
               Thy princely office how cauſt thou fulfill
               When patterned by thy fault, foule ſinne may ſay,
               He learnd to ſinne, and thou didſt teach the way?
            
            
               Thinke but how vile a ſpectacle it were,
               To view thy preſent treſpaſſe in another:
               Mens faults doe ſildome to themſelues appeare,
               Their owne tranſgreſſions partially they ſmother:
               This guilt would ſeem death-worthy in thy brother.
               
               O how are they wrapt in with infamies,
               
               That from their owne miſdeeds aſkaunce their eies.
               
            
            
               To thee, to thee, my heau'd vp hands appeale,
               Not to ſeducing luſt thy raſh reply:
               Iſue for exild maieſties repeale,
               Let him returne and flattering thoughts retire.
               His true reſpect will priſon falſe deſire,
               
               
                  7 Tarquin all impatient interrupts her and denied of conſent breaketh the encloſure of her chaſtity by force.And wipe the dim miſt from thy doting eies, 
               
               That thou ſhalt ſee thy ſtate and pitty mine.
               
            
            
               Haue done, quoth he, my vncontrolled tide
               
               Turnes not, but ſwels the higher by this let,
               Small lights are ſoone blowne out, huge fires abide,
               And with the winde in greater fury fret:
               The pretty ſtreames that pay a daily debt
               
               To their ſalt ſoueraigne with their freſh fals haſt,
               Adde to this flowe but alter not his taſte.
               
            
            
               Thou art (quoth ſhe) a ſea, a ſoueraigne King,
               
               And loe, therefals into thy boundleſſe flood,
               
               Blacke luſt, diſhonor, ſhame, miſgouerning.
               
               Who ſeeke to ſtaine the Ocean of thy bloud.
               
               If all theſe petty ils ſhall change thy good,
               
                  
Thy ſea within a puddle wombe is berſed,
               And not the puddle in thy ſea diſperſed.
            
            
               So ſhall theſe ſlaues be King, and thou their ſlaue:
               
               Thou nobly baſe, they baſely dignified:
               
               Thou their faire life, and they thy fouler graise:
               
               Thou lothed in their ſhame, they in thy pride,
               
               The leſſer thing ſhould not the greater hide.
               The Cedar ſtoops not to the baſe ſhrubs foot,
               But low ſhrubs wither at the Cedars root.
               
            
            
               So let thy thoughts low vaſſals to thy ſtate,
               
               No more, quoth he, by heauen I will not heare thee;
               Yeeld to my loue, if not, enforced hate,
               
               In ſtead of loues coy touch ſhall rudely teare thee:
               That done, deſpightfully I meane to beare thee
               Vnto the baſe bed of ſome raſcall groome,
               
               To be thy partner in this ſhamefull doome.
               
            
            
               This ſaid, he ſets his foot vpon the light,
               
               For light and luſt are deadly enemies:
               Shame folded vp in blind concealing night,
               
               When moſt vnſeen, then moſt doth tyrannize.
               The Wolfe hath ſeizd his Prey, the poore Lambe cries
               Till with her owne white fleece her voice controld,
               Intombs her outcry in her lips ſweet fold.
            
            
               For with the mighty linnen that ſhe weares,
               He pens her piteous clamors in her head,
               
               Cooling his hot face in the chaſteſt teares,
               
               That euer modeſt eies with ſorrow ſhed.
               O that fowle luſt ſhould ſtaine ſo pure a bed:
               
               The ſpots whereof could weeping purifie,
               Her teares ſhould drop on them perpetually.
            
            
               But ſhe hath loſt a dearer thing then life,
               And he hath won what he would looſe againe:
               This forced league doth force a further ſtrife,
               
                  
This momentary ioy breeds months of paine,
               
               This hot deſire conuerts to cold diſdaine:
               
               Pure Chaſtity is rifled of her ſtore,
               And luſt, the theefe, far poorer then before.
            
            
               Looke as the ful-fed Hound or gorged Hawke,
               
               Vnapt for tender ſmell or ſpeedy flight,
               
               Make ſlow purſuit, or altogether bauke
               The prey wherein by nature they delight:
               So ſurfet-taking TARQVIN fares this night.
               His taſte delicious, in digeſtion ſowring,
               Deuoures his will, that liu'd by foule deuouring.
            
            
               O deeper ſinne then bottomleſſe conceit
               
               Can comprehend in ſtill imagination!
               Drunken Deſire muſt vomit his receipt,
               
               Ere he can ſee his owne abhomination.
               While luſt is in his pride no exclamation
               Can curbe his heat, of reine his raſh deſire,
               Till like a Iade, ſelfe-will himſelfe doth tire.
            
            
               And then with lanke and leane diſcolour'd cheeke,
               With heauy eye, knit brow, and ſtrengthleſſe pace,
               
               Feeble deſire all recreant, poore and meeke,
               Like to a bankerout begger wailes his caſe:
               The fleſh being proud, Deſire doth fight with grace:
               For there it reuels, and when that decaies,
               The guilty rebel for remiſſion praies.
            
            
               So fares it with this fault-full Lord of Rome,
               Who this accompliſhment ſo hotly chaſed;
               For, now againſt himſelfe he ſounds this doome,
               That through the length of times he ſtands diſgraced:
               Beſides, his ſoules faire temple is defaced:
               To whoſe weake ruines muſter troopes of cares,
               
               To aſke the ſpotted Princeſſe how ſhe fares.
            
            
               She ſaies her ſubiects with foule inſurrection,
               
                  
Haue battred downe her conſecrated wall,
               
               And by their mortall fault brought in ſubiection
               Her immortality, and made her thrall
               To liuing death and paine perpetuall.
               
               VVhich in her preſcience ſhe controled ſtill,
               But her foreſight could not foreſtall their will.
               
            
            
               Euen in this thought through the darke night he ſtealeth
               A captiue victor that hath loſt in gaine:
               
               Bearing away the wound that nothing healeth,
               The ſcar that will deſpight of Cure remaine;
               Leauing his ſpoile perplext in greater paine.
               She beares the load of luſt he left behinde,
               And he the burthen of a guilty minde.
            
            
               He like a theeuiſh dog creeps ſadly thence,
               She like a wearied Lambe lies panting there:
               He ſcowles and hates himſelfe for his offence,
               She deſperate, with her nailes, her fleſh doth teare,
               He faintly flies, ſweating with guilty feare;
               She ſtaies exclaiming on the direfull night;
               He runs and chides his vaniſht loth'd delight.
            
            
               He thence departs a heauy conuertite,
               
               She there remaines a hopeleſſe caſt-away:
               
               He in his ſpeed lookes for the morning light:
               She prayes ſhe neuer may behold the day,
               
               For day, quoth ſhe, night ſcapes doth open lay:
               And my true eies haue neuer practizd how,
               To cloake offences with a cunning brow.
            
            
               They thinke not but that euery eye can ſee,
               The ſame diſgrace which they themſelues behold:
               And therefore would they ſtill in darkneſſe lie,
               To haue their vnſeene ſinne remaine vntold:
               For they their guilt with weeping will vnfold,
               And graue, like water that doth eate in ſteele,
               Vpon my cheeks what helpleſſe ſhame I feele.
            
            
               
               Here ſhe exclaimes againſt repoſe and reſt,
               
                  8 Lucrece thus abuſed complaines on her miſery.And bids her eyes hereafter ſtill be blind: 
               She wakes her heart by beating on her breſt,
               
               And bids it leape from thence, where it may finde
               Some purer cheſt, to cloſe ſo pure a minde.
               Franticke with griefe thus breaths ſhe forth her ſpight,
               Againſt the vnſeene ſecrecy of night.
               
            
            
               O comfort-killing night, image of Hell,
               
               Dim regiſter, and notary of ſhame,
               
               Blacke ſtage for tragedies and murthers fell,
               Vaſt ſinne concealing Chaos, nurſe of blame,
               
               Blind muſſled bawde, darke harbor for defame,
               
               Grim caue of death, whiſpring conſpirator
               With cloſe tongu'd treaſon, and the rauiſher.
               
            
            
               O hatefull, vaporous and foggy night,
               Since thou art guilty of my cureleſſe crime:
               
               Muſter thy myſts to meet the Eaſterne light,
               
               Make war againſt proportion'd courſe of time:
               
               Or if thou wilt permit the Sunne to clime
               His wonted height, yet ere he go to bed,
               
               Knit poyſonous clouds about his golden head.
            
            
               VVith rotten damps rauiſh the morning ayre,
               Let their exhal'd vnholeſome breaths make ſicke
               The life of purity, the ſupreme faire,
               Ere he ariue his weary noon tide pricke.
               And let thy myſty vapors march ſo thicke,
               That in their ſmoaky rankes his ſmothered light
               
               May ſet at noone and make perpetuall night.
               
            
            
               VVere Tarquin night as he is but nights child,
               The ſiluer ſhining Queen he would diſdaine,
               Her twinckling handmaids to (by him defild)
               Through nights blacke boſome ſhould not peep againe.
               So ſhould I haue copartners in my paine.
               
                  
And fellowſhip in woe doth woe aſſwage,
               As Palmers that makers ſhort their Pilgrimage.
               
            
            
               VVhere now I haue no one to bluſh with me,
               To croſſe their armes and hang their heads with mine,
               To maske their browes and hide their infamy,
               
               But I alone, alone muſt ſit and pine,
               Seaſoning the earth with ſhowres of ſiluer brine,
               
               Mingling my talke with teares, my griefe with grones
               
               Poore waſting monuments of laſting mones.
               
            
            
               O night thou furnace of foule reeking ſmoke,
               Let not the iealous day behold that face
               VVhich vnderneath thy blacke all-hiding cloke
               
               Immodeſtly lies martyred with diſgrace.
               Keepe ſtill poſſeſſion of thy gloomy place,
               That all the faults which in thy raigne are made,
               May likewiſe be ſepulchred in thy ſhade.
               
            
            
               Make me not obiect to the tel-tale day,
               
               The light ſhall ſhew charactred in my brow,
               The ſtory of ſweet chaſtities decay,
               The impious breach of holy wedlockes vow.
               
               Yea, the illeterate that know not how
               To cipher what is writ in learned bookes,
               Will quote my lothſome treſpaſſe in my lookes.
            
            
               The nurſe to ſtill her child will tell my ſtory,
               
               And fright her crying babe with Tarquins name:
               The Orator to decke his oratory,
               VVill couple my reproch to Tarquins ſhame,
               Feaſt finding minſtrels tuning my defame
               Will tie the hearers to attend each line,
               How Tarquin wronged me, I COLATINE.
            
            
               Let my good name, that ſenceleſſe reputation,
               For COLATINES deare loue be kept vnſpotted:
               If that be made a theame for diſputation,
               
               
                  
The branches of another root are rotted,
               And vndeſeru'd reproch to him allotted,
               That is as cleare from this attaint of mine,
               As I ere this, was pure to COLATINE.
            
            
               O vnſeene ſhame, inuiſible diſgrace!
               O vnfelt ſore, creſt-wounding priuate ſcarre:
               
               Reproch is ſtampt in COLLATINVS face,
               And Tarquins eye may read the mot a far,
               How he in peace is wounded, not in warre.
               
               Alas how many beare ſuch ſhamefull blowes,
               
               Which not themſelues but he that giues them knowes?
            
            
               If Colatine thine honor lay in me,
               From me by ſtrong aſſault it is bereft:
               My hony loſt, and I a Drone like bee,
               Haue no perfection of my ſommer left,
               But robd and ranſackt by iniurious theft.
               
               In thy weake hiue a wandring waſpe hath crept,
               And ſuckt the hony which thy chaſt Bee kept.
            
            
               Yet am I guilty of thy honors wracke;
               Yet for thy honor did I entertaine him;
               Comming from thee I could not put him backe:
               For it had been diſhonor to diſdairie him,
               Beſides of wearineſſe he did complaine him,
               And talke of vertue (O vnlookt for euill)
               VVhen vertue is prophan'd in ſuch a Diuell.
               
            
            
               VVhy ſhould the worme intrude the maiden bud?
               Or hatefull Cuckowes hatch in Sparrowes neſts?
               Or Todes infect faire founts with venom mud?
               Or tyrant Folly lurke in gentle breſts?
               Or Kings be breakers of their owne beheſts?
               
               But no perfection is ſo abſolute,
               That ſome impurity doth not pollute.
            
            
               The aged man that coffers vp his gold,
               
               
                  
Is plagu'd with cramps, and gouts, and painfull fits,
               
               And ſcarce hath eies his treaſure to behold,
               But like ſtill pining Tantalus he ſits,
               And vſeleſſe bannes the harueſt of his wits:
               
               Hauing no other pleaſure of his gaine,
               
               But torment that it cannot cure his paine.
               
            
            
               So then, he hath it when he cannot vſe it:
               And leaues it to be maſtred by his yong,
               
               VVho in their pride doe preſently abuſe it:
               Their father was too weake, and they too ſtrong:
               
               To hold their curſed-bleſſed fortunelong.
               The ſweets we wiſh for turne to loathed ſowers,
               
               Euen in the moment that we call them ours.
               
            
            
               Vnruly blaſt wait on the tender ſpring,
               
               Vnholſome weeds take root with precious flowers:
               
               The Adder hiſſeth where the ſweet birds ſing:
               What vertue breeds, iniquity deuours:
               VVe haue no good that we can ſay is ours:
               But ill-annexed Opportunity,
               Or kils his life, or els his quality.
               
            
            
               O Opportunity thy guilt is great;
               Tis thou that execut'ſt the traitors treaſon:
               Thou ſets the Wolfe where he the Lambe may get:
               Who euer plots the ſinne thou points the ſeaſon.
               
               Tis thou that ſpurnſt at right, at law, at reaſon.
               
               And in thy ſhady Cell where none may ſpie her,
               
               Sits Sinne to ſeaze the ſoules that wander by her.
            
            
               Thou mak'ſt the Veſtall violate her oath:
               Thou bloweſt the fire when Temperance is thawd;
               Thou ſmotherſt honeſty, thou murtherſt troth:
               
               Thou fowle abbettor, thou notorions baud:
               
               Thou planteſt ſcandall, and diſplaceſt land.
               
               Thou rauiſher, thou traitor, thou falſe thiefe,
               
               Thy hony turnes to gall, thy ioy to griefe.
               
            
            
               
               Thy ſecret pleaſure turnes to open ſhame;
               
               Thy priuate feaſting to a publicke faſt:
               
               Thy ſmothering titles to a ragged name:
               
               Thy ſugred tongue to bitter wormwood taſte:
               
               Thy violent vanities can neuer laſt.
               How comes it then, vile opportunity
               
               Being ſo bad, ſuch numbers ſeeke for thee?
            
            
               VVhen wilt thou be the humble ſuppliants friend,
               And bring him where his ſuit may be obtained?
               VVhen wilt thou ſort an houre great ſtrifes to end?
               Or free that ſoule which wretchedneſſe hath chained?
               Giue phyſicke to the ſicke, eaſe to the pained?
               The poore, lame, blinde, halt, creep, cry out for thee;
               But they nere met with opportunity.
               
            
            
               The Patient dies while the Phyſitian ſleepes;
               The Orphan pines while the Oppreſſor feeds:
               Iuſtice is feaſting while the widow weeps:
               Aduiſe is ſporting while infection breeds,
               Thou grant'ſt no time for charitable deeds,
               
                  Wrath, enuy, treaſon, rape, and murther rages,
               Thy hainous houres wait on them as their pages.
            
            
               VVhen Trueth and Vertue haue to doe with thee
               A thouſand croſſes keep them from thy aid;
               
               They buy thy helpe, but Sinne nere giues a fee,
               He gratis comes, and thou art well apaid
               As well to heare, as grant what he hath ſaid.
               My Colatine would elſe haue come to me:
               VVhen Tarquin did, but he was ſtaid by thee.
            
            
               Guilty thou art of murther and of theft,
               
               Guilty of periury and ſubornation,
               
               Guilty of treaſon, forgery and ſhift,
               
               Guilty of inceſt that abhomination,
               
               An acceſſary by thine inclination
               
                  
To all ſinnes paſt, and all that are to come,
               
               From the creation to the generall doome.
               
            
            
               Miſhapen time, copeſmate of vgly night,
               
               Swift ſubtile poſt, carrier of griſly care,
               
               Eater of youth, falſe ſlaue to falſe delight,
               Baſe watch of woes, ſins packe-horſe, vertues ſnare;
               
               Thou nurſeſt all, and murthereſt all that are:
               O heare me then, iniurious ſhifting time,
               
               Be guilty of my death, ſince of my crime.
               
            
            
               VVhy hath thy ſeruant Opportunity
               
               Betrai'd the houres thou gau'ſt me to repoſe?
               Canceld my fortunes and inchained me
               To endleſſe date of neuer-ending woes?
               
               Times office is to fine the hate of foes,
               
               To eate vp error by opinion bred,
               Not ſpend the dowry of a lawfull bed.
            
            
               
                  Times glory is to calme contending Kings,
               
               To vnmaske falſhood, and bring truth to light,
               To ſtampe the ſeale of time in aged things,
               To wake the morne and centinell the night,
               To wrong the wronger till he render right,
               To ruinate proud buildings with thy houres:
               
               And ſmeare with duſt their glittering golden towres.
               
            
            
               To fill with worme-holes ſtately monuments,
               
               To feede obliuion with decay of things,
               To blot old bookes, and alter their contents,
               To plucke the quils from ancient Rauens wings.
               To dry the old oakes ſap, and cheriſh ſprings.
               
               To ſpoile antiquities of hammered ſteele,
               And turne the giddy round of Fortunes wheele.
            
            
               To ſhew the beldame daughters of her daughter,
               
               To make the child a man, the man a childe,
               To ſlay the Tygre that doth liue by ſlaughter.
               
                  
To tame the Vnicorne and Lyon wild,
               To mocke the ſubtile in themſelues beguild.
               To cheare the Plowman with increaſefull crops,
               
               And waſte huge ſtones with little water drops.
            
            
               Why work'ſt thou miſchiefe in thy pilgrimage,
               
               Vnleſſe thou couldſt returne to make amends?
               One poore retyring minute in an age,
               VVould purchaſe thee a thouſand thouſand friends,
               Lending him wit that to bad dettors lends,
               O this dread night, wouldſt thou one houre come back
               I could preuent this ſtorme and ſhun this wracke.
            
            
               Thou ceaſeleſſe lackie to Eternity,
               
               VVith ſome miſchance croſſe Tarquin in his flight
               Deuiſe extreames beyond extremity,
               To make him curſe this curſed crimefull night:
               
               Let gaſtly ſhadowes his lewd eies affright,
               And the dire thought of his committed euill.
               Shape euery buſh a hideous ſhapeleſſe Diuell.
               
            
            
               Diſturbe his howres of reſt with reſtleſſe trances
               
               Afflict him in his bed with bedred grones:
               
               Let there bechance him pittifull miſchances,
               
               To make him mone, but pitty not his mones:
               
               Stone him with hardned harts harder then ſtone,
               And let mild women to him looſe their mildneſſe,
               
               VVilder to him then Tygers in their wildneſſe.
               
            
            
               Let him haue time to teare his curled haire,
               Let him haue time againſt himſelfe to raue,
               Let him haue time of times helpe to deſpaire,
               Let him haue time to liue a loathed ſlaue,
               
               Let him haue time a beggars orts to craue:
               And time to ſee one that by almes doth liue,
               Diſdaine to him diſdained ſcraps to giue.
            
            
               Let him haue time to ſee his friends his foes,
               
               
                  
And merry fooles to mocke at him reſort:
               Let him haue time to marke how ſlow time goes
               In time of ſorrow, and how ſwift and ſhort
               His time of folly, and his time of ſport.
               
               And euer let his vnrecalling time,
               
               Haue time to waile th'abuſing of his time.
            
            
               O time thou tutor both to good and bad,
               
               Teach me to curſe him that thou taughts this ill,
               
               At his owne ſhadow let the theefe runne mad,
               Himſelfe, himſelfe ſeeke euery houre to kill,
               Such wretched hands ſuch wretched bloud ſhould ſpill.
               For who ſo baſe would ſuch an office haue
               As ſlanderous deaths-man to ſo baſe a ſlaue?
            
            
               The baſer is he, comming from a King,
               
               To ſhame his hope with deeds degenerate,
               The mightier man, the mightier is the thing
               That makes him honour'd, or begets him hato:
               
               For greateſt ſcandall waites on greateſt ſtate.
               
               The Moone being clouded preſently is miſt,
               But little Starres may hide them when they liſt.
            
            
               The Crow may bathe his cole-blacke wings in mire,
               And vnperceiu'd flye with the filth away,
               But if the like the ſnow-white Swan deſire,
               The ſtaine vpon his ſiluer Downe will ſtay.
               Poore groomes are ſightleſſe night, Kings glorious day;
               
               
                  Gnats are vnnoted whereſoere they flye,
               But Eagles gaz'd vpon with euery eye.
            
            
               Our idle words, ſeruants to ſhallow fooles,
               
               Vnprofitable ſounds, weake arbitrators,
               
               Buſie your ſelues in ſkil-contending ſchooles,
               
               Debate where leaſure ſerues with dul debators:
               To trembling Clyents be you mediators,
               For me, I force not argument a ſtraw,
               Since that my caſe is paſt the help of law.
               
            
            
               
               In vaine I raile at Opportunity,
               
               At Time, at Tarquin, and vnſearchfull night:
               
               In vaine I cauill with mine infamy,
               
               In vaine I ſpurne at my confirm'd deſpight:
               
               This helpleſſe ſmoke of words doth me no right;
               The remedy indeed to do me good
               Is to let foorth my foule defiled blood.
               
            
            
               Poore hand, why quiuereſt thou at this decree?
               
               Honor thy ſelfe to rid me of this ſhame,
               
               For if I die, my Honor liues in thee,
               But if I liue, thou liu'ſt in my defame;
               
               Since thou couldſt not defend thy loyall Dame:
               
               And waſt affeard to ſcratch her wicked Foe,
               Kill both thy ſelfe and her for yeelding ſo.
            
            
               This ſaid from her betumbled couch ſhe ſtarts,
               To finde ſome deſperate inſtrument of death,
               But this no ſlaughterhouſe no toole imparts,
               To make more vent for paſſage of her breath,
               
               Which thrunging through her lips ſo vaniſheth
               As ſmoake from Aetna, that in aire conſumes,
               Or that which from diſcharged Canon fumes.
            
            
               In vaine (quoth ſhe) I liue, and ſeeke in vaine
               Some happy meane to end a hapleſſe life:
               I fear'd by Tarquins Fauchion to be ſlaine,
               Yet for the ſelfe-ſame purpoſe ſeeke a knife:
               
               But when I feard, I was a loyall wife;
               So am I now: O no that cannot be,
               Of that true type hath Tarquin rifled me.
            
            
               O that is gone for which I ſought to liue,
               And therefore now I need not feare to die,
               To cleare this ſpot by death (at leaſt) I giue
               A badge of Fame to ſlaunders liuery,
               
               A dying life to liuing infamy.
               
                  
Poore helpleſſe helpe the treaſure ſtolne away,
               To burne the guiltleſſe casket where it lay.
            
            
               Well well deare Colatine thou ſhalt not know
               The ſtained taſt of violated troth:
               I will not wrong thy true affection ſo,
               To flatter thee with an infringed oath:
               
               This baſtard graſſe ſhall neuer come to growth,
               He ſhall not boaſt who did thy ſtocke pollute,
               That thou art doting father of his fruit.
            
            
               Nor ſhall he ſmile at thee in ſecret thought,
               
               Nor laugh with his companions at thy ſtate,
               
               But thou ſhalt know thy intereſt was not bought
               Baſely with gold, but ſtolne from forth thy gate,
               
               For me I am the miſtreſſe of my fate
               
               And with my treſpaſſe neuerwill diſpence,
               Till life to death acquit my forſt offence.
            
            
               I will not poiſon thee with my attaint,
               
               Nor fold my fault in cleanly coyn'd excuſes,
               My ſable ground of ſinne I will not paint,
               To hide the truth of this falſe nights abules:
               My tongue ſhall vtter all, mine eyes like ſluces
               
               As from a mountaine ſpring that feeds a dale,
               
               Shall guſh pure ſtreames to purge my impure tale.
            
            
               By this lamenting Philomele had ended,
               The well-tun'd warble ofher nightly ſorrow,
               
                  9 Lucrece continuing herlaments, diſputeth whether ſhe ſhould kill her ſelfe or no.And ſolemne night with ſlow ſad gate deſcended 
               To ougly Hell, when loe the bluſhing morrow
               Lends light to all faire eyes that light would borrow.
               But clowdy Lucrece ſhames her ſelfe to ſee,
               And therefore ſtill in night would cloiſtred be.
            
            
               Reuealing day through euery cranny ſpies,
               And ſeems to point her out where ſhe ſits weeping,
               To whom ſhe ſobbing ſpeakes, O eye of eyes,
               
               
                  
Why pry'ſt thou through my window? leaue thy peeping,
               Mock with thy tickling beames, eyes that are ſleeping:
               Brand not my forehead with thy piercing light,
               
               For day hath nought to do whats done by night.
               
            
            
               Thus cauils ſhe with euery thing ſhe ſees,
               True griefe is fond and teſtie as a childe,
               
               Who way-ward once, his mood with nought agrees,
               
                  Old woes, not infant ſorrowes beare them milde;
               
               
                  Continuance tames the one, the other wilde
               Like an vnpractiz'd ſwimmer plunging ſtil,
               With too much labour drowns for want of skill,
               
            
            
               So ſhe deepe drenched in a Sea of care,
               
               Holds diſputation with each thing ſhe viewes,
               And to her ſelfe all ſorrow doth compare,
               No obiect but her paſſions ſtrength renewes,
               And as one ſhifts another ſtraight inſewes,
               Sometimes her griefe is dumbe and hath no words,
               
               Sometime tis mad and too much talke affoords.
            
            
               The little birds that tune their mornings ioy,
               Make her mones mad with their ſweet melodie,
               
               For mirth doth ſearch the bottome of annoy,
               
               Sad ſoules are ſlaine in merry company,
               
                  Griefe beſt is pleaſed with griefes ſocietie?
               True ſorrow then is feelingly ſuffiz'd
               When with like ſemblance it is ſimpathiz'd.
            
            
               Tis double death to drowne in ken of ſhore,
               
               He ten times pines, that pines beholding food,
               
               To ſee the ſalue doth make the wound ake more,
               
                  Great griefe grieues moſt at that would do it good,
               
                  Deepe woes roule forward like a gentle floud.
               
               Who being ſtopt, the bounding banks oreflowes,
               Griefe dallied with, nor law, nor limit knowes.
            
            
               You mocking Birds (quoth ſhe) your tunes intombe
               
                  
Within your hollow ſwelling feathred breaſts,
               
               And in my hearing be you euer dumbe,
               My reſtleſſe diſcord loues no ſtops nor reſts;
               
               A wofull hoſteſſe brooks not merry gueſts.
               
               Reliſh your nimble notes to pleaſing eares,
               
               
                  Diſtreſſe likes dumps when time is kept with teares.
               
            
            
               Come Philomele that ſingſt of rauiſhment,
               
               Make thy ſad groue in my diſheueld heare,
               
               As the danke earth weepes at thy languiſhment,
               So I at each ſad ſtraine, will ſtraine a teare,
               
               And with deepe groanes the Diapaſon beare:
               For burthen-wiſe Ile hum on Tarquin ſtill,
               While thou on Tereus deſcants better skill.
               
            
            
               And whiles againſt a thorne thou bearſt thy part,
               To keepe thy ſharpe woes waking wretched I
               To imitate thee well, againſt my heart
               Will ſixe a ſharpe knife to affright mine eye,
               
               Who if it winke, ſhall thereon fall and die.
               Theſe meanes as frets vpon an inſtrument,
               
               Shall tune our heart-ſtrings to true languiſhment,
            
            
               And for poore bird thou ſing'ſt not in the day,
               
               As ſhaming any eye ſhould thee behold:
               Some darke deepe deſart ſeated from the way,
               
               That knowes nor parching heat, nor freezing cold
               
               Will we finde out: and there we will vnfold
               To creatures ſtern, ſad tunes to change their kinds
               Since men proue beaſts, let beaſts beare gentle minds.
            
            
               As the poore frighted Deere that ſtands at gaze,
               Wildly determining which way to fly,
               Or one incompaſt with a winding maze,
               
               That cannot tread the way out readily:
               So with her ſelfe is ſhe in mutinie,
               To liue or die which of the twaine were better
               
                  
When life is ſham'd and death reproches detter.
            
            
               To kill my ſelfe quoth ſhe, alacke what were it,
               But with my body my poore ſoules pollution?
               They that looſe halfe with greater patience beare it,
               Then they whoſe whole is ſwallowed in confuſion.
               That mother tries a mercileſſe concluſion
               Who hauing two ſweet babes when death takes one,
               Will ſlay the other, and be nurſe to none.
            
            
               My body or my ſoule which was the dearer?
               When the one pure, the other made diuine,
               Whoſe loue of either, to my ſelfe was nearer?
               When both were kept for Heauen and Colatine
               
               Ay me, the barke pild from the lofty Pine
               
               His leaues will wither and his ſap decay,
               So muſt my ſoule, her barke being pild away.
            
            
               Her houſe is ſackt, her quiet interrupted,
               Her manſion battered by the enemy,
               Her ſacred Temple ſpotted, ſpoild, corrupted,
               Groſly ingirt with daring infamy,
               Then let it not be cald impiety
               
               If in this blemiſht fort I make ſome hole,
               
               Through which I may conuey this troubled ſoule.
               
            
            
               Yet die I will not till my Colatine
               
               Haue heard the cauſe of my vntimely death,
               
               That he may vow in that ſad houre of mine,
               Reuenge on him that made me ſtop my breath,
               My ſtained bloud to Tarquin ile bequeath,
               VVhich by him tainted, ſhall for him be ſpent,
               And as his due writ in my Teſtament.
               
            
            
               My honor ile bequeath vnto the knife,
               
               That wounds my body ſo diſhonored:
               Tis Honor to depriue diſhonored life
               The one will liue, the other being dead.
               
                  
So of ſhames aſhes ſhall my Fame be bred:
               For in my death I murther ſhamefull ſcorne,
               
               My ſhame ſo dead, my honor is new borne.
               
            
            
               Deare Lord of that deare Iewell I haue loſt,
               What legacy ſhall I bequeath to thee?
               My reſolution, loue, ſhall be thy boſt,
               By whoſe example thou reueng'd maiſt be.
               How Tarquin muſt be vſ'd, read it in me.
               My ſelfe thy friend will kill my ſelfe thy foe,
               
               And for my ſake ſerue thou falſe Tarquin ſo.
            
            
               This briefe abridgement of my will I make,
               My ſoule and body to the skies and ground,
               
               My reſolution (Husband) doe you take,
               Mine honor be the knifes that make my wound,
               
               My ſhame be his that did my fame confound.
               And all my fame that liues diſburſed be,
               To thoſe that liue and thinke no ſhame of me.
            
            
               Then Colatine ſhall ouerſee this will,
               
               How was I ouerſeene that thou ſhalt ſee it?
               My bloud ſhall waſh the ſlander of mine ill;
               My lifes foule deed my lifes faire end ſhall free it.
               Faint not faint heart, but ſtoutly ſay, ſo be it.
               Yeeld to my hand, my hand ſhall conquer thee,
               Thou dead, both die, and both ſhall victors be.
            
            
               This plot of death when ſadly ſhe had laid,
               And wipt the briniſh pearle from her bright eyes,
               
               
                  10 Lucrece reſolued to kil her ſelfe determines firſt to ſend her Husband word.With vntun'd tongue ſhe hoarſely calld her maid, 
               
               Whoſe ſwift obedience to her miſtreſſe hies,
               For fleet-wingd duty with thoughts feathers flies
               Poore Lucrece cheekes vnto her maid ſeeme ſo,
               As winter meads when Sunne doth melt their ſnow.
               
            
            
               Her miſtreſſe ſhe doth giue demure good morrow,
               
               With ſoft ſlow tongue, true markes of modeſty,
               
                  
And ſorts a ſad looke to her Ladies ſorrow,
               (For why her face wore ſorrowes liuery.)
               But durſt not aske of her audaciouſly
               Why her two ſuns were clowd-eclipſed ſo,
               Nor why her faire cheeks ouer waſht with woe.
               
            
            
               But as the earth doth weepe the Sun being ſet,
               Each flower moyſtned like a melting eye:
               
               Euen ſo the maid with ſwelling drops gan wet
               Her circkled eyne enforc'd, by ſympathie
               Of thoſe faire Suns ſet in her miſtreſſe skie,
               
               Who in a ſalt-wau'd Ocean quench their light.
               
               Which makes the maid weepe like the dewy night.
               
            
            
               A prettie while theſe pretty creatures ſtand,
               Like iuory conduits corall ceſierues filling:
               One iuſtly weepes, the other takes in hand
               
               No cauſe, but company of her drops ſpilling.
               Their gentle ſex to weepe are often willing,
               Grieuing themſelues to geſſe at other ſmarts,
               And then they drowne their eies, or breake their harts.
               
            
            
               For men haue marble, women waxen minds,
               
               And therefore are they form'd as marble will,
               The weake oppreſt, th' impreſſion of ſtrange kinds,
               
               Is form'd in them by force, by fraud or skill.
               
               Then call them not the Authors of their ill,
               
               No more then waxe ſhall be accounted euill,
               Wherein is ſtampt the ſemblance of a diuell.
               
            
            
               Their ſmothneſſe like a champaine plaine,
               Layes open all the little wormes that creepe,
               In men as in a rough growne groue remaine
               
                  Caue-keeping euils that obſcurely ſleepe.
               Through chryſtall walles ech little mote will peepe,
               Though men can couer crimes with bold ſtern looks
               
               Poore womans faces are their owne faults bookes.
               
            
            
               
               No man inueighs againſt the withered flowre,
               
               But chide rough winter that the flowre hath kild,
               Not that deuourd, but that which doth deuoure
               
               Is worthy blame, ô let it not be held
               Poore womens faults, that they are ſo fulfild
               With mens abuſes, thoſe proud Lords to blame,
               Make weake-made women tenants to their ſhame.
               
            
            
               The preſident whereof in Lucrece view,
               Aſſail'd by night with circumſtances ſtrong
               Of preſent death and ſhame that mightinſue,
               By that her death to do her husband wrong:
               Such danger to reſiſtance did belong.
               The dying feare through all her body ſpread,
               And who cannot abuſe a body dead?
            
            
               By this milde patience bid faire Lucrece ſpeake
               To the poore counterfeit of her complayning:
               My girle, quoth ſhe on what occaſion breake
               Thoſe teares from thee, that downe thy cheeks are raining
               If thou doſt weepe for griefe of my ſuſtaining,
               Know gentle wench, it ſmall auailes my moode,
               If teares could helpe, mine owne would do me good.
            
            
               But tell me girle, when went (and there ſhe ſtaid,
               Til after a deepe grone) Tarquin from hence?
               Madam ere I was vp (repli'd the maid,)
               
               The more to blame my ſluggard negligence:
               
               Yet with the fault I thus farre can diſpence,
               My ſelfe was ſtirring ere the breake of day,
               
               And ere I roſe was Tarquin gone away.
            
            
               But Lady, if your maid may be ſo bold,
               She would requeſt to know your heauineſſe:
               
               O peace (quoth Lucrece) if it ſhould be told,
               The repetition cannot make it leſſe:
               For more it is then I can well expreſſe,
               
                  
And that deep torture may be cald a Hell,
               
               When more is felt then one hath power to tell.
            
            
               Goe get me hither, paper, inke, and pen,
               
               Yet ſaue that labour for I haue them heare,
               (What ſhould I ſay) one of my husbands men,
               Bid thou be ready by and by to beare,
               A Letter to my Lord, my loue, my deare,
               
               Bid him with ſpeed prepare to carry it,
               The cauſe craues haſt, and it will ſoone be writ.
            
            
               Her maide is gone and ſhe prepares to write,
               Firſt houering ore the paper with her quill,
               
               Conceipt and griefe an eager combat fight,
               What Wit ſets downe is blotted ſtill with Will,
               
               This is too curious good, this blunt and ill.
               
               Much like a preaſe of people at a dore,
               
               Throng her inuentions which ſhall goe before.
            
            
               At laſt ſhe thus begins: Thou worthy Lord
               
               Of that vnworthy wife that greeteth thee,
               
                  Health to thy perſon, next vouchſafet' afford
               (If euer loue thy LVCRECE thou wilt ſee)
               Some preſent ſpeed to come and viſit me.
               So I commend me from our houſe in griefe,
               My woes are tedious, though my words are briefe.
            
            
               Here folds ſhe vp the tenor of her woe,
               
               Her certain ſorrow writ vncertainly,
               By this ſhort ſedule Colatine may know
               Her griefe, but not her griefes true quality
               
               She dares not thereof make diſcouery,
               Leaſt he ſhould hold it her owne groſſe abuſe,
               
               Ere ſhe with blood had ſtaind her ſtaind excuſe.
            
            
               Beſides the life and feeling of her paſſien,
               
               She hoords to ſpend, when he is by to heare her,
               VVhen ſighes and grones and teares may grace the faſhion
               
                  
Of her diſgrace, the better ſo to cleare her
               From that ſuſpition which the world might beare her.
               To ſhun this blot ſhe would not blot the letter,
               
               With words, till action might become them better.
            
            
               To ſee ſad ſights moues more then heare them told:
               For then the eye interprets to the eare
               
               The heauy motion that it doth behold
               VVhen euery part a part of woe doth beare:
               Tis but a part of ſorrow that we heare.
               Deepe ſounds make leſſer noiſe then ſhallow fords,
               
               And ſorrow ebs being blowne with wind of words.
               
            
            
               Her letter now is ſeald, and on it writ,
               At Ardea to my Lord with more than haſte,
               The Poſt attends and ſhe deliuers it,
               Charging the ſoure fac'd groom to high as faſt
               As lagging foules before the Northren blaſt.
               Speed, more then ſpeed, but dull and ſlow ſhe deems,
               Extremity ſtill vrgeth ſuch extremes.
               
            
            
               The homely villaine curſies to her lowe,
               And bluſhing on her with a ſtedfaſt eye
               
               Receiues the ſcroll without or yea or no,
               
               And forthwith baſhfull innocence doth lie,
               But they whoſe guilt within their boſomes lie,
               Imagine euery eye beholds their blame,
               For Lucrece thought he bluſht to ſee her ſhame.
            
            
               VVhen ſilly Groome (God wot) it was defect
               Of ſpirit, life, and bold audacity,
               
               Such harmleſſe creatures haue a true reſpect
               To talke in deeds, while others ſaucily
               Promiſe more ſpeed, but doe it leaſurely.
               Euen ſo this patterne of the worne out age,
               
               Pawn'd honeſt lookes but laid no words to gage.
            
            
               His kindled duty kindled her miſtruſt,
               
               
                  
That two red fires in both their faces blazed,
               She thought he bluſht as knowing Tarquins luſt,
               And bluſhing with him, wiſtly on him gazed,
               Her earneſt eye did make him more amazed:
               The more ſhe ſaw the bloud his cheeks repleniſh,
               The more ſhe thought he ſpied in her ſome blemiſh.
               
            
            
               But long ſhe thinks till he returne againe,
               And yet the duteous vaſſall ſcarce is gone,
               The weary time ſhe cannot entertaine,
               For now tis ſtale to ſigh, to weepe, and grone,
               
               So woe hath wearied woe, mone tyred mone,
               
               That ſhe her plaints a little while doth ſtay,
               Pawſing for meanes to mourne ſome newer way.
            
            
               At laſt ſhe cals to minde where hangs a peece
               
               Of skilfull painting, made for Priams Troy,
               
               Before the which is drawne the power of Greece,
               
               For Hellens rape the citie to deſtroy,
               Threatning cloud-kiſſing Illion with annoy;
               Which the conceipted Painter drew ſo proud,
               As heauen (it ſeemd) to kiſſe the turrets bowd.
            
            
               A thouſand lamentable obiects there
               In ſcorne of Nature. Art gaue liueleſſe life:
               
               Many a dire drop ſeemd a weeping teare.
               
               Shed for the ſlaughtred husband by the wife.
               
               The red bloud reekd to ſhew the painters ſtrife,
               And dying eies gleemd forth their aſhy lights,
               
               Like dying coales burnt out in tedious nights,
               
            
            
               There might you ſee the labouring Pyoner
               
               Begrimd with ſweat, and ſmeared all with duſt,
               
               And from the towres of Troy there would appeare
               The verie eies of men through loope-holes thruſt,
               Gazing vpon the Greekes with little luſt,
               Such ſweet obſeruance in this worke was had,
               
                  
That one might ſee thoſe farre off eies looke ſad.
            
            
               In great commanders, Grace and Maieſtie
               
               You might behold triumphing in their faces,
               
               In youth quick-bearing and dexteritie,
               
               And heere and there the Painter interlaces
               Pale couards marching on with trembling paces,
               
               Which hartleſſe peaſants did ſo well reſemble,
               That one would ſweare he ſaw them quake & tremble.
            
            
               In Aiax and Vlyſſes, O what Art
               
               Of Phiſiognomy might one behold!
               The face of either cipher'd eithers heart,
               
               Their face, their maners moſt expreſly told.
               In Aiax eies blunt rage and rigor rold.
               But the mild glance that ſhe Vliſſes lent,
               Shew'd deepe regard and ſmiling gouernment.
               
            
            
               There pleading might you ſee graue Neſtor ſtand
               As'twere incouraging the Greekes to fight,
               Making ſuch ſober action with his hand,
               
               That it beguild attention, charm'd the ſight,
               
               In ſpeach it ſeemd his beard, al ſiluer white,
               
               Wag'd vp and downe, and from his lips did flie
               Thin winding breath, which purl'd vp to the skie.
               
            
            
               About him were a preaſe of gaping faces
               
               Which ſeem'd to ſwallow vp his ſound aduiſe:
               
               All ioyntly liſtning, but with ſeuerall graces,
               
               As if ſome Mermaid did their eares intiſe,
               Some high, ſome low, the painter was ſo niſe.
               The ſcalpes of many almoſt hid behind,
               To iump vp higher ſeem'd to mock the mind.
               
            
            
               Here one mans hand lean'd on anothers head.
               
               His noſe being ſhadowed by his neighbours eare,
               
               Here one being throng'd beares backe al boln and red;
               Another ſmotherd, ſeemes to pelt and ſweare,
               
                  
And in their rage ſuch ſignes of rage they beare,
               As but for loſſe of Neſtors golden words,
               It ſeem'd they would debate with angry ſwords.
               
            
            
               For much imaginarie worke was there,
               
                  Conceipt deceitfull, ſo compact ſo kinde,
               That for Achilles image ſtood his ſpeare
               
               Gript in an armed hand, himſelfe behinde
               Was left vnſeene, ſaue to the eye of minde,
               
               A hand, a foote, a face, a leg, a head,
               
               Stood for the whole to be imagined.
            
            
               And from the wals of ſtrong beſieged Troy,
               
               When their braue hope, bold Hector, march'd to field,
               
               Stood many Troiane mothers ſharing ioy,
               
               To ſee their youthfull ſonnes bright weapons wield,
               And to their hope they ſuch odde action yield,
               That through their light ioy ſeemed to appeare,
               (Like bright things ſtain'd) a kind of heauie feare.
               
            
            
               And from the ſtrond of Dardan where they fought,
               To Simois reedy banks the red bloud ran,
               Whoſe waues to imitate the battel ſought
               With ſwelling ridges, and their ranks began
               To breake vpon the galled ſhore, and than
               Retire againe, till meeting greater ranks
               
               They ioyne, and ſhoot their ſome at Simois banks.
            
            
               To this well painted peece is Lucrece come,
               To finde a face where all diſtreſſe is ſteld,
               Many ſhe ſees, where cares haue carued ſome,
               But none where all diſtreſſe and dolour dweld,
               Til ſhe diſpairing Hecuba beheld,
               Staring on Priams wounds with her old eyes,
               
               Which bleeding vnder Pirrhus proud foot lies.
            
            
               In her the Painter had annotimiz'd
               
                  Times ruine, Beauties wrack, and grim Cares raigne,
               
               
                  
Her cheeks with chops and wrinckles were diſguiz'd,
               Of what ſhe was, no ſemblance did remaine;
               Her blew bloud chang'd to black in euery vain,
               
               Wanting the ſpring that thoſe ſhrunk pipes had fed
               Shew'd life impriſon'd in a body dead.
            
            
               On this ſad ſhadow Lucrece ſpends her cies,
               
               And ſhapes her ſorrow to the Beldames woes,
               Who nothing wants to anſwer her but cries,
               
               And bitter words to ban her cruell foes.
               
               The Painter was no God to lend her thoſe;
               And therefore Lucrece ſweares he did her wrong,
               To giue her ſo much griefe, and not a tong.
               
            
            
               Poore inſtrument (quoth ſhe) without a ſound,
               
               Ile tune thy woes with my lamenting tongue:
               
               And drop ſweet balme in Priams painted wound,
               
               And raile on Pirrhus that hath done him wrong,
               And with my teares quench Troy that burns ſo long:
               And with my knife ſcratch out the angry eyes
               
               Of all the Greeks, that are thine enemies.
               
            
            
               Shew me the ſtrumpet that began this ſturre,
               
               That with my nailes her beautie I may teare:
               Thy heat of luſt fond Paris did incurre
               This lode of wrath, that burning Troy doth beare:
               Thy eye kindled the fire that burneth here.
               And here in Troy for treſpaſſe of thine eye,
               
               The Sire, the Son, the Dame and Daughter die.
            
            
               Why ſhould the priuate pleaſure of ſome one
               Become the publick plague of many moe?
               Let ſinne alone committed, light alone
               Vpon his head that hath tranſgreſſed ſo.
               Let guiltleſſe ſoules be freed from guiltie woe.
               
               For ones offence why ſhould ſo many fall?
               To plague a priuate ſinne in generall.
            
            
               
               Loe here weepes Hecuba, here Priam dies,
               Here manly Hector faints, here Troylus ſounds,
               Here friend by friend in bloudy channell lies:
               And friend to friend giues vnaduiſed wounds,
               
               And one mans luſt theſe many liues confounds.
               Had doting Priam checkt his ſonnes deſire,
               
                  Troy had bin bright with Fame, and not with fire.
               
            
            
               Here feelingly ſhe weeps Troyes painted woes,
               
               For ſorrow, like a heauy hanging bell,
               
               Once ſet on ringing, with his owne waight goes,
               Then little ſtrength rings out the dolefull knell:
               
               So Lucrece ſet a worke, ſad tales doth tell
               To penſeld penſiueneſſe, and colour'd ſorrow,
               She lends them words, and ſhe their looks doth borrow.
            
            
               She throwes her eies about the painted round,
               
               And who ſhe finds forlorne ſhe doth lament:
               At laſt ſhee ſees wretched image bound,
               That piteous lookes to Phrygian ſhepheards lent,
               His face though full of cares, yet ſhew'd content,
               
               Onward to Troy with theſe blunt ſwaines he goes,
               So mild, that patience ſeemd to ſcorne his woes.
               
            
            
               In him the painter labour'd with his skill
               
               To hide deceipt and giue the harmeleſſe ſhow
               An humble gate, calme lookes, eies wayling ſtill,
               A brow vnbent that ſeem'd to welcome wo,
               
               
                  Cheekes, neither red, nor pale, but mingled ſo
               That bluſhing red, no guilty inſtance gaue,
               Nor aſhie pale, the feare that falſe hearts haue.
            
            
               But like a conſtant and confirmed Deuill,
               
               He entertain'd a ſhow ſo ſeeming iuſt,
               And therein ſo enſconc't this ſecret euill,
               
               That Iealouſie it ſelfe could not miſtruſt,
               Falſe creeping craft and Periurie ſhould thruſt
               
                  
Into ſo bright a day, ſuch blackfac'd ſtormes,
               
               Or blot with hel-borne ſin ſuch Saint-like forms.
            
            
               The well-skild workman this mild Image drew
               For periur'd Sinon, whoſe inchanting ſtorie
               
               The credulous old Priam after ſlew.
               Whoſe words like wild fire burnt the ſhining glorie
               Of rich built Illion, that the skies were ſorie,
               And little ſtarres ſhot from their fixed places,
               When their glaſſe fell wherein they viewd their faces.
               
            
            
               This picture ſhe aduiſedly peruſd,
               And chide the Painter for his woundrous skill:
               
               Saying, ſome ſhape in Sinons was abuſd,
               So faire a forme lodg'd not a mind ſo ill,
               
               And ſtill on him ſhe gaz'd, and gazing ſtill
               Such ſignes of truth in his plaine face ſhe ſpied,
               That ſhe concluds, the picture was belied.
            
            
               It cannot be (quoth ſhe) that ſo much guile,
               
               (She would haue ſaid) can lurke in ſuch a Looke:
               
               But Tarquins ſhape, came in her minde the while.
               And from her tongue, can lurke, from cannot, tooke
               It cannot be, ſhe in that ſenſe forſooke,
               And turnd it thus, it cannot be I find,
               But ſuch a face ſhould beare a wicked minde.
               
            
            
               For euen as ſubtill Sinon here is painted,
               So ſober ſad, ſo weary and ſo milde,
               (As if with griefe or trauaile he had fainted,)
               To me came Tarquin armed to beguild
               With outward honeſtie, but yet defil'd
               With inward vice: as Priam him did cheriſh,
               So did I Tarquin, ſo my Troy did periſh.
            
            
               Looke, looke how liſtning Priam wets his eies
               
               To ſee thoſe borrowed teares that Sinon ſheds
               
                  Priam why art thou old, and yet not wiſe?
               
               
                  
For euery teare he fals, a Troyan bleeds:
               His eyes drops fire, no water thence proceeds,
               Thoſe round cleare pearles of his that moue thy pity
               Are bals of quenchleſſe fire to burne thy Citie.
               
            
            
               Such Diuels ſteale effects from lightleſſe hell,
               
               For Sinon in his fire doth quake with cold,
               And in that cold hot burning fire doth dwell,
               Theſe contraries ſuch vnitie do hold,
               Onely to flatter fooles and make them bold:
               So Priams truſt falſe Sinons teares doth flatter
               That he finds means to burn his Troy with water.
               
            
            
               Here all inrag'd ſuch paſſion her aſſailes,
               That patience is quite beaten from her breaſt,
               
               She teares the ſenceleſſe Sinon with her nailes,
               
               Comparing him to that vnhappie gueſt,
               
               Whoſe deede hath made herſelfe, herſelfe deteſt;
               At laſt ſhe ſmilingly with this giues ore,
               Foole, foole, quoth ſhe his wounds will not be ſore.
            
            
               Thus ebs and flowes the currant of her ſorrow,
               
               And time doth weary time with her complayning,
               She lookes for night, and then ſhe longs for morrow,
               
               And both ſhe thinks too long with her remaining.
               Short time ſeemes long, in ſorrows ſharp ſuſtaining:
               Though woe be heauie, yet it ſeldome ſleeps,
               And they that watch, ſee time how ſlow it creeps.
            
            
               Which all this time hath ouerſlipt her thought,
               
               That ſhe with painted Images hath ſpent,
               Being from the feeling of her owne griefe brought,
               By deepe ſurmiſe of others detriment,
               
               Looſing her woes in ſhewes of diſcontent:
               
               It eaſeth ſome, though none it euer cured,
               To thinke their dolour others haue endured.
            
            
               But now the mindfull Meſſenger comes backe,
               
                  
                  Vpon Lucrece ſending for Collatine i
                        •
                      ſuch haſt, he with d
                        •
                     
                     uers of his allies and friends returnes home.
Brings home his Lord and other company, 
               Who finds his Lucrece clad in mourning black,
               And round about her teare-diſtained-eye
               
               Blew circles ſtream'd, like Rainbowes in the skie.
               
               Theſe watergals in her dim Element,
               
               Foretell new ſtormes to thoſe already ſpent.
            
            
               Which when her ſad beholding husband ſaw,
               Amazedly in her ſad face he ſtares:
               Her eies though ſod in teares look'd red and raw,
               
               Her liuely colour kild with deadly cares,
               
               He hath no power to aske her how ſhe fares,
               But ſtood like old acquaintance in a trance
               
               Met far from home, wondring ech others chance.
            
            
               At laſt he takes her by the bloudleſſe hand:
               
               And thus begins: what vncouth ill euent
               
               Hath thee befallen, that thou doſt trembling ſtand?
               Sweet loue, what ſpite hath thy faire colour ſpent?
               Why art thou thus attir'd in diſcontent?
               
               Vnmask deare deare, this moodie heauineſſe,
               
               And tell thy griefe, that we may giue redreſſe.
            
            
               Three times with ſighs ſhe giues her ſorrow fire,
               Ere once ſhe can diſcharge one word of woe:
               
               At length addreſt to anſwere his deſire,
               She modeſtly prepares, to let them know
               Her Honor is tane priſoner by the Foe,
               
               While Colatine and his conſorted Lords
               
               With ſad attention long to heare her words.
               
            
            
               And now this pale Swan in her watrie neſt,
               
               Begins the ſad Dirge of her certaine ending,
               Fow words (quoth ſhee) ſhall fit the treſpaſſe beſt,
               Wherein no excuſe can giue the fault amending,
               In me more woes then words are now depending
               And my laments would be drawne out too long,
               
                  
To tell them all with one poore tired tongue?
               
            
            
               Then be this all the taske it hath to ſay,
               Deare husband in the intereſt of thy bed
               
               A ſtranger came, and on that pillow lay,
               Where thou was wont to reſt thy weary head,
               
               And what wrong elſe may be imagined,
               By foule inforcement might be done to me,
               From that (alas) thy Lucrece is not free.
            
            
               For in the dreadfull dead of darke mid night,
               
               With ſhining Fauchion in my chamber came
               A creeping creature with a flaming light,
               
               And ſoftly cryed, awake thou Roman Dame,
               
               And intertaine my loue, elſe laſting ſhame
               
               On thee and thine this night I will inflict,
               If thou my loues deſire doe contradict.
            
            
               For ſome hard-fauour'd groome of thine, quoth he,
               Vnleſſe thou yoake thy liking to my will,
               
               Ile murther ſtraight, and then Ile ſlaughter thee,
               And ſweare I found you where you did fulfill
               The lothſome act of Luſt, and ſo did kill
               The Leachers in their deed, this act will be
               My fame, and thy perpetuall infamie.
               
            
            
               With this I did begin to ſtart and cry,
               And then againſt my heart he ſets his ſword
               
               Swearing, vnleſſe I tooke all patiently,
               I ſhould not liue to ſpeake another word,
               So ſhould my ſhame ſtill reſt vpon record,
               
               And neuer be forgot in mightie Rome
               
               Th' adulterat death of Lucrece and her groome.
               
            
            
               Mine enemy was ſtrong, my poore ſelfe weake,
               
               (And farre the weaker with ſo ſtrong a feare)
               My bloudie Iudge forbad my tongue to ſpeake,
               No rightfull plea might plead for Iuſtice there.
               
                  
His ſcarlet luſt came euidence to ſweare,
               That my poore beautie had purloin'd his eies;
               
               And when the Iudge is rob'd the priſoner dies.
            
            
               O teach me how to make mine owne excuſe,
               
               Or (at the leaſt) this refuge let me finde,
               Though my groſe bloud be ſtaind with this abuſe,
               
               Immaculate, and ſpotleſſe is my minde,
               
               That was not forc't, that neuer was inclin'd
               To acceſſarie yeeldings, but ſtill pure
               Doth in her poiſon'd cloſet yet indure.
            
            
               Loe here the hopeleſſe Marchant of this loſſe,
               With head inclin'd and voice dam'd vp with wo,
               
               With ſad ſet eies and wretched armes a croſſe,
               From lips new waxen pale, begins to blow
               The griefe away, that ſtops his anſwere ſo,
               But wretched as he is he ſtriues in vaine,
               What he breaths out, his breath drinks vp againe.
            
            
               As through an Arch, the violent roaring Tide,
               
               Out runs the eye that doth behold his haſt:
               Yet in the Edie boundeth in his pride,
               Back to the ſtraite that forſt him on ſo faſt:
               In rage ſent out, recald in rage being paſt;
               Euen ſo his ſighs, his ſorrows make a ſaw,
               To puſh griefe on and back the ſame griefe draw.
            
            
               Which ſpeechleſſe woe of his poore ſhe attendeth,
               And his vntimely frenzie thus awaketh,
               Deare Lord, thy ſorrow to my ſorrow lendeth
               Another power, no floud by raining ſlaketh,
               My woe too ſenſible thy paſſion maketh
               More feeling painfull, let it then ſuffice
               To drowne one woe, one paire of weeping eyes,
               
            
            
               And for my ſake when I might charme thee ſo,
               For ſhe that was thy Lucrece, now attend me,
               
                  
Be ſodainly reuenged on my foe,
               
               
                  Thine, mine, his owne, ſuppoſe thou doſt defend me
               From what is paſt, the help that thou ſhalt lend me
               Comes all too late, yet let the Traytor die:
               For ſparing Iuſtice feeds iniquitie.
               
            
            
               But ere I name him, you faire Lords, quoth ſhe
               (Speaking to thoſe that came with Collatine)
               
               Shall plight your honourable faiths to me,
               With ſwift purſute to venge this wrong of mine,
               For tis a meritorious faire deſigne,
               
               To chaſe Iniuſtice with reuengefull armes,
               
               
                  Knights by their oaths ſhould right poore Ladies harms.
            
            
               
                  Vpon the relation of Lucrece her rape, Collatine and the reſt ſweare to reuenge: but this ſeemes not full ſatisfaction to her loſſes. She killeth her ſelfe to exaſperate them the more to puniſh the delinquent.At this requeſt, with noble diſpoſition, 
               Each preſent Lord began to promiſe aid,
               As bound in knighthood to her impoſition,
               Longing to heare the hatefull foe bewrard,
               But the that yet her ſad taske hath not ſaid,
               The proteſtation ſtops, O ſpeake quoth ſhe,
               How may this forced ſtaine be wipt from me?
            
            
               What is the qualitie of mine offence
               
               Being conſtrain'd with dreadfull circumſtances?
               
               May my pure mind with the foule act diſpence
               My low declined honour to aduance?
               May any termes acquit me from this chance?
               
               The poyſoned fountaine cleares it ſelfe againe
               And why not I from this compelled ſtaine?
               
            
            
               With this they all at once began to ſay,
               Her bodies ſtaine, the minde vntainted cleares,
               While with a ioyleſſe, ſmile, ſhe turnes away
               The face, that map which deepe impreſſion beares
               Of hard misfortune, caru'd it in with teares.
               
               No no, quoth ſhe, no Dame hereafter liuing,
               By my excuſe ſhall claime excuſes giuing.
            
            
               
               Here with a ſigh, as if her heart would breake,
               She throwes forth Tarquins name: he, he, ſhe ſaies
               But more then he, her poore tongue could not ſpeake,
               Till after many accents and delaies,
               
               Vntimely breathings, ſick and ſhort aſſaies,
               She vtters this, he he, faire Lord, tis he
               That guids this hand to giue this wound to me.
            
            
               Euen here ſheath'd in her harmeleſſe breaſt
               
               A harmefull knife, that thence her ſoule vnſheathed,
               That blow did bayle it from the deepe vnreſt
               Of that polluted priſon where it breathed
               Her contrite ſighs vnto the clouds bequeathed,
               Her winged ſpright, and through her wounds doth flye
               
                  Lifes laſting date from cancel'd deſtinie.
               
            
            
               
                  Stone ſtill, aſtoniſht with this deadly deed,
               
               Stood Colatine and all his Lordly crue,
               Till Lucrece father that beholds her bleed.
               Himſelfe, on her ſelf-ſlaughtered body threw,
               And from the purple fountaine Brutus drew
               The murdrous knife, and as it left the place,
               
               Her bloud in poore reuenge, held it in chaſe.
            
            
               And bubling from her breſt, it doth deuide
               In two ſlow riuers, that the crimſon bloud
               
               Circles her body in on euery ſide,
               Who like a late ſackt Iland vaſtly ſtood
               Bare and vnpeopled in this fearefull flood.
               
               Some of her blood ſtill pure and red remain'd
               And ſome lookt blacke, and that falſe Tarquin ſtain'd.
            
            
               About the mourning and congealed face
               
               Of that black blood, a watry rigoll goes,
               Which ſeemes to weepe vpon the tainted place;
               
               And euer ſince as pitying Lucrece woes,
               Corrupted blood ſome watry token ſhowes,
               
                  
And bloud vntainted ſtill doth red abide,
               Bluſhing at that which is ſo putrifide.
            
            
               
                  Daughter, deare daughter, old Lucretius cries.
               That life was mine which thou haſt here depriued,
               If in the childe the fathers image lies,
               Where ſhall I liue now Lucrece is vnliued?
               Thou waſt not to this end from me deriued.
               If children praedeceaſe progenitours,
               
               We are their off-ſpring and they none of ours.
               
            
            
               Poore broken glaſſe, I often did behold
               In thy ſweete ſemblance, my old age new borne,
               But now that faire freſh mirrour dim and old,
               Shewes me a barebon'd death by time out worne,
               O from my cheeks my image thou haſt torne,
               And ſhiuerd all the beautie from my glaſſe,
               
               That I no more can ſee what once I was.
               
            
            
               O time ceaſe thou thy courſe and haſt no longer,
               If thou ſurceaſe to be that ſhould ſuruiue:
               Shall rotten death make conqueſt of the ſtronger,
               And leaue the foultring feeble ſoules a liue?
               The old Bees die, the yong poſſeſſe their hiue,
               
               Then liue ſweet Lucrece, liue againe and ſee
               Thy father die, and not thy father thee.
            
            
               By this ſtars Collatine as from a dreame.
               
               And bids Lucretius giue his ſorrow place,
               And then in Key cold Lucrece bleeding ſtreame
               He fals, and bathes the pale feare in his face,
               
               And counterfeits to die with her a ſpace.
               Till manly ſhame bids him poſſeſſe his breath,
               
               And liue to be reuenged on her death.
               
            
            
               The deepe vexation of his inward ſoule,
               
               Hath ſeru'd a dumbe arreſt vpon his tongue,
               
               Who made that ſorrow ſhould his vſe controle,
               
                  
Or keepe him from heart-eaſing words ſo long,
               Begins to talke, but through his lips do throng
               Weak words ſo thick comes in his poore hearts aid
               That no man could diſtinguiſh what he ſaid.
            
            
               Yet ſometime Tarquin was pronounced plaine,
               But through his teeth as if his name he tore.
               This windie tempeſt till it blow vp raine,
               Held back his ſorrowes tide to make it more.
               At laſt it raines, and buſie winds giue ore:
               Then ſonne and father weepe with equall ſtrife,
               Who ſhould weepe moſt for daughter or for wife.
               
            
            
               The one doth call her his, the other his,
               
               Yet neither may poſſeſſe the claime they lay.
               The father ſaies ſhe's mine, O mine ſhe is
               Replies her husband, do not take away
               My ſorrowes intereſt, let no mourner ſay
               He weepes for her, for ſhe was onely mine.
               And onely muſt be waild by Colatine.
               
            
            
               O, quoth Lucretius, I did giue that life
               Which ſhe too early and too late hath ſpild.
               Woe woe, quoth Colatine, ſhe was my wife,
               
               I owed her, and tis mine that ſhe hath kild.
               My daughter and my wife with clamors fild
               The diſperſt aire, who holding Lucrece life,
               Anſwered their cries, my daughter and my wife.
               
            
            
               
                  Brutus who pluckt the knife from Lucrece ſide
               Seeing ſuch emulation in their woe,
               
               Began to cloath his wit in ſtate and pride.
               
               Burying in Lucrece wound his follies ſhow.
               
               He with the Romains was eſteemed ſo
               As ſelie ieering ideots are with kings,
               
               For ſportiue words, and vttering fooliſh things.
            
            
               But now he throwes that ſhallow habit by,
               
                  
Wherein the pollicy did him diſguiſe,
               And arm'd his long hid wits aduiſedly
               To check the teares in Colatinus eies,
               Thou wronged Lord of Rome, quoth he, ariſe,
               Let my vnſounded ſelfe ſuppoſd a foole,
               Now ſet thy long experienc't wit to ſchoole,
            
            
               Why Colatine, is woe the cure for woe?
               
               Doe wounds help wounds, or griefe helpe grieuous deeds
               
               Is it reuengie to giue thy ſelfe a blow
               For his foule Act, by whom thy faire wife bleeds?
               Such childiſh humor from weake minds proceeds,
               Thy wretched wife miſtooke the matter ſo,
               To ſlaue her ſelfe that ſhould haue ſlaine her Foe.
               
            
            
               Couragious Romane doe not ſteepe thy heart
               
               In ſuch lamenting dew of lamentations,
               
               But kneele with me and helpe to beare thy part,
               To rouſe our Roman Gods with inuocations,
               That they will ſuffer theſe abhominations,
               (Since Rome her ſelfe in them doth ſtand diſgraced)
               By our ſtrong arms from forth her faire ſtreets chaſed.
            
            
               Now by the Capitoll that we adore,
               And by this chaſt blood ſo vniuſtly ſtained,
               By heauens faire ſun that breeds the fat earths ſtore
               
               By all our country rites in Rome maintained,
               And by chaſt Lucrece ſoule that late complained
               Her wrongs to vs, and by this bloudy knife,
               
               We will reuenge the death of this true wife.
               
            
            
               This ſaid, he ſtroke his hand vpon his breaſt,
               
               And kiſt the fatall knife to end his vow:
               And to his proteſtation vrg'd the reſt,
               Who wondring at him did his words allow:
               Then ioyntly to the ground their knees they bow,
               And that deepe vow which Brutus made before
               
                  
He doth againe repeat, and that they ſwore.
            
            
               When they had ſworne to this aduiſed doome,
               
               They did conclude to beare dead Lucrece thence
               To ſhew the bleeding body through out Rome,
               
               And ſo to publiſh Tarquins foule offence;
               
               Which being done, with ſpeedy diligence
               The Romains plauſibly did giue conſent,
               To Tarquins euerlaſting baniſhment.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   