
      
         
            
            REASONS MOST HVMBLY OFFERED TO THE HONOVRABLE Houſe of Commons in Parliament, by Sr Robert Sharpeigh Knight and Alexander Haitley Eſquire, Patentees for Survey of Sea-coales at Newcaſtle, &c. by nomination of the late Duke of Richmond and Lenox, proving the Grant and Patent thereof to be neceſſary and profitable to the Common-wealth, the Fee to be but competent and proportionable to the charge, and no impoſition but a meere wages, or quid pro quo, voluntarily, offered to be payd for the ſervice.
            VPon petition to his Majeſty of great abuſes and deceipts practiſed in corrupt mingling,13 Iacobi the firſt petition referred by the King to his learned Councel. Their Certificate of the abuſe deſired to bee reformed, with conſent to pay the fee.   working, and venting of Sea-coales at and neere Newcaſtle, Sunderland, and Blithe, his Majeſtie referred the ſame to the examination of his then learned Councell.
            They certified the abuſes and deceipts to be verified by the Coale-Merchants, Woodmongers, and Chandlors of London, who deſired reformation thereof by way of Survey, and freely conſented to pay the Surveyors for ſuch reformation, 4 pence the great Chaldron Newcaſtle meaſure, being about 2 pence London meaſure.
            
               Letters patents 26 Feb. 13 Iacobi, granted.Hereupon his Majeſty by his Letters Patents, dat: 26 Febr: 13 Iacobi, for remedy of the ſaid abuſes, erected an Office of Survey of Coales, and granted the ſame to Sir Andrew Boyd Knight.
            
               Oaſtmen oppoſe and deny the fact. One third part of baſe coales mixt and ſold with and for the beſt, and beſt price, proved. 1. By proofe and decree of the Star chamber 6 Maij, 16 Iacob.
               The Oaſtmen of Newcaſtle oppoſing the Grant, and denying the matter of fact, the ſame was by the Lords of the Councell referred to a Legall triall in the Starchamber.
            Where accordingly an Information was exhibited againſt the Oaſtmen and ſome Shippers, and there (upon hearing of the cauſe) it appeared by oath of above twenty witneſſes, that the Oaſtmen of Newcaſtle (being the Coale-merchants there) did mingle one third part of low prized Coales, of 4 ſhillings 6 pence, and 5 ſhillings the Chaldron, with two third parts of their good Coales of 10 ſhillings 6 pence, and 11 ſhillings the Chaldron, and ſold them ſo mingled for the beſt Coales, and at the beſt price: For which fraud and abuſe the Oaſtmen were (by the decree of that Court, made 6 Maij, 16 Iacobi) cenſured, fined, and impriſoned, and their abuſes ordered to be publiſhed by reading of the ſame Decree two ſeuerall market dayes at Newcaſtle, and the Shippers then alſo defendants were admoniſhed not to uſe ſuch fraud thereafter.
            
               By order of the Lords of the Coū
                  cell 1 Aug: 20 Iac. Surveyors ſent to NewcaſtleThe ſaid Patent by conſent being afterwards re-called, and the new Grant made and paſſed unto the Duke of Richmond and Lenox, but not under the great Seale, by reaſon of the oppoſitions of the Oaſtmen and their Confederates, (who to maintaine their abuſes and unjuſt gaine thereby were the ſole oppoſers) and thereupon the abuſes ſtill remaining, and complaints thereof being made to his Majeſty and the Lords of the Councell,  by Shippers that brought Coales, Woodmongers and Merchants that bought Coales, and Brewers and others that ſpent Coales, the Lords of the Councell by order 1 Auguſti, 20 Iacobi, appointed Surveyors to be preſently ſent to Newcaſtle to make ſurvey of the Colyary there, and to prevent the ſaid abuſes in what they could, till a further courſe might be ſetled.
            
               2 By the Surveyors returne of a plot and booke of all the coale-pits and abuſes then found 9 Ianuar: 20 Iacob.
               The Surveyors having taken paines therein, did in Ianuary following (by a booke and plot of Survey) certifie their Lordſhips in particular, the number of Coale-pits good and bad, the particular abuſes pactiſed in mingling of bad Coales with good, and ſuch like; notwithanding, there were ſufficient ſtore of Mynes of good Coales to ſerue all poſterity, and at farre lower prices, if the Lords and owners of good Colyaries were not by the Oaſtmens Charter and Monopoly debarred from venting their Coales to Ships and Shippers in and by the River of Tyne, and Port of Newcaſtle.
            
            
               3. By the Shippers letters & petitiō to the Board in March 1623, and their Lordſhips letters 15 April, 1623.
               XXV Marcij, 21 Iacobi, the Shipmaſters then being in the Port of Newcaſtle, by their Letters complained to their Owners of London, Alborough, Harwich, Ipſwich, Woodbridge, Colcheſter, and other Townes, and their owners to the Lords of the Councell, That the ſaid Oaſtmen, their agents and ſervants, did then debarre them of a free market, and of their accuſtomed over-meaſure, and did and would inforce them to lade one third part of unſaleable Coales, not fitting their Markets. Whereupon their Lordſhips wrote their Honourable Letters to Newcaſtle, 15 April following, commanding the Market there to be opened, and that ſome ſhould be ſent vp to attend the Honourable Board, and to anſwer the Complaint.
            
               
               What quantity of coales are given and never entered by the Oaſtmen & Shippers confeſſion, & why.The Oaſtmen 7 Maij 1623, anſwering in writing, alledged to their Lordſhips, that they (by the covetouſneſſe of the Shippers had beene forced to giue away 12, 16, and ſometimes 20 Chaldrons in a Ships lading, and two Chaldrons in a Keeles lading of 9 or 10 Chaldrons burthen. The owners of Ships in their replication thereunto in writing, ſhewed that ſuch quantities of gift-coales were allowed in reſpect of the baſeneſſe and deceitfull mixture of the Coales vpon that allowance taken and vented. 
                  〈…〉
               .
            
               Inferences from the premiſſes.Vpon due examination of many particulars herein, it was demonſtrated to their Lordſhips, and may appeare as followeth.
            
               1. Oaſtmen doe gain by their mixture one ſixt part of their whole price, viz. 1400 l. 
                  per annum there. And the ſpending buyers loſe above twice ſo much, and the reaſons why, and manner how.Firſt, That a third part of low prized Coales being mingled with two third parts of good Coales, and ſold for the full price of good Coales, doe coſt above one ſixt part of the prices being ſold apart: as for example; Two Chaldrons at 10 ſhillings per Chaldron, and one chaldron at 5 ſhillings, comming but to 25 ſhillings apart, are ſold (being mingled) for 10 ſhillings the Chaldron round, viz: for 30 ſhillings, and being ſold for 10 ſhillings 6 pence, or 11 ſhillings the Chaldron, the loſſe is more to the buyer: This ſixt part or above (they venting yearly one hundred and threeſcore thouſand Chaldrons, or ſixteene thouſand Tennes, as the Oaſtmen confeſs in their ſaid anſwer, which at 10 ſhillings 6 pence yeeld them fourſcore and foure thouſand pounds) bring in by this fraud to the Oaſtmen fourteene thouſand pounds per annum unjuſt gaines: And the Newcaſtle meaſure being almoſt double to London meaſure, and the prices alſo increaſing, the ſubjects loſſe is at the leaſt thirty thouſand pounds per annum to the buyers and ſpenders of coales, beſides the making of them oftentimes unſerviceable by ſuch mingling and fraud.
            
               2. The Kings loſs of cuſtome by the fraudulent packing of the Oaſtmen and Shippers to vēt baſe coales. The ſubject much wronged by ſlate, ſtone, &c. paſſing amongſt coales, which the Surveyors doe remedie, and the benefit thereof.Secondly, That by the Oaſtmen and Shippers thus combining and masking their fraud under pretence of over-meaſure and gift-coales, the King is deceived in his Cuſtomes: which abuſes and wrongs both to King and ſubject, ſo much and ſo continually petitioned againſt, hath beene cauſe of the expence of much money, and of great paines and labour taken by the proſecutors for reformation, as is herein ſpecified.
            Beſides the prevention of the foreſaid loſſes by mixture, to King and ſubject, it is by experience found and certified, that by the paines and care of the Surveyors in looking to the workes and workmen, ſlate, ſtone, mettall, and unfuellable ſtuffe, is and may be ſeparated and wealed out of the Coales, which formerly have paſſed unſeparated, and beene ſold in and with the Coales for ten or twelue thouſand pounds per annum, though worth nothing of themſelves: for ſince the Surveyors appointed by the Lords, 1 Auguſti, 20 Iacobi, above 8000 Chaldrons of ſlate-ſtone and unſaleable ſtuffe per annum more then formerly have beene wealed out of Coales by their care and authority given them, being but a few men. And alſo ſince the Patentee hath placed and imployed a competent number of officers for that ſervice, like unfuellable ſtuffe hath beene wealed out of the coales there, to at leaſt a double proportion of what the Surveyors appointed by the Board had formerly cauſed to be caſt out as aforeſaid.
            
               What baſe pan-coale-pits have beene layd in frō work by the Surveyors vigilancy ſince Aug: 1622, and the prevention of deceiptfull mixture thereby.And further, touching the prevention of mixture of baſe and good Coales by the ſervice of the ſaid Surveyors appointed by the Honourable Board, it ſhall be made cleere to this honourable Houſe, that at the time of the ſaid Surveyors comming to Newcaſtle in September 1622, there were 42 baſe pan Coale-pits working, and lately laid in from worke, and now when the Patentee came downe in Ianuary laſt, there were but about 12 baſe pan coale-pits in worke, all the reſt being then laid in from worke, which whether they may and will be ſet on worke againe, if there ſhall not be officers continued for prevention, is humbly left to examination and the grave conſideration of this Honourable Houſe, the ſmall or rather no reformation cauſed by the foreſaid cenſure and command of the high Court of Star-chamber being duly conſidered.
            
               How much the Oaſtmen and maſters of ſhips have improved their eſtates by this fraud.All which abuſes are the greater, in regard they are in a commodity ſo common and uſefull, that people cannot live without the ſame. And the Oaſtmen have ſo inriched themſelves by ſuch abuſes, and not by the true gaines of their profeſſion, that ſome of them are growne to be worth 20000 pound, ſome 30000 pound, and ſome 40000 pound, as by depoſitions & the ſaid Decree appeareth. Shipmaſters likewiſe combining with them, make ſuch gaine by this fraud, as in one yeares trading of ſervants to their owners, they become part owners of one eight, one fourth, or one halfe of their Ship, as was avouched lately by Newcaſtle men.
            
               The Surveyors fee but competēt.And as touching the Officers fee, it is but competent and proportionable to the charge layd out for diſcouering, and which is and muſt be laid out for reformation of the abuſes, as may appeare. For the whole vent of Coales yearly made in and by the Port of Newcaſtle, according to the Oaſtmens foreſaid anſwer being about ſixteene thouſand tens, or one hundred and

60. thouſand Chaldrons, for which the fee of 4 pence the Chaldron amounteth to about two thouſand and ſix hundred pounds yearly. What the fee is of 4 pence the chaldrō for the whole vent, what to the Surveyors.Strangers are excepted from payment of the ſaid fee. The whole profit then which in any probability can by true calculation be conceiued yearly to come to the Surveyors, cannot be above two thouſand, or one and twenty hundred pounds per annū
                at the vttermoſt; which ſumme is not the tenth part of what the Oaſtmen make by their deceipts, and not a twentieth part of what the Common-wealth ſhall gaine by the reformation.
            
               42 officers imploied in the execution of the office, whoſe wages amounts to 1300 pound per annum. Money formerly ſpent in this buſineſſe by the proſecutors of the reformation, five thouſand pound & what ſurpluſage may remaine for the Grantees, the office and debts being diſcharged. After many petitions, propoſitiōs, and offers, made by complaynants and hearings taken of all parties, what courſe the Lords of the Coū
                  cell adviſed & ſet downe, and with what cautions, limitations, and reſervations.The execution of the office will require 42 perſons at leaſt, moſt of them of good quality and truſt, to be attendant reſpectiuely upon their places of charge at the cole-pits, on the wharfs and water, at the ſalt-pannes and on Ship-board, at all tides and times of working and cariage, or lading of Coales, by night or by day, on land or water, who cannot be well maintained under 1300 pound per annum, and without the ſaid officers, true reformation cannot be made.
            The money ſpent in the diſcovery of the abuſes, ſuits of Law, touching the ſame againſt the Oaſtmen, who all this time oppoſed by practices the reformation juſtly deſired, and maintaining men in that ſervice of Survey for a long time by direction of the Lords of the Privy Councel, upon their Lordſhips order that recompence ſhould be given, hath coſt 5000 pounds at leaſt, which how the benefit of the whole fee above the charge of the officers imployed will ſatisfie, and with what remainder for the Kings intended bounty to the Grantee, is humbly left to conſideration. No benefit having beene made, nor fee received by the proſecutors or officers imployed for the ſervice and expences aforeſaid, ſince the beginning of this ſure, which was above eight yeares ſithence, ſave onely 7 ſhillings.
            The Lords of the Councell upon many petitions, propoſitions, and offers, made under the hands of ſeverall Companies in London, and other Coaſt townes traders in Coales, and many hearings of all parties, and divers reports upon references to Honourable Committees of the ſame Board, finding the greatneſſe of the abuſes and neceſſity of reformation, and the complainants in this caſe offering to lay the charge of the officers fee upon themſelves and ſuch like buyers, without charging the ſubject in generall; as alſo in the behalfe of the towne of Newcaſtle, Maſter Warmouth their Solicitor, willingly conſenting to any courſe for reformation of the ſaid abuſes, did by order of that Honourable Board confirme the ſaid former courſe of Surveyors as moſt fitting: adding thereunto a caution for reſtraint of mingling good and baſe coales after they came from Newcaſtle, which the Surveyors by officers and wayters to be kept and attendant at London, alſo will ſee there performed. And likewiſe that the Surveyors ſhall make good the Merchants dammages for Coales miſ-certified: And that for want of due execution or abuſes of ſurvey the Office ſhould be voyd.
            
               A reference to the Kings learned Councell, & their Certificate.After all which, upon ſome exceptions made,   and referred to the Kings now Atturney and Solicitor generall, and upon their examination thereof, and direction therein by their Certificate of what they did hold fitting both for the King and ſubject in that caſe.
            
               The Kings Grant made accordingly.The ſame Office by Letters Patents bearing date the twentieth day of September 1623, was accordingly paſſed to the late Duke of Richmond and Lenox, and to ſuch Patentees as his Lordſhip did nominate; the other Letters Patents thereof being ſurrendred and made void.
            
               The Grant conceived to be good and the fee well raiſed: and that it is no impoſition.It is conceived, That the ſame Grant is good, the Office well erected, and the Fee well raiſed, and that the ſame Fee is no Impoſition contrary to the Law, ſince great profit by the Officers attendance ariſeth to the Common wealth: In which caſe it is reaſon the Officers ſhould haue quid pro quo, ſomewhat for their paines. Beſides, it is by conſent of the greateſt traders in and ſpenders of Sea-coales, and their voluntary offer not to charge it againe upon the ſubject buying by retaile.
            
               A concluſive inferēce & humble ſubmiſſion of and in the premiſſes.And therefore this Patent being thus made for the good, and at the ſute and offer of the ſubjects grieved for the ſuppreſſing of ſo great abuſes, whereby ſuch benefit will grow both to King and Subject, as aforeſaid, and the Merchandize and commodity of Coales being bettered and advanced thereby, and Coales becomming more ſerviceable and generally uſefull for all mens proviſion of Fuell, whether trade and traffique therein, and thereupon, the Shipping and Navigators of this Kingdome will be increaſed or no, and wood preſerved; and whether the Patent in reſpect of the premiſes be fit to be maintained and ratified or no, It is humbly ſubmitted to the conſideration and great wiſedome of this Honourable Houſe.
            All the particulars herein, and inferences thereupon, ſhall appeare by proofes, and cleare demonſtrations out of the ſame.
         
      
   