
      
         
            
            
            ¶ Pithy pleaſaunt and profitable workes of maiſter Skelton, Poete Laureate. Nowe collected and newly publiſhed. ANNO 1568.
            
            
               ❧ Imprinted at London in Fleteſtreate, neare vnto ſaint Dunſtones churche by Thomas Marſhe.
         
         
            
            Salue plus decies 
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                ſunt momenta dierum,
            Quot generū ſpecies, quot res quot nomina rerū,
            Quot prati flores, quot ſunt in orbe colores,
            Quot Piſces, quot aues, quot ſunt in equore naues,
            Quot volucrū penne, quot ſunt tormenta gehēne,
            Quot coeli ſtelle, quot ſunt in orbe puelle,
            Quot ſancti rome, quot ſunt miracula thome,
            Quot ſunt virtutes, tot vobis mitto ſalutes.
         
         
            
            
               IF ſlouth and tract of time, (that wears eche thing away)
            Should ruſt and canker worthy artes, Good works would ſoen decay.
            If ſuche as preſent are, For goeth the people paſt:
            Ourſelus ſhould ſoen in ſilence ſlepe, And loes renom at laſt.
            No ſoyll nor land ſo rude, But ſom odd men can ſhoe:
            Than ſhould the learned pas vnknowne, whoes pen & ſkill did floe.
            God ſhéeld our ſloulth wear ſutch, Or world ſo ſimple nowe:
            That knowledge ſcaept without reward, Who ſercheth vertue throwe
            And paints forth vyce a right, And blames abues of men:
            And ſhoes what lief deſarues rebuke, And who the prayes of pen.
            You ſée howe forrayn realms, Aduance their Poets all:
            And ours are drowned in the duſt, Or flong againſt the wall.
            In Fraunce did Marrot raigne, and neighbour thear vnto:
            Was Petrark, marching full with dantte, Who erſt did wonders do
            
               
Among the noble Grekes, Was Homere full of ſkill:
            And where that Ouid noriſht was, The ſoyll did floriſh ſtill.
            With letters hie of ſtyle, But Uirgill wan the fraes,
            And paſt them all for deep engyen, And made them all to gaes
            Upon the bookes he made, Thus eche of them you ſée
            Wan prayſe and fame and honor had, Eche one in their degrée.
            I pray you then my friendes, Diſdaine not for to vewe:
            The workes and ſugred verſes fine, Of our raer poetes newe
            Whoes barborus language rued, Perhaps ye may miſlike,
            But blame them not that ruedly playes If they the ball do ſtrike.
            Nor ſkorne not mother tunge, O babes of engliſhe breed,
            I haue of other language ſéen, And you at full may reed.
            Fine verſes trimly wrought, And coutcht in comly ſort,
            But neuer I nor you I troe, In ſentence plaine and ſhort.
            
               
Did yet beholde with eye, In any forraine tonge:
            A higher verſe a ſtaetly ſtyle, That may be read or ſong.
            Than is this daye in déede, Our engliſhe verſe and ryme:
            The grace wherof doth touch ye gods, And reatch the cloudes ſomtime.
            Thorow earth and waters déepe, The pen by ſkill doth paſſe:
            And featly nyps the worldes abuſe, And ſhoes vs in a glaſſe,
            The vertu and the vice, Of eury wyght a lyue:
            The hony combe that bée doth make, Is not ſo ſwéete in hyue.
            As are the golden leues, That drops from poets head:
            Which doth ſurmoūt our cōmō talke As farre as dros doth lead.
            The flowre is ſifted cleane, The bran is caſt aſide.
            And ſo good corne is knowen from chaffe, And each fine graine is ſpide.
            Peers plowman was full plaine, And Chauſers ſpréet was great:
            Earle Surry had a goodly vayne, Lord Uaus the marke did beat.
            
               
And Phaer did hit the pricke, In thinges he did tranſlate:
            And Edwards had a ſpecial gift, And diuers men of late.
            Hath helpt our Engliſhe toung, That firſt was baes and brute
            Ohe ſhall I leaue out Skeltons name, The bloſſome of my frute
            The trée wheron in deed, My branchis all might groe,
            Nay ſkelton wore the Lawrell wreath, And paſt in ſchoels ye knoe,
            A poet for his arte, Whoes iudgment ſuer was hie,
            And had great practies of the pen, His works they will not lie.
            His terms to taunts did lean, His talke was as he wraet:
            Full quick of witte, right ſharp of words, And ſhilfull of the ſtaet.
            Of reaſon riep and good, And to the haetfull mynd:
            That did diſdain his doings ſtill, A ſkornar of his kynd.
            Moſt pleaſant euery way, As poets ought to be:
            And ſeldom out of Princis grace, And great with eche degre.
            
               
Thus haue you heard at full, What Skelton was in deed:
            A further knowledge ſhall you haue, If you his bookes do réed.
            I haue of meer good will, Theas verſes written heer:
            To honour vertue as I ought, And make his fame apéer.
            That whan the Garland gay, Of lawrel leaues but laet,
            Small is my pain, great is his prayes, That thus ſutch honour gaet.
            Finis
            
                ꝙ Churchyarde.
            
         
         
            
            Workes of Skelton newly collected by I. S. as folovveth.
            
               1 The crowne of lawrel.
               2 The bouge of court.
               3 The duke of Albany
               4 Speake parrot.
               5 Edward the fourth.
               6 Againſt the Scottes
               7 Ware the hauke.
               8 Howe euery thinge muſt haue a time.
               9 A prayer to the father of heauen.
               10 To ye ſecond perſon.
               11 To the holy ghoſt.
               12 The tunning of Elinour Rumming.
               13 The relucēt mirror
               14 Why come ye not to court.
               15 Colyn Clout.
               16 Philip ſparowe.
               17 Of a comly Coyſtrowne.
               18 Upō a deadmās héed
               19 To maiſtris Anne.
               20 Of thre fooles.
               21 En parlement a Paris.
               22 Epitaphes of two knaues of diſe.
               23 Lamentation for Nor wiche.
               24 Againſt ye Scottes.
               25 Praiſe of ye palmtre
               26 Bedel quōdā Belial.
               
               27 The dolorus death of the Lord Percie Erle of Northumberlande.
               28 Epitaphium Margarete countiſſe de Derbi.
               
               29 Epita. Hen. ſepti.
               
               30 Eulogium pro ſuorum temporum.
               
               31 A parable by William Corniſhe in yt Fléete.
               32 Againſt venemous tongues.
               33 Of Calliope.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The crowne of Lawrell
            
               
                  ARrectynge my ſyght towarde the zodiake
                  The ſignes. xij. for to beholde a farre
                  Whan Mars retrograunt reuerſed his backe
                  Lorde of the yere in his orbicular
                  Put vp his ſworde, for he coude make no warre
                  And whan Lucina plenary dyd ſhyne
                  Scorpion aſcendynge degrees twyſe nyne
               
               
                  ¶ In place alone, than muſynge in my thought
                  How all thing paſſeth, as doth the ſomer flowre
                  On euery halfe my reaſons forthe I ſought
                  Howe often fortune varyeth in an howre
                  Now clere wether, forth with a ſtormy ſhowre
                  All thyng compaſſed, no perpetuyte,
                  But nowe in welthe, nowe in aduerſyte.
               
               
                  ¶ So depely drowned I was in this dumpe
                  Encraumpyſſhed ſo ſore was my conceyte
                  That me to reſt, I lent me to a ſtumpe
                  Of an oke, that ſomtyme grewe full ſtreyghte
                  A myghty tre and of a noble heyght
                  whoſe beaute blaſted was wt the boyſturs winde
                  His leaues loſte, the ſappe was from the rynde.
               
               
                  ¶ Thus ſtode I in the frytthy foreſt of Galtres
                  Enſowked with ſylt of the myry moſe
                  Where hartes belluyng emboſed with diſtres
                  Ra
                        •
                     on the raunge ſo longe, that I ſuppoſe
                  Fewe men can tell where the hynde calfe goſe.
                  F
                        •
                     re fal ye forſter that ſo wel can bate his hoūde
                  But of my purpoſe now turne we to the groūde
               
               
                  
                  ¶ Whylis I ſtode muſynge. in this meditacion
                  In ſlumbrynge I fell, and halfe in a ſlepe
                  And whether it were of ymaginacion
                  Or of humors ſuperflue, that often will crepe
                  In to the brayne by drynkyng ouer depe
                  Or it proceded of fatall perſwaſion
                  I can nat tell you what was the occaſion
               
               
                  ¶ But ſodaynly at ones as I me aduyſed
                  (As one in a trans or in an extaſy)
                  I ſawe a pauylion wonderſly diſguiſed
                  Garnyſſhed freſſhe after my fantaſy
                  Enhachyde with perle and ſtones preciouſly
                  The groūde engroſed and bet with bourne gold
                  That paſſynge goodly it was to be holde
               
               
                  ¶ Within that a princes excellente of porte
                  But to recounte her riche abilyment
                  And what eſtates to her dyd reſorte
                  Therto am I full inſuffycient
                  A goddeſſe immortall ſhe dyd repreſent
                  As I harde ſaye Dame Pallas was her name
                  To whom ſupplyed the royall quene of fame
               
            
            
               ¶ The quene of Fame to dame Pallas.
               
                  PRinces moſt puſant of hygh preeminence
                  Renowned lady aboue the ſterry heuyn
                  All other tranſcendynge of very congruence
                  Madame regent of the ſciences ſeuyn
                  To whoſe aſtate all nobleneſſe moſt lenen
                  My ſuppitcacion to you I arrecte
                  Wherof I beſeche you to tendre the effecte.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ Nat vnremembred it is vnto your grace
                  Howe ye gaue me a ryall commaundement
                  That in my courte Skelton ſhulde haue a place
                  Bycauſe that he his tyme ſtudiouſly hath ſpent
                  In your ſeruice: and to the accomplyſſhement
                  Of your requeſt, regeſtred is his name
                  With laureate triumphe in the courte of Fame
               
               
                  But good madame the accuſtome and vſage
                  Of auncient poetes ye wote full wele hath bene
                  Themſelfe to embuſy with all their hole corage
                  So that theyr workes myght famouſly be ſene
                  In figure wherof they were the laurell grene
                  But howe it is, Skelton is wunder ſlacke
                  And as we dare we fynde in hym a lacke
               
               
                  ¶ For ne were onely he hath your promocion
                  Out of my bokes full ſoone I ſhulde hym raſe
                  But ſithe he hath taſted of the ſugred pocion
                  Of Heliconis well: refreſſhed with your grace
                  And wyll nat endeuour hymſelfe to purchace
                  The fauour of ladys with wordes electe
                  It is ſyttynge that ye muſt hym correcte.
               
            
            
               ¶ Dame Pallas to the quene of Fame.
               
                  THe ſum of your purpoſe, as we are aduyſed
                  Is that our ſeruaunt is ſome what to dull
                  Wherin this anſwere for hym we haue cōpriſed
                  Howe ryuers ren nat till the ſprynge be full
                  Be
                        ••
                     er a dūme mouthe than a brayneles ſcull
                  For if he gloriouſly publyſſhe his matter
                  Tha
                        •
                      men wyll ſaye howe he doth but flatter.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ And if ſo him fortune to write true and plaine
                  As ſomtyme he muſt vices remorde
                  Than ſome wyll ſay he hath but lytell brayne
                  And how his wordes with reaſō wil nat accorde
                  Beware, for wrytyng remayneth of recorde
                  Diſpleaſe nat an hūdred for one mānes pleaſure
                  Who wryteth wyſely hath a great treaſure.
               
               
                  ¶ Alſo to furnyſſhe better his excuſe
                  Ouide was banyſſhed for ſuch a ſkyll,
                  And many mo, whom I coude enduce.
                  Iuuenal was thret parde for to kyll
                  For certayne inuectiues: Yet wrote he none yll
                  Sauynge he rubbed ſome vpon the gall,
                  It was not for hym to abyde the triall.
               
               
                  In general wordes I ſay nat greatly nay
                  A poet ſomtyme may for his pleaſure taunt
                  Spekyng in parables, howe the fox, the grey
                  The gander, the gooſe, and the huge oliphant
                  Went with the pecocke agaynſt the feſaunt
                  The leſarde came leaping and ſayd that he muſt
                  With helpe of the ram lay all in the duſt.
               
               
                  ¶ Yet druerſe there be induſtriouſe of reaſon
                  Som what wolde gadder in their coniceture
                  Of ſuche an endarked chaptre ſome ſeaſon
                  Howe be it, it were harde to cōſtrue this lecture
                  Soyhiſticated craftely is many a confecture
                  An other mannes mynde diffuſe is to expou
                        ••
                     e
                  Yet harde is to make but ſome faute be fou
                        ••
                     e.
               
            
            
               
               ☞ The quene of Fame to dame Pallas
               
                  MAdame with fauor of your benigne ſuffraūce
                  Unto your grace thā make I this motiue
                  Wherto made ye me hym to auaunce
                  Unto the rowme of laureat promotyue?
                  Or wherto ſhulde he haue the prerogatiue
                  But yf he had made ſome memoriall
                  Wherby he myght haue a name immortall?
               
               
                  ¶ To paſſe the tyme in ſloughtfull ydelneſſe
                  Of your royall palais it is nat the gyſe
                  But to do ſomwhat eche man doth hym dreſſe
                  For howe ſhulde Cato els be called wyſe
                  But that his bokes, whiche he dyd deuyſe
                  Recorde the ſame? Or why is had in mynde
                  Plato, But for that he lefte wrytynge behynde
               
               
                  ¶ For men to loke on? Ariſtotille alſo
                  Of philoſophers called the principall.
                  Olde Diogines, with other many mo
                  Demoſthenes that oratour royall
                  That gaue Eſchines ſuche a cordiall
                  That baniſſhed was he through his propoſicion
                  Agaynſt whom he coude make no contradiction.
               
            
            
               ¶ Dame Pallas to the quene of Fame
               
                  SOft my good ſyſter, & make there a pauſes
                  And was Eſchines rebuked as ye ſay?
                  Remembre you well, poynt well that clauſe
                  Wherfore than raſed ye nat away
                  His name? Or why is it I you praye,
                  That he to your court is goynge and commyng
                  Sith he is ſklaundred for defaute of counnynge?
               
            
            
               
               ¶ The Quene of Fame to dame Pallas.
               
                  MAdame your appoſelle is well inferred
                  And at your auauntage quickely it is
                  Touched: and harde for to be barred
                  Yet ſhall I anſwere your grace as in this
                  With your reformacion if I ſay amis
                  For but if your bounte dyd me aſſure
                  Myne argument els could nat longe endure
               
               
                  ¶ As touchyng that Eſchines is remembred
                  That he ſo ſhulde be, me ſemeth it ſyttynge
                  All be it great parte he hath ſurrendred
                  Of his honour, whoſe diſſuaſyue in wryttynge
                  To corage Demoſthenes was moche excitynge
                  In ſettynge out freſſhely his crafty perſuaſion
                  From whiche Eſchines had none euaſion
               
               
                  ¶ The cauſe why Demoſthenes ſo famouſly is bruted
                  Onely proceded, for that he did outray
                  Eſchines: whiche was nat ſhamefully confuted
                  But of that famous oratour I ſay
                  Whiche paſſed all other: wherfore I may
                  Amonge my recordes ſuffre him named.
                  For though he wer vāquiſhed yet was he nat ſhamed
               
               
                  ¶ As Hierome in his preāble frater Ambroſius
                  From that I haue ſayd in no poynt doth vary
                  Wherin he reporteth of the coragious
                  Wordes, that were moche conſolatory
                  By Eſchines reherſed, to the great glory
                  Of Demoſthenes, that was his vtter fo
                  Fewe ſhall ye fynde or none that wyll do ſo.
               
            
            
               
               Dame Pallas to the quene of Fame.
               
                  A Thanke to haue ye haue well deſerued,
                  your mynde yt can maynteyne ſo apparētly:
                  But a great parte yet ye haue reſerued
                  Of that muſt folow than conſequently
                  Or els ye demeane you inordinatly
                  For if ye laude hym, whom honour hath oppreſt
                  Than he that dothe worſt is as good as the beſt.
               
               
                  ¶ But whom yt ye fauour, I ſe well hath a name
                  Be he neuer ſo lytell of ſubſtaunce
                  And whom ye loue nat, ye wyll put to ſhame
                  Ye counterwey nat euynly your balaunce
                  As well foly as wyſdome oft ye do auaunce
                  For reporte ryſeth many dyuers wayes
                  Some be moche ſpoken of for makyng of frayes
               
               
                  ¶ Some haue a name for thefte and bribery
                  Some be called crafty, that can pyke a purſe
                  Some men be made of for their mockery
                  Som careful cokolds, ſōe haue their wiues curſe
                  Som famous witwoldes, & they be moche wurſe
                  Som lidderons, ſom loſels, ſom naughty packes
                  Som facers, ſom bracers, ſom make gret cracks.
               
               
                  ¶ Some dronkē daſtards with their drye ſoules
                  Some ſluggyſſhe ſlouens ye ſlepe day and night
                  Ryot and Reuell be in your courte roules
                  Maintenaūce & Miſchefe theſe be men of myght
                  Extorcion is counted with you for a knyght
                  Theſe people by me haue none aſſignement
                  Yet they ryde and renne from Carlill to Rent.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ But lytell or nothynge ye ſhall here tell
                  Of them that haue vertue by reſon of counnyng
                  Whiche ſoueraynely in honoure ſhulde excell
                  Men of ſuche matters make but mummynge
                  For wyſdome and ſadneſſe be ſet out a ſunnyng
                  And ſuche of my ſeruauntes as I haue promoted
                  One faute or other in them ſhalbe noted
               
               
                  ¶ Eyther they wyll ſay he is to wyſe
                  Or elles he can nought but whan he is at ſcole
                  Proue his wytte ſayth he at cardes or dyce
                  And ye ſhall well fynde he is a very fole
                  Twyſhe, ſet hym a chayer or reche hym a ſtole
                  To ſyt hym vpon, & rede Iacke a thr ūmis bibil
                  For truly it were pite that he ſat idyll.
               
            
            
               ☞ The quene of Fame to dame Pallas.
               
                  TO make repugnāce againe that ye haue ſaid
                  Of very dutie it may nat well accorde
                  but your benigū ſuffrāce for my diſcharge I laid
                  For that I wolde nat with you fall at diſcorde
                  But yet I beſeche your grace that good recorde
                  May be brought forth ſuche as can be founde
                  wt laureat triūphe why Skeltō ſhulde be croūde.
               
               
                  ¶ For elles it were to great a derogacion
                  Unto your palais our noble courte of Fame
                  That any man vnder ſupportacion
                  Without deſeruing ſhulde haue the beſt game
                  If he to the ample encreace of his name
                  Can lay any warkes that he hath compiled
                  I am content that he be nat exiled
               
               
                  
                  From the laureat ſenate: by force of proſcripcion
                  Or elles ye knowe well I can do no leſſe
                  But I muſt bannyſſhe hym frō my iuriſdiction
                  As he that aqueynteth hym with Idelneſſe
                  But if that he purpoſe to make a redreſſe
                  What he hath done let it be brought to ſyght
                  Graunt my peticion, I aſke you but ryght.
               
            
            
               ¶ Dame Pallas to the quene of Fame
               
                  ¶ To your requeſt we be well condiſcended
                  Call forth, let ſe where is your clarionar
                  To blowe a blaſte with his longe breth extended
                  Eolus your trumpet that knowen is ſo farre
                  That bararag bloweth in euery marciall warre
                  Let hym blowe nowe, that we may take a vewe
                  What poetes we haue at our retynewe.
               
               
                  ¶ To ſe if Skelton wyll put hymſelfe in preaſe
                  Amonge the thickeſt of all the hole route
                  Make noiſe ynoughe, for claterars loue no peace
                  Let ſe my ſyſter, nowe ſpede you, go aboute
                  Anone I ſay this trumpet were founde out
                  And for no man hardely let hym ſpare
                  To blowe bararag, tyll both his eien ſtare.
               
            
            
               ¶ Skelton poeta.
               
                  FOr the with there roſe among the throng
                  A wonderfull noyſe, and on euery ſyde
                  They preſed i faſt, ſome thought thei wer to lōg
                  Some were to haſty, and wolde no man ſyde
                  Sue whiſpred, ſūe rowned, ſūe ſpake, & ſom cride
                  with heuyng and ſhouyng, haue in and haue out
                  Some ran the next waye, ſome ran about.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ There was ſuynge to the quene of Fame
                  He plucked him backe, and he went afore.
                  Nay hold thy tūge ꝙ an other let me haue yt nāe
                  Make rowme ſaid an other ye preſe all to ſore
                  Som ſayd, holde thy peas yu getteſt here no more
                  A thouſande thouſande I ſawe on a plumpe
                  With that I harde the noyſe of a trumpe
               
               
                  ¶ That longe time blew a full tymorous blaſte
                  Like to the Boriall wyndes, whan they blowe
                  That towres, and townes, and trees downe caſt
                  Droue clowdes to gether like dryftes of ſnowe
                  The dredeful dinne droue all the route on a row
                  Som trēbled, ſom girned, ſom gaſped, ſom gaſed
                  As people halfe peuiſſh or men that were maſed
               
               
                  ¶ Anone all was whyſhte, as it wer for ye nones
                  And eche man ſtode gaſyng & ſtaryng vpō other
                  With that there come in wonderly at ones
                  A murmur of minſtrels, that ſuche an other
                  Had I neuer ſene, ſome ſofter ſome lowder
                  Orpheus the Thracian harped melodiouſly
                  With Amphion, and other muſis of Archady.
               
               
                  ¶ Whoſe heuenly armony was ſo paſſing ſure
                  So truly proporcioned, and ſo well dyd gree
                  So duly entuned with euery meaſure
                  That in the foreſt was none ſo great a tre
                  But that he daunced for ioye of that gle
                  The huge myghty okes themſelfe did auaunce
                  And lepe from the hilles to lerne for to daunce
               
               
                  
                  ¶ In ſo muche the ſtumpe, wherto I me lente
                  Sterte all at ones an hundred fote backe
                  With that I ſprange vp towarde the tent
                  Of noble dame Pallas, wherof I ſpake
                  Where I ſawe came after I wote full litel lacke
                  Of a thouſande poetes aſſembled to gether
                  But Phebus was formeſt of al that came theder
               
               
                  ¶ Of laurell leaues a cronell on his heed
                  With heares encriſped yolowe as the golde
                  Lamētynge Daphnes, whom wt the darte of leed
                  Cupide hath ſtryken ſo that ſhe ne wolde
                  Concente to Phebus to haue his harte in holde
                  But for to preſerue her maydenheed clene
                  Tranſformed was ſhe into the laurell grene.
               
               
                  Medled with murning yt moſt part of his muſe
                  O thou gatfull harte, was euer more his ſonge
                  Daphnes my derlynge why do you me refuſe?
                  Yet loke on me, that loued you haue ſo longe
                  Yet haue compaſſion vpon my paynes ſtronge
                  He ſange alſo, howe the tre as he did take
                  Betwene his armes he felte her body quake
               
               
                  ¶ Than he aſſurded into this exclamacion
                  Unto Diana the goddes immortall
                  O merciles ma dame harde is your conſtellacion
                  So cloſe to kepe your cloyſter virginall
                  Enharded adyamant the ſement of your wall
                  Alas what ayle you to be ſo ouerth wart
                  To banyſſhe pite out of a maydens harte?
               
               
                  
                  ¶ why haue the goddes ſhewed me this crueltte
                  Sith I contryued firſt principles medycinable
                  I helpe all other of their infirmyte
                  But nowe to helpe myſelfe I am not able
                  That profitteth all other is nothinge profitable
                  Unto me, alas that herbe nor greſſe
                  The feruent axes of loue can not repreſſe.
               
               
                  ¶ O fatall fortune what haue I offended?
                  Odious diſdayne why raiſt yu me on this facyon?
                  But ſith I haue loſt nowe that I entended
                  And may nat atteyne it by no mediacion
                  Yet in remembraūce of Daphnes trāſformation
                  All famous poets enſuynge after me
                  Shall we are a garlande of the laurell tre
               
               
                  ¶ This ſaid, a great nombre folowed by and by
                  Of poetes laureat of many diuerſe nacions
                  Parte of their names I thynke to ſpecifie
                  Firſt olde Quintilian with his Declamations
                  Theocritus with his bucolicall relacions
                  Heſiodus the Icononucar,
                  And Homerus the freſſhe hiſtoriar.
               
               
                  ¶ Prince of eloquence Tullius Cicero,
                  With Saluſt agaynſt Lutius Catiline
                  That wrote the hiſtory of Iugurtha alſo,
                  Ouide enſhryned with the Muſis nyne,
                  But bleſſed Bacchus the pleaſant god of wyne
                  Of cluſters engroſed with his ruddy flotes
                  Theſe orators & poetes refreſſhed their throtes.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ Lucan with ſtacius in Achilliedos
                  Percius preſed forth with problemes diffuſe
                  Uirgill the mantuan with his enridos
                  Inuenall ſatirray that men makythe to muſe
                  But bleſſed Bacchus the pleaſant god of wyne
                  Of cluſters engroſed with his ruddy flotes
                  Theſe oraters & Poetes refreſhed their throtes
               
               
                  ¶ There Titus Liuius hymſelfe dyd auaunce
                  With decadis hiſtorious which that he mēgleth
                  with maters yt amoūt the Romayns in ſubſtaūce
                  Ennius that wrote of marciall warre at length
                  But bleſſed Bacchus potenciall god of ſtrengthe
                  Of cluſters engroſed with his ruddy dropes
                  Theſe orators & poetes refreſſhed their throtes.
               
               
                  ¶ Aulus Gellius that noble hiſtoriar,
                  Orace alſo with his newe poetry
                  Maiſter Terence the famous comicar,
                  With Plautus that wrote many a comedy
                  But bleſſed Bacchus was in their company
                  Of cluſters engroſed with his ruddy dropes
                  Theſe orators & poetes refreſſhed their throtes.
               
               
                  ¶ Senec full ſobrely with his tragedies,
                  Boece recomforted with his philoſophie,
                  And Marimiane with his madde dities,
                  Howe dotynge age wolde iape with yonge foly
                  But bleſſed Bacchus moſt reuerent and holy
                  Of cluſters engroſſed with his ruddy dropes
                  Theſe orators & poetes refreſſhed their throtes.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ There came Iohn Boccas wt his volūes grete
                  Quintus Curſius full craftely that wrate
                  Of Alexander: And Macrobius that did treate
                  Of Scipiōs dreame what was the true probate
                  But bleſſed Bacchus that neuer man forgate
                  Of cluſters engroſed with his ruddy dropes
                  Theſe orators & poetes refreſſhed their throtes.
               
               
                  ¶ Pogius alſo that famous florentie
                  Muſtred there among thē with many a mad tale
                  With a frere of Fraunce men call ſyr Gaguine
                  That frowned on me full angerly and pale
                  But bleſſed Bacchus, that bote is of all bale
                  Of cluſters engroſed with his ruddy dropes
                  Theſe orators & poetes refreſſhed theyr throtes.
               
               
                  ¶ Plutarke and Patrarke two famous clarkes
                  Lucilius and Ualerius Marimus by name
                  with Uincētius in ſpeculo yt wrote noble warkes
                  Propercius and Piſandros poetes of noble fame
                  But bleſſed Bachus that maſtriſe oft doth frame
                  Of cluſters engroſed with his ruddy dropes
                  Theſe notable poetes refreſſhed theyr throtes.
               
               
                  ¶ And as I thus ſadly among them aduyſed
                  I ſaw Gower, ye firſt garniſhed our ēgliſhe rude
                  And maiſter Chaucer, that nobly entrepriſed
                  How ye our engliſhe myght freſhely be ennewed
                  The monke of Bury than after them enſued
                  Dane Iohn̄ Lydgate: theſe engliſhe poetes thre
                  As I ymagened repayred vnto me.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ To gether in armes as bretherne enbraſed
                  Their apparell farre paſſing beyond yt I can tell
                  wt diamātes & rubies their taberdes were traſed
                  None ſo riche ſtones in Turkey to ſell
                  They wanted nothynge but the Laurell.
                  And of their bounte they made me goodly chere
                  In maner and forme as ye ſhall after here.
               
            
            
               ¶ Maiſter Gower to Skelton.
               
                  BRother Skelton your endeuorment
                  So haue ye done, that meretoriouſly
                  Ye haue deſerued to haue an enplement
                  In our collage aboue the ſterry ſkye
                  Bycauſe that ye encreaſe and amplifie
                  The bruted Britons of Brutus Albion
                  That welnere was loſt whā that we were gone
               
            
            
               ¶ Poeta Skelton to Maiſter Gower.
               
                  MAiſter Gower I haue nothyng deſerued
                  To haue So laudabyle A commendacion
                  To yow thre this honor ſhalbe reſerued
                  Arrectinge vnto your wyſe examinacion
                  How all that I do is vnder Refformation
                  For only the Subſtance of that I entend
                  Is glad to pleaſe and loth to offend.
               
            
            
               ☞ Maiſter Chaucher Lawreat poete to Skelton.
               
                  COunter waying your buſy diligence
                  Of that we beganne in the ſupplement
                  Enforced are we you to recompence
                  Of all our holle collage by the agrement
                  That we ſhall brynge you perſonally preſent
                  Of noble Fame before the quenes grace
                  In whoſe courte poynted is your place.
               
            
            
               
               
                  ❧ Poeta Skelton anſwereth
               
                  O Noble Chaucer, whoſe pulliſſhed eloquēcs
                  Our engliſſhe rude ſo freſhely hath ſet out
                  That bounde are we with all due reuerence
                  with all our ſtrengthe that we can bryng about
                  To owe to you our ſeruice, & more if we mowte
                  But what ſhulde I ſay, ye wote what I entende
                  whiche glad am to pleaſe, and loth to offende.
               
            
            
               ¶ Maiſter Lydgate to Skelton.
               
                  SO am I preuēted of my bretherne twayne
                  In rendrynge to you thankes meretory
                  That welnere nothynge there doth remayns
                  wherwith to gyue you my regraciatory
                  But that I poynt you to be protonotory
                  Of Fames courte, by all our holle aſſent
                  Auaunced by Pallas to laurell preferment.
               
            
            
               
                  ❧ Poeta Skelton anſwereth.
               
                  So haue ye me far paſſyng my merites extolled
                  Maiſter Lydgate of your accuſtomable
                  Bounte, and ſo gloriouſly ye haue enrolled
                  My name. I knowe well beyōde that I am able
                  That but if my warkes therto be agreable
                  I am elles rebuked of that I entend
                  whiche glad am to pleaſe and loth to offende
               
               
                  ¶ So Finally, whā they had ſhewed their deuiſe
                  Under the forme as I ſayd before
                  I made it ſtraūge, and drewe backe ones or twiſe
                  And euer they preſed on me more and more
                  Tyll at the laſt they forced me ſo ſore
                  That wt them I went where they wold me brīge
                  Unto the pauylion, where Pallas was ſyttyng.
               
               
                  
                  Dame Pallas cōmāded ye they ſhuld me cōuay
                  In to the riche palace of the quene of Fame,
                  There ſhall he here what ſhe to hym will ſay
                  Whan he is called to anſwere to his name,
                  A crye anone forth with ſhe made proclame,
                  All orators and poetes ſhoulde thider go before
                  With all the preaſe that there was leſſe & more.
               
               
                  Forthwith I ſay: thus wādring in my thought
                  Howe it was, or elles within what howres
                  I can nat tell you, but that I was brought
                  In to a palace, with turrettes and towres
                  Engalared goodly with halles and bowres
                  So curioſly, ſo craftly, ſo coūnyngly wrought
                  That all the worlde I trowe and it were ſought
               
               
                  Suche an other, there could no man fynde
                  Wherof partly I purpoſe to expounde
                  Whiles it remayneth freſſhe in my mynde
                  wt turks and groſſolites enpaued was the groūd
                  Of birral enboſed were the pyllers round
                  Of elephantes tethe, were the palace gates
                  Enloſenged with many goodly plates
               
               
                  Of golde entached with many a precious ſtone
                  An hundred ſteppes mountynge to the halle
                  ONe of iaſper, an other of whales bone,
                  Of diamantes poynted, was the Rokky wal.
                  
                     
The carpettes within and tappettes of pall
                  The chambres hanged with clothes of Arace
                  Enuauted with rubies yt v aute was of this
               
               
                  Thus paſſed we forth. walkyng vnto ye pretory
                  Wher ye poſtis wer ēbulioned wt ſaphirs īdy blew
                  Englaſed glitteryng with many a clere ſtory
                  Iacictes & ſmaragdes out of yt florth they grew.
                  Unto this place all poetes there dyd ſue
                  Wherin was ſet of Fame the noble quene
                  All other tranſcendyng moſt richely beſene
               
               
                  Under a glorious clothe of eſtate
                  Fret all with orient perles of Garnate
                  Encrowned as empreſſe of all this worldly fate
                  So ryally, ſo richely, ſo paſſyngly ornate
                  It was excedynge beyonde the cōmune rate
                  This houſe enuiron was a myle about
                  If. xii. were let in. xii. hundred ſtode without
               
               
                  Thā to this lady and ſouerayne of this palace
                  Of purſeuātes ther preſed ī wc many diuers tale
                  Some were of Poyle, and ſome were of Thrace
                  Of Lymerik, of Loreī, of Spaine, of Portugale
                  From Napuls, frō Nauern, and frō Koūceuale
                  Some from Flaunders, ſome fro the ſee coſte
                  Some frō the maine lāde, ſome fro the frēch hoſt
               
               
                  
                  with how doth yt north, what tydīges ī yt ſouth
                  The weſt is wyndy, the Eeſt is metely wele
                  It is harde to tell of euery mannes mouthe
                  A ſlypper holde the tayle is of an ele
                  And he halteth often that hath a kyby hele
                  Sūe ſhewed his ſafecōduct, ſūe ſhewed his chart
                  Some loked ful ſmothely, and had a fals quart.
               
               
                  With ſir I praye you a litell tyne ſtāde backe
                  And let me come in to delyuer my letter
                  An other tolde, howe ſhyppes went to wracke
                  There were many wordes ſmaller and greatter
                  With I as good as thou, I faith and no better
                  Some came to tell treuthe, ſome came to lye.
                  Some came to flatter, ſome came to ſpye,
               
               
                  There were I ſaye of all maner of ſortes
                  Of dertmouth, of plymouth, of porteſmouth alſo
                  The burgeis and the bayliues of the. v. portes
                  With nowe let me come, and nowe let me go
                  And all tyme wandred I thus. to and fro,
                  Tyll at the laſte theſe noble poetes thre
                  Anto me ſayd lo ſyr nowe ye maye ſe,
               
               
                  Of this hyghecourte the dayly buſynes
                  From you muſt we, but nat longe to tary
                  Lo hither cometh a goodly maiſtres
                  Occupacion, Fames regeſtary.
                  
                     
Whiche ſhalbe to you a ſouerayne acceſſary
                  With ſingular pleaſures to dryue away y• tyme
                  And we ſhall ſe you agayne or it be pryme.
               
               
                  Whā they wer paſt, & went forth on their way
                  This gentilwoman, that called was by name
                  Occupacion, in ryght goodly araye
                  Came towarde me, and ſmyled halfe in game.
                  I ſawe her ſmyle, and than I dyd the ſame
                  With that on me ſhe caſt her goodly loke
                  Under her arme me thought ſhe had a boke.
               
            
            
               ¶ Occupation to Skelton.
               
                  LYke as the larke vpon the ſomers daye
                  Whā Titā radiāt burniſheth his bemes bright
                  Mounteth on hye, with hir melodius laye
                  Of the ſon ſhyne engladed with the lyght
                  So am I ſuppriſed with pleaſure and delyght
                  To ſe this houre nowe, that I may ſaye
                  Howe ye are welcome to this court of araye
               
               
                  Of your aqueyntaūce I was in tymes paſte
                  Of ſtudious doctrine whan at the port ſalu
                  Ye fyrſt arryued, whan broken was your maſte
                  Of worldly truſt, than dyd I you reſkew
                  Your ſtorme dryuen ſhyp I repared newe
                  So well entacled, what wynde ſo euer blow
                  No ſtormy tempeſt your barge ſhall ouer throw
               
               
                  
                  Welcome to me as hertly as herte can thinke,
                  Welcome to me with all my holle deſyre
                  And for myſake ſpare neyther pen nor ynke
                  Be well aſſured I ſhall aquyte your hyre.
                  Your name recoūtyng beyonde the land o Tire
                  From Sydony to the mount Olympian
                  From Babyll towre to the hils Caſpian.
               
            
            
               ¶ Skelton Poeta anſwereth.
               
                  I Thanked her moche of her moſt noble offer
                  Affiaunſynge her myne hole aſſuraunce
                  For her pleaſure to make a large profer
                  Empryntyng her wordes in my remembraunce
                  To owe her my ſeruice with true perſeueraunce
                  Come on with me ſhe ſayd, let vs nat ſtande
                  And with that worde ſhe toke me by the hande
               
               
                  So paſſed we forth into the forſayd place.
                  With ſuch cōmunicacion as came to our mynde
                  And than ſhe ſayd, whyles we haue tyme & ſpace
                  To walke where we lyſt, let vs ſomwhat fynde
                  To paſſe the time with▪ but let vs waſt no wynd
                  For ydell Ianglers haue but lytell brayne
                  Wordes be ſwordes and harde to call agayne
               
               
                  Into a felde ſhe brought me wyde and large
                  Enwalled about with the ſtony flynt
                  Strongly enbateld muche coſtious of charge
                  To walke on this wal, ſhe bed I ſhould nat ſtint
                  
                     
Go ſoftly ſhe ſaid, the ſtones be full glynt
                  She went before and bad me take good holde
                  I ſawe a thouſande yates newe and olde
               
               
                  Than queſtioned I her what theſe yates ment,
                  Wherto ſhe anſwered, and bryefly me tolde
                  Howe from the Eſt vnto the Occident
                  And from the South vnto the North ſo colde,
                  Theſe yates ſhe ſaid, whiche that ye beholde
                  Be iſſues and portes from all maner of nacions
                  and ſeriouſly ſhe ſhewed me their denominaciōs
               
               
                  They had wrytynge ſome greke, ſome ebrew,
                  Some Romayne letters as I vnderſtode
                  Some were olde writen, ſome were writē new,
                  Sūe carectis of Caldy, ſome frēche was ful good
                  But one gate ſpecially, where as I ſtode
                  Had grauen in it of Calcidony a capitall. A.
                  What gate call ye this? and ſhe ſayd Anglia
               
               
                  The buyldyng therof was paſſing cōmendable
                  Wherō ſtode a lybbard crowned wt gold & ſtones
                  Terrible of countinaunce, & paſſing formidable
                  As quickly touched as it were fleſhe and bones
                  As gaſtly that glaris, as grimly that gronis
                  As fierſly frownyng as he had ben fyghtynge
                  And wc his forme fote, he ſhoke forth this writīg.
               
               
                  
                  Cacoſinthicon ex induſtria.
                  Formidanda nimis Iouis ultima fulmina tollis
                  Vnguibus ire parat loca ſingula liuida curuis
                  Quam modo per Phebes nummos raptura Celenoz
                  Arma, lues, luctus, fel, uis fraus barbara tellus
                  Mille modis erras odium tibi querere martis.
                  Spreto ſpineto cedat ſaliunca roſeto.
               
               
                  Than I me lent and loked ouer the wall
                  Innumerable people preſed to euery gate
                  Shet were yt gates, they might wel knocke & cal
                  And turne home agayn, for they came al to late
                  I her demaunded of them and their aſtate
                  Forſothe ꝙ ſhe, theſe be haſkardes & rybaudes
                  Dicers, carders, tumblars with gambaudes.
               
               
                  Fordrers of loue, with baudrie a
                        •
                     neynted
                  Brayneles blynkardes that blowe at the cole
                  Falſe forgers of money for coynnage atteynted
                  Pope holy hypocrites as they were golde & hole,
                  Poule hatchettes yt prate well at euery ale pole
                  Ryot, reueler, rayler, brybery, thefte,
                  With other condicions that well might be lefte.
               
               
                  Sūe fayne thēſelf foles, & wold be called wyſe
                  Sōe medling ſpies, by craft to grope thy minde
                  Some diſdaynous daucockes that al men diſpiſe
                  Falſe flatterers that faune the, & curres of kynd
                  
                     
That ſpeke faire before the, & ſhrewdly behynde
                  Hither they come crowding to get them a name
                  But hayled they be homwarde wt ſorow & ſhame
               
               
                  With that I herde gunnes ruſhe out at ones
                  Bowns, bowns, bowns, that all they out cryde
                  It made ſome limpe legged & broiſed their bones
                  Some were made pyuyſhe poriſſhly pynke eyde
                  That euermore after by it they were aſpyde
                  And one ther was there, I wondred of his hap
                  For a gunſtone I ſay had all to lagged his cap.
               
               
                  Ragged and dagged and cunnyngly cut
                  The blaſt of the brymſton blew away his braine
                  Maſed as a marche hare, he ran lyke a ſcut
                  And ſir amonge all me thought I ſawe twayne
                  The one was a tumblar that afterward agayne
                  Of a dyſſour a deuyll way grewe a ientilman
                  Persprater the ſeconde that quarelles began
               
               
                  wc a pellet of peuiſhenes thei had ſuch a ſtroke
                  That al ye dayes of their lyf ſhal ſtick by their ribbes
                  Foo, foiſty baudias ſom ſmelled of ye ſmoke
                  I ſaw diuers yt were caried away thens ī cribbes
                  Daſyng after dotrels lyke drunkardes yt dribbes
                  Theſe titiuils wc taūpins were touched & tapped
                  moche miſchef I hight you amōg thē ther happed
               
               
                  Somtyme as it ſemeth whan the mone lyght
                  
                     
By meanes of a groſely endarked clowde,
                  Sodainly is eclipſed in the wynter nyght
                  In like maner of wyſe, amyſt dyd vs ſhrowde
                  But wel may ye thinke. I was nothyng prowde
                  Of that auentures, whiche made me ſore agaſte
                  In darkenes thus dwelt we, tyll at the laſt
               
               
                  The clowdes gon to clere, the miſt was rarified
                  In an herber I ſawe brought where I was
                  There byrdes on the brere ſange on euery ſyde
                  With aleys enſanded about in compas
                  The bankes enturfed with ſingular ſolas
                  Enrailed with roſers, and vines engraped
                  It was a new comfort of ſorowes eſcaped
               
               
                  In the middes a cundite, yt curiouſly was caſt
                  With pypes of golde, enguſſhyng out ſtreames
                  Of criſtall, the clerenes theſe waters far paſt
                  Enſwimmyng with roches, barbils, & breames,
                  Whoſe ſkales enſilured again the ſon beames
                  Engliſterd: that ioyous it was to be holde
                  Than farthermore about me my ſight I reuolde
               
               
                  Where I ſawe growyng a goodly laurell tre
                  Enuerdured with leaue, continually grene,
                  Aboue in the top a byrde of Araby
                  Men call a phenix: her wynges bytwene
                  She bet vp a fyre with the ſparkes full kene
                  
                     
With braunches & boughes of the ſwete olyue
                  whoſe flagraunt flower was chefe preſeruatiue. 
                        
                           •
                        iua ſpe
                        
                           •
                        oſa in 
                           ••
                        pis.
                  
               
               
                  A geynſt al infections, with rancour enflamed
                  Ageynſt all baratous broiſiours of olde
                  It paſſed all bawmes that euer were named
                  Or gummes of Saby ſo derely that be ſolde Nota ex
                        
                           •
                        elletiam 
                           •
                        irtutis 
                           ••
                         oliua.
                  
                  There blewe in that garden a ſoft piplyng colde
                  Enbrethyng of zephirus with his pleaſāt wynde
                  Al frutes & flowres grewe there in their kynde.
               
               
                  Dryades there daunſed vpon that goodly ſoile
                  With the nyne muſes Pierides by name
                  Phillis and Teſtalis there treſſes with oyle
                  Were newly enbybed: & rounde about the ſame
                  Grene tre of laurell, moche ſolacious game
                  They made wt chapplettes and garlandes grene
                  And formeſt of al Dame Flora the quene
               
               
                  Of ſomer ſo formally ſhe foted the daunce
                  Ther Citheus ſat twinklyng vpō his harpeſtriges
                  An̄d Iopas his inſtrument dyd auaunce
                  The poemes and ſtories auncient in brynges
                  Of Athlas aſtrology, and many noble thynges
                  Of wandryng of the mone the courſe of the ſon
                  Of men and of beſtes, and whereof they begone,
               
               
                  What thyng occaſioned the ſhowres of rayne
                  
                     
Of fyre elementar in his ſupreme ſpere
                  And of that pole artike, whyche doth remayne
                  Behynde the tayle of vrſa ſo clere
                  Of Pliades he preched with their drowſy chere
                  Immoyſtred with miſlyng and ay droppyng dry
                  And where the two trions a man ſhoulde eſpye.
               
               
                  And of the wynter dayes that hye theym ſo faſt
                  And of the wynter nyghtes that fary ſo longe
                  And of the ſomer dayes, ſo longe that done laſts
                  And of their ſhort nightes: he brought i his ſōge
                  How wrōge was no right, & right was no wrōg.
                  There was coūteryng of carols i meter & i verſe
                  So many, that longe in were to reherce.
               
            
            
               Occupacion to Skelton.
               
                  HOwe ſaye ye? is this after your appetite?
                  May this cōtent you & your mery mynde?
                  Here dwelleth pleaſure, with luſt and delyte
                  Continuall comfort here ye may fynde
                  Of welthe and ſolace nothynge lefte behynde
                  All thynge couenably here is contryued
                  Wherwith your ſprites may be reuyued.
               
            
            
               Poeta Skelton Anſwereth.
               
                  QUeſtionles no doubte of that ye ſaye
                  Iupiter himſelfe this life myght endure
                  This ioye excedeth all worldly ſport and playe
                  Paradyſe, this place is of ſyngular pleaſure
                  O well were hym that herof might be ſure
                  
                     
And here to inhabite, and aye for to dwell
                  But goodly mayſtres one thynge ye me tell
               
            
            
               Occupacion to Skelton.
               
                  OF your demaunde ſhew me the content
                  What it is, and where vpon it ſtandes
                  And if there be in it any thynge ment,
                  Wherof the anſwere reſtyth in my handes
                  It ſhall be loſed ful ſone out of the bandes
                  of ſcrupulus doubt wherfore your mid diſcharge
                  And of your will the playnnes ſhewe at large
               
            
            
               Poeta Skelton anſwereth.
               
                  I thāke you goodly maiſtres to me moſt benign
                  That of your bountie ſo well haue me aſſured
                  But my requeſt is nat ſo great a thynge
                  That I ne force what thoughe it be diſcured
                  I am nat wounded but that I may be cured
                  I am nat laden of lyddyrnes with lumpes
                  As daſed doterdes that dreame in their dumpes.
               
            
            
               Occupacion to Skelton.
               
                  Nowe what ye meane I trowe I coniect
                  God gyue you good yere ye make me to ſmyle
                  Nowe by your fayth is nat this theffect
                  Of your queſtion ye make all this whyle
                  To vnderſtande who dwelleth in yone pile
                  And what blūdrer is pōder ye playeth diddil diddil.
                  He fyndeth falſe meſures out of his fonde fiddill
               
               
                  
                  ¶ Interpolata (que induſtrioſum poſtulat interpretem) ſatyra in uatis aduerſarium.
                  
                  
                     Treſſis Agaſonis ſpecies prior, altera Daui. 
                     Nota Al chimiam & ſeptē metalla.
                  
                  
                     Aucupium culicis limis dum torquet ocellum.
                  
                  
                     Concipit. aligeras rapit, opetit, 
                           •
                        ſpice muſcas,
                  
                  
                     Maia quoque fouet, fouet aut que Iupiter, aut que
                  
                  
                     Frigida Saturnus, Sol, Mars, Venus, Algida Luna,
                  
                  
                     Si tibi contingat uerbo aut committere ſcripto
                  
                  
                     Quam ſibi mox tacita ſudant precordia culpa?
                  
                  
                     Hinc ruit in flammas, ſtimulans huncurget & illum
                  
                  
                     Inuocat ad rixas, uanos tamen excitat ignes.
                  
                  
                     Labra mouens tacitus, rumpantur ut ilia Codro.
                  
                  17. 4. 7. 2. 17. 5. 18.
                  18. 19. 1. 19. 8. 5. 12.
               
               
                  HIs name for to knowe if that ye lyſt
                  Enuious Rancour truly he hight
                  Beware of him I warne you: for if ye wyſt
                  Howe dangerous it were to ſtande in his lyght
                  ye wold nat deale wyth him thought yt ye might
                  For by his deuilliſſhe drift & graceles, prouiſion
                  An holle realme he is able to ſet at dyuiſion.
               
               
                  For whā he ſpeketh faireſt thā thiketh he moſt il
                  Ful gloriouſly can he gloſe, thy mynd for to fele
                  He wyl ſett men a feighting & ſyt himſelfe ſtyll
                  And ſmerke lyke a ſmythy cur at ſperkes of ſtele
                  
                     
He can neuer leaue warke whyles it is wele
                  To tell all his touches it were to great wonder
                  The deuyll of hell and he be ſeldome a ſonder
               
               
                  Thus talkīg we went forth ī at a poſtern gate,
                  Turning on the right hāde, by a wynding ſtayre
                  She brought me to a goodly chambre of aſtate,
                  Where the noble countes of Surrey in a chaire
                  Sate honorably, to whom dyd repayre
                  Of ladyes a Beuy. with all dewe reuerence
                  Syt downe fayre ladyes and do your diligence
               
               
                  Come forth gentilwomen I pray you ſhe ſaid
                  I haue contryued for you a goodly warke
                  And who can worke beſt nowe ſhalbe aſſayd
                  A cronell of laurell with verdures light & darke
                  I haue deuiſed for Skelton my clerke
                  For to his ſeruyce I haue ſuche regarde
                  That of our bountie we wyll hym rewarde.
               
               
                  For of all ladyes he hath the library
                  Their names recountyng in the court of Fame
                  Of all gentylwomen he hath the ſcruteny
                  In F
                        •
                     mes courte reportyng the ſame
                  For yet of women he neuer ſayd ſhame
                  But if they were coūtrefettes yt women thē call
                  That liſt of their lewdneſſe with him for to bral.
               
               
                  
                  With yt the tappettes & carpettes were layde
                  Wheron theſe ladyes ſoftely myght reſt
                  The ſaumpler to ſowe on, the laces to enbrayde
                  To weaue in the ſtole ſome were full preſt
                  with ſlaies, with tauels, with hedelles wel dreſt
                  The frame was brought forth wc his weauīg pin
                  God giue them good ſpede their warke to begin.
               
               
                  Some to enbrowder put them in preaſe
                  wel gydīg their glottō to kepe ſtreight their ſilk,
                  Some pyrlyng of golde their worke to encreaſe
                  With fingers ſmale, & handes as white as mylk
                  With reche me that ſkayne of tewly ſylke
                  And wynde me that botoume of ſuche an hewe
                  Grene, red, tawney, whyte, purple, and blewe,
               
               
                  Of brokē warkes wroght many a goodly thīg
                  In caſtyng, in turnyng, in floriſhing of flowres
                  With burres rowgh and buttons ſurffyllyng
                  In nedyll warke rayſyng byrdes in bowres
                  With vertue enbeſed all tymes and howres
                  And truly of theyr bountie thus were they bent
                  To worke me this chaplet, by good aduiſement.
               
            
            
               Occupacion to Skelton.
               
                  BEholde and ſe in your aduertiſement,
                  Howe theſe ladies and gentylwomen all
                  For your pleaſure do theyr edeuourment
                  And for your ſake, howe faſt to warke they fall
                  
                     
To your remembraunce wherfore ye muſt call
                  In goodly wordes pleaſauntly compriſed
                  That for them ſome goodly conceyte be deuiſed.
               
               
                  Whith propre captacions of beneuolence
                  Ornately pullyſhed after your faculte
                  Sith ye muſt nedes afforce it by pretence
                  Of your profeſſion vnto humanite
                  Commenſyng your proces after their degree
                  To eche of them rēdring thākes cōmendable
                  With ſētence fructuous, and termes couenable
               
            
            
               Poeta Skelton anſwereth.
               
                  AUanſyng myſelfe ſome thanke to deſerue
                  I me determyned for to ſharpe my pen
                  Deuoutly arrectyng my prayer to Minerue
                  She to vouche ſafe me to enforme and ken
                  To Mercury alſo hertely prayed I then
                  Me to ſupporte, to helpe, and to aſſyſt
                  To gyde & to gouerne my dredful trembling fiſt
               
               
                  As a mariner that amaſed is in a ſtormy rage
                  Hardly be ſtad and dryuen is to hope
                  Of that the tempeſtous wynde will a ſwage
                  In truſt wherof comfort his heart doth grope
                  From the anker he cutteth the gabill rope
                  Committeth al to god, and letteth his ſhip ryde
                  So I beſeche Ieſu now to be my gyde
               
            
            
               To the right noble countes of Surrey.
               
                  
                  AFter all duly ordred obeyſaunce
                  In humble wyſe as lowely as I maye
                  Unto you madame I make reconiſaunce
                  My lyfe enduryng I ſhall both wryte and ſaye
                  Recounte, reporte, reherſe without delaye
                  The paſſynge bountie of your noble eſtate
                  Of honour & worſhip which hath ye formar date.
               
               
                  Lyke to Argiua by iuſt reſemblaunce
                  The noble wyfe of Polimites kynge
                  Prudent Rebecca, of whom remembraunce
                  The bible maketh, with whoſe chaſte lyuynge
                  Your noble demenour is counterwaynge
                  Whoſe paſſing bounte, and right noble eſtate
                  Of honour and worſhyp it hath the formar date.
               
               
                  The noble Pāphilia quene of the grekes land
                  Habilimentes royall founde out induſtriouſly
                  Thamer alſo wrought with her goodly hande
                  Many diuiſes paſſynge curiouſly
                  Whom ye repreſent and exemplify
                  Whoſe paſſynge bounte and right noble eſtate,
                  Of honour and worſhip it hath the formar date,
               
               
                  As dame Thamaris whiche toke the kyng of Perſe
                  Cyrus by name, as writeth the ſtory.
                  Dame Agrippina alſo I may reherſe
                  Of gentill corage the parfite memory
                  
                     
So ſhall your name endure perpetually
                  Whoſe paſſynge bounte and right noble eſtate
                  Of honour and worſhip it hath the formar date.
               
            
            
               To my lady Eilabet h Howarip
               
                  To be your remēbraūce madame I am boūde
                  Lyke to Aryna maydenly of porte
                  Of vertue & connyng the well and perfit groūde
                  Whom dame nature, as well I may reporte
                  Hath freſhely enbeautied wc many a goodly ſorte
                  Of womāly fetures, whoſe floriſhing tēder age
                  Is luſty to loke on, pleſaunt, demeure, and ſage,
               
               
                  Goodly Creſeid: fayrer than Polyxene
                  For to enuyne Pandarus appetite
                  Troilus I trowe, if that he had you ſene
                  In you he wolde haue ſet his holle delyte
                  Of all your beaute I ſuffice nat to write
                  But as I ſayd your floriſſhyng tender age
                  Is luſty to loke on, pleaſaunt, demure, & ſage.
               
            
            
               To my lady Myrriall hawarde.
               
                  MI lytell lady I may nat leaue behynde
                  But to do you ſeruice nedes nowe I muſt
                  Benigne curteyſe of gentill harte and mynde
                  Whom fortune and fate playnly haue diſcuſt
                  Longe to enioye pleaſure, delyte, and luſt,
                  The enbudded bloſſoms of roſes redde of hewe
                  With lilies white your beauty doth renewe.
               
               
                  
                  Compare you I may to Cidippes the mayde
                  That of Aconcius whan ſhe founde the byll
                  In her boſome, lorde howe ſhe was afrayde
                  The ruddy ſhamefaſtnes in her vyſage fyll
                  Which maner of abaſſhemēt became her not yll
                  Right ſo madame the roſes redde of hewe
                  With lillyes whyte your beuatie doth renewe
               
            
            
               To my lady Anne Dakers of the ſowth.
               
                  zeuſis that enpictured fayre Helene the quene
                  You to deuiſe his crafte were to ſeke
                  And if Apelles, your countenaunce had ſene
                  Of porturature, which was the famous greke
                  He could not deuiſe the leſt point of your cheke
                  Princes of youthe and flowre of goodly porte
                  Uertue, counnyng, ſolace, pleaſure, comforte.
               
               
                  Paregall in honour vnto Penolope
                  That for her trouth is in remembraunce had
                  Fayre Dianira ſurmountynge in beautie
                  Demure Diana womanly and ſad
                  Whoſe luſty lokes make heuy hartes glad
                  Princes of youthe, and flowre of goodly porte
                  Uertue counnyng, ſolace, pleaſure, comforte.
               
            
            
               To maiſtres Margary wentworthe.
               
                  With Margerain gentill
                  The flowre of goodly hede
                  Enbrowdered the mantyll
                  Is of your maydenhede.
                  
                     
Playnely I can nat gloſe
                  Ye be as I deuyne
                  The praty primeroſe
                  The goodly columbyne.
                  With margerain gentill
                  The flowre of goodly hede
                  Enbrowdered the mantill
                  Is of your mayden hede
                  Benygne, courteiſe, and meke,
                  With wordes well deuyſed
                  In you who lyſt to ſeke
                  Be vertues well compryſed.
                  With margerain gentill
                  The flowre of goodly hede
                  Enbrowdered the mantill
                  Is of your mayden hede.
               
            
            
               
                  To maiſtres Margaret Tylney.
               
                  I you aſſure
                  Ful well I knowe,
                  My buſy cure
                  To you I owe
                  Humbly and lowe
                  Commendyng me
                  To your bounte.
               
               
                  As Machareus
                  Fayre Canace
                  So I, I wys
                  Endeuoure me
                  Your name to ſe
                  It be enrolde.
                  Writen with golde
               
               
                  Phedra ye may
                  Well repreſent
                  
                     Intentyue ay
                  And diligent
                  No tyme myſpent
                  Wherfore delyte
                  I haue to wryte
               
               
                  Of Margarite
                  Perle orient
                  Lode ſterre of lyght
                  Moche relucent
                  Madame regent
                  I maye you call
                  Of vertues all.
               
            
            
               
                  To maiſters Iane Blenner-Haiſet.
               What thoughe my penne waxe faynt
               And hath ſmalle luſt to paynt
               Yet ſhall there no reſtraynt
               Cauſe me to ceaſe,
               Amonge this preaſe,
               For to encreaſe
               Your goodly name.
               I wyll myſelfe applye
               Truſte me ententyuely
               You for to ſtellifye
               And ſo obſerue
               That ye ne ſwarue
               For to deſerue
               Immortall fame.
               Sith maiſtres Iane Haiſet
               Smalle flowres helple to ſette
               In my goodly chappelet
               Therfore I rendre, of her the memorie
               
                  
Unto the legende of fayre Leodomie.
            
            
               To maiſters Iſabell Pennell.
               By ſaynt Mary my lady
               Your mammy and your dady
               Brought forthe a goodly baby
               My mayden Iſabell,
               Reflarynge roſabell.
               The flagraunt cammamell,
               The ruddy roſary,
               Tho ſouerayne roſemary
               The praty ſtrawbery,
               The columbyne, the nepte,
               The ieloffer well ſette,
               The propre violet.
               Ennewed your colowre
               Is lyke the daſy flowre,
               After the Aprile ſhowre.
               Sterre of the morowe graye,
               The bloſſome on the ſpraye,
               The freſſheſte flowre of Maye.
               Maydenly demure,
               Of woman hede the lure,
               Wherfore I make you ſure,
               It were an heuenly helthe,
               It were an endeleſſe welthe,
               A lyfe for god hymſelfe,
               To here this nyghtyngale
               Amonge the byrdes ſmale,
               
                  
Warbelynge in the vale
               Dug, dug, iug, iug,
               Good yere and good lucke,
               With chucke, chucke, chucke, chucke.
            
            
               To maiſties Margaret Huſſey.
               
                  Mirry Margaret
                  As midſomer flowre
                  Gentyll as faucoun
                  Or hauke of the towre
               
               
                  With ſolace & gladnes
                  Moch mirth & no madnes
                  All good and no badnes
                  So ioyouſly
                  So maydenly
                  So womanly
                  Her demenynge
                  In euery thynge
                  Far, far paſſynge
                  That I can endite
                  Or ſuffice to write
                  Of mirry Margarete
                  As mydſomer flowre
                  Gentill as faucoun
                  Or hauke of the towre
               
               
                  As pacient & as ſtyll
                  And as ful of good wil
                  As fayre Iſiphill
                  Coliander
                  Swete pomaunder
                  Oood Caſſander
                  Stefaſt of thought
                  wel made, wel wroght
                  Far may be ſought
                  Erſt that ye can fynde
                  So curteiſe ſo kynde
                  As mirry Margarēte
                  this midſomer flowre
                  Gentyll as faucoun
                  Or hauke of ye towre.
               
            
            
               
                  To maiſtres Geretrude Statham.
               
                  Thoughe ye were harde harted
                  And I with you thwarted
                  
                     
With wordes that ſmarted,
                  Yet nowe doutles, ye gyue me cauſe
                  To wryte of you this goodly clauſe
                  Maiſtres Geretrude
                  With wowan hede endude
                  With vertue well renude.
               
               
                  I wyll that ye ſhalbe
                  In all benignite, Lyke to dame Paſiphe.
                  For nowe doutleſſe, ye gyue me cauſe
                  To write of you this goodly clauſe
                  Maiſtres Geretrude
                  With woman hede endude,
                  With vertue well renude.
               
               
                  Partly by your counſell.
                  Garnyſſhed with laurell.
                  Was my freſſhe coronell.
                  Wherfore doutles
                  Ye gyue me cauſe
                  To write of you this goodly clauſe
                  Maiſtres Geretrude
                  With womanhede endude
                  With vertue well renude.
               
            
            
               To maiſtres Iſabēll Knyght
               
                  BUt if I ſhoulde aquite your kyndnes 
                  Els ſaye ye myght
                  That in me were great blyndnes
                  I for to be ſo myndles
                  
                     
And coulde nat wryte
                  Of Iſabell knyght
               
               
                  It is nat my cuſtome nor my gyſe
                  To leaue behynde
                  Her, that is both womanly and wyſe
                  And ſpecially whiche glad was to deuyſe
                  The meanes to fynde
                  To pleaſe my mynde.
               
               
                  In helpynge to warke my laurel grene,
                  With ſylke and golde
                  Galathea the mayde wel beſene.
                  Was neuer halfe ſo fayre as I wene
                  Whiche was extolde, A thouſande folde
               
               
                  By Maro the Mantuan prudent
                  Who lyſt to rede,
                  But and I had leyſer competent
                  I coude ſhewe you ſuche a preſident
                  In very dede, Howe ye excede.
               
            
            
               Occupacion to Skelton.
               
                  Withdrawe your hand, the time paſſeth faſte
                  Set on your heed this laurell which is wrought
                  Here you nat Eolus. for you bloweth a blaſte
                  I dare well ſaye, that ye and I be ſought.
                  Make no delay, for now ye muſt be brought
                  Before my ladys grace, the quene of Fame,
                  Where ye muſt brefely anſwere to your name.
               
            
            
               Skelton Poeta.
               
                  
                  CAſtyng my ſyght the chambre about
                  To ſe howe duly, eche thyng in ordre was
                  Towarde the dore as we were cōmyng out
                  I ſawe maiſter Newton ſyt with his compas
                  His plummet, his penſell, his ſpectacles of glas
                  Deuyſynge in picture by his induſtrious wit
                  Of my laurell the proces euery whitte.
               
               
                  Forth with vpon this as it were in a thought
                  Gower, Chawcer, Lydgate theſe thre
                  Before remembred, me courteiſely brought
                  Into that place, where as they lefte me
                  Where all the ſayd poetes ſat in their degre
                  But whan they ſaw my laurell richely wrought
                  All other beſyde were countrefet they thought.
               
               
                  In compariſon of that whiche I ware
                  Some preyſed the perle, ſome the ſtones bryght
                  Well was hym that thervpon might ſtare
                  Of this warke they had ſo great delyght
                  The ſylke, the golde, the flowres freſh to ſight,
                  They ſayd my laurell was the goodlyeſt
                  That euer they ſaw, & wrought it was the beſt,
               
               
                  In her eſtate there ſate the noble quene
                  Of Fame, perceyuyng howe that I was cum
                  She wondred me thought at my laurell grene
                  She loked hautely, and gaue on me a glum
                  There was amōge them no word thā but mum
                  
                     
For eche mā herkened what ſhe wolde to me ſay
                  Wherof in ſubſtaunce I brought this awaye.
               
            
            
               The quene of Fame to Skelton.
               
                  MY frende ſith ye are before vs here preſent,
                  To anſwere vnto this noble audience
                  Of that ſhalbe reaſoned ye muſt be content
                  And for as moche as by the hye pretence
                  That ye haue nowe by the preeminence
                  Of laureat triūphe, your place is here reſerued
                  We will vnderſtande howe ye haue it deſerued.
               
            
            
               Skelton poeta to the quene of Fame.
               
                  RYght high and mighty princes of aſtate
                  In famous glory all other tranſcendyng
                  Of your bounte the cuſtomable rate
                  Hath ben ful often, and yet is attendyng
                  To all that to reaſon is condiſcendyng
                  But if haſty credēce by maintenaunce of myght
                  Fortune to ſtande betwene you and the lyght.
               
               
                  But ſuche euidence I thynke for to enduce,
                  And ſo largely to lay for myne indempnyte
                  That I truſt to make mine excuſe
                  Of what charge ſo euer ye lay againſt me
                  For of my bokes, parte ye ſhal ſe
                  Which in your recordes I know wel be enrolde
                  And ſo occupacion your Regeſter me tolde.
               
               
                  Forth with ſhe cōmāded I ſhuld take my place
                  Caliope pointed me where I ſhoulde ſit
                  
                     
With that. Occupacion preaſed in a pace
                  Be mirry ſhe ſayd, be nat a ferde a whit
                  Your diſcharge here vnder myn arme is it
                  So than cōmaunded ſhe was vpon this
                  To ſhewe her boke: and ſhe ſayd here it is.
               
            
            
               The quene of Fame to Occupacion.
               
                  Your boke of remēbrāce we wil now yt ye rede
                  If any recordes in nombre can be found
                  What Skelton hath cōpiled and written in dede
                  Reherſynge by ordre, and what is the grounde
                  Let ſe nowe for hym, howe ye can expounde
                  For ī our court ye wote wel his name cā nat riſe
                  But if he write oftenner than ones or twyſe.
               
            
            
               Skelton Poeta.
               
                  With that of ye boke loſende were the claſpes
                  The margēt was illumined al with goldē railes
                  And bice enpictured, with graſſoppes & waſpes.
                  With butterflies, and freſhe pecocke tailes.
                  Enflored with flowres and ſlymy ſnayles,
                  Enuiued pictures well touched and quickely
                  It wold haue made a mā hole yt had be right ſikly
               
               
                  To beholde, howe it was garniſſhed and boūd,
                  Encouerde ouer with golde of tiſſue fine
                  The clapſes and bulliōs were worth a. M. poūde
                  with balaſſis & carbūcles ye borders dyd ſhyne
                  With aurum muſicum euery other lyne
                  Was writen: and ſo ſhe dyd her ſpede
                  Occupacion immediately to rede.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Occupacion readeth and expoundeth ſome part of Skeltōs bokes and balades with dities of pleaſure: In aſmoche as it were to longe a proces to reherce by name, that he hath compiled. &c.
               
                  OF your oratour and poete laureate
                  Of Englande, his warkes here they begyne
                  In primis the boke of Honorouſe aſtate
                  Item the boke howe men ſhoulde fle ſynne
                  Item royall demenaunce, worſhyp to wynne
                  Item the boke to ſpeke well or be ſtyll.
                  Item to lerne you, to dye whan ye will.
               
               
                  Of vertue alſo, the ſouerayne enterlude
                  The boke of the roſtar, prince Arthuris creacion
                  the falſe faith yt now goth which daily is renude
                  Item his dialogues of ymaginacion
                  Item Antomedon of loues meditacion
                  Item newe grammer in engliſhe compilled
                  Itē Bouge of courte, where drede was begylled
               
               
                  His comedy, Achademios called by name
                  Of Tullis familiars the tranſlacion
                  Itē good aduiſement that braineles doth blame
                  
                     
The recule againſt Gaguine of the frēch nacion
                  Item the Popingay, that hath in commendaciō
                  
                  Ladies and gentilwomen ſuche as deſerued
                  And ſuche as be countrefettes they be reſerued.
               
               
                  And of ſoueraintie a noble pamphelet.
                  And of magnificence a notable mater
                  Howe countrefet countenaunce of the new get
                  With crafty conueyaunce doth ſmater & flater
                  And cloked colluſion is brought in to clater
                  with courtly abuſiō who prīteth it wel in minde
                  Moch doublenes of ye world therin he may finde.
               
               
                  Of manerly maiſtres Margery mylke and ale
                  To her he wrote many maters of myrth
                  Yet thoughe I ſaye it, therby lieth a tale
                  For Margery wynſed & brake her hynder gyrth
                  Lorde howe ſhe made moche of her gentill byrth
                  wc gīgerly go gingerly her taile was made of hay
                  Go ſhe neuer ſo gingerly her honeſtie is gone awaye.
               
               
                  Harde to make ought of that is naked nought
                  This fuſtian maiſtres and this giggiſſhe gaſe
                  Wonder is to write what wrēches ſhe wrought
                  To face out her foly with a mydſomer maſe
                  wt pitche ſhe patched her pitcher ſhould nat craſe
                  It may well ryme but ſhrewdly it doth accorde
                  To pyke out honeſtie of ſuche a potſhorde.
               
               
                  
                  Patet per uerſus.
                  Hinc puer hinc natus? uir coniugis hinc ſpollatus
                  Iure thori? eſt? fetus deli, de ſanguine cretus.
                  Hinc magis extollo, quod erit puer alter Apollo.
                  Si queris qualis? meretrix caſtiſſima talis.
                  Et relis & ralis, & reliqualis
                  A good herynge of theſe olde talis
                  Fynde no mo ſuch from wanflete to walis
               
               
                  Et reliquà. ome lia de diuerſis tactatibus.
               
               
                  OF my ladis grace at the contemplacion
                  Out of frenche into engliſſhe proſe
                  Of mannes lyfe the peregrinacion
                  He dyd tranſlate: interprete, and diſcloſe
                  The treatiſe of triumphes of the redde roſe
                  Wherin many ſtories are brefely contayned
                  That vnremembred longe tyme remayned.
               
               
                  The duke of Yorkes creaūcer whā Skeltō was
                  Nowe Henry the. viij. kynge of Englande
                  A treatiſe he deuyſed, and brought it to pas
                  Galled Speculum principis, to beare in his hande
                  Therin to rede, and to vnderſtande
                  All the demenour of princely aſtate
                  To be our kynge of god preordinate.
               
               
                  Alſo the tunnyng of Eiinor Rummyng
                  With Colin clout, Iohn yue, with Ioforth Iacke
                  To make ſuche trifels it aſketh ſome counnyng
                  
                     
In honeſt myrth parde requireth no lacke
                  The white appereth the better for the blacke
                  And after conueyaunce as the worlde goſe
                  It is no foly to vſe the walſhemannes hoſe.
               
               
                  The vmbles of veniſon, the botels of wyne
                  To faire maiſtres Anne, that ſhuld haue be ſent
                  He wrote therof many a praty lyne
                  Where it became, and whither it went
                  And howe that it was wantonly ſpent.
                  The balade alſo of the muſtarde tarte
                  Suche problemes to paint it longeth to his arte.
               
               
                  Of one Adam all a knaue late dead and gone
                  
                     Dormiat in pace like a dormous
                  He wrote an epitaph for his graue ſtone
                  With wordes deuout and ſentence Egerdous
                  For he was euer agaynſt goddes houſe
                  All his delite was to braule and to barke
                  Agayne holy churche, the preſt, and the clarke.
               
               
                  Of Philip ſparowe the lamentable fate
                  The dolefull deſteny, and the carefull chaunce
                  Deuiſed by Skelton after the funerall rate
                  Yet ſome there be there with that take greuaūce
                  And grugge therat with frowning coūtenaūce
                  But what of that? harde it is to pleaſe all men
                  Who lyſt amende it, let hym ſet to his penne.
                  
                     
                     For the gyſe now adayes,
                     Of ſome iangelynge da Iayes
                     Is to diſcommende
                     That they can nat amende
                     Thoughe they wolde ſpende
                     All the wittes they haue
                  
                  
                     What ayle them to depraue
                     Philippe ſparowes graue
                     His dirige, her commendacion
                     Can be no derogacion
                     But myrthe and conſolacion
                     Made by proteſtacion
                     No man to myſcontent
                     With Philippis enterement
                  
                  
                     Alas that goodly mayde
                     Why ſhould ſhe be afrayde?
                     Why ſhoulde ſhe take ſhame,
                     That her goodly name
                     Honorably reported,
                     Should be ſet and ſorted
                     To be matriculate, with ladies of aſtate?
                  
                  
                     I coniure the Philip ſparowe
                     By Hercules that hell dyd harowe
                     And with a venemous arowe
                     Slewe of the Epidaures
                     One of the Centaures
                     Or Onocentaurus,
                     Or Hippocentaurus
                  
                  
                     By whoſe myght and mayne
                     
                        
An hart was ſlayne with hornes twayne
                     Of glitteryng golde,
                     And the apples of golde
                     Of Heſperides with holde
                     And with a dragon kepte
                     That neuer more ſlepte
                     By marciall ſtrength,
                     He wan at length.
                  
                  
                     And ſlewe Gerione,
                     With thre bodyes in one
                     With mighty corage,
                     Adaunted the rage
                     Of a lyon ſauage.
                     Of Diomedis ſtabyll,
                     He brought out a rabill
                     Of courſers and rounſes
                     With leapes and bounſes
                  
                  
                     And with mighty luggynge
                     Wraſtelynge and tuggynge,
                     He plucked the bull,
                     By the horned ſcul
                     And offred to Cornucopia,
                     And ſo forthe per cetera
                  
                  
                     Alſo by Hecates bowre
                     In Plutos gaſtly towre.
                     By the vgly Eumenides,
                     That neuer haue reſt nor eaſe
                     By the venemous ſerpent,
                     That in hell is neuer brent.
                     In Lerua the grekes fen
                     That was engendred then
                     By Chemeras flames,
                     And all the deedly names,
                     Of infernall poſty
                     
                        
Where ſoules frye and roſty.
                     By the ſtygial flode, 
                     And the ſtremes wode
                     Of Cocytus botomleſſe well.
                     By the feryman of hell
                     Caron with his berde hore
                     That roweth with a rude ore,
                     And with his frounſed fore toppe
                     Gydeth his bote with a proppe.
                  
                  
                     I coniure Philippe and call
                     In the name of kynge Saul.
                     
                        Primo regum expres,
                     He bad the Phitones
                     To wytche crafte her to dres,
                     And by her abuſions,
                     And damnable illuſions,
                     Of merueylous concluſions,
                     And by her ſuperſticions,
                     And wonderfull condicions,
                     She rayſed vp in that ſtede
                     Samuel, that was dede.
                  
                  
                     But wheder it were ſo,
                     He were idem innumero
                     
                     The ſelfe ſame Samuel,
                     Howe be it to Saul he dyd tell
                     The Philiſtinis ſhould hym aſkrye
                     And the nexte daye he ſhould dye,
                     I wyll myſelfe diſcharge
                     To lettred men at large.
                  
                  
                     But Philip I coniure the
                     Nowe by theſe names thre
                     
                        
Diana in the woddes grene,
                     
                        Luna that ſo bryght doth ſhene,
                     
                        Proſerpina in hell,
                     That thou ſhortly tell
                     And ſhewe nowe vnto me,
                     What the cauſe may be,
                     Of this perplexite,
                  
                  
                     
                        Inferias Philippe tuas Scroupe pulchra Ioanna
                     
                     
                        Inſtanter peciit, cur noſtri carmints illam
                     
                     
                        Nunc pudet, eſt ſero, minor eſt infamia Vero
                     
                  
                  
                     Than ſuche as haue diſdayned,
                     And of this worke complayned,
                     I praye god they by payned
                     No worſe than is contayned
                     In verſes two or thre,
                     That folowe as ye maye ſe▪
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Luride cur liuor Volucris pia funera damnas
                     
                     
                        Talia te rapiant, 
                              •
                           apiunt quae fata Volucrem,
                     
                     
                        Eſt tamen inuidia mors tibi continua.
                     
                  
               
               
                  The groūting & ye groining of ye groning ſwyne
                  Alſo the Mournyng of the mapely rote
                  Howe the grene couerlet ſuffred great pyne.
                  Whan the flie net was ſet for to catche a cote
                  Strake one with a byrdbolt to the heart rote
                  Alſo a deuoute prayer to Moyſes hornes
                  Metrified merily, medled with ſcornes.
               
               
                  Of paiantes that were played in ioyous garde
                  He wrate of a mows through a mud wall
                  
                     
Howe a doe cam trippyng in at the rere warde
                  But lorde howe the parker was wroth with all
                  And of caſtell Angell the feneſtrall
                  Glittryng and gliſtryng and gloriouſly glaſed
                  It made ſome mennes eyen daſyld and daſed.
               
               
                  The repete of the recule of Roſamūdes bowre
                  Of his pleaſant paine there and his glad deſtres
                  In plantyng & plucking a propre ieloffer flowre
                  But howe it was, ſome were to recheles
                  Nat withſtandyng it is remedeles
                  What myght ſhe ſay? what myght he do therto?
                  Though Iack ſayd nay: yet mok ther loſt her ſho.
               
               
                  Howe than lyke a man he wan the Barbican
                  With a ſaute of ſolace at the longe laſt
                  The colour deedly, ſwart, blo, and wan
                  Of Ereone her lambe is dede and paſt
                  The cheke and the necke but a ſhorte caſt
                  In fortunes fauour euer to endure
                  No man lyuyng he ſayth can be ſure.
               
               
                  How dāe Minerua firſt foūd yu oliue tre, ſhe red
                  & plāted yet wher neuer before was nōe, vnſhred
                  An hynde vnhurt it by caſuelte, nat bled
                  Recouerd whan the forſter was gone, and ſped
                  The hartes of the herd began for to grone, & fled
                  The houndis began to yerne and to queſt: & dred
                  
                     
With lyttell buſines ſtandeth moche reſt. in bed.
               
               
                  His epitomis of the myller and his ioly make
                  How herble was bryght as bloſſom on the ſpray
                  A wanton wenche and well coulde bake a cake
                  The myllar was loth to be out of the way
                  But yet for all that be as be may
                  Whether he rode to Swaſſham̄ or to Some
                  The myllar durſt nat leaue his wyfe at home
               
               
                  With wofully arayd and ſhamefully betrayde
                  Of his making deuoute medytacions
                  
                     Vexilla regis he deuyſed to be deſplayde,
                  With Sacris ſolempnus, and other contemplacious
                  That in them compriſed conſideracions
                  Thus paſſeth he the time both night and day
                  Somtime with ſadnes, ſomtime with play
               
               
                  Though Galene and Dioſcorides
                  With Hipocrates, and mayſter Auicen
                  By theyr phiſike done many a man eaſe
                  And though Albumaſar can the enforme and ken
                  What conſtellacions ar good or bad for men:
                  Yet whan the raine raineth and ye goſe winketh
                  Litell wotteth ye goſling what the goſe thinketh
               
               
                  He is nat wiſe agayne the ſtreame yt ſtriueth
                  Dun is in the mire, dame reche me my ſpur
                  
                     
Nedes muſt he ren that the deuill dryueth
                  Whan the ſtede is ſtolen ſparre the ſtable dur
                  A gentyll hounde ſhoulde neuer playe the kur
                  It is ſoone aſpyed where the thorne pricketh
                  And well woteth the cat whoſe berde ſhe licketh
               
               
                  With Marione clarione ſol lucerne
                  Grande iuir, of this frenche prouerbe olde
                  Howe men were wont for to diſcerne
                  By candelmas daye, what wether ſhoulde holde
                  But Marione clariōe was caught wc a colde
                  And all ouercaſt with cloudes vnkinde
                  This goodly flowre with ſtormes was vntwīde
               
               
                  This ieloffer gētill, this roſe, this lylly flowre,
                  This prime roſe pereles, this propre violet,
                  This delicate daſy, this ſtraubery prately ſet,
                  This columbyne clere and freſſheſt of coloure
                  With frowarde froſtis alas was all to fret
                  But who may haue more vngracious life
                  Than a childes byrde and a knaues wife?
               
               
                  Thinke what ye will
                  Of this wanton byll.
                  By Mary Gipcie
                  
                     Quod ſcripſi ſcripſt
                  
               
               
                  
                     Vxor tua ſicut Vitis
                  
                  
                     Habetis in cuſtodiam
                  
                  
                     Cuſtodite ſicut ſcitis.
                  
                  
                     Secundum Lucam. &c.
                  
               
               
                  Of ye bone homs of Aſſhrige beſide Barcāſtede
                  
                     
That goodly place to Skelton moſt kynde,
                  where the ſange royall is, Chriſtis blode ſo rede
                  whervpon he metrified after his mynde.
                  A pleſāter place thā Aſhrige is, hard were to fīde
                  As Skeltō reherſeth with wordes fewe & playne
                  In his Diſtichon, made on verſes twayne.
                  
                     Fraximus in cliuo frondetqne Viret ſine riuo.
                  
                  
                     Non eſt fub diuo ſimilis ſiue flumini uiuo
                  
               
               
                  The Nation of foles he lefte nat behinde,
                  Item Apollo that whirled vp his chare,
                  That made ſome to ſnurre and ſnufe in ye winde
                  It made them to ſkip, to ſtampe, and to ſtare,
                  whiche (if they be happy) haue cauſe to beware
                  In rymynge and raylynge with him for to mell
                  For drede yt he lerne them theyr. A. B. C. to ſpell
               
            
            
               Poeta Skelton
               
                  with that I ſtode vp, halfe ſodaynly afrayde
                  Supplieng to Fame, I beſought her grace
                  And that it wolde pleaſe her full tēderly I prayd
                  Out of her bookes Appollo to raſe.
                  Nay ſyr ſhe ſayd, what ſo in this place
                  Of our noble courte is ones ſpoken out
                  It muſte nedes after ren all the worlde aboute.
               
               
                  God wote theſe wordes made me full ſad
                  And whan that I ſawe it wolde no better be
                  
                     
But that my peticion wolde nat be had,
                  What ſhoulde I do, but take it in gre?
                  For by Iupiter and his high maieſtye,
                  I dyd what I coulde to ſcarpe out the ſcrolles
                  Apollo to raſe out of her ragman rolles.
               
               
                  Nowe here of it erketh me lenger to wryte,
                  To Occupacion, I wyll agayne reſort
                  whiche redde on ſtyll, as it came to her ſyght
                  Rendrynge my deuiſes I made in diſporte
                  Of the mayden of Rent called comforte
                  Of louers teſtamentes & of theyr wanton willis
                  And howe Iollas loued goodly Phillis.
               
               
                  Diodorus Siculus of my tranſlation
                  Out of freſſhe latine into our englyſſhe playne
                  Recoūtyng cōmodites of many a ſtrange nacion
                  who redeth it ones wolde rede it agayne
                  Six volumes engroſed together it doth cōtayne.
                  But whan of the laurell ſhe made reherſall
                  Al orators and poetes with other great and ſmal
               
               
                  A thouſande thouſande I trowe to my dome
                  Triumpha triumpha they cried all about
                  Of trūpettes & clariōs the noyſe went to Rome
                  The ſterry heuē me thought ſhoke with yt ſhout
                  The groūd groned & trēbled ye noyſe was ſo ſtout
                  The quene of Fame cōmaūded, ſhet faſt y• booke
                  
                     
And therwith ſodaynely out of my ſlepe I woke
               
               
                  My mīde of the great din was ſomdele amaſed
                  I wyped myn eyen for to make them clere
                  Than to the heauen ſphericall vpwarde I gaſed
                  where I ſawe Ianus with his double chere
                  Makynge his almanak for the newe yere
                  He turned his tirickes his voluell ran faſt
                  Good lucke this newe yere the olde yere is paſt.
                  
                     Mens tibi ſit conſulta petis? ſic conſule menti,
                  
                  
                     Emula ſis Iani, retro ſpeculetur et ante.
                  
               
               
                  Skeltonis alloquitur librum ſuum.
                  Ite Britannorum lux o radioſa Britannum
                  Carmina noſtra pium Veſtrum celebrate Catullum
                  Dicite Skeltonis Veſter Adonis erat.
                  Dicite Skeltonis Veſter Homerus erat.
                  Barbara cum lacio pariter iam currite Verſu.
                  Et licet eſt Verbo pars maxima texta Britanno,
                  Non magis incompta noſtra Thalia patet:
                  Eſt magis inculta nec mea Caliope.
                  Nec uos poenite at liuoris tela ſubire.
                  Nec uos poeniteat rabiem tolerare caninam,
                  Nam Maro diſſmiles non tulit ille minas,
                  Immunis necenim muſa Naſonis erat.
               
            
            
               Lenuoy.
               
                  Go litell quaire
                  Demeane you faire
                  Take no diſpaire
                  Though I you wrate
                  
                     After this rate
                  In engliſſhe letter
                  So muche the better
                  welcome ſhall ye
                  To ſome men be
                  For latin warkes
                  Be good for clarkes
                  Yet nowe and then
                  Some latin men
                  May happely loke
                  Upon your boke
                  And ſo procede
                  In you to rede
                  That ſo in dede
                  your fame may ſprede
                  In lengthe and brede
                  But that I drede
                  you ſhall haue nede
                  you for to ſpede
                  To harnes bryght
                  By force of might
                  Agaynſt enuy
                  And obloquy
                  And wote ye why
                  Nat for to fyght
                  Agaynſt diſpyght
                  Nor to derayne
                  Batayle agayne
                  Scornfull diſdayne
                  Nor for to chyde
                  Nor for to hyde
                  You cowardly
                  But courteiſly
                  That I haue pende
                  For to defende
                  Under the banner
                  Of all good maner
                  Under protection
                  Of ſad correction
                  with toleration
                  And ſupport acion
                  Of reformacion
                  If they can ſpye
                  Circumſpectly
                  Any worde defaced
                  That myght be raſed
                  Els ye ſhall praye
                  Them that ye may
                  Continue ſtyll
                  with theyr good wyll.
               
               
                  Adſereniſſimam maieſtatem regiam, pariter cū dūo Cardinalilegato a latere honoriſicatiſſimo▪ &c.
               
            
            
               
               Lautre enuoy.
               
                  
                     Perge Uber, celebrem pronus regem Veneraro
                  
                  
                     Henricum octauum, reſonans ſua premia laudis.
                  
                  
                     Cardineum dominum pariter Venerando ſalutes,
                  
                  
                     Legatum a latere & fiat memor ipſe precare,
                  
                  
                     Prebende, quam promiſet mihi credere quondam.
                  
                  
                     Meque ſuum referas pignus ſperare ſalutis
                  
                  
                     Inter ſpemque metum.
                  
               
               
                  Twene hope & drede
                  My lyfe I lede
                  But of my ſpede
                  Small ſekernes.
               
               
                  Howe be it I rede
                  Both worde & dede
                  Should be agrede
                  In noblenes.
               
               
                  Or els. &c.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  The Prolgue to the Bouge Of Courte.
               
                  IN Autumpne whan the ſonne in vyrgyne
                  By radyante hete enryped hath our corne
                  Whan luna full of mutabylyte
                  As Emperes the dyademe hath worne
                  Of our pole artyke, ſmylynge halfe in ſcorne
                  At our foly, and our vnſtedfaſtneſſe
                  The tyme whan Mars to warre hym dyd dres,
               
               
                  
                  I callynge to mynde the greate auctoryte
                  Of poetes olde, whiche full craftely
                  Under as couerte termes as coulde be
                  Can touche a trouth, and cloke ſubtylly
                  With freſſhe vtteraunce full ſentencyouſly
                  Dyuerſe in ſtyle ſome ſpared not vyce to wryte
                  Some of mortalitie nobly dyd endyte
               
               
                  Wherby I rede, theyr renome and theyr fame
                  Maye neuer dye, but euermore endure
                  I was ſore moued to a forſe the ſame
                  But Ignoraunce full ſoone dyde me dyſcure
                  And ſhewed that in this arte I was not ſure
                  For to Illumine ſhe ſayd I was to dulle
                  Aduyſynge me my penne awaye to pulle
               
               
                  And not to wryte, for he ſo wyll atteyne
                  Excedyng ferther than his connynge is
                  His heed maye be harde, but feble is brayne
                  Yet haue I knowen ſuche er this
                  But of reproche ſurely he maye not mys
                  That clymmeth hyer than he may fotinge haue
                  What and he ſlyde downe, who ſhall hym ſaue?
               
               
                  Thus vp & downe my mynde was drawen & caſt
                  That I ne wyſte what to do waa beſte
                  So ſore enwered that I was at the laſte
                  Enforſed to ſlepe, and for to take ſome reſte
                  
                     
And to lye downe as ſoone as I my dreſte
                  At har wyche porte ſlumbrynge as I laye
                  In myne hoſtes houſe called powers keye
               
               
                  Me thought I ſawe, a ſhyppe goodly of ſayle
                  Come ſaylyng forth in to that hauen brood
                  Her takelyng ryche and of hye apparayle
                  She kaſt an anker and there ſhe laye at rode
                  Marchauntes her borded to ſe what ſhe had
                  There in they founde Royall marchaundyſe
                  Fraghted with pleaſure of what ye could deuiſe
               
               
                  But than I thought I wolde not dwell behynde
                  Amange all other I put myſelfe in prece
                  Than there could I none aquentaunce fynde
                  There was moche noyſe anone one cryed ceſe
                  Sharpely cōmaūdynge eche man holde his pece
                  Mayſters he ſayd, the ſhyp that ye here ſe
                  The bowge of courte it hyghte for certeynte.
               
               
                  The owner therof is lady of eſtate
                  Whoos name to tell is dame ſaunce pere
                  Her marchaundyſe is ryche and fortunate
                  But who will haue it muſte paye therfore dere
                  This royall chaffre that is ſhypped here
                  Is called fauoure to ſtonde in her good grace
                  Than ſhould ye ſe there preſſynge in a pace.
               
               
                  
                  Of one and other that wolde this lady ſe
                  Which ſat behynde a tranes of ſylke fyne
                  Of golde of teſſew the fyneſt that myght be
                  In a trone whiche ferre clere dyd ſhyne
                  Than Phebus in his ſpere celeſtyne
                  Whoos beautie bonoure goodly porte
                  I haue to lytyll connynge to reporte
               
               
                  But of eche thynge there as I toke hede
                  Amonge all other was wryten in her trone
                  In golde leters this worde whiche I dyd rede
                  Garde le fortune que eſt mauelz et bone
                  And as I ſtode redyng this verſe myſelfe alone
                  Her chyef gentylwoman daunger by her name
                  Gaue me ataunte and ſayd I was to blame.
               
               
                  To be ſo perte to preſe ſo proudely vppe
                  She ſayd ſhe trowed that I had eten ſauſe
                  She aſked yf euer I dranke of ſauces cuppe
                  And I than ſoftely anſwered to that clauſe
                  That ſo to ſaye, I had gyuen her no cauſe
                  Than aſked ſhe me Syr ſo god the ſpede
                  What is thy name? and I ſayd it was drede
               
               
                  What moued the quod ſhe hydder to come
                  Forſoth quod I to bye ſome of your ware
                  And with that worde on me ſhe gaue a glome
                  With browes bente and gan on me to ſtare
                  
                     
Full daynouſly and fro me ſhe dyd fare
                  Leuynge me ſtondynge as a maſed man
                  To whome there came an other gentilwoman.
               
               
                  Deſire her name was and ſo ſhe me folde
                  Sayenge to me brother be of good chere
                  Abaſſhe you not but hardely be bolde
                  Auaunce yourſelfe to aproche and come nere
                  What though our chaffer be neuer ſo dere
                  Yet I auyſe you to ſpeke for ony drede
                  Who ſpareth to ſpeke, in faith he ſpareth to ſped
               
               
                  Maiſtres quod I, I haue none aquentaunce
                  That wyll for me be medyatoure and mene
                  But this an other I haue but ſmale ſubſtaunce
                  Peace quod Deſyre ye ſpeke not worth a bene
                  Yf ye haue not in fayth I will you lene
                  A precious Iewell no rycher in this londe
                  Bone auenture haue here nowe in your honde.
               
               
                  Shyfte now therwith let ſe as ye can
                  In Bowge of courte cheuyſaunce to make
                  For I dare ſaye that there nys erthly man
                  But and he can bone auenture take
                  There can no fauoure nor frēdſhyp him forſake
                  Bone auenture may brynge you in ſuche caſe
                  That ye ſhall ſtonde in fauoure and in grace.
               
               
                  
                  But of one thynge I warne you er I goo
                  She that ſtyreth the ſhyp make her your frende
                  Mayſtres quod I, I praye you tel me why ſo
                  And how I may that waye & meanes fynde
                  Forſoth quod ſhe how euer blowe the wynde
                  Fortune gydeth and ruleth all our ſhyppe
                  Whom ſhe hateth ſhall ouer ye ſhyp borde ſkyp.
               
               
                  Whome ſhe loueth of all pleaſure is riche
                  Whyles ſhe laugheth and hath luſte for to playe
                  Whome ſhe hateth ſhe caſteth in the dyche
                  For whā ſhe froūeth ſhe thinketh to make a fray
                  She cheryſſhed hym and hym ſhe chaſſeth away
                  Alas quod I how myght I haue her ſure
                  In fayth quod ſhe by bone auenture.
               
               
                  Thus in a row of marchauntes a grete route
                  Sued to fortune that ſhe wolde be theyr frynde
                  They thronge in faſte and flocked her aboute
                  And I with them prayed her to haue in mynde
                  She promyſed to vs all ſhe wolde be kynde
                  of bowge of court ſhe aſketh what we wold haue
                  And we aſked fauoure, and fauoure ſhe vs gaue
               
               Thus endeth the Prologue.
            
            
               Drede.
               
                  THe ſayle is vp fortune ruleth our helme
                  We wante no wynde to paſſe now ouer all
                  
                     
Fauoure we haue tougher then any elme
                  That will abide and neuer frome vs fall
                  But vnder honie ofte time lieth bytter gall
                  For as me thoughte in our ſhippe I did ſe
                  Full ſubtell perſones in nombre foure and thre
               
               
                  The firſt was fauell full of flaterie
                  With fables falſe that well coude fayne a tale
                  The ſeconde was Suſpecte whiche that dayly
                  Myſdempte eche man with face deedly & pale
                  And Haruy haſter that well coulde picke a male
                  With other foure of theyr affynyte
                  Dyſdayne. Ryotte. Dyſſymuler, Subtylte.
               
               
                  Fortune theyr frende wt whom oft ſhe dyd daūce
                  They coude not fayle they thought they were ſo ſure
                  And oftentimes I wold myſelfe auaunce
                  With them to make ſolace and pleaſure
                  But my dyſporte they coulde not well endure
                  They ſayd they hated for to dele with Drede
                  Than Fauell gan with fayre ſpeche me to ſede
               
            
            
               Fauell,
               
                  Nothinge erthly that I wonder ſo ſore
                  As of your conninge that is ſo excellent
                  Deynte to haue with vs ſuche one in ſtore
                  So vertuouſly that hath his dayes ſpente
                  Fortune to you gyftes of grace hathe lente
                  Lo what it is a man to haue conninge
                  
                     
All erthly treſoure it is ſurmountinge
               
               
                  Ye be an apte man as ony can be found
                  To dwell with vs & ſerue my ladyes grace
                  Ye be to her yea worth a thouſande pounde
                  I herde her ſpeke of you within ſhorte ſpace
                  when there were dyuerſe yt ſore did you manace
                  And though I ſaye it, I was myſelfe your frend
                  For here be dyuerſe to you that be vnkinde
               
               
                  But this one thinge ye maye be ſure of me
                  For by that lorde that bought dere all mankinde
                  I cannot flatter I muſt be playne to the
                  And ye nede ought man ſhew to me your minde
                  For ye haue me whome faythfull ye ſhall finde
                  Whyles I haue ought by god yu ſhalte not lacke
                  And if nede be, a bolde worde I dare cracke
               
               
                  Naye naye be ſure whiles I am on your ſyde
                  Ye may not fall truſte me ye maye not fayle
                  Ye ſtande in fauoure and fortune is your gyde
                  And as ſhe wyll ſo ſhall our greate ſhyppe ſayle
                  Theſe lewd cok witts ſhal neuermore preuaile
                  Againſte you hardely therfore be not afrayde
                  Fare well till ſoone but no worde that I ſayde
               
            
            
               Drede.
               
                  Than thanked I him for his great gentylnes
                  But as me thought he ware on him a cloke
                  
                     
That lyned was with doubtfull doublenes
                  Me thoughte of wordes that he had full a poke
                  His ſtomake ſtuffed ofte tymes dyde reboke
                  Suſpycyon me thoughte mett hym at a brayde
                  And I drewe nere to herke what they two ſayde
               
               
                  In fayth qd ſuſpecte, ſpake drede no worde of me
                  Why what than wylte thou lette men to ſpeke
                  He ſayth he can not well accorde with the
                  Twyſſhē qd ſuſpecte go
                        •
                      playe him I ne reke
                  By chryſt qd fauell drede is ſoleyne freke
                  What lete vs holde hym vp man for a whyle
                  Ye ſo qd ſuſpecte, he maye vs bothe begyle
               
               
                  And whan he came walkinge ſoberly
                  With whom, and, ha, and with a croked loke
                  Me thoughte his heed was full of gelouſy
                  His eyen rollynge his hondes faſt they quoke
                  And to me warde the ſtrayghte way he toke
                  God ſped brother to me quod he than
                  And thus to talke with me he began,
               
            
            
               Suſpicion
               
                  Ye remembre the gentylman ryght now
                  That cōmaund wt you me thought a party ſpake
                  Beware of hym for I make god auowe
                  He wyll begyle you and ſpeke fayre to your face
                  Ye neuer dwelte in ſuche an other place
                  For here is none that dare well other truſte
                  
                     
But I wolde tell you athinge and I durſte
               
               
                  Speke he a fayth no wordeto you of me
                  I wote and he dyde ye wolde me tell
                  I haue a fauoure to you wherof it be
                  That I muſte ſhewe you muche of my coūſelle
                  But I wonder what the deuyll of hell
                  He ſayd of me whan he with you dyd talke
                  By myne aduyſe vſe not with him to walke
               
               
                  The ſoueraynſt thinge that any man may haue
                  Is litill to ſaye, and muche to here and ſe
                  For but I truſted you ſo god me ſaue
                  I wolde nothing ſo playne be
                  To you onely me thynke I durſte ſhryue me
                  For nowe am I plenarely dyſpoſed
                  To ſhewe you thyngs that may not be diſcloſed
               
            
            
               Drede,
               
                  Than I aſſured hym my fydelyte
                  His counſeyle ſecrete neuer to dyſcure
                  Yf he could fynde in herte to truſte me
                  Els I prayed hym with all my beſy cure
                  To kepe it hymſelfe for than he myght be ſure
                  That no man erthly could hym bewreye
                  Whyles of his mynd it were lockte with yt keye
               
               
                  By god quod he this and thus it is
                  And of his mynde he ſhewed me al and ſome
                  
                     
Farre well quod he we will talke more of this
                  So he departed there he wolde be come
                  I dare not ſpeke I promiſed to be dome
                  But as I ſtode muſinge in my minde
                  Haruy haſter came lepinge light as linde,
               
               
                  Upon his breſte he bare a verſinge boxe
                  His throte was clere and luſtely coulde fayne
                  Me thought his gowne was all furred with foxe
                  And euer he ſange, ſithe I am nothinge plaine
                  To kepe him from pikinge it was a grete paine
                  He gaſed on me with his gotiſhe berde
                  Whan I loked on him me purſe was halfaferde
               
            
            
               Heruy Haſter
               
                  Syr god you ſaue why loke ye ſo ſadde
                  What thinge is that I maie do for you
                  A wonder thinge that ye waxe not madde
                  For and I ſtudie ſholde, as ye do nowe
                  My witte wolde waſte I make god auowe
                  Tell me your minde me thinke ye make a verſe
                  I could it ſkan and ye wolde reherſe
               
               
                  But to the pointe ſhortelie to procede
                  Wher hathe your dwelling ben er ye came here
                  For as I trowe I haue ſene you in dede
                  Er this whan that ye made me roiall chere
                  Holde vp the helme loke vp & lete god ſtere
                  
                     
I wolde be merie what wind that euer blowe
                  Heue & how rombelow row yt bote normā rowe
                  Princes of youghtecan ye ſinge by rote
                  Or ſhall I ſaile with you a feloſhip aſſaie
                  For on the booke I can not ſinge a note
                  Wolde to god it wolde pleaſe you ſome daye
                  A ballade booke before me for to laye
                  And lerne me to ſinge (Re mi fa ſol)
                  And when I faile bobbe me on the noll
               
               
                  Loo what is to you a pleaſure great
                  To haue that coninge & waies that ye haue
                  By goddes ſoule I wonder howe ye gete
                  Soo great pleaſure or who to you it gaue
                  Sir pardone me I am an homelie knaue
                  To be with you thus perte and thus bolde
                  But ye be welcome to our houſſholde
               
               
                  And I dare ſaie there is no man here Inne
                  But wolde be glade of your companie
                  I wiſte neuer man that ſo ſoone coude winne
                  The fauoure that ye haue with my lady
                  I praye to god that it maie neuer dy
                  It is your fortune for to haue that grace
                  As I be ſaued it is a wonder caſe
               
               
                  For as for me I ſerued here many a daie
                  
                     
And yet vnneth I can haue my lyuynge
                  But I requyre you no worde that I ſaye
                  For and I knowe ony erthly thynge
                  That is agayne you ye ſhall haue wetynge
                  And ye be welcome ſyr ſo god me ſaue
                  I hope here after a frende of you to haue
               
            
            
               Drede.
               
                  With that as he departed ſo frome
                  Anone there mette with hym as me thoughte
                  A man, but wonderly beſene was he
                  He loked hawtie he ſette eche man at nouhte
                  His gawdy garment wt ſcornes was all wrought
                  With Indygnacion lyned was his hode
                  He frowned as he wolde ſwere by cockes blode.
               
               
                  He bote the lyppe he loked paſſynge coye
                  His face was belymmed as byes had hym ſtoūge
                  It was no tyme with hym to Iape nor toye
                  Enuye hath waſted his lyuer & his lounge
                  Hatred by the herte ſo had hym wrounge
                  That he loked pale as aſſhes to my ſyghte
                  Dyſdayne I wene his comerous crabes hyghte
               
               
                  To heruy haſter than he ſpake of me
                  And I drewe nere to harke what they two ſayde
                  Now quod Dyſdayne as I ſhall ſaued be
                  I haue grete ſcorne & am ryght euyll apayed
                  Than quod Heruy why arte thou ſo dyſmayde
                  
                     
By chryſt quod he for it is ſhame to ſaye
                  To ſe Iohan dawes that came but yeſter daye
               
               
                  How he is now taken in conceyte
                  This doctour dawcocke Drede I wene he hyght
                  By goddes bones but yf we haue ſome ſleyte
                  It is lyke he wyll ſtonde in your lyghte
                  By god quod heruy & it ſo happen myghte
                  Lete vs therfore ſhortly at a worde
                  Fynde ſome mene to caſte hym ouer the borde
               
               
                  By him yt me bought than quod Dyſdayne
                  I wonder ſore he is in ſuche conceite
                  Turde qd Haſter I wyll the nothynge ſayne
                  There muſt for him be layde ſome prety beyte
                  We tweyne I trowe be not without dyſceyte
                  Fyrſte pycke a quarell & fall out with him then
                  And ſo out face hym with a carde of ten,
               
               
                  Forth with he made on me a proude aſſawte
                  With ſcorfull loke meuyd all in moode
                  He wente about to take me in a fawte
                  He froūde he ſtared he ſtampped where he ſtoode
                  I loked on hym I wende he had be woode
                  He ſet the arme proudly vnder the ſyde
                  And in this wiſe he gan with me to chyde
               
            
            
               Dyſdayne
               
                  Remembreſt thou what thou ſayd yeſter nyghte
                  
                     
Wilte thou abide by the wordes againe
                  By god I haue of the now grete diſpite
                  I ſhall the angre ones in euery vaine
                  It is grete ſcorne to ſe ſuche an haine
                  As thou arte one that came but yeſterdaie
                  With vs olde ſeruantes ſuche maiſters to plaie
               
               
                  I tell the I am of countenaunce
                  What weneſt I were, I trowe yu know not me,
                  By goddes woundes but for diſpleſaunce
                  Of my querell ſoone wolde I venged be
                  But no force I ſhall ones mete with the
                  Come whan it will oppoſe the I ſhall
                  What ſom euer auenture therof fall
               
               
                  Troweſt thou dreuill I ſaie thou gawdie knaue
                  That I haue deinte to ſe the cheriſſhed thus
                  By goddis ſide my ſworde thy berde ſhall ſhaue
                  well ones thou ſhalte be cherined I wus
                  Naie ſtrawe for tales thou ſhalt not rule vs
                  we be thy betters and ſo thou ſhalte vs take
                  Or we ſhall the out of thy clothes ſhake
               
            
            
               Drede,
               
                  With that came Ryotte ruſhing al at ones
                  A ruſtie galande to ragged and to rente
                  And on the borde he whirled a paire of bones
                  Quarter treye dews he clattered as he went
                  Noue haue at all by ſaint thomas of kente
                  
                     
And euer he threwe & kyſt I wote nere what
                  His here was growen thorowe out his hat
               
               
                  Than I behylde how he dyſgyſed was
                  His heed was heuy for watchinge ouer night
                  His eyeu blered his face ſhone like a glas
                  His gowne ſo ſhorte that it ne couer myght
                  His rumpe he wente ſo all for ſomer light
                  His hoſe was garded with a lyſte of grene
                  Yet at the knee they were broken I wene
               
               
                  His cote was checkerd with patches rede & blewe
                  Of kyrkeby kendall was his ſhorte demye
                  And ay he ſange in fayth decon thou crewe
                  His elbowe bare he ware his gere ſo nye
                  His noſe droppinge, his lippes were full drye
                  And by his ſyde his whynarde & his pouche
                  The deuyll might dance therin for any crouche
               
               
                  Counter he coude (O lux) vpon a potte
                  And eeſtriche fedder of a capons tayle
                  He ſet vp fraſſhely vpon his hat a lofte
                  What reuell route quod he and gan to rayle
                  How ofte he hit Ienet on the tayle
                  Of felyce fetewſe and lytell prety cate
                  How ofte he knocked at her klycket gate
               
               
                  What ſhould I tell more of his rybaudrye
                  
                     
I was a ſhamed ſo to here hym prate
                  He had no pleaſure but in harlotrye
                  Ay quod he in the deuylles date
                  What arte thou I ſawe the nowe but late
                  Forſoth quod I in this courte I dwel nowe
                  Welcome quod Ryote I make god auowe
               
            
            
               Ryoct
               
                  And ſyr in fayth why comſte not vs amonge
                  To make the mery as other felowes done
                  Thou muſt ſware and ſtare man aldaye longe
                  And wake all nyght and ſlepe tyll it be none
                  Thou mayſte not ſtudye or muſe on the mone
                  This worlde is nothing but ete drynke and ſlepe
                  And thus with vs good company to kepe
               
               
                  Plucke vp thyne herte vpon a mery pinne
                  And let vs laugh a plucke or twayne at nale
                  What the deuyll man myrth is here within
                  What lo man ſe here of dyce a bale
                  A brydelynge caſte for that is in thy male
                  Now haue at all that lyeth vpon the burde
                  Fye on this dyce they be not worth a turde
               
               
                  Haue at the haſarde or at the doſen browne
                  Or els I pas a penny to a pounde.
                  Now wolde to god thou wold leye money down
                  Lorde how that I wolde caſte it full rounde
                  Ay in mp pouche a buckell I haue founde
                  
                     
The armes of calyce I haue no coyne nor croſſe
                  I am not happye I renne ay on the loſſe
               
               
                  Now renne muſte I to the ſtewes ſyde
                  To wete yf malkyn my lēman haue gete ought
                  I lete her to hyre that men may on her ryde
                  Her armes eaſy ferre and nere is ſoughte
                  By goddis ſydes ſyns I her thyder broughte
                  She hath gote me more money with her tayle
                  Than hath ſome ſhyppe that into bordews ſayle
               
               
                  Had I as good an hors as ſhe is a mare
                  I durſte auenture to Iourney through Fraūce
                  Who rydeth on her he nedeth not to care
                  For ſhe is truſſed for to breke a launce
                  It is a curtel that well can wynche & praunce
                  To her wyll I nowe all my pouerty lege
                  And tyll I come haue here myne hat to plege
               
            
            
               Drede
               
                  Gone is this knaue this rybaude foule and leude
                  He ranne as faſte as euer that he myghte
                  Unthryftynes in him maye well be ſhewed
                  For whome tyborne groneth both daie & nighte
                  And as I ſtode and caſte a ſyde my ſyghte
                  Daſdayue I ſawe with Dyſſymulacyon
                  Standynge in ſadde communicacyon
               
               
                  But there was poyntynge & noddyng wt ye hede
                  
                     
And many wordes ſayd in ſecrete wyſe
                  They wandred ay and ſtode ſtyll in no ſtede
                  Me thoughte alwaye Diſſymular dyde deuyſe
                  Me paſſynge ſore myne herte than gan aryſe
                  I dempte and drede their talkynge was not good
                  Anone dyſſimular came where I ſtode
               
               
                  Than in his hode I ſawe there faces tweyne
                  That one was lene & lyke a pyned ghoſt
                  That other loked as he wolde me haue ſlayne
                  And to me warde as he gan for to cooſt
                  Whan that he was euen at me almooſt
                  I ſawe a knyfe hyd in his one ſleue
                  Wheron was wryten this worde myſch efe
               
               
                  And in his other ſleue me thought I ſawe
                  A ſpone of golde, full of hony ſwete
                  To fede a fole, and for to preye a dawe
                  And on that ſleue theſe wordes were wrete
                  A falſe abſtracte cometh frome a fals concrete
                  His hode was ſyde his cope was roſet graye
                  Theſe were the wordes yt he to me dyde ſaye.
               
            
            
               Dyſſymulacyon.
               
                  How do ye maiſter ye loke ſo ſoberly
                  As I be ſaued at the dredefull daye
                  It is a perilous vyce this enuy
                  Alas a connynge man ne dwelle maye
                  In no place well but foles with fraye
                  
                     
But as for that conninge hath no foo
                  Saue him that noughte can ſcripture ſaith ſoo.
               
               
                  I knowe your vertue and your lytterkture
                  By that lytell conninge that I haue
                  Ye be maligned ſore I you enſure
                  But ye haue crafte yourſelfe alwaie to ſaue
                  It is grete ſkorne to ſe a miſproude knaue
                  With a clerke that conning is to prate
                  Let them go, lowſe them in the deuilles date
               
               
                  For all be it that this longe not to me
                  Yet on my backe I bere ſuche lewde delyng
                  Right now I ſpake with one I trowe I ſe
                  But what a ſtrawe I maye not tell all thing
                  By god I ſaie there is grete herte brenning
                  Betwene the perſonne ye wote of Iou
                  Alas I coulde not dele ſo with an yew
               
               
                  I wold eche man were as playne as I
                  It is a worlde I ſaye to here of ſome
                  I hate this fayninge fye vpon it fye
                  A man can not wote where to become
                  I wis I coulde tell but humlery home
                  I dare not ſpeke we be ſo layde awaite
                  For all our courte is full of deſceite
               
               
                  Now by ſaint fraūcys that holy man & frere
                  
                     
I hate this wayes agayne you that they take
                  Where I as you I wolde ryde them full nere
                  And by my trouthe but yf an ende they make
                  Yet wyll I ſaye ſome wordes for your ſake
                  That ſhall them angre I holde thereon a grote
                  For ſome ſhall wene be hanged by the throte.
               
               
                  I haue a ſtoppynge oyſter in my poke
                  Truſte me and yf it come to a nede
                  But I am lothe for to reyſe a ſmoke
                  Yf ye could be otherwyſe agrede
                  And ſo I wolde it were ſo god me ſpede
                  For this maye brede to a confuſyon
                  Without god make a good concluſyon.
               
               
                  Naye ſe where yonder ſtondeth the feder man
                  A flaterynge knaue & falſe he is god wote
                  The dreuill ſtondeth to herken and he can
                  It were more thryfte he bought him a new cote
                  It will not be, his purſe is not on flote
                  All that he woreth it is borowed ware
                  His wytte is thynne his hode is threde bare.
               
               
                  More could I ſaye but what this is ynowe
                  A dewe till ſoone we ſhall ſpeke more of this
                  Ye muſte be ruled as I ſhall tell you howe
                  Amendes maye be of that is now a mys
                  And I am your ſyr ſo haue I blys
                  
                     
In euery poynte that I can do or ſaye
                  Gyue me your honde farewell & haue good daye
               
            
            
               Drede
               
                  Sodaynly as he departed me fro
                  Came preſſynge in one in a wonder araye
                  Er I was ware behynde me he ſayde bo
                  Than I aſtonyed of that ſodeyne fraye
                  Sterte all at ones I lyked nothynge his playe
                  For yf I had not quyckely fledde the touche
                  He had plucte oute the nobles of my pouche.
               
               
                  He was truſſed in a garmente ſtrayte
                  I haue not ſene ſuche an others page
                  For he coude well vpon a caſket wayte
                  His body all pounſed and garded lyke a cage
                  Lyghte lyme fynger he toke none other wage
                  Harken quod he lo here myne honde in thyne
                  To vs welcome thou arte by ſainct Quyntyne.
               
            
            
               ¶ Diſceyte.
               
                  But by that lorde that is one two and thre
                  I haue an errande to rounde in your ere
                  He tolde me ſo by god ye may truſt me
                  Parte remembre whan ye were there
                  There I wynked on you, wote ye not where
                  In (A) loco I mene iuxta (B)
                  Woo is hym that is blynde and maye not ſe
               
               
                  But to here the ſubtylte and the crafte
               
               
                  〈2… pages missing〉
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
And the ragged ray
               Of Galaway.
            
            
               ¶ Dunbar, Dunde
               Ye ſhall trowe me
               Falſe ſcottes are ye
               Your hartes ſore faynted
               And ſo attaynted
               Lyke cowardes ſtarke
               At the caſtell of warke
               By the water of Twede
               Ye had euill ſpede.
               Lyke cankerd curres
               Ye loſte your ſpurres
               For in that fraye
               ye ranne awaye
               With hey dogge hay.
            
            
               For ſir William Lyle
               Within ſhorte whyle
               That valiaunt knyght
               Putte you to flyght
               By his valyaunce
               Two thauſande of Fraunte
               There he putte backe
               To your great lacke
               And vtter ſhame
               Of your ſcottyſſhe name.
            
            
               
               Your chefe Cheftayne
               Uoyde of all brayne
               Duke of all Albany
               Than ſhamefuly
               He reculed backe
               To his great lacke
               Whan he herde tell
               That my Lorde Amrell
               Was comyng downe
               To make hym frowne
               And to make hym lowre
               With the noble powre
               Of my lorde Cardynall
               As an hooſt royall
               After the auncient manner
               With ſainct Cutberdes banner
               And ſainct Williams alſo
               Your capitayne ranne to go
               To go to go to go
               And brake vp all his hooſt
               For all his crake and boſt
               Lyke a cowarde knyght
               He fledde and durſt nat fyght:
               He ranne awaye by night
            
            
               But now muſt I
               Your duke aſcry, Of Albany
               With a worde or twayne
               
                  
In ſentence playne:
            
            
               Ye duke ſo doutty
               So ſterne ſo ſtoutty
               In ſhorte ſentens
               Of your pretens
               What is the grounde?
               Breuely and rounde
               To me expounde
            
            
               Or els wyll I
               Euydently
               Shewe as it is
               For the cauſe is this
               Howe ye pretende
               For to defende
               The yonge Scottyſhe kyng
               But ye meane a thyng
               And ye coude bryng
               The matter about
               To putte his eyes out
               And put hym downe
               And ſet hys crowne
               On your owne heed
               Whan he were deed
            
            
               Such trechery: And traytory
               Is all your caſt.
               Thus ye haue compaſt
               With the frenche kyng
               A fals rekenyng
               
                  
To enuade Englande
               As I vnderſtande.
               But our kyng royall
               Whoſe name ouer all
               Noble Henry the eyght
               Shall caſt a beyght
               And ſette ſuche a ſnare
               That ſhall caſt you in care
               Bothe kyng Fraunces and the
               That knowen ye ſhall be
               For the mooſt recrayd
               Cowardes afrayd
               And falſeſt forſworne
               That euer were borne.
            
            
               O ye wretched ſcottes
               Ye puaunt pyſpottes
               It ſhalbe your lottes
               To be knytte vp with knottes
               Of halters and ropes
               About your traytours throtes:
            
            
               Oſcottes pariured
               Unhaply vred
               Ye may be aſſured
               Your falſhod diſcured
               It is, & ſhal be. Frō the ſcottiſh ſe
               Unto Gabione
               For ye be falſe echone
               
                  
Falſe and falſe agayne
               Neuer true nor playne
               But flery, flatter and fayne
               And euer to remayne
               In wretched beggary
               And maungy miſery
               In louſy lothſumneſſe
               And ſcabbed ſcorffyneſſe
               And in abhominacion
               Of all maner of nacion
               Nacion mooſt in hate
               Proude and poore of ſtate:
            
            
               Twyt ſcot go kepe thy den
               Mell nat with Englyſhe men
               Thou dyd nothyng but barke
               At the caſtell of warke:
               Twyt ſcot yet agayne ones
               We ſhall breke thy bones
               And hang you vpon polles
               And byrne you all to colles
               With twyt ſcot, twyt ſcot twyt
               Walke ſcot go begge a byt
               Of brede, at ylke mannes hecke
               The fynde ſcot breke thy necke
               Twyt ſcot agayne I ſaye
               Twyt ſcot of Galaway
               Twyt ſcot, ſhake thy dogge hay
               
                  
Twyt ſcot thou ran away
               We ſet nat a flye
            
            
               By your duke of Albany
               We ſet nat a prane
               By ſuche a dronken drane
               We ſet nat a myght
               By ſuche a cowarde knyght
               Suche a proude palyarde
               Suche a ſkyrgaliarde
               Suche a ſtarke cowarde
               Suche a proude pultrowne
               Suche a foule Coyſtrowne
               Suche a doutty dagſwayne
               Sende him to Faunce agayne
               To bring with hym more brayne
               From kynge Fraunces of Frauns
               God ſende them bothe myſchauns:
            
            
               Ye ſcottes all the rable
               Ye ſhall neuer be hable
               With vs for to compare
               What though ye ſtāpe and ſtare
               God ſende you ſorow and care
            
            
               With vs whan euer ye mell
               Yet we bear away the bell
               Whan ye cankerd knaues
               Muſt crepe in to your caues
               Your heedes for to hyde
               For ye dare nat abyde.
            
            
               
               Sir duke of Albany
               Right inconuenyently
               Ye rage and ye raue
               And your worſhyp depraue
               Nat lyke duke Hamylcar
               With the Romayns yt made war
               Nor lyke his ſonne Hanyball
               Nor lyke duke Haſdruball
               Of Cartage in Aphrike
               Yet ſomwhat ye be lyke
               In ſome of their condicions
               And their falſe ſedycions
               And their dealyng double
               And their weywarde trouble:
               But yet they were bolde
               And manly manyfolde
               Their enemyes to aſſayle
               In playn felde and battayle.
            
            
               But ye and your hooſt
               Full of bragge and booſt
               And full of waſte wynde
               Howe ye wyll beres bynde
               And the deuill downe dynge
               Yet ye dare do nothynge
               But lepe away lyke frogges
               And hyde you vnder logges
               Lyke pygges and lyke hogges
               And lyke maungy dogges.
               
                  
What an army were ye?
               Or what actyuyte?
               Is in you beggers braules
               Full of ſcabbes and ſcaules:
               Of vermyne and of lyce
               and of all maner vyce.
            
            
               Syr duke: nay ſyr ducke
               Syr drake of the lake: ſir ducke
               Of the donghyll, for ſmalllucke
               Ye haue in feates of warre
               Ye make nought but ye marre
               Ye are a fals entruſar
               And a fals abuſar
               And an vntrewe knyght
               Thou haſt to lytell myght
               Agaynſt Englande to fyght
               Thou art a graceles wyght
               To put thyſelfe to flyght
               A vengeaunce and diſpight
               On the muſt nedes lyght
               That durſt nat byde the ſight
               Of my lorde amrell
               Of chiualry the well
               Of knighthode the floure
               In euery marciall ſhoure
               The noble erle of Surrey
               That put the in ſuche fray
               Thou durſt no felde derayne
               
                  
Nor no batayle mayntayne
               Againſt our ſtonge captaine
               But thou ran home agayne
               For feare thou ſhoulde be ſlayne
               Lyke a ſcottyſhe keteryng
               That durſt abyde no reknyng
               Thy hert wolde nat ſerue the
               The fynde of hell mot ſterue the.
            
            
               No man hath harde
               Of ſuche a cowarde
               And ſuch a mad ymage
               Caried in a cage:
               As it were a cotage
               Or of ſuchea mawment
               Caryed in a tent
               In a tent: nay nay
               But in a mountayne gay
               Lyke a great hill. For awyndmil
               Therin to couche ſtyll
               That no man hym kyll
               As it were a gote
               In aſhepe cote
               About hym a parke
               Of a madde warke
               Men call it a toyle
               Therin lyke a royle
               Sir Dunkanye dared
               And thus ye prepared
               Youre carkas to kepe
               
                  
Lyke a ſely ſhepe
               
                  
                     •
                   ſhepe of Cottyſwolde
               From rayne and from colde
               And from raynning of rappes
               And ſuche after clappes
               Thus in your cowardly caſtell
               Ye decte you to dwell
               Suche a captayne of fors
               It made no great fors
               If that ye had tane
               Your laſt deedly bane
               With a gon ſtone
               To make you to grone
               But hyde the ſir Topias
               Nowe into the caſtell of Bas
               And lurke there lyke an as
               With ſome ſcotyſhe as
               With dugges dugges dugges
               I ſhrewe thy ſcottiſhe lugges
               Thy munpynnys and thy crag
               For thou can not but brag
               Lyke a ſcottyſhe hag
               A due nowe ſir wrig wrag
               A due ſir dalyrag
            
            
               Thy mellyng is but mockyng
               Thou mayſt giue vp thy cocking
               Gyue it vp. And cry creke
               Lyke an huddy peke:
               
                  
Wherto ſhuld I more ſpeke
               Of ſuche a farly freke
               Of ſuche an horne keke
               Of ſuche an bolde captayne
               That dare nat turne agayne
               Nor durſt nat crak aworde
               Nor durſt nat drawe his ſwerde
               Agaynſt the lyon white
               But ran away quyte
               He ran away by nyght
               In the owle flyght
               Lyke a cowarde knyght
               A due cowarde a due
               Fals knight and mooſte vntrue
               I render the fals rebelle
               To the flingande fende of helle.
            
            
               Harke yet ſir duke aworde
               In erneſt or in borde
               What haue ye villayn forged?
               And virulently dyſgorged
               As though ye wolde parbrake
               Your auauns to make
               With wordes enboſed
               Ungracioufly engroſed
               Howe ye wyll vndertake
               Our royall kyng to make
               His owne realme to forſake
               Suche lewde langage ye ſpake:
            
            
               
               Sir Dūkan in the deuill waye
               Be well ware what ye ſay.
               Ye ſaye that he and ye
               Whyche he and ye? let ſe
               Ye meane Fraūces french kyng
               Shulde bring about that thing
               I ſay thou lewde lurdayne
               That neyther of you twayne
               So hardy nor ſo bolde
               His countenaunce to beholde
               If our mooſt royall Harry
               Lyſt with you to varry
               Full ſoone ye ſhould miſcary
               For ye durſt nat tarry
               With hym to ſtryue a ſtownde
               If he on you but frounde
               Nat for a thouſande pouned
               Ye durſt byde on the grounde
               Ye wolde ryn away rounde
               And cowardly fourne your backes
               For all your comly crackes
               And for feare par caſe
               To loke hym in the face
               Ye wolde defoyle the place
               And ryn your way apace
               Thoughe I trym you thys frace
               With englyſhe ſomwhat baſe
               Yet ſaua voſter grace
               
                  
Therby I ſhall purchace
               No diſpleſaunt rewarde
               If ye wele can regarde
               Your cankarde cowardneſſe
               And your ſhamfull doubleneſſe.
            
            
               ¶ Are ye nat frantyke madde?
               And wretchedly beſtadde
               To rayle agaynſt his grace
               That ſhall bring you full bace
               And ſet you in ſuche caſe
               That bytwene you twayne
               There ſhalbe drawen a trayne
               That ſhalbe to your payne
               To flye ye ſhalbe fayne
               And neuer tourne agayne:
               What wold Fraūces our friar?
               Be ſuche a falſe lyar
               So madde a cordylar
               So madde a murmurar
               Ye muſe ſomwhat to far
               All out of ioynt ye iar
               God let you neuer thriue
               Wene ye daucockes to driue
               Our kyng, out of his reme
               Ge heme ranke ſcot ge heme
               With fonde Fraunces french kyng
               Our mayſter ſhall you brynge
               
                  
I truſt to lowe eſtate
               And mate you with chek mate:
            
            
               Your braynes are ydell
               It is time for you to brydell
               And pype in a quibyble
               For it is impoſſible
               For you to bring about
               Our kyng for to dryue out
               Of this his realme royall
               And lande imperiall
               So noble a prince as he
               In all actyuite
               Of hardy merciall actes
               Fortunate in all his faytes:
            
            
               And nowe I wyll me dreſſe
               His valiaunce to expreſſe
               Though inſufficient am I
               His grace to magnify
               And laude equiualently
               Howe be it loyally
               After myne allegyaunce
               My pen I will auaunce
               To extoll his noble grace
               In ſpyght of thy cowardes face
               In ſpyght of kyng Fraunces
               Deuoyde of all nobles
               Deuoyde of good corage
               Deuoyde of wyſdome ſage
               
                  
Mad: frantyke, and ſauage
               Thus he dothe diſparage
               His blode with fonde dotage:
            
            
               A prince to play the page
               It is a recheleſſe rage
               And a lunatyke ouerage
               What though my ſtile be rude?
               With trouthe it is ennewde
               Trouth ought to be reſcude
               Trouthe ſhould nat be ſubdude
            
            
               But nowe will I expounde
               What nobleneſſe dothe abounde
               And what honour is founde
               And what vertues be reſydent
               In our royall regent
               Our pereleſſe preſident
               Our kyng moſt excellent:
            
            
               In merciall prowes
               Lyke vnto Hercules
               In prudence and wyſdom
               Lyke vnto Salamon
               In his goodly perſon
               Lyke vnto Abſolon
               In loyalte and foy
               Lyke to Ector of Troy
               And his glory to incres
               Lyke to Scipiades
               
                  
In royal mageſte
               Lyke vnto Ptholome
               Lyke to duke Ioſue
               And the valiaunt Machube:
            
            
               That if I wolde reporte
               All the roiall ſorte
               Of his nobilyte
               His magnanymyte
               His animoſite
               His fragalite
               His lyberalite
               His affabilite
               His humanyte
               His ſtabilite
               His humilite
               His benignite
               His royall dignyte.
               My lernyng is to ſmall
               For to recount them all.
            
            
               What loſels than are ye
               Lyke cowardes as ye be
               To rayle on his aſtate
               With wordes inordinate.
            
            
               He rules his cominalte
               With all benignite
               His noble baronage
               He putteth them in corage
               
                  
To exployte dedes of armys
               To the domage and harmys
               Of ſuche as be his foos
               Where euer he rydes or goos
               His ſubiectes he dothe ſupporte
               Maintayne them with comforte
               Of his moſte princely porte
               As all men can reporte:
            
            
               Than ye be a knappiſhe ſorte
               Et faitez a luy grant torte
               With your enboſed iawes
               To rayle on hym lyke dawes
               The fende ſcrache out your mawes:
            
            
               All his ſubiectes and he
               Mooſt louyngly agre
               With hole hart and true mynde
               They fynde his grace ſo kynde
               Wherwith he dothe them bynde
               At all houres to be redy
               With hym to lyue and dye
               Their bodyes and their gode
               And to ſpende their hart blode
               With hym, in all dyſtreſſe
               Alway in redyneſſe.
               To aſſyſt his noble grace
               In ſpyght of thy cowardes face
               Mooſt falſe attaynted traytour
               And falſe forſworne faytour.
            
            
               
               Auaunte cowarde recrayed
               Thy pride ſhalbe alayd
               With ſir Fraunces of Fraunce
               We ſhall pype you a daunce
               Shall tourne you to myſchauns:
            
            
               I rede you loke about
               For ye ſhalbe driuen out
               Of your lande in ſhorte ſpace
               We will ſo folowe in the chace
               That ye ſhall haue no grace
               For to tourne your face
               And thus ſainct George to borowe
               Ye ſhall haue ſhame and ſorowe.
            
            
               ¶ Lenuoy.
               GO lytell quayre quickly
               Shew them that ſhall you rede
               How that ye are lykely
               Ouer all the worlds to ſprede:
               The fals Scottes for dred
               With the duke of Albany,
               Beſide the water of Twede
               They fledde full cowardly.
               Though your engliſhe be rude
               Barreyne of eloquence
               Yet breuely to conclude
               Grounded is your ſentence
               
                  
On trouthe, vnder defence
               Of all trewe englyſhemen
               This mater to credence
               That I wrate with my pen.
               Skelton Laureat: obſequious et loyall.
               To my lorde Cardynals right noble grace. &c.
            
            
               Lenuoy.
               
                  Go lytell quayre apace
               In mooſt humble wyſe
               Before his noble grace
               That cauſed yon to deuiſe
               This lytel enterpriſe
               And hym mooſt lowly pray
               In his mynde to compriſe
               Thoſe wordes his grace dyd ſaye
               Of an ammas gray.
               Ie, Foy enterment
               En ſa bone grace.
            
         
         
            
            
               The boke compiled by maiſter Skelton, Poet Laureat called ſpeake Parrot.
            
               MY name is parrot, a bird of paradiſe
               By nature deuiſed, of a wonderous kynd
               Dienteli dieted, with diuers delicate ſpice
               Tyl Euphrates that floud, driueth me into Inde
               Where men of that countrey, bi fortune me find
               And ſend me, to great Ladyes of eſtate
               Then parrot muſt haue an almon or a date.
            
            
               A cage curiouſly caruen, with ſiluer pin
               Properly painted, to be my couertowre
               A myrrour of glaſſe, that I may tote therin
               Theſe maidēs ful mekely wc many a diuers flour
               Freſhly they dreſſe, and make ſwete my boure
               with ſpeke parrot I prai you, ful courteouſly thei ſay
               Parrot is a goodly byrd, a prety Popagey
            
            
               With my becke bent, my litle wanton eye
               My feders freſhe, as is the Emrawde grene
               About my necke a circulet, lyke the ryche rubye
               My lyttle legges, my fete both fete and cleane
               I am a minion, to wayt vpon the quene
               My proper parrot, my lytle prety foole
               With ladies I learne, and go with them to ſcole.
            
            
               
               Hagh, ha, ha, parrot, ye can laugh pretely
               Parrot hath not dined, of al this long day
               Lyke your pus cat parrot can mute and cry
               In lattyn, in Ebrew, Araby and Caldey
               In greke tonge, parrot, can both ſpeake and ſaye
               As percius that poet, doth report of me
               Quis expediuit pſitatio ſuum Chire.
            
            
               Howſe frenche of parriſe, Parrot can learne
               Pronouſynge my purpoſe, after my properte
               With perliez bien, Parrot ou perlez rien
               With Duche, with Spaniſh, my tonge can agre
               In Engliſh, to God Parrot can ſupple
               Chriſt ſaue king Henry the eight our roial king
               The red roſe in honour, to floriſh and ſpring.
            
            
               With Katherin incōparable: our roial quene alſo
               That parelespōgarnet chriſt ſaue her noble grace
               Parrot ſauies, habler caſtiliano
               With ſidaſſo de coſto, in turkey and in trace
               Uis conſilii expers, as teacheth me horace
               Mole ruit ſua, whoſe dices at pregnaunte.
            
            
               My lady maiſters, dame Philology
               Gaue me a gift, in my neſt whan I lay
               To learne al language, and it to ſpeke aptely
               Now pandez mory, wax franticke ſom men ſaye
               Proneles or freneſes, may not hold her way
               
                  
An almon now for Parrot, delicatly dreſt
               In ſalue feſta dies toto, their doth beſt.
            
            
               Moderata iuuant, but toto doth excede
               Dicreſſion is mother of noble vertues all
               Niden agan, in greke tonge we rede
               But reaſon, and wit wanteth their prouinciall
               When wilfulnes, is virar generall
               Hec res acu tangitur, Parrot parmafoy
               Ticez vous Parrot, Tenez vous coye.
            
            
               Beſy, beſy, beſy, and beſines agayne
               Que pēſez voz parrot, what meneth this beſines
               Uitulus in Oreb, troubled Arons brayn
               Melchiſedecke mercifull, made Moloe merciles
               To wiſe is no vertue, to medling, to reſtles
               In meaſure is treaſure, cum ſenſu marturat
                     •
                  
               
               Ne tropo ſaung, ne tropo mato.
            
            
               Aram was fired, with caldies fire called Ur
               Iob was brought vp, in the land of Hus
               The linage of lot, toke ſupporte of Aſſur
               Iereboſeth is Ebrue, who liſt the law diſcus
               Peace Parrot ye prate, as ye were ebrius
               Howſt the lyuer god, van hemrick ic ſeg
               In popeting grew peres, whā parrot was ancg
            
            
               What is this to purpoſe, ouer in a whinninmeg
               
                  
Hop Lobin of Lowdeon, wold haue a bit of bread
               The Iebet of Baldock, was made for Iacke leg
               A narow vnfethered, and without an hed
               A bagpype without blowyng, ſtandeth in no ſted
               Some run to far before, ſome run to far behinde
               Some be to churliſh, and ſome be to kynd.
            
            
               Ic dien ſerueth for Erſtrych fether
               Ic dien, is the lauguage of the land of Beme
               In Affric tongue, Byrſa is a tonge of lether
               In Paleſtina, there is Ieruſalem
               Colluſtrū now for parot, whit bred & ſwete creme
               our thomaſe ſhe doth trip, our ienet ſhe doth ſhall
               Parrot hath a blackebeard, & a faire grene tayle.
            
            
               Moryſh myne owne ſhelf, the oſtermonger ſay
               Fate, fate, fate, ye tryſh water lag
               In flettering fables, men fynde but lytle fayth
               But moueatur terra, let the world wag
               Let ſyr wrig wag, wraſtle wyth ſir declarag
               Euery man, after his maner of wayes
               Pawbe uene aruer, ſo the welche man ſayes
            
            
               Such ſhredis of ſentence, ſtrowed in the ſhop
               Of auncient Ariſtippus, and ſuch other mo
               I gather together, and cloſe in my crip
               Of my wanton conceyt, vnde do promo
               Dilemata docta, in pedagogio
               Sacro vatum, wherof to you I breake
               
                  
I pray you, let parrot haue lybertie to ſpeke:
               But ware the cat parrot, ware the falſe cat
               With who is there, a mayd, nay, nay, I trow
               Ware ryat parrot, ware ryot, ware that
               Meate, meate for parrot: meate I ſay how
               Thus diuers of language, by learnyng I grow
               with bas me ſwete parrot: bas me ſwete ſwete
               To dwel amonge Ladies, parrat is mete.
            
            
               Parrot, parrot, parrot, praty popigay
               With my beke I can pyke, my lytle prety too
               My delight is ſolas, pleaſure: diſport and play
               Lyke a wanton whan I will, I rele to and froo
               Parrot can ſay, Ceſar, aue, alſo
               But Parrot, hath no fauour to Eſebon
               Aboue all other byrdes, ſet parrot alone.
            
            
               Ulula, Eſebon, for Ieremy doth wepe
               Sion is in ſadnes, Rachel ruly doth loke
               Madionita, Ietro, our moyſes kepeth hys ſhepe
               Gedeon is gon, that Zalmane vndertoke
               Oreb et zeb, of Iudicum rede the boke
               Nowe Gebal, Amon, and Amoloch, harke, harke
               Parrot pretendeth to be a bibil clarke.
            
            
               O Eſebon Eſebon, to the is come agayne
               Seon the regent amoreorum
               And hog that fat hog, or baſan dothe retayne
               
                  
The crafty coiſtroinus canaueorum
               And aſſilum, whilom, refugium miſerorum
               Non phanum ſed prophanum, ſtandeth in little ſted
               Ulula Eſebon, for iept is ſtarke ded.
            
            
               Eſtbon, Maribon, wheſton, nexte Barnet
               A trim tram for an hors mil it wer a niſe thinge
               Deintes for dammoyſels, Chaffer far fet
               Bo ho doth barkwel, but hough ho ruleth yt ring
               Frō ſcarpary to tartari renoun therin doth ſprīg
               With he ſaid, & we ſaid ich wot now what ich wot
               Quod magnus eſt dominus iudas ſcarioth.
            
            
               Ptholomie, and haly were cunnyng and wyſe
               In the vol vel, in the quadrant, & in the aſtroloby
               To pronoſticate truli the chaūce of fortunes diſe
               Some trete of their tirikis, ſome of aſtrology
               Some pſeudo propheta with Chiromancy
               If fortune be frendly, and grace be the guyde
               Honoure with renowne, will renne of that ſide
            
            
               Manon calon
            
            
               Agaton quod parato. In greca
            
            
               Let parrot I pray you, haue liberty to prate
               For aurea lingua greca, ought to be magnified
               If it wer cond perfitely, and after the rate
               As lingua latina, in ſchole matter occupied
               But our grekis, their greke ſo wel haue applied
               That they cannot ſay in greke, riding by the way
               
                  
How hoſteler, fetche my horſe a bottel of hay.
            
            
               Neither frame a ſilogiſme, in phrieſe ſomorū
               
               For maliter et grece, cum medio termino
               Our grekes ye walow, in the waſhbol argolicorū
               
               For though ye can tel in greke what is phormio
               Yet ye ſeke out your greke, in Capricornio
               For they ſcrape out good ſcripture, & ſet in a gal
               Ye go about to amend, and ye mar all.
            
            
               Some argue, ſecundum quid ad ſimpliciter
               And yet he would be rekened, pro ario pagita
               And ſome make diſtinctions, multipliciter
               Whether ita were before uou, or uou before ita
               Nether wiſe nor well lerned but like hermophra dita
               Set ſophia a ſide, for euery Iacke raker.
               And euery mad medler muſt now be a maker.
            
            
               In achademia Parrot, dare no probleme kepe
               For greciſari, ſo occupieth the chayre
               That letinum fari, may fal to reſt and ſlepe
               And ſilogiſari, was drowned at ſturbridge faire
               Triuiale, & quatriuials, ſo ſore now they appair
               That Parrot that Popagay, hath pity to beholde
               How yt reſt of good lerning, is roulled vp & trolde
            
            
               Albertus de modo ſignificandi
               And Donatus, be dryuen out of ſchole
               
                  
Priſians hed broken, now handy dandy
               And inter did aſcolos, is rekened for a fole
               Alexander, a gander of Menanders pole
               With da canſales, is caſt out of the gate
               And da racionales, dare not ſhew his pate,
            
            
               Plaut ſi in his comedies, a child ſhal now rehers
               And medil with Quintilian, in his declarations
               That pety Caton, can ſcantly conſtrue a verſe
               With Aueto, in Greco, & ſuch ſolempn ſalutaciōs
               Can ſkantly the tenſis, of his comugacions
               Setting their mindes, ſo much of eloquence
               That of theyr ſcole maters, loſt is the hole ſētēce
            
            
               Now a nutmeg, a nut meg, cum gariopholo
               For parrot to pike vpon, his brayne for to ſtable
               Swete ſynamum ſtickes, and pleris commuſco
               In paradiſe. that place of pleaſure perdurable
               The progeny of parrottis, wer faire & fanorable
               Now in valle ebron, parrot is fayne to fede
               Chriſt croſſe, & ſanct nicolas, parrot be your good pede
            
            
               The myrour that I tote in, quaſi diaphonum
               Uel quaſi ſpeculum, in Enigmate
               Elencum, or elles, Emtimaticum
               For logicions to loke on, ſomwhat ſophiſtice
               Retorcions and oratours, in freſhe humanite
               Support parrot, I pray you wt your ſuffrage ornat
               
                  
Of confuſe tantū, auoyding the checkmate
            
            
               But of that ſupoſicion, that called is arte
               Confuſe diſtrubitiue, as parrot hath deuiſed
               Let euery man, after his merit, take hys part
               For in this proces, parrot nothīg hath ſurmiſed
               No matter pretended, nor nothyng enterpryſed
               But that metaphora, alegoria with all
               Shall be his protection, his pauis and his wall.
            
            
               For parrot is no churliſh chough nor no flekid py
               Parrot is no pendugum, that men call a carlyng
               Parrot is no woodcocke, nor no butter fly
               Parrot is no ſtamring ſtare, that mē cal a ſtariīg
               But parrot is mine own dere harte, & my derlīg
               Melpomene ye fair maid, ſhe burniſhed his beke
               I pray you let parrot, haue libertie to ſpeke.
            
            
               Parrot is a fayre byrd for a Lady
               God of his goodnes him framed and wrought
               Whan parrot is dead ſhe doth not putrify
               Ye all thinge mortall ſhall turne vnto noughte
               Except mannes ſoule, that Chriſt ſo dere bought
               That neuer may dye, nor neuer dye ſhall
               Make much of parrot, that popegay royal.
            
            
               For that pereles prynce, that parrot did creat
               He made you of nothing, by his magiſty
               Point wel this probleme, that parrot doth prate
               
                  
And remembre among, how parrot and ye
               Shal lepe from this life, as merye as we be
               Pompe, pryde, honour, ryches and worldly luſte
               Parrot ſaith plainly, ſhall tourne all to duſt.
            
            Thus parrot doth pray you
            With heart moſt tender
            To reken with this recule nowe
            And it to remember
            
               Pſitacus ecce cauo nec ſunt mea carmina phebo
            
            
               Dignaſcio Tamen eſt
            
            
               Plena camena dec.
            
            
               Secundum Skeltonida famigeratum
            
            
               In picreorum Cathalago numeratum
            
            
               Gala thea.
            
            
               Itaque Conſolanimi inuicem
            
            
               In uerbis iſtis.
            
            
               Candidi lectores callide callete
            
            
               Veſtrum ſeuete, pſitacum.
            
            
               Galethea.
            
            Now kus me parrot, kus me, kus, kus, kus
            Gods bleſſing light on thy ſwete litle mus
            
               Vita & anima
            
            
               zoelzepſiche
            
            Aquinates Amen,
            
               Concubunt grece, Non
            
            
               eſt hic ſermo pudicus
            
            
               
               Actica dictamina
            
            
               Ergo Suus plumbilamina
            
            
               Vel ſpuria Vitulamino
            
            
               Auertat hoc Vxania.
            
            Amen amen
            and ſet to a. d
            And then it is amend
            Our new found a. b. c.
            
               Cum ccrteris
            
            
               Paribus.
            
         
         
            
               Of the death of the noble Prince kynge Edward the forth, per Skeltonidē Laureatum.
            
               MIſeremini mei, ye that be my frendes
               This worlde hath formed me down to fall
               How may I endure when yt euery thynge endes
               What creature is borne, to be eternall
               Now there is no more, but pray for me all
               Thus ſay I Edward, that late was your kyng
               And. xxiii. yeres ruled, this imperiall
               Some vnto pleaſure, and ſome to no likyng
               Mercy I aſke of my miſdoyng
               What auaileth it, frendes to be my fo
               Sith I can not reſiſt, nor amend your cōplainīg
               Quia ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
            
            
               
               I ſlepe now in molde, as it is naturall
               As earth vnto earth, hath his reuerture
               What ordeyned god, to be terreſtriall
               Without recours, to the earth of nature
               Who to liue euer, may be ſure
               What is it to truſt, on mutabilite
               Sith that in this world, nothing may indure
               For now am I gone, that late was in proſperite
               To preſume ther vppon, it is but a vanitie
               Not certaine: but as a chery fayre ful of wo
               Raygned not I of late: in great felicite
               Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
            
            
               Where was in my lyfe, ſuch one as I
               While lady fortune: with me had continuaunce
               Graunted not ſhe me, to haue victory
               In England to raine, and to contribute Fraūce
               She toke me by the hand, and led me a daunce
               And with her ſugred lips, on me ſhe ſmyled
               But what for her diſſembled countenaunce
               I could not beware, til I was begiled
               Now from this world, ſhe hath me excild
               When I was lotheſt, hens for to go
               And I am in age, but as who ſaith a child.
               Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
            
            
               I had ynough, I held me not contente
               Without remembraunce, that I ſhould dye
               And more ouer to incroche, redy was I bente
               
                  
I knew not how long, I ſhould it occupy
               I made the tower ſtronge, I wyſt not why
               I knew not to whom, I purchaſed Teterſall
               I amended Douer, on the mountayne hye
               And London I prouoked to fortify the wal
               I made Notingam, a place royal
               Wyndſor, Eltam, and many other mo
               Yet at the laſt, I went from them al
               Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
            
            
               Where is now, my conqueſt and victory
               Where is my riches, and my royal araye
               Where be my courſers, and my horſes hye
               Where is my myrth, my ſolas, and play
               As vanite to nought, al is wandred away
               O lady Beſſe, longe for me may ye cal
               For I am de parted, til domes day.
               But loue ye that lord, that is ſoueraygne of all
               Where be my caſtels, and buildinges royall
               But Winſore alone, nowe I haue no mo
               And of Eton, the prayers perpetuall
               Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
            
            
               Why ſhoulde a man, be proud or preſume hye
               Sainct Bernard, therof nobly doth treate
               Sythe a man, is nothing but a ſacke of ſtercorri
               And ſhall returne, vnto wormes meate
               Whye, what came of Alexander the great
               Or elſſe of ſtronge Sampſon, who can tell
               Wher no wormes ordened, theyr fleſh to freat
               
                  
And of Salomon, that was of wit the well
               Abſolon, profered his heare for to ſel
               Yet for al his beutie, wormes eat him alſo
               And I but late in honour did excell
               Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
            
            
               I haue played my pageyond, now am I paſte
               Ye wot wel all, I was of no great yeld
               This al thing concluded, ſhalbe at the laſt
               When death approcheth, then loſt is the felde
               Then ſithen this worlde, me no longer vp helde
               Nor nought wold conſerue me, here in my place
               In manus tuas domine, my ſpirite vp I yealde
               Humbly beſeching, the God of his grace
               O ye curteſſe commens, your hartes vnbrace
               Boningly now to pray for me alſo
               For right wel you know, your kyng I was
               Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
            
            ¶ FINIS.
         
         
            
               Skelton Laureate againſt the Scottes.
            
               Againſt the proud Scottes clatteryng
               That neuer wyll leaue theyr tratlyng
               Wan they the felde, and loſt their kynge
               They may wel ſay, fye on that winning.
            
            
               
                  
                  LO theſe fond ſottes. And tratling ſcottes
                  How they are blind. In their owne minde
                  And will not know. Their ouerthrow
                  At Branxſton more. They are ſo ſrowre
                  So frantike mad. They ſay they had
                  And wan the felde. With ſpeare and ſhield
                  That is as trew. As blacke is blew
                  And grene is gray. What euer they ſay
                  Iemmy is dead. And cloſed in leade
                  That was theyr own king. Fy on that winning
               
               
                  At Flodden hilles. Oure bowes our bylles
                  Slewe all the floure. Of theyr honoure.
                  Are not theſe ſcottes. Foles and ſettes
                  Suche boſte to make. To prate and crake
                  To face to brace All voyde of grace
                  So proud of hart. So ouerth wart
                  So out of frame. So voyd of ſhame
                  As it is enrold. Wrytten and told
                  Within this quaire. Who liſt to repair
                  And ther in reed. Shal finde in deed
                  A mad rekening. Conſidering all thing
                  That the ſcottes may ſin. Fye on the winning
               
            
            
               When the Scotte lyued.
               
                  IOly Iemmy, ye ſcornefull Scot
                  Is it come vnto your lot
                  A ſolempne ſumner for to be
                  It greeth nought for your degre
                  
                     
Our kyng of England for to fight
                  Your ſoueraine lord, our prince of might
                  Ye for to ſend, ſuch a Citacion
                  It ſhameth al your noughty nacion
                  In compariſon, but kynge roppyng
                  Unto our prince, annointed kyng
                  Ye play Hop Lobbyn of Lowdean
                  Ye ſhew ryght wel, what good ye can
                  Ye may be Lord of Locrian
                  Chriſt ſence you, with a frying pan
                  Of Edingborrow, and ſaincte Ionis towne
                  A dieu ſyr ſommer, caſt of your crowne.
               
            
            
               When the Scot was ſlayne.
               
                  COntinually I ſhall remember
                  The mery moneth of September
                  With the▪ xi. day of the ſame
                  For than began, our myrthe and game
                  So that now I haue deuiſed
                  And in my minde, I haue compriſed
                  Of the proude Scot, kyng Iemmy
                  To wryte ſome lyttell tragedy
                  For no manner conſideration
                  Of any ſorowful lamentation
                  But for the ſpecial conſolacion
                  Of al our royal englyſh nacion
                  Melnomone, O muſe tragediall
                  Unto your grace, for grace now I call
                  To guyde my pen, and my pen to enbibe
                  
                     
Illumine me, your Poet, and your ſcribe
                  That with mixture of Aloes and bitter gall
                  I may compound, confectures for Accordiall
                  To angre the Scottes, & Iriſh kiteringes withal
                  That late were diſcomfect, with battaile marcial
               
               
                  Thalia, my muſe, for you alſo cal I
                  To touche them with tauntes of your armonye
                  A medley to make, of mirth with ſadnes
                  The hartes of England, to comfort with gladnes
                  And now to begyn, I wyll me a dres
                  To you reherſyng, the ſomme of my proces.
               
            
            
               
                  KYnge Iamy, Iemmy, Iocky my ioye
                  Summond our king, why did ye ſo
                  To you, nothing it did accord
                  To Summon our king, your ſoueraigne Lorde
                  A kyng a Summer, it was great wonder
                  Knowye not ſuger, and ſalt a ſonder
                  Your Summer to ſaucye, to malapert
                  Your harrold in armes, not yet halfe expert
                  Ye thought ye did, yet valiauntlye
                  Not worth thre ſkippes of a Pye
                  Syr ſkyr galyard, ye were ſo ſkit
                  Your wil, than ran before your wyt.
               
               
                  Your lege ye layd, and your aly
                  Your franticke fable, not worth a fly
                  Frenche kynge, or one or other
                  Regarded you ſhould your lord your brother
                  
                     
Trowed ye ſir Iemy, his nobel grace
                  From you ſir ſcot, would tourne his face
                  With gup ſyr ſcot, of Galawey
                  Now is your pryde fall to decay
                  Male vrid, was your fals entent
                  For to offende your preſident
                  Your ſoueraigne Lord, moſt reuerente
                  Your Lord, your brother and your regent.
               
               
                  In him is figured, Melchiſedecke
                  And ye were diſloyall Amalecke
                  He is oure noble Scipione
                  Annoynted kynge, and ye were noue
                  Thoughe ye vntrulye your father haue ſlayne
                  His tytle is true, in Fraunce to raygne
                  And ye proude Scot, Dunde, Dun
                        •
                     ar
                  Pardy ye were, his homager
                  And ſuter to his Parliament
                  For your vntruthe, nowe are ye ſhent
                  Ye bare your ſelf, ſomwhat to bold
                  Therfore ye loſt, your copy hold
                  Ye were bonde tenent, to his eſtate
                  Loſt is your game, ye are checke mate
               
               
                  Unto the caſtell of Norram
                  I vnderſtande, to ſone ye came
                  At Branxſton more, and Flodden hilles
                  Our Englyſh bowes, our Englyſh bylles
                  
                     
Againſt you gaue ſo ſharpe a ſhower
                  That of Scotland, ye loſt the flower
                  The white Lyon: there rampaunte of moode
                  He raged and rente out your hart bloude
                  He the White, and you the Red
                  The white there ſlewe the red ſtarke ded
                  Thus for your guerdon quyt are ye
                  Thanked be God in trinite
                  And ſwete ſainct George our ladyes knyghte
                  Your eye is oute, a dewe good nyghte.
               
               
                  Ye were ſtarke mad to make a fray
                  His grace beyng out of the way
                  But by the power and might of God
                  For your tayle ye made a rod
                  Ye wanted wit, ſir at a worde
                  Ye loſt your ſpurs: ye loſt your ſword
                  Ye mighte haue buſked you to huntly bankes
                  Your pryde was peuyſh to play ſuche prankes
                  Your pouerte could not attayne
                  With our kyng royal, war to maintaine.
               
               
                  Of the kyng of Nauerne, ye myght take heed
                  Ungraciouſly howe he dothe ſpeede
                  An double dealynge, ſo he dyd dreame
                  That he is kynge, wythoute a Reame
                  And for exaumple, he woulde none take
                  Experiens hath brought you in ſuch a brake
                  
                     
Your wealthe, your ioy, your ſport, your play
                  Your braggyng boſt, your royal aray
                  Your beard ſo brym, as bore at baye
                  Your ſeuen ſyſters, that Gun ſo gay
                  All haue ye loſt, and caſte awaye.
                  Thus fortune hath turned you: I dare wel ſaye
                  Now from a kyng, to a clot of clay
                  Oute of Robes, ye were ſhaked
                  And wretchedly ye lay, ſtarke all naked
                  For lacke of grace, harde was your hap
                  The Popes cures, gaue you that clap.
               
               
                  Of the out yles, the rough foted Scottes
                  We haue wel eaſed them of the bottes
                  The rude rācke Scottes, lyke droncken dranes
                  At Englyſh bowes haue fetched theyr banes
                  It is not ſitting, in tower and towne
                  A Summer, to were a kynges crowne
                  Fortune on you, therfore dyd frowne
                  Ye were to hye, ye are caſt downe
                  Syr ſumner now, where is your crowne
                  Caſt of your crowne, caſt vp your crowne
                  Sir Summer, now ye haue loſt your crowne
                  
                     Quod Skelton Laureate, Oratoure to the kynges moſt royal eſtate.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  SCotica redicta in formam prouincie
               
               
                  Regis parebit nutibus anglie:
               
               
                  Alioquin (per deſertum ſin) ſuper Cherubim
               
               
                  Cherubin, ſeraphim, ſeraphin que ergo. &c.
               
               
                  
Unto diuers people that remord this
               ryming againſte the Scot Iemmy.
            
            
               
                  I Am now conſtrayned
                  With wordes nothynge fayned
                  This inuectiue to make For ſom people ſake
                  That lyſt for to iangell
                  And way wardly to wrangell
                  Againſte this my makynge
                  Their males thereat ſhakynge
                  At it reprehending. And venemouſly ſtingyng
                  Rebukynge and remordyng
                  And nothynge accordynge
               
               
                  Cauſe they haue none other
                  But for that he was hys brother
                  Brother vnnaturall. Unto our kyng royall
                  Againſt whome he dyd fighte
                  Faſlye agaynſt all ryghte
                  Lyke that vtrue rebell
                  Falſſe Cayne agaynſt Abell.
               
               
                  But who ſo there at pyketh mood
                  The tokens are not good
                  To be true Englyſh blood
                  For if they vnderſtood
                  His traitourly diſpight
                  He was a recrayed knighte
                  A ſubtill ſyſmatike
                  Righte neare an heritike
                  Of grace out of the ſtate
                  
                     
And died excommunicate
               
               
                  And for he was a kynge
                  The more ſhameful rekenynge
                  Of hym ſhoulde men reporte
                  In earneſt and in ſporte
                  He ſcantlye loueth oure kynge
                  That grudgeth at this thinge
                  That caſte ſuche ouerth wartes
                  Percaſe haue hollowe hartes
               
            
            
               Si veritatē dico, quare non creditis michi. Chorus de Dys contra Scottes, cum omni proceſſionali feſtiuitate ſolempne ſauit hoc Epitoma. xxii. die Septembris. &c.
               
                  SAlue feſta dies toto reſonabilis euo
                  Qua ſcottus iacobus obiuius en ſe cadit
                  Barbara ſcottorum gens perfda plena maloruns
                  Vincitur ad Norran, uertitut inque fugam
                  Vaſta paulus ſed campeſtris (borie memoratur
                  Branxion more) ſcottins terra peroſa fuit
                  Scottica caſtra fremunt Floddun ſub mōtibus altis.
                  Que Valide inuadens diſſipat angla manus
                  Millia ſcottorum truſit gens anglica paſſim
                  Luxuriat tepido ſanguine pi g
                        •
                     us humus
                  Pas animas miſeri miſeras, miſere ſub umbras
                  Pars ruit in foueas, pars ſubiit latebras
                  
                     
Iam quid ag't Iachobus, damnorū gremine cretus
                  Perſidus Vt nemro'th lapſus ad iam ruit
                  Dic modo ſcottorum dudum male fane malorum
                  Rector nunc Regeris mortuus exce iaces
                  Sic Leo te Rapidus Leo candidus inclitus urſit
                  quo Leo in Rubins ultim
                        •
                      f
                        •
                     ta luis
                  Anglia doc choreas Reſonent tua tempana pſallas
                  Da laudes domino. Da pia uot a deo.
               
            
            
               Hec Laureatus Skeltonis Regine orator.
               Chorus de dis. &c. ſupar triumph ali victoīa centra gallos. &c. cantauit ſolemniter hoc Elogium in profeſto diui Iohannis ad de colationem.
               
                  SAlue feſta dies toto memorabilis euc.
                  Qua rex Henricus gallico bella premit
                  Henricus Rutilans Octauus noſter in armis
                  Tir winne gentis menit ſtrauit humi
                  Sceptriger anglorum bello ualiaiſſimus hector
                  Francorum gentis colla ſuperba terit
                  Dux armis nuper celebris modo dux mermis
                  De longuile modo dic quo tuo pomparuit
                  De cleremount clarus dudum dic galle ſuperbe
                  Vnde ſuperbus eris? carcere nonne gemis?
                  Diſcite francorum gens cetera capt
                        •
                     , britannum
                  
                     
Noſcite magnanimum, ſubdite uos que ſibi
                  Gloria cappa docis diue miles que Marie
                  Illius hic ſub ope Gallica regna reget.
                  Hoc inſigne bonum diuino Numine geſtum Anglica gens referat ſempar, ouans que canat Per Skeltonida Laureatum, Oratorem Regium.
               
            
         
         
            
               Here after folovveth the booke, entituled. Ware the Hawke. Per ſkelton Laureat.
            
            
               Prologus Skeltonidis Laureati ſuper ware the Hawke.
               
                  
                     THis worke deuiſed is
                  For ſuch as do a mis
                  And ſpecially to controule
                  Suche as haue cure of ſoule
                  That be ſo farre abuſed
                  They can not be excuſed
                  By reaſon nor by lawe
                  But that they play the dawe
                  To hawke or elſſe to hunte
                  From the Aulter to the funte
                  With crye vnreuerente
                  Before the Sacramente
                  
                     
Within the holy church boundis
                  That of our faith, the ground is
                  That pryeſt that hawkes ſo
                  All grace is farre him fro
                  He ſemeth a ſiſmatike
                  Or elſſe an heritike
                  For faith in him is faynte
                  Therefore to make complaynte
                  Of ſuche myſaduiſed
                  Parſons, and diſgiſed
                  This boke we haue deuiſed
                  Compendiouſlye compriſed
                  No good prieſt to offend
                  But ſuch dawes to amend
                  In hope that no man ſhall
                  Be miſcontent withall.
               
               
                  I Shall you make relacion
                  By waye of a peſtrofacion
                  Under ſupportacion
                  Of your pacient tolleracion
                  How I Skelton Laureat
                  Deuiſed and alſo wrate
                  Upon a lewde Curate
                  A parſon beneficed
                  But nothing well aduiſed
                  He ſhall be as now nameles
                  But he ſhall not be blameles
                  
                     
Nor he ſhall not be ſhameles
                  For ſure he wrought a mis
                  To hawke in my churche of Dis
                  This fonde frantike fauconer
                  With hys poluted pawtner
                  As prieſt vnreuerent
                  Straight to the Sacrament
                  He made his Hawke to fly
                  With hogeous ſhowte and crye
                  The hye aulter he ſtrypt naked
                  There on he ſtode and craked
                  He ſhoke downe al the clothes
                  And ſware horrible othes
                  Before the face of God
                  By Moyſes and Arons rod
                  Or that he thence yede
                  His hawke ſhould pray and fede
                  Upon a pigeons mawe
                  The bloude ran downe raw
                  Upon the auter ſtone
                  The hawke tyred on a bonne
                  And in the holy place
                  She muted there a chaſe
                  Upon my corporas face
                  Such ſacrificium laudis
                  He made with ſuch gambawdis.
               
            
            
               Obſeruate.
               His ſecond hawke waxed gerye
               
                  
And was with flying wery
               She had flow in ſo oft
               That on the rode loft
               She perked her to reſt
               The Fauconer then was preſt,
               Came running with a dow
               And cryed ſtow ſtow ſtow
               But ſhe would not bowe
               He then to be ſure
               Called her with a lure
               Her meate was very crude
               She had not wel endude
               She was not cleane enſaymed
               She was not wel reclaymed
               But the fawconer vnfayned
               Was much more febler brained
               The hawke had no lyſt
               To come to hys fyſt
               She loked as ſhe had the fronce
               With that he gaue her a bounce
               Ful vpon the gorge
               I wyl not fayne nor forge
               The hawke with that clap
               Fell downe with euil hap
               The church dores wer ſparred
               Faſt bolted and barred
               Yet with a prety gin
               I fortuned to come in
               
                  
This rebell to beholde
               Whereof hym I contrould
               But he ſayd that he wolde
               Agaynſt my mynde and will
               In my churche hawke ſtyll.
            
            
               Conſiderate.
               On ſainct Iohn decollacion
               He hawked on this facion
               Tempore, veſperarum
               Sed, non ſecundum ſarum
               But lyke a marche harum
               His braynes were ſo parum
               He ſayde he would not let
               His houndes for to fet
               To hunte there by lyberte
               In the diſpite of me
               And to halowe there the foxe
               Downe went my offeryng box
               Boke bel and candell
               Al that he might handell
               Cros ſtaffe, lectrine and banner
               Feldone on thys manner.
            
            
               Deliberate.
               With troll, citrace and trouy
               They ranged hankin bouy
               My church all about
               Thys fawconer gan ſhoute
               Theſe be my goſpellers
               
                  
Theſe be my piſtillers
               Theſe be my queriſters
               to helpe me to ſinge
               My hawkes to mattens ring
               In this prieſtly giding
               His hawke then flew vpon
               The rode with Mary and Ihō
               
               Delt he not lyke a fon
               Delt he not lyke a daw
               Or elſſe is this goddes law
               Decrees or Decretals
               Or holy ſinodals
               Or elſſe prouincials
               Thus within the wals
               Of holy church to deale
               Thus to ringe a peale
               With his hawkes belles
               Doutles ſuche loſels
               Make the church to be
               In ſmal aucthorite
               A curate in ſpeciall
               To ſnapper and to fall
               Into this open crime
               To loke on this were time
            
            
               Vigilate.
               But who ſo that lokes
               In the officials bokes
               Ther her may ſee and reed
               
                  
That this is matter in deed
               How be it mayden meed
               Made them to be agreed
               And ſo the ſcribe was feed
               And the Pharaſaye
               Than durſt nothing ſay
               But let the matter ſlip
               And made truth to trip
               And of the ſpituall law
               They made but a gew gaw
               And toke it out in drynke
               And this the cauſe doth ſhrink
               The church is thus abuſed
               Reproched and polluted
               Correction hath no place
               And al for lacke of grace
            
            
               Deplorate.
               Loke now in Exodi
               And de archa domini
               With regum by and by
               The Bibel wyl not lye
               How the temple was kept
               How the temple was ſwept
               Where ſanguis taurorum
               Aut ſanguis vitulorum
               Was offred within the wals
               After ceremonials
               When it was poluted
               
                  
Sentence was executed
               By way of expiacion
            
            
               Diuinitate.
               Then much more by the rode
               Where chriſtes precious bloud
               Daily offred is
               To be poluted this
               And that he wiſhed with all
               That the dowues donge downe might fall
               Into my chalis at mas
               When conſecrated was
               The bleſſed ſacrament
               O prieſt vnreuerent
               He ſayde that he would Hunt
               From the aulter to the Funt
            
            
               Reformate.
               Of no tyrande I rede
               That ſo farre dyd excede
               Neither yet Diocleſian
               Nor yet domiſian
               Nor yet croked Cacus
               Nor yet dronken Baccus
               Nother Olibrius Nor D
                     •••••
                  ius
               Nother Phalary
               Reherſed in valery
               Nor Sardanapall
               Unhappieſt of all
               
                  
Nor Nero the worſt
               Nor Clawdius the curſt
               Nor yet Egeas
               Nor yet ſyr Pherumbras
               Nother zorobabell
               Nor cruell Ieſabell
               Nor yet tarquinius
               Whome Titus Liuius
               In writinge doth enroll
               I haue red them poll by pol
               The ſtorye of Ariſtobel
               And of Conſtantinobel
               Whiche citye Miſcreantes wan
               And ſlue many a chriſten man
               Yet the Sowden nor the turke
               Wrought neuer ſuch a worke
               For to let their hawkes flye
               In the church of Saint Sophy
               With much matter more
               That I kepe in ſtore
            
            
               Penſitate
               Then in a tabel playne
               I wrote a verſe or twayne
               Where at he made diſdayne
               The pekyſhe parſons brayne
               Coulde not reache nor attaine
               
                  
What the ſentence mente
               He ſayde for a croked intent
               The wordes were paruerted
               And this he ouerthwarted
               Of the whiche proceſſe
               Ye maye knowe more expreſſe
               If it pleaſe you to loke
               In the reſidue of this booke.
            
            
               Here after followeth the Table.
               
                  LOke on this tabul
                  Vvhether thou art a bul
                  To rede or to ſpel
                  Vvhar theſe verſes tel.
                  Sicculo lutueris eſt colo bunraard
                  Nixphedras uiſarum caniuter 
                        •
                     auntantes.
                  Raterplas Natanbrian um ſudus itnugenus,
                  18. 10. 2. 11. 19. 4. 13. 3. 3. 1. tēualet.
                  Cartula ſtet precor hec uello temer and a petulco
                  Hos rapiet Numeros non homo ſz mala bos.
                  Ex parte. Rem carte aduerte aperte, pone muſam are thuſam hanc.
               
               
                  
                  Where to ſhoulde I rehers
                  The ſentence of my vers.
                  In them be no ſcholes
                  For braynſicke franticke foles
                  Conſtruas hoc, domine dawcocke,
                  Ware the hawke.
               
               
                  Maiſter Sophiſta
                  Ye ſimplex, ſilogiſta
                  The Deuelyſhe dogmatiſta
                  Your hawke on your fiſta
                  To hawke when your liſta
                  In eccleſia iſta domine cacapiſti
                  With thy hawke on thy fiſty
                  Nunquid ſic dixiſti. Nunquid ſic feciſti
                  Sed vbi hoc legiſti
                  Aut vnde hoc, doctor dawcocke.
                  Ware the hawke.
               
               
                  Doctor Dialetica
                  Where finde you in Ipotetica
                  Or in Cathagoria. Latina, ſiue dorica
                  To vſe your hawkes, forica
                  In propiciatorio, tanquam, diuerſorio
                  Unde hoc, domine dawcocke
                  Ware the Hawke.
               
               
                  Saye to me Iacke haris
                  Quare accuparis Ad ſacramentum altaris
                  For no reuens thou ſpares
                  To ſhake my pygeons federis
                  
                     
Super, arcam federis
                  Unde hoc, doctor dawcocke
                  Ware the Hawke.
               
               
                  Sir dominus vobiſcum Par aucupium
                  Ye made your hawke to cum
                  De ſuper candelabrum
                  Chriſti crucifixi
                  To fede vpon your fiſtye
                  Dic inimice crucis chriſti. Ubi didiciſti
                  Facere hoc, domine dawcocke
                  Ware the Hawke
               
               
                  Apoſtata Iulianus
                  Nor yet Neſtorianus
                  Thou ſhalt no where rede
                  That they dyd ſuch a dede
                  To let theyr hawkes fly
                  Ad oſtium tabernaculi
                  In quo eſt corpus domini
                  Caue hoc, doctor dawcocke
                  Ware the Hawke
               
               
                  This doutleſſe ye raued
                  Dis churche ye thus depraued
                  Wherfore as I be ſaued
                  Ye are therefore be knaued
                  Quare, quia euangelia
                  Concha, et conchelia
                  Ancipiter, & ſonalia
                  Cetera, quoque talia
                  
                     
Tibi ſunt equalia
                  Unde hoc domine dawcocke
                  Ware the Hawke
               
               
                  Et relis et ralis Et reliqualis
                  From Granado to galis
                  From winchelſee to wales
                  Non eſt brainſicke tales
                  Nec minus racionalis. Nec magis beſtis
                  That ſingges with a chalis
                  Conſtruas hor doctor dawcocke
                  Ware the Hawke.
               
               
                  Maſed witles ſmery ſmyth
                  Hampar with your hammer vpon thy ſtyth
                  And make here of a ſickel or a ſaw
                  For though ye liue. a. c. yere ye ſhal dye a daw
                  Uos valete doctor indiſcrete
               
            
            
               S̄keltonis Apoſtrophat ad diuum Iohannem decollatum in cuius profeſto ficbat hoc a ucupium.
               O Memoranda dies qua decolare Iohannes Acupiū facit hod quandam quod fecerit infra eccleſiam de dis uiolans ſua ſacra ſacrorum rector de Whiphſtocke doctor cognomine daucocke, & dominus Wodcocke, probatis. probat hic. probat, hec hoc.
               
            
            
               Idem. de liber a dicacitate poetica, in cextolem da probitate et in per fricam da ignobilate.
               
                  
                  LIbertas ueneran da piis conceſſa poetis, diſcendi eſt quecunque placent querunque iuuabunte uell quecunque ualent iuſ
                        ••
                     s defendere cauſas uell quecunque uolent ſtolidos mordere peculcos. Ergo da bi
                        •
                     
                     ueniam.
               
            
            
               Quod Skelton Laureat
            
         
         
            
               All noble men of this take hede
               And beleue it as your crede.
               TO haſtye of ſentence
               To fearſe for none offence
               To ſcarce of your expens
               To large in necligence
               To ſlacke in recompens
               To hawte in excellence
               To lighte intelligence
               And to lyghte of credence
               Where theſe kepe reſidence
               Reaſon is banyſhed thence
               And alſo dame Prudence
               With ſober pacience.
            
            
               All noble men of this take hede
               And beleue it as your crede
            
            
               Then wythoute colluſyon
               Marke well this concluſion
               Thorowe ſuche abuſion
               And by ſuche Illuſion
               
                  
Unto greate confuſion
               A nobell man may fall
               And hys honoure appall
               That yf ye thinke this ſhall
               Not rub you on the gall
               Then the deuill take all
               All nobell men of this take hede. &c.
               
                  Quod Skelton Laureate.
               
            
            
               Ye may heare now, in this Rhime
               How euery thing, muſt haue a time.
               TIme is a thing, that no man may reſiſt
               Time is tranſitory, and Irreuocable
               Who ſaith the cōtrary, time paſſeth as him
               Time muſt be taken, in ſeaſon couenable
               Take time when time is, for time is ay mutable liſt
               All thing hath time, who can for it prouide
               Bide for time who wil, for time wil no mā abide
            
            
               Tyme to be ſad, and time to play and ſporte
               Time to take reſt, by way of recreation
               Tyme to ſtudy, and time to vſe comfort
               Tyme of pleaſure, and time of conſolation
               Thus time hath his time, of diuers maner faciō
               
               Tyme for to eate and drynke, for thy repaſt
               Tyme to be liberall, and time to make no waſt
            
            
               Tyme to trauel, and time for to reſt
               Time for to ſpeake, and time for to hold thi peace
               
                  
Time woulde be vſed, when time is beſt
               Time to begin, and time for to ceaſe
               And when time is, put thyſelf in preaſe
               And when time is, to holde thyſelfe a backe
               For time wel ſpent, can neuer haue lacke.
            
            
               The rotes take their ſap, in time of vere
               In time of ſommer, floures freſhe and grene
               In time of harueſt, men their corne ſhere
               In time of winter the North wind waxeth kene
               So bitterly biting, the floures be not ſene
               The Ralendis of Ianus, with his froſtes hore
               That time is, whē people muſt liue vpō the ſtore
            
            
               Quod Skelton Laureat.
            
         
         
            A prayer to the father of heauen.
            
               O Radiant luminary of light interminable
               Celeſtiall father, potenciall God of might
               Of heauen and earth. O lorde incōperable
               Of al perfections the eſſenciall moſt perfighte
               O maker of mankind, that formed day and night
               Whoſe power imperial, cōprehēdeth euery place
               Mine hart, my mind, my thought, my hole delite
               Is after this lyfe, to ſe thy glorious face.
            
            
               Whoſe magnificence, is incomprehenſible
               Al argumentes of reaſon, whiche far doth excede
               Whoſe de
                     •
                  te doutles, is indiuiſible
               From whō al goodnes, and vertue doth procede
               
                  
Of thy ſupport, al creatures haue nede
               Aſſiſt me good Lord, and graunt me of thy grace
               To liue to thy pleaſure, in word thought & dede
               And after this lyfe to ſee thy glorious face.
            
         
         
            To the ſeconde Parſone.
            
               OBenigne Ieſu, my ſouerain lorde and kynge
               The only ſonne of God, by filiacion
               The ſecond parſon, without beginning
               Both god & man, our faith maketh plain relaciō
               
               Mary the mother, by way of incarnacion
               Whoſe glorious paſſion, our ſoules doth reuiue
               Again al bodely, and ghoſtly tribulacion
               Defend me with thy piteous woundes fiue
            
            
               O pereles prynce, paynted to the death
               Rufully rent, thy body wan and blo
               For my redempcion, gaue vp thy vytal breathe
               Was neuer ſorow, lyke to thy deadly wo
               Graunt me, out of this world when I ſhal go
               Thine endles mercy, for my preſeruatiue
               Againſt the world, the fleſh, the deuill alſo
               Defende me with thy piteous woundes fiue.
            
         
         
            To the holy ghoſt.
            
               
               OFiry ſentence, inflamed with all grace
               Enkyndeling hertes, with brandes charitable
               The endleſſe rewarde, of pleaſure and ſolace
               To the father, and the ſon, thou art cōmunicable
               In vnitate, which is inſeperable
               O water of lyfe, O wel of conſolacion
               Againſt al ſuggeſtions deadly, and dampnable
               Reſcu me good Lorde, by your preſeruacion.
            
            
               To whome is appropryed, the holy ghoſt by name
               The third parſon, one god in Trinite
               Of perfyt loue, thou art the ghoſtlye flame
               O mirrour of mekenes, peace and tranquilitye
               My confort, my counſel, my parfit charity
               O water of lyfe, O wel of conſolacion
               Againſt all ſtormes, of hard aduerſitie
               Reſcu me good Lord, by thy preſeruation.
            
            Amen.
            
               Quod Skelton Laureate.
            
            Here after foloweth the boke called Elinour Rumming.
         
         
            
            
               The tunnyng of Elynour Rummyng. Per. Skelton Laureate.
            
               TEll you I chill
               If that ye wyll
               A whyle be ſtill
               Of a comelye gyll
               That dwelt on a hyll
               But ſhe is not gryll
               For ſhe is ſomewhat ſage
               And well worne in age
               For her viſage
               It woulde aſſwage
               A mannes courage
            
            
               Her lothelye leare
               Is nothynge cleare
               But vglye of cheare.
               Droupye and drowſye
               Scuruy and lowſy
               Her face all bowſy
               Comelye crinckled
               Wonderſly wrynkled
               Lyke a roſte pigges eare
               Bryſtled with here
            
            
               Her lewde lyppes twayne
               They ſlauer men ſayne
               
                  
Lyke a ropye rayne
               A gummy glayre
               She is vglye fayre
               Her noſe ſome dele hoked
               And camouſlye croked
               Neuer ſtoppinge
               But euer dropping
               Her ſkin loſe and ſlacks
               Grained like a ſacke
               With a croked backe
            
            
               Her eyen gowndye
               Are full vnſowndy
               For they are blered
               And ſhe graye heared
               Iawed lyke a Ietty
               A man would haue pity
               To ſe how ſhe is gumbed
               Fingered and thumbed
               Gently ioynted
               Greſed and annointed
               Up to the knockels
               The bones her buckels
               Together made faſte
               Her youthe is farre paſte
               Foted lyke a plane
               Legges like a crane
               And yet ſhe wyl iet
               Lyke a iolly ſet
               
                  
In her furred flocket
               And gray ruſſet rocket
               With ſimper the cocket
               Her huke of Lyncole grene
               It hadde bene hers I wene
               More then fortye yeare
               And ſo it dothe appeare
               And the grene bare thredes
               Looke lyke ſere wedes
               Wythered lyke Haye
               The woll worne awaye
               And yet I dare ſaye
               She thinketh herſelfe gaye
               Uppon the holye daye
               Whan ſhe dothe her araye
               And girdeth in her getes
               Stitched and pranked with pletes
               Her kirtell Briſtowe red
               With clothes vppon her heade
               That they way a ſowe of leade
               Wrythen in a wonder wiſe
               After the Sarazins giſe
               With a whim wham
               Knit with a trim tram
               Uppon her brayne panne
               Like an Egiptian
               Capped aboute
               Whan ſhe goeth oute
               
                  
Herſelfe for to ſhewe
               She driueth downe the Dewe
               With a paire of heles
               As brode as two wheles
               She hobbles as a Goſe
               With her blauket hoſe
               Her ſhone ſmered with talow
               Greſed vpon dyrt
               That baudeth her ſkyrt
            
            
               Primus paſſus.
               
                  And this comelye dame
                  I vnderſtande her name
                  Is Elynoure Rumminge
                  At home in her wonnyng
                  And as men ſay
                  She dwelt in Sothray
                  In a certaine ſtede
                  By ſyde Lederhede
                  She is a tonniſhe gyb
                  The deuell and ſhe be ſib.
               
               
                  But to make vp my tale
                  She brueth noppy ale
                  And maketh therof poorte ſale
                  To traueilers, to tinkers
                  To ſweters, to ſwinkers
                  And all good ale drynkers
                  That wyll nothinge ſpare
                  But dryncke tyll they ſtare
                  
                     
And bringe themſelfe bare
                  With nowe away the mare
                  And let vs ſley care
                  As wiſe as an hare
               
               
                  Come who ſo wil
                  To Elinour on the hil
                  With fil the cup fill
                  And ſit there by ſtill
                  Earelye and late
                  Thither commeth Rate
                  Ci
                        ••
                     ye and Sare
                  With their legges bare
                  And alſo theyr fete
                  Hardely full vnſwete
                  With their heles dagged
                  Theyr kyrtelles all to iagged
                  Theyr ſmockes all to ragged
                  With titters and tatters
                  Brynge dyſhes and platters
                  With all theyr mighte runnyng
                  To Elynoure rumminge
                  To haue of her tunninge
                  She leaneth them of the ſame
                  And thus beginneth the game
               
               
                  Some wenches come vnbraſed
                  Wyth theyr naked pappes
                  That flippes and flappes
                  It wygges and it wagges
                  
                     
Lyke tawny ſaffron bagges
                  A ſorte of foule drabbes
                  All ſcuruy with ſcabbes
                  Some be flye bytten
                  Some ſkewed as a kytten
                  Some with a ſho cloute
                  Bynde their heades aboute
                  Some haue no herelace
                  Theyr lockes about their face
                  Theyr treſſes vntruſte
                  All full of vnluſte
                  Some looke ſtrawrye
                  Some cawrye mawrye
                  Full vntidye tegges
                  Lyke rotten egges
                  Suche a lewde ſorte
                  To Elynoure reſorte
                  From tyde to tyde
                  Abyde abyde
                  And to you ſhall be toulde
                  Howe her ale is ſoulde
                  To mawte and to molde
               
            
            
               Secundus paſſus
               
                  Some haue no monye
                  That thither commye
                  For their ale to paye
                  That is a ſhrewde a ray
                  Elinoure ſweared naye
                  
                     
Ye ſhall not beare awaye
                  My ale for noughte
                  By him that me boughte
               
               
                  With hey dogge haye
                  Haue theſe dogges awaye
                  With gette me a ſtaffe
                  The ſwyne eate my draffe
                  Strike the hogges with a clubbe
                  They haue dronk vp miſwilling tub
                  For be there neuer ſo much preſe
                  Theſe ſwine go to the hye deſe
                  The ſowe with her pygges
                  The bore his taile wrygges
                  Againſt the hye bench.
                  With fo, ther is aſtench
                  Gather vp thou wench.
                  Seeſt thou not what is fall
                  Take vp drit and all.
                  And beare out of the hal
                  God geue it il preuing.
                  Clenly as euel cheuing
               
               
                  But let vs turne plain,
                  Ther we left againe
                  For as ill a patch as that.
                  The hens run in the maſh fat
                  For they go to rouſt
                  Straight ouer the ale iouſt
                  And donge whan it commes
                  
                     
In the ale tunnes
                  Then Elinour taketh.
                  The maſh bol and ſhaketh
                  The hennes donge away.
                  And ſkommeth it in a tray
                  Where as the yeſt is.
                  With her maungy fiſtis
                  And ſomtime ſhe blens.
                  The donge of her hennes
                  And the ale together.
                  And ſayth goſſip come hither
                  This ale ſhalbe thicker
                  And floure the more quicker
                  For I may tel you
                  I learned it of a Iewe
                  Wham I began to brewe
                  And I haue founde it trew
                  Drinke nowe while it is new
                  And ye may it broke
                  It ſhall make you loke
                  Yonger then ye be
                  Yeres two or thre
                  For ye may proue it by me
                  Behold ſhe ſayd and ſee
                  How bright I am of ble
                  Ich am not caſt away
                  That can my huſband ſaye
                  Whan we kyſte and playe
                  
                     
In luſte and in likynge
                  He calleth me his whiting
                  His mullinge and his nittine
                  His nobbes and his connye
                  His ſweting and hys honny
                  With baſſe my prety bonny
                  Thou arte worthe good and monny
                  This make I my falyre fanny
                  Tyll that he dreame and dronnye
                  For after all oure ſport
                  Than will he rout and ſnort
                  Then ſwetely together we ly
                  As two pygges in a ſtye.
               
               
                  To ceaſe me ſemeth beſt
                  And of this tale to reaſt
                  And for to leaue this letter
                  Becauſe it is no better
                  And becauſe it is no ſwetter
                  We wyll no farther ryme
                  Of it, at this time
                  But we wyl turne playne
                  Where we left agayne.
               
            
            
               Tertius paſſus.
               
                  In ſtede of coine and monny
                  Somme brynge her a conny
                  And ſome a pot with honni
                  Some a ſalt, and ſome a ſpone
                  Some their hoſe, ſome ther ſhone
                  
                     
Some ran a good trot
                  With a ſkyllet or a pot
                  Some fyll their pot full
                  Of good Lemſter woll
                  An huſwife of truſte
                  Whan ſhe is a thruſt
                  Suche a webbe can ſpyn
                  Her thryfte is full thyn
               
               
                  Some go ſtrayghte thyther
                  Be it ſlaty or ſlider
                  They holde the hye waye
                  They care not what men ſaye
                  Be that as be maye
                  Some lothe to be eſpyde
                  Some ſtart in at the backe ſyde
                  Ouer the hedge and pale
                  And all for the good ale
               
               
                  Some renne tyll they ſwete
                  Bryng with them malt or whete
                  And dame Elinoure entreaet
                  To byrle them of the beſt
               
               
                  Than cometh an other geſt
                  She ſwered by the rode of reſt
                  Her lyppes are ſo drye
                  Without drynke ſhe muſt dye
                  Therefore tyll it by and by
                  And haue here a pecke of ry
               
               
                  Anone cometh another
                  
                     
As drye as the other
                  And wyth her dothe bryng
                  Mele, ſalt, or other thing
                  Her harneſt girdle, her wedding ringe
                  To paye for hir ſcot
                  As cometh to her lot
                  Som bringeth her huſbādes hood
                  Becauſe the ale is good
                  A nother brought her his cap
                  To offer to the ale tap
                  With flaxe and with towe
                  And ſome brought ſoure dow
                  With hey and with howe
                  Syt we downe a rowe
                  And dryncke tyll we blowe
                  And pype tirlye tyrlowe
               
               
                  Some layde to pledge
                  Theyr hatchet and their wedge
                  Their hekell and their rele
                  Their rock, their ſpinnīg whele
                  And ſome went ſo narrow
                  They laid to pledge their wharrow
                  Their rihſkin and theyr ſpindell
                  Theyr nedel and their thimbell
                  Here was ſcante thryſte
                  Whan they made ſuch ſhyfte
               
               
                  Their thruſt was ſo great
                  They aſked neuer for meate
                  
                     
But drincke ſtill drynke
                  And let the cat winke
                  Let vs waſhe oure gommes
                  From the dry crommes
               
            
            
               Quartus paſſus.
               
                  Some for very nede
                  Lay down a ſkain of threde
                  And ſome a ſkain of yarne
                  Bothe Beanes and peaſe
                  Small Chaffer dothe eaſe
                  Sometime, now and than
                  Another there was that ran
                  With a good braſſepan
                  Her coloure was full wan
                  She ran in al the haſte
                  Unbraſed and vnlaſte
                  Tawnye ſwart and ſwallowe
                  Lyke a cake of tallowe
                  I ſweare by all hallowe
                  It was a ſtare to take
                  The Deuill in a brake.
               
               
                  And than came haltynge Ione
                  And broughte a gambone
                  Of bakon that was reaſtye
                  But Lorde as ſhe was teſtye
                  Angrye as a waſpye
                  She began to yane and gaſpy
                  And bad Elynoure go bet
                  
                     
And fyll in good meate
                  It was dere that was farre fet
               
               
                  Another broughte a ſpycke
                  Of a bacon flicke
                  Her tonge was verye quicke
                  But ſhe ſpake ſomewhat thicke
                  Her felowe did ſtammer and ſtut
                  But ſhe was a foule ſlut
                  For her mouthe fomed
                  And her bellye groned
                  Ione ſayne ſhe had eaten a fyeſt
                  By Chriſte ſayde ſhe thou lyeſt
                  I haue as ſwete a breathe
                  As thou with ſhamefull deathe
               
               
                  Then Elinour ſayd, ye callettes
                  I ſhall breake your palettes
                  Withoute ye nowe ceaſe
                  And ſo was made the dronken peace
                  Than thider came droncken Ales
                  And ſhe was full of tales
                  Of tidinges in Wales.
                  And of ſainct Iames in Gales
                  And of the Portyngales
                  With lo goſſip I wis
                  Thus and thus it is
                  There hath ben greate warre
                  Betwene temple barre
                  And the croſſe in cheape
                  
                     
And there came and heape
                  Of mil ſtones in a route
                  She ſpeaketh thus in her ſnoute
                  Sneuelynge in her noſe
                  As thoughe ſhe had the poſe
                  Lo here is an olde tippet
                  And ye wil geue me a ſippet
                  Of your ſtale ale
                  God ſende you good ſale
                  And as ſhe was drynkynge
                  She fell in a wynkynge
                  With a barlye hoode
                  She pyſte where ſhe ſtoode
                  Than began ſhe to wepe
                  And forthwith fell on flepe
                  Elynoure tooke her vp
                  And bleſſed her wyth acup
                  Of newe ale in cornes
                  Ales founde therein no thornes
                  But ſupped it vp at ones
                  She found therin no bones
               
            
            
               Quintus paſſus.
               
                  Now in cometh another rabel
                  Fyrſt one with a ladell
                  Another with a cradell
                  And with a ſyde ſadel
                  And there began a fabel
                  A clatterynge and a babell
                  
                     
Of foles ſilly
                  That had a fole with willy
                  With iaſt you, and gup gillye
                  She coulde not lye ſtillye
                  Then came in a genet
                  And ſware by ſainct Bennet
                  I dranke not this ſennet
                  A draughte to my paye
                  Elynoure I the pray
                  Of thyne ale let vs aſſaye.
                  And haue here a pilch of gray
                  I weare ſkinnes of Conye
                  That cauſeth I loke ſo donny
                  Another than dyd hyche her
                  And broughte a pottel pycher
                  A tonnel, and a bottel
                  But ſhe had loſt the ſtoppel
                  She cut of her ſho ſole
                  And ſtopped ther with the hole.
               
               
                  Amonge all the blommer
                  Another brought a ſkommer
                  A frying pan and a ſlice
                  Elynoure made the pryce
                  For good ale eche whit.
               
               
                  Than ſtarte in mad kyt
                  That had lytle wyt
                  She ſemed ſome deale ſeke
                  And brought vp a peny cheke
                  
                     
To dame Elinoure
                  For a draughte of lycour.
               
               
                  Than Margery milke ducke
                  Her kirtell ſhe did vp tucke
                  An ynche aboue her kne
                  Her legges that ye might ſe
                  But they wer ſturdy and ſtubbled
                  Mighty peſtels and clubbed
                  As fayre and as white
                  As the fote of a kite
                  She was ſomwhat foule
                  Croke necked lyke an Owle
                  And yet ſhe broughte her fees
                  A cantel of Eſſex cheſe
                  Was well a fote thicke
                  Full of magottes quicke
                  It was huge and greate
                  And mightye ſtronge meate
                  For the deuill to eate
                  It was tarte and punyete
                  Another ſorte of ſluttes
                  Some broughte walnutes
                  Some apples, ſome peares
                  Some brought their clippinge ſheres
                  Some broughte thys and that
                  Some broughte I wote neare what
                  Some broughte theyr huſbandes hat
                  Some podynges and lynkes
                  
                     
Some tripes that ſtinkes
               
               
                  But of all thys thronge
                  One came them amonge
                  She ſemed halfe a leche
                  And began to preach
                  Of the teweſday in the weke
                  Whan the mare doth keke
                  Of the vertue of an vnſet leke
                  Of her huſbandes breke
                  With the feders of a quaile
                  She could to bourde on ſayle
                  And with good ale barme
                  She could make a charm
                  To healpe with all a ſtytche
                  She ſemed to be a wytche
                  Another brought. ii. goſlings
                  That wer noughty froſlings
                  Some brought thē in a wallet
                  She was a cumlye callet
                  The goſlinges were vntide
                  Elinour began to chide
                  They be wrethocke thou haſte brout
                  They ar ſhyre ſhaking nought
               
            
            
               Sextus paſſus.
               
                  Maud ruggy, thither ſkipped
                  She was vglye hipped
                  And vglye thicke lipped
                  Like an Onion ſided
                  
                     
Like tan ledder hided
                  She had her ſo guided
                  Betwene the cup and & the wall
                  That ſhe was there with all
                  Into a palſey fall
                  With that her hed ſhaked
                  And her handes quaked
                  Ones heade wold haue aked
                  To ſe her naked
                  She dranke ſo of the dregges
                  The dropſy was in her legges
                  Her face gliſtring lyke glaſſe
                  All foggye fat ſhe was
                  She had alſo the goute
                  In all her ioyntes aboute
                  Her breth was ſoure and ſtale
                  And ſmelled all of ale
                  Suche a bedfellawe
                  Wold make one caſt his craw
                  But yet for all that
                  She drancke on the maſhe fat
                  There came an olde rybibe
                  She halted of a kybe
                  And had broken her ſhyn
                  At the threſhold cummyng in
                  And fell ſo wyde open
                  That one myght ſe her token
                  Te deuil there on be wroken
                  
                     
What nede all this be ſpoken
                  She yelled lyke a calfe
                  Ryſe vp on gods halfe
                  Sayde Elynoure rummynge
                  I be ſhrewe the for thy cummyng
                  As ſhe at her did plucke
                  Quake, quake, ſayde the ducke
                  In that lampatrams lap
                  With fye, couer the ſhap
                  Wyth ſum flip flap
                  God geue it yll happe
                  Sayde Elynoure for ſhame
                  Lyke an honeſt daine
                  Up ſhe ſtearte, halfe lame
                  And ſkantlye coulde go
                  For payne and for wo
               
               
                  In came another dant
                  Wyth a goſe and a gant
                  She had a wide weſant
                  She was nothynge pleaſaunt
                  Necked lyke an Oliphant
                  It was a bullifant
                  A gredy cormerante
                  A nother brought her garlik heds
                  A nother brought her bedes
                  Of Iet or of coale
                  To offer to the ale pole
                  Some brought a wimble
                  
                     
Some brought a thymble
                  Some brought a ſilke lace
                  Some brought a pincaſe
                  Some her huſbandes gowne
                  Some a pillowe of downe
                  Some of the napery
                  And all this ſhyfte they make
                  For the good ale ſake
               
               
                  A ſtraw ſaid bele ſtande vtter
                  For we haue egges and butter
                  And of pigeons a payre.
               
               
                  Than ſterte forthe a fiſgigge
                  And ſhe brought a bore pigge
                  The fleſh thereof was ranke
                  And her breath ſtrongly ſtanke
                  Yet or ſhe wente ſhe dranke
                  And gate her greate thancke
                  Of Elynoure for her ware
                  That ſhe thither bare
                  To paye for her ſhare
                  Nowe trulye to my thinkynge
                  This is a ſolempne drinkyng
               
            
            
               Septimus paſſus.
               
                  Soft quod one high Sibbil
                  And let me with you bib
                        •
                     ill
                  She ſate downe in the place
                  With a ſorye face
                  Whey wormed aboute
                  
                     
Garniſhed was her ſnoute
                  With here and there a puſcul
                  Lyke a ſcabbed muſcull
                  This ale ſayde ſhe is noppy
                  Let vs ſippe and ſoppy
                  And not ſpil a droppy
                  For ſo mote I hoppye
                  It coleth well my coppy
               
               
                  Dame Elinoure ſayde ſhe
                  Haue here is for me
                  A cloute of London pinnes
                  And with that ſhe beginnes
                  The pot to her plucke
                  And dranke a good lucke
                  She ſwinge vp a quarte
                  At ones for her part
                  Her paunche was ſo puffed
                  And ſo with ale ſtuffed
                  Had ſhe not hyed a pace
                  She had defoyled the place
               
               
                  Than began the ſport
                  Amonge, that dronken fort
                  Dame Elynoure ſayde they
                  Lende here a cocke of hay
                  To make all thynge cleane
                  Ye wote well what we meane
               
               
                  But ſyr amonge all
                  That ſate in that hall
                  
                     
There was a pricke me deintie
                  Sate lyke a ſaintye
                  And began to paintye
                  As thoughe ſhe woulde fainty
                  She made it as koy
                  As a lege demoy
                  She was not halfe ſo wiſe
                  As ſhe was peuyſh nyſe
                  She ſayde neuer a worde
                  But roſe from the borde
                  And called for oure dame
                  Elynoure by name
                  We ſuppoſed I wys
                  That ſhe roſe to piſſe
                  But the verye grounde
                  Was for to compounde
                  With Elynour in the ſpence
                  To paye for her expence
                  I haue no penny nor grote
                  To pay ſayd ſhe, god wot
                  For waſhinge of my throte
                  But my bedes of amber
                  Bere them to your chaumber
                  Then Elynour dyd them hide
                  Wythin her beddes ſyde
                  But ſome than ſat righte ſad
                  That nothynge had
                  There of theyr one
                  
                     
Neyther gelt nor pawne
                  Suche were there mennye
                  That had not a pennye
                  But whan they ſhould walke
                  Were fayne with a chalke
                  To ſcore on the balke
                  Or ſcore on the tayle
                  God geue it yll hayle
                  For my fyngers ytche
                  I haue written to mych
                  Of this mad mummyng
                  Of Elynoure Rummynge
                  Thus endeth the geſt
                  Of this worthye felt.
               
               
                  Quod Skelton Laureat. 
               
            
            
               Laurratiſkeltonidis in deſpectu malignantium diſticon.
               
                  QVdmuis infanis, quanuis marceſcis inams
               
               
                  Iuuidi cantamus, hec loca plena locis
               
               Bien men ſounient.
               
                  OMnes feminas, que uel nimis bibule ſunt, uel que ſcordida labe ſqualoris, aut quamſpuria feditatis macula, aut uerboſa laquatita te notantur, poeta inuitat ad audicndum hunc libellum, &c.
               
               
                  
                  EBric, ſqualida, ſordida femini, perdiga uerbis 
               
               
                  Huc currat, properet ueniat ſuafacta libellus 
               
               
                  Iſte uolutabit: pean ſua plectra ſonando 
               
               
                  Materiam riſus cantabit carmine rauco.
               
               FINIS.
               
                  
                     Quod Skelton Laureate.
               
            
         
         
            
               Here after folovveth a litle 
                     〈◊〉
                   vvhiche hath to name, vvhie co
                     ••
                  
                ye not to Court Comoned by Mayſter Skelton poete Laureate. The relucent mirror for all Prela Preſidents aſwell ſpirituall as temporall ſadly to loke vpon deuiſed in Engliſh by Skelton.
            All noble men of this take hede and leue it as your Crede.
            
               
                  TO haſtye of ſentence
               To fearce for none offence
               To ſcarce of your expence
               To large in negligence
               To ſlacke in recompence
               
                  
To haut in excellence
               To lyght intellygence
               And to lyght incredence
               Where theſe kepe reſydence
               Reaſon is baniſhed thence
               And alſo dame prudence
               Wyth ſober patience
               All noble men. &c.
            
            
               Than without colluſion
               Marke well thys concluſion
               Through ſuch abuſion
               And by ſuche illuſion
               Unto great confuſion
               A noble man may fall
               And his honoure appall
               And yf ye thynke thys ſhal
               Not rubbe you on the gall
               Than the deuyll take all. &c.
            
            
               Hoc vates ille, de quo loquntur in ille.
            
         
         
            
            Vvhy come ye not to Court.
            
            
               FOr age is a page
            For the court full vnmeete
            For age can not rage
            Nor baſſe her ſweete ſweete
            But whan age ſeeth that rage
            Dothe aſwage and refrayne
            Than wyll age haue a corage
            To come to court agayne
            But
            Helas, ſage ouerage
            To madly decayes
            That age for dottage
            Is recouered now a dayes
            Thus age graunt domage
            Is nothyng ſet by
            And rage in a rerage
            Doth renne lamentably.
            So
            That rage muſt make pillage
            To catche that catche maye
            And wyth ſuche forage
            Hunte the boſkage
            That hartes wyl runne awaye
            Bothe Hartes and hindes
            With all good mindes
            Fare well, than haue good day
            
               
               Than haue good day a dew
               For defaute of reſcew
               Some men may happely rew
               And theyr heades mew
               The time dothe faſte enſew
               That bales begin to brew
               I drede by ſwete Ieſu
               This tale will be to trew
               In fayth dicken thou crew.
            
            
               In fayth dicken, thou crew. &c.
               DIcken, thou crew doutles
               For truelye to expreſſe
               There hath be much exces
               With banketyng braynleſſe
               With ryoting rechles
               With gambaudyng thryftles
               With ſpend, and waſte witles
               Treating of truce reſtleſſe
               Pratyng for peace peaſleſſe
               They countring at Cales
               Wrange vs on the wales
               Cheife Councelour was careles
               Gronyng grouching graceles
               And to none entent
               Our talwod is all brent
               Our fagottes are all ſpent
               We may blow at the cole
               
                  
Our mare hath caſt her fole
               And mocke hath loſt her ſhoo
               What may ſhe do thertoo
               An end of an old ſong
               Do right and no wrong
               As right as a rammes horne
               For thrift is threde bare worne
               Our ſhepe are ſhrewdlye ſhorne
               And trouthe is all to torne
               Wiſdome is laught to ſcorne
               Fauel is falſe forſworne
               Iauel is nobly borne
               Hauel and Haruy hafter
               Iacke Trauell and Cole crafter
               We ſhall heare more hereafter
               With polling and ſhauynge
               With borowyng and crauyng
               With reuyng and rauyng
               With ſwearing and ſtaryng
               There vayleth no reaſonyng
               For wil doth rule al thyng
               Wyl, wyl, wyl, wyl, wyl,
               He ruleth alway ſtyl
               Good reaſon and good ſkyll
               They may garlicke pill
               Cary ſackes to the mil
               Or peſcoddes they may ſhil
               Or els go roſte a ſtone
               
                  
There is no man but one
               That hath the ſtrokes alone
               Be it blacke or white
               All that he dothe is right
               As right as a Cammocke croked
               Thys bil wel ouer loked
               Clerely perceiue we may
               There went the hare awaye
               The hare, the For, the Gray,
               The hart, the hinde, the bucke
               God ſend vs better lucke.
            
            
               God ſend vs better lucke. &c.
               TWit Andrew, twit Scot
               Ge heme, ge ſcoure thy pot
               For we haue ſpent our ſhot
               We ſhall haue a tot quot
               From the Pope of Rome
               To weaue all in one lome
               A webbe of Lylſe wulce
               
                  Opus male dulce.
               
               The deuill kyſſe his cule
               For whiles he doth rule
               All is warſe and warſe
               The deuill kyſſe his arſe
               For whether he bleſſe or curſe
               It can not be muche worſe
               From Baumberow to both ābar
               
                  
We haue caſt vp oure war
               And made a worthy truſe
               Wyth gup leuel ſuſe
               Our mony madly ſent
               And more madly ſpent
               From Croydon to Kent
               Wote ye whither they went?
               From winchelſy to Rye
               And all not worthe a flye
               From wentbridge to Hull
               Our army waxeth dull
               With turne all home agayne
               And neuer a ſcot ſlayne
               Yet the good Erle of Surray
               The french men he doth fraye
               And vexeth them day by day
               With all the power he maye
               The frenchemen he hath fainted
               And made their hertes attainted
               Of cheualry he is the flour
               Our Lord be his ſuccoure
               The french men he hath ſo mated
               And their courage abated
               That they are but halfe men
               Like foxes in their den
               Like cankerd cowardes all
               Like heons in a ſtone walle
               Tey kepe them in their holdes
               
                  
Lyke hen herted cokoldes
            
            
               But yet they ouer ſhoote vs
               With crownes and with ſcutus
               With Scutes and crownes of golde
               I drede we are bought and ſolde
               It is a wonders warke
               They ſhoote all at one marke
               At the Cardinals hat
               They ſhote all at that
               Out of their ſtronge townes
               They ſhote at him with crownes
               With crownes of gold enblaſed
               They make him ſo a maſed
               And his eyen ſo dafed
               That he ne ſee can
               To know God nor man
               He is ſet ſo hye
               In his Ierarchy
               Of frantike freneſy
               And folyſh fantaſy
               That in the chambre of ſtars
               All matters there he mars
               Clapping his rod on the borde
               No man dare ſpeake a word
               For he hath all the ſaying
               Without any renaying
               He rolleth in his recordes
               
                  
He ſaith, how ſay ye my lordes?
               Is not my reaſon good
               Good euin good Robin hood
               Some ſay yes. And ſome
               Sit ſtill as they were dome
               Thus thwarting ouer thome
               He ruleth al the roſte
               With bragging and with boſte
               Borne vp on euery ſyde
               With pompe and with pryde
               With trompe vp alleluya
               For dame Philargerya
               Hath ſo his hart in hold
               He loueth nothyng but gold
               And Aſmodeus of hel
               Maketh his membres ſwel
               With Dalyda to mell
               That wanton damſell
            
            
               A dew Philoſophia
               A dew theologia
               Welcome dame Simonia
               With dame Caſtrimergia
               To drynke and for to eate
               Sweet Ipocras & ſwete meate
               To kepe his fleſhe chaſte
               In lente for a repaſte
               He eateth Capons ſtewed
               
                  
Feſaunt, and Partriche mewed
               Hennes, chickins and pigges
               He foynes and he frigges
               Spareth neyther mayd ne wyfe
               This is a poſtels lyfe
            
            
               Helas my hart is ſory
               To tell of vayne glory
               But now vpon this ſtory
               I wyll no further rimè
               Tyll another time
            
            
               Tyll another time.
               VUhat newes what newes
               Small newes that true is
               That be worth two kues
               But at the naked ſtewes
               I vnderſtande howe that
               The ſygne of the Cardinall hat
               That Inne is now ſhit vp
               With gup whore gup, nowe gup
               Gup Gilliam Trauillian
               With iaſt you I ſay Iullian
               Wyll ye beare no coles
               A mainy of marefolles
               That occupy their holes
               Full of pocky moles.
               What heare ye of Lancaſhire
               They were not payd theyr hyre
               
                  
They are fell as any fyre
               What heare ye of Cheſſhyre
               They haue layde all in the myre
               They grudge and ſayde
               Their wages were not payde
               Some ſayde they were afrayde
               Of the Scottiſhe hoſte
               For all their crake and boſte
               Wilde fire and thunder
               For all this worldly wonder
               A hundred myle a ſunder
               They were whan they were next
               That is a true text
            
            
               What heare ye of the ſcottes
               They make vs all ſottes
               Poppyng folyſh dawes
               They make vs to pyll ſtrawes
               They play their old prankes
               After huntly bankes
               At the ſtreme of Banokes burns
               They did vs a ſhrewde turne
               Whan Edward of karnaruan
               Loſt all that his father wan
            
            
               What here ye of the lord dakers
               He maketh vs Iacke rakers
               He ſayes we are but crakers
               He calleth vs England men
               
                  
Stronge harted lyke an hen
               For the ſcottes and he
               To well they do agree
               With do thou for mee
               And I ſhal do for thee
               Whiles the red hat doth endure
               He maketh himſelf cocke ſure
               The red hat with his lure
               Bryngeth al thinges vnder cure
            
            
               But as the world nowe gooſe
               What heare ye of the Lord Roſe
               Nothyng to purpoſe
               Not worth a cockly foſe
               Their hertes be in their hoſe
               The Erle of Northumberland
               Dare take nothing on hand
               Our barons be ſo bolde
               Into a mouſe hole they wold
               Runne away and creep
               Like a mainy of ſheep
               Dare not loke out a dur
               For drede of the mayſtife cur
               For drede of the bouchers dog
               Wold wirry them like an hog
            
            
               For and this curre do gnar
               They muſt ſtande all a far
               To holde vp their hand at the bat
               For all their noble bloude
               
                  
He pluckes them by the hood
               And ſhakes them by the eare
               And bryng them in ſuche feare
               He baiteth them lyke a beare
               Lyke an oxe or a bul
               Their wittes he ſayth are dul
               He ſaith they haue no brayne
               Their eſtate to maintaine
               And make to bowe their knee
               Before his maieſtee.
            
            
               Iudges of the kinges lawes
               He countes them foles & dawes
               Sergeauntes of the coyfe cke
               He ſayeth they are to ſeke
               
                  
                     •
                  n pleating of their caſe
               At the commune place
               Or at the kinges benche
               He wringeth thē ſuch a wrenche
               That all our learned men
               Dare not ſet theyr penne
               To plete a true triall
               Within weſtminſter hall
               In the chaūcery where he ſittes
               But ſuche as he admittes
               None ſo hardy to ſpeake
            
            
               He ſaith, thou huddy peake
               They learnyng is to lewd
               
                  
Thy tounge is not well thewde
               To ſeeke before our grace
               And openly in that place
               He rages and he raues
               And calles them cankerd knaues
               Thus royally he doth deale
               Under the kinges brode ſeale
               And in the checker he thē checkes
               In the ſter chābre he nods & becks
               And beareth him there ſo ſtout
               That no man dare rout
               Duke, Earle, Baron, nor Lorde
               But to his ſentence muſt accorde
               Whether he be knyght or ſquyer
               All men folow his deſyre
               What ſay ye of the ſcottiſh kyng
               That is another thing
               He is but an yonglyng
               A tall worthy ſtriplyng
               Her is a whiſpring & a whiplyng
               He ſhould be hither brought
               But and it were well ſought
               I trow all will be nought
               Not worth a ſhittel cocke
               Nor worth a ſoure calſtocke
            
            
               There goeth many a lye
               Of the duke of Albany
               
                  
That of ſhould go his head
               And brought in quicke or dead
               And all Scotland oures
               The moūtenaunce of two houres
            
            
               But as ſome men ſayn
               I drede of ſome falſe trayn
               Subtelly wrought ſhalbe
               Under a fained treate
               But within monethes three
               Men may happely ſee
               The trechery, and the prankes
               Of the Scottiſhe bankes
            
            
               What heare ye of Burgonions
               And the Spanyardes Onions?
               They haue ſlain our Engliſhmen
               Aboue three ſcore and ten
               For al your amitee
               No better they agree
               God ſaue my Lord Admirell
            
            
               What heare ye of Muttrel?
               There wyth I dare not mel
               Yet what heare ye tell
               Of our graund counſel?
               I could ſay ſome what
               But ſpeake ye no more of that
               For drede of the red hat
               Take peper in the noſe
               For than thyne head of goſe
               
                  
Of by the hard arſe
               But there is ſome trauars
               Betwene ſome and ſome
               That makes our ſire to glum
               It is ſome what wrong
               That his berde is ſo long
               He morneth in blacke clothing
               I pray god ſaue the kyng
               Where euer he go or ride
               I pray God be his guide
               Thus will I conclude my ſtile
               And fall to reſt a whyle
            
            
               And ſo to reſt a while. &c.
               
                  ONce yet agayn
                  Of you I wold fraine
                  Why come ye not to courte
                  To which court?
                  To the kinges court
                  Or to Hampton court?
               
               
                  Nay to the kinges court
                  The kynges court
                  Should haue the exellence
                  But hampton court
                  Hath the preeminence
                  And yorkes place
                  With my Lordes grace
                  To whoſe magnificence
                  
                     
Is all the confluence
                  Sutes and ſupplications
                  Embaſſades of all nacions
                  Straw for law canon
                  Or for the law common
                  Or for lawe ciuill
                  It ſhall be as he wyll
                  Stop at law tancrete
                  An obſtract or a concrete
                  Be it ſoure be it ſweete
                  His wiſdome is ſo diſcrete
                  That in a fume or an hete
                  Warden of the flete
                  Set him faſt by the fete
                  And of his royal poure
                  Whan him lyſt to loure
                  Than haue him to the toure
                  Saunz aulter remedy
                  Haue him forth by and by
                  To the marſhalſy
                  Or to the kinges benche
                  He diggeth ſo in the trench
                  Of the court royall
                  That he ruleth them all
                  So he dothe vndermynde
                  And ſuch ſleightes dothe fynde
                  That the kinges mynde
                  By him is ſubuerted
                  
                     
And ſo ſtreatly coarted
                  In credenſing his tales
                  That all is but nutſhales
                  That any other ſayth
                  He hath in him ſuch faith
               
            
            
               Now, yet al this might be
               Suffred and taken in gree
               If that, that he wrought
               To any good end wer brought
               But all he bryngeth to nought
               But God that me deare bought
            
            
               He beareth the king on hand
               That he muſt pyl his land
               To make his cofers rych
               But he layeth al in the dyche
               And vſeth ſuch abuſion
               That in the concluſion
               All commeth to confuſion
               Perceiue the cauſe whye
               To tell the trouth plainlye
               He is ſo ambicious
               So ſhameles, and ſo vicious
               And ſo ſuperſticious
               And ſo much obliuious
               From whēs that he came
               That he falleth in Aciſiam
               Which truely to expreſſe
               
                  
Is a forgetfulnes
               Or wylful blindnes
               Wherwith the Sodomites
               Loſt their inward ſightes
            
            
               The gommorians alſo
               Were brought to deadly wo
               As ſcripture recordes
               A cecitate cordis
               In the latyn ſynge we
               Libera nos domine
            
            
               But this mad Amalecke
               Like to Amamelek
               He regardeth Lordes
               No more than pot ſhordes
               He is in ſuche elacion
               Of his exaltacion
               And the ſupportacion
               Of our ſoueraine Lords
               That God to recorde
               He ruleth al at will
               Without reaſon or ſkyll
               Howbeit they be prymordyall
               Of hys wretched originall
               And his baſe progeny
               And his greſy genealogy
               He came of the ſanke roiall
               That was caſt out of a bouchers ſtall.
            
            
               
               But howe euer he was borne
               Men would haue the leſſe ſcorne
               If he could conſider
               His byrth and rowme together
               And call to his mynde
               How noble and how kynde
               To hym he hath founde
               Our ſouerayne lord, chief groud
               Of all thys prelacy
               And ſet hym nobly
               In great aucthorite
               Out from a low degre
               Which he can not ſee
               For he was parde
               No doctour of deuinttie
               Nor doctor of the law
               Nor of none other ſaw
               But a pore maiſter of arte
               God wot had little part
               Of the Quatriuials
               Nor yet of triuials
               Nor of philoſophye
               Nor of philology
               Nor of good pollicy
               Nor of Aſtronomy
               Nor acquainted worth a fly
               With honourable haly
               Nor with royal Ptholomy
               
                  
Nor with Albumaſar
               To treate of any ſtar
               Fyxt or els mobil
               His latin tounge doth hobbyl
               He doth but clout and cobbel
               In tullis facultie
               Called humanitie
               Yet proudly he dare pretend
               How no ma can him amend
               But haue ye not heard this
               How an one eyed man is
               Wel ſighted, when
               He is amonge blynd men.
            
            
               Than our proces for to ſtable
               This man was ful vnable
               To reche to ſuch degree
               Had not our Prince be
               Royall henry the eyght
               Take him in ſuch conceyte
               That he ſet him on heyght
               In exemplyfieng
               Great Alexander the king
               In writing as we finde
               Which of his royal minde
               And of his noble pleaſure
               Tranſcending out of meaſure
               Thought to do a thyng
               
                  
That pertaineth to a kyng
               To make vp one of nought
               And made to him be brought
               A wretched pore man
               Which his liuing wan
               With planting of Leekes
               By the dayes and by the weekes
               And of this pore vaſſal
               He made a kyng royal
               And gaue him a realme to rule
               That occupyed a ſhowel
               A mattoke, and a ſpade
               Before that he was made
               A kyng, as I haue told
               And ruled as he wold
               Such is a kynges power
               To make within an hower
               And worke ſuch a miracle
               That ſhalbe a ſpectacle
               Of renowme and worldly fame
               In likewiſe now the ſame
               Cardinall, is promoted
               Yet with lewd conditions noted
               As hereafter bene noted
            
            
               Preſumpcion and vain glorie
               Enuy, wrath, and lechery
               Couetes, and gluttony
               Slouthfull to do good
               
                  
Now frantike, now ſtarke wode
               Shuld this man of ſuch mode
               Rule the ſwerde of myght
               How can he do right
               For he wyll as ſoone ſmyght
               His freend, as his foe
               A prouerbe longe ago
            
            
               Set vp a wretche on hye
               In a trone triumphantly
               Make him a great eſtate
               And he wil play checke mate
               With royall maieſtee
               Count hymſelf as good as he
               A prelate potenciall
               To rule vnder Bellyall
               As ferce and as cruell
               As the feende of hel
               His ſeruauntes meniall
               He dothe reuile and brall
               Lyke Mahound in a play
               No man dare him with ſaye
               He hath diſpight and ſcorne
               At them that be wel borne
               He rebukes them and rayles
               Ye horſons, ye vaſſayles
               Ye knaues, ye churles ſonnes
               Ye ribauds, not worth two plūms
               
                  
Ye rainbeaten beggers reiagged
               Ye recrayed ruffins all ragged
               With ſtoupe thou hauel
               Renne thou iauel
               Thou peuiſhe pie pecked
               Thou loſel long necked
               Thus daily they be decked
               Taunted and checked
               That they are ſo wo
               They wot not whether to go.
            
            
               No man dare come to the ſpeche
               Of this gentel Iacke breche
               Of what eſtate he be
               Of ſpiritual dignitie
               Nor duke of hye degree
               Nor Marques, Earle, nor Lord
               Which ſhrewdly doth accord
            
            
               Thus he borne ſo baſe
               All noble men ſhould out face
               His countinaunce lyke a kayſer
               My Lord is not at layſer
               Sir ye muſt tary a ſtound
               Tyl better layſer be found
               And ſir, ye muſt daunce attendaunce
               And take pacient ſufferaunce
               For my Lordes grace
               Hath now no time nor ſpace
               To ſpeake with you, as yet
            
            
               
               And thus they ſhal ſyt
               Chuſe them ſyt or flit
               Stand, walke, or ride
               And his laiſer abide
               Parchaunce half a yere
               And yet neuer the nere
            
            
               This daungerous dowſipere
               Like a kinges pere
               And within this. xvi. yere
               He wold haue ben right fayn
               To haue ben a chaplayn
               And haue taken right great pain
               With a pore knight
               What ſo euer he hight
               The chiefe of his own counſel
               They can not well tell
               Whan they with him ſhould mel
               He is ſo fierce and fel
               He rayles and he rates
               He calleth them doddy pates
               He grinnes and he gapes
               As it were Iacke Napes
               Such a mad Bedlem
               For to rule this realm
               It is a wonderous caſe
               That the kinges grace
               Is toward him ſo minded
               And ſo farre blinded
               
                  
That he can not perceiue
               How he doth him diſce yue
               I dought leaſt by Sorſery
               Or ſuch other loſelry
               As witch craft, or charming
               For he is the kinges derlyng
               And his ſweete hart rote
               And is gouerned by this mad koote
               For what is a man the better
               For the kynges letter
               For he wil tere it a ſunder
               Wherat much I wonder
               How ſuch a hoddy poule
               So boldly dare controule
               And ſo malapertly withſtand
               The kynges owne hand
               And ſettes not by it a mite
               He ſayth the kyng doth wryte
               And wryteth he wot not what
               And yet for all that
               The kyng his clemency
               Deſpenſeth with his demenſy
            
            
               But what his grace doth thinke
               I haue no pen nor ynke
               That therwith can mel
               But wel I can tel
               How Fraunces Petrarke
               
                  
That much noble clerke
               Writeth how charlemaine
               Could not himſelf refrayne
               But was rauiſht with a rage
               Of a lyke dotage
               But how that came aboute
               Rede ye the ſtory out
               And ye ſhal finde ſurely
               It was by nicromanſy
               By carectes and coniuracion
               Under a certayne conſtellacion
               And a certayne fumigacion
               Under a ſtone on a gold ryng
               Wrought to Charlemain yt kyng
               Whiche conſtrayned him forcebly
               For to loue a certaine body
               Aboue all other inordinatlye
               This is no fable nor no lie
               At Acon it was brought to pas
               As by mine auctor tried it was
               But let my maſters mathematical
               Tel you the reſt, for me they ſhall
               They haue the ful intelligence
               And dare vſe the experience
               In there obſolute conſcience
               To practique ſuch abolete ſcience
            
            
               For I abhor to ſmatter
               Of one ſo deuillyſhe a matter
               
                  
But I wil make further relacion
               Of this Iſagogicall colation
               How maſter Gaguine the crownicler
               Of the feates of war
               That were done in Fraunce
               Maketh remembraunce
               How kyng Lewes of Late
               Made vp a great eſtate
               Of a pore wretched man
               Wherof much care began
               Iohannes Balua was his name
               Mine auctor writeth the ſame
               Promoted was he
               To a Cardinals dignitie
               By Lewes the kynge aforeſayd
               With him ſo wel apayd
               That he made him hys chaunceler
               To make all, or to mar
               And to rule as him liſte
               Tyl he checked at the fiſte
               And agayne all reaſon
               Committed open treaſon
               And againſt his lord ſouerain
               Wherfore he ſuffred pain
               Was heded drawen and quarterd
               And dyed ſtinkyngly martred
            
            
               Loe yet for all that
               He ware a cardinals hat
               
                  
In him was ſmall fayth
               As mine auctor ſayth
               Not for that I meane
               Suche a caſuelty ſhould be ſeene
               Or ſuche chaunce ſhould fal
               Unto oure Cardinal.
            
            
               Almightye God I truſt
               Hath for him diſcuſte
               That of force he muſte
               Be faythfull, true and iuſte
               To oure moſte royal kynge
               Chief rote of his makyng
               Yet it is a wilye mouſe
               That cā bylde his dwelling houſe
               Within the cattes eares
               Withouten drede or feare
               It is a nice reconing
               To put al the gouernyng
               All the rule of this land
               Into one mans hand
               One wiſe mans head
               May ſtand ſomwhat in ſtede
               But the wittes of many wyſe
               Much better can deuiſe
               By their circumſpection
               And their ſad direction
               To cauſe the commune weale
               Longe to endure in heale
               
                  
Chriſt kepe king Henry the eyght
               From trechery and diſceipt
               And graunt him grace to know
               The Faucon from the Crow
               The wolfe from the Lambe
               From whens that maiſtife came
               Let him neuer confounde
               The gentil greyhound
               Of this matter the ground
               Is eaſy to expound
               And ſone may be perceyued
               How the world is conueyd
            
            
               But harke my frend one worde
               In earneſt or in borde
               Tel me now in this ſtede
               Is maiſter Mewtas dead
               The kinges french ſecretary
               And his vntrue aduerſary
               For he ſent in writing
               To fraunces the french kynge
               of our maſters coūſel in eueri thīg
               That was a perillous rekenyng
            
            
               Nay nay, he is not dead
               But he was ſo payned in the head
               That he ſhall neuer eat more bred
               Now he is gone to another ſtede
               
                  
With a Bul vnder lead
               By way of commiſſion
               To a ſtraunge iuriſdiction
               Called Diminges Dale
               Farre beyonde portyngale
               And hath his paſporte to pas
               Ultra ſauro matas
               To the deuil ſyr Sathanas
               To Pluto and ſyr Bellyal
               The deuils vicare generall
               And to his colledge conuentuall
               As wel calodemonial
               As to cacademoniall
               To purney for our Cardinall
               A palace pontificall
               To kepe his court prouinciall
               Upon articles iudiciall
               To contend and to, ſtriue
               For his prerogatiue
               Within that conſiſtory
               To make ſommons peremptorye
               Before ſome prothono
                     •
                  ory
               Imperial or papal
               Upon this matter miſticall
               I haue told you part, but not all
               Here after perchaunce I ſhall
               Make a large memoriall
               And a further reherſall
               
                  
And more paper I thinke to blot
               To the court why I came not
               Deſiring you aboue all thing
               To kepe you from laughyng
               Whan ye fall to redyng
               Of this wanton ſcrowle
               And pray for Mewtas ſoule
               For he is wel paſt and gone
               That wold god euery chone
               Of his affinitie
               Were gone as wel as he
               Amen, amen, ſay ye
               Of your inward charitie.
               Amen.
            
            
               Of your inward charitie.
               IT were greate ruthe
               For writinge of truthe
               Anye manne ſhoulde be
               In perplexitie
               Of diſpleaſure
               For I make you ſure
               Where trouth is abhord
               It is a playne recorde
               That there wantes grace
               In whoſe place
               Dothe occupye
               Full vngraciouſly
               Fals flattery
               
                  
Fals trechery
               Fals bryberye
               Subtyle Sym Sly
               Wyth mad folye
               For who can beſt lye
               He is beſt ſet by
               Than farewell to thee
               Welthfull felicitee
               For proſperitie
               Awaye than wyll flee
               Than muſte we agree
               With pouertye
               For miſery
               With penurye
               Miſerably
               And wretchedly
               Hathe made Aſkry
               And oute crye
               Folowynge the chaſe
               To dryue away grace
               Yet ſayeſt thou percaſe
               We can lacke no grace
               For my Lordes grace
               And my Ladyes grace
               With trey deuſe aſe
               And aſe in the face
               Some haute and ſome bace
               Some daunce the trace
               
                  
Euer in one caſe
               Marke me that chaſe
               In the Tennis play
               For ſinke quater trey
               Is a tal man
               He rod, but we ran
               Hay the gye and the gan
               The graye gooſe is no ſwan
               The waters waxe wan
               And beggers they ban
               And they curſed datan
               De tribu dan
               That this worke began
               Palam et clam
               With Balak and Balam
            
            
               The golden ram
               Of flemmyng dam
               Sem, Iapheth, or cam?
            
            
               But how come to pas
               Your cupboorde that was
               Is turned to glaſſe
               From ſiluer to braſſe
               From golde to pewter
               Or els to a newter
               To copper, to tyn
               To leade, or Alcumin
               A goldſmyth your Mayre
               
                  
But the chefe of your fayre
               Might ſtand now by potters
               And ſuche as ſel trotters
               Pytchars potſhordes
               This ſhrewdly accordes
               To be a cupborde for Lordes
            
            
               My lord now and ſir knyghte
               Good euen and good nyghte
               For now ſir Triſtram
               Ye muſte weare buckram
               Or Canuas of Cane
               For ſilkes are wane
               Our royals that ſhone
               Our nobles are gone
               Amonge the Burgonions
               And ſpanyardes Onyons
               And the Flanderkyns
               Gyl ſweates and Cate ſpinnes
               They are happy that wynnes
               But Englande may well ſay
               Fye on this winnyng alway
               Now nothing, but pay pay
               With laughe and lay downe
               Borough, Citie and towne
            
            
               Good Springe of Lanam
               Muſt counte what became
               Of his clothe makyng
               He is at ſuch takyng
               
                  
Though his purſe wax dul
               He muſt tax for his wul
               By nature of a new writ
               My Lordes grace nameth it
               A quia non ſatiſfacit
               In the ſpight of his teeth
               He muſt pay agayne
               A thouſand or twayn
               Of his gold in ſtore
               And yet he payde before
               An hunderd pound and more
               Which pincheth hym ſore
               My Lordes grace wil bryng
               Downe thys hye ſprynge
               And brynge it ſo lowe
               It ſhal not euer flow
            
            
               Suche a prelate I trow
               Were worthy to row
               Thorow the ſtreytes Marocke
               To the gybbet of Baldock
               He wold dry vp the ſtreames
               Of. ix. Kynges realme
               Al riuers and wels
               Al waters that ſwels
               For with vs he ſo mels
               That within England dwels
               I would he were ſomwhere els
               
                  
For els by and by
               He will drynke vs ſo dry
               And ſucke vs ſo nye
               That men ſhall ſcantly
               Haue penny or halpennye
               God ſaue hys noble grace
               And graunt him a place
               Endleſſe to dwel
               With the deuill of hel
               For and he were there
               We nead neuer feare
               Of the feendes blacke
               For I vnder take
               He wold ſo brag and crake
               That he wold than make
               The deuils to quake
               To ſhudder and to ſhake
               Lyke a fier drake
               And with a cole rake
               Bruſe them on a brake
               And binde them to a ſtake
               And ſet hel on fyre
               At his owne deſire
               He is ſuch a grym ſyre
               And ſuch a poteſtolate
               And ſuche a potestate
               That he wold breke the braynes
               Of Lucifer in his chaines
               
                  
And rule them eche one
               In Lucifers trone
               I would he were gone
               For amonge vs is none
               That ruleth, but he alone
               With oute all good reaſon
               And all oute of ſeaſon
               For Folam Peaſon
               With him be not geſon
               They grow very ranke
               Upon euery banke
               Of his herbers greene
               With my lady bright and ſheene
               On their game it is ſeen
               They play not al cleen
               And it be as I weene
            
            
               But as touching diſcretion
               With ſober direction
               He kepeth them in ſubiection
               They can haue no protection
               To rule nor to guide
               But all muſt be tryde
               And abide the correction
               Of him wil ful affection
               For as for wylte
               The deuill ſpéed whitte
               But brainſicke and braynleſſe
               
                  
Witles and reachleſſe
               Careles and ſhameleſſe
               Thriftles and graceleſſe
               To gether are bended
               And ſo condiſcended
               That the commune welth
               Shal neuer haue good helth
               But tatterd and tugged
               Ragged, and rugged
               Shauen and ſhorne
               And all threde bare worne
               Such gredines
               Such nedines
               Miſerablenes
               With wretchednes
               Hath brought in diſtres
               And much heauines
               And great dolour
               England the Flour
               Of relucent honour
               In old commemoracion
               Moſt royal Engliſh nacion
               Now all is out of facion
               Almoſt in deſolation
               I ſpeake by proteſtacion
               God of his miſeracion
               Send better reformacion
            
            
               Lo, for to do ſhamfully
               
                  
He iudgeth it no foly
               But to write of his ſhame
               He ſaythe we are to blame
               What a frenſi is this
               No ſhame to do amys
               And yet he is a ſhamed
               To be ſhamefully named
               And oft prechours be blamed
               Bycauſe they haue proclamed
               His madnes by writing
               His ſimplenes reſiting
               Remording and biting
               With chiding and with fiting
               Shewyng him goddes lawes
               He calleth the preachers dawes.
            
            
               And of holy ſcriptures ſawes
               He counteth them for gigawes
               And putteth them to ſcilence
               And with wordes of violence
               Like Pharao, void of grace
               Did Moyſes ſore manaſe
               And Aron ſore he thret
               The word of God to let
            
            
               This maumet in likewiſe
               Againſt the church doth riſe
               The preachoure he doth diſpiſe
               With crakyng in ſuch wiſe
               
                  
So bragging all with boſt
               That no preachour almoſt
               Dare ſpeake for hys lyfe
               Of my lordes grace, nor his wyfe
               For he hath ſuche a bul
               He may take whome he wul
               And as many as him likes
               May eat pigges in lent for pykes
               After the ſectes of heretikes
               For in lent he wil eate
               Al maner of fleſhe meate
               That he can any where geat
               With other abuſions great
               Wherof to trete
               It wold make the deuil to ſwet
               For all priuileged places
               He brekes and defaces
               All places of religion
               He hath them in deriſion
               And maketh ſuch prouiſion
               To driue them at diuiſion
               And finally inconcluſion,
               To bring them to confuſion
               Sainct Albons to recorde
               Wherof this vngracious Lorde
               Hathe made himſelf abbot
               Againſt their willes god wot
               Al this he doth deale
               
                  
Under ſtrength of the great ſeall
               And by his legacy
               Which madly he doth applye
               Unto an extrauagancye
               Pyked out all good law
               With reaſons that ben raw
               Yet whan he toke firſt his hat
               He ſaid he knew what was what
               Al iuſtice he pretended
               Al thinges ſhould be amended
               Al wronges he wold redreſſe
               Al iniuries he wold repres
               Al periuries he wold oppreſſe
               And yet this graceles elfe
               He is periured himſelfe
               As plainlye it dothe appere
               Who liſt to enquere
               In the regeſtry
               Of my Lord of Cantorbury
               To whowe he was profeſſed
               In thre pointes expreſſed
            
            
               The firſt to do him reuerence
               The ſecond to owe him obedience
               The third with whole affection
               To be vnder his ſubiection
               But now he maketh obiection
               Under the protection
               Of the kinges great ſeale
               
                  
That he ſetteth neuer a deale
               By his former othe
               Whether god be pleaſed or wroth
               He maketh ſo proud preſence
               That in his equipolens
               He iudgeth him equiualent
               With God omnipotent
               But yet beware the rod
               And the ſtroke of God
            
            
               The Apoſtel Peter
               Had a pore miter
               And a pore cope
               Whan he was create Pope
               Fyrſt in Antioche
               He did neuer approche
               Of Rome to the ſee
               Wyth ſuche dignitie
            
            
               Sainct dunſtan what was he
               Nothing he ſaieth lyke to me
               There is a diuerſitie
               Betwene him and me
               We paſſe hym in degre
               As legatus a latere
               
                  Ecce ſacerdos magnus
               
               That wyll hed vs and hange vs
               And ſtraightly ſtrangle vs
               That he maye fang vs
               Decre and decretall
               
                  
Conſtitucion prouinciall
               Nor no lawe canonicall
               Shal let the preeſt pontificall
               To ſit in canſa ſanguinis
               Now god amende that is amis
               For I ſuppoſe that he is
               Of Ieremy the whiſking rod
               The flayle, the ſcourge
               Of almighty God
            
            
               This Naman Sirus
               So fel and ſo irous
               So ful of me lancoly
               With a flap before his eye
               Men wene that he is pocky
               Or els his ſurgions they lye
               For as far as they can ſpy
               By the craft of ſurgery
               It is manus domini
               
               And yet this proud Antiochus
               He is ſo ambicious
               So elate, and ſo vicious
               And ſo cruel harted
               That he will not be conuerted
               For he ſetteth God a parte
               He is now ſo ouerthwart
               And ſo payned with panges
               That al his truſt hanges
               In Balthaſor, which healed
               
                  
Domingos noſe, that was wheled
               That Lumberdes noſe mean I
               That ſtandeth yet a wry
               It was not healed alderbeſt
               It ſtandeth ſomwhat on the weſt
               I meane Domingo Lomelyn
               That was wonte to win
               Muche mony of the kyng
               At the cardes and haſerding
               Balthaſor that healed domingos poſe
               From the puſkilde pocky poſe
               Now with his gummes of araby
               Hath promiſed to hele our cardnals eie
               Yet ſum ſurgions put a dout
               Leſt he wil put it clean out
               And make him lame of his nether lims
               God ſend hym ſorow for his ſinnes
               Sum men might aſke a queſtion
               By whoſe ſuggeſtion
               I toke on hand this warke
               Thus boldly for to barke
               And men liſte to harke
               And my wordes marke
               I wyl anſwere lyke a clerke
               For truly and vnfayned
               I am forcebly conſtrained
               At Iuuinals requeſt
               To wryght of this glorious geſt
               
                  
Of this vaine glorious beaſt
               His fame to be encrcaſt
               At euery ſolempne feaſt
               
                  Quia aifficile eſt
               
               
                  Satiram non ſcribere?
               
               Now maſter doctour, how ſaye ye
               What ſo euer your name be
               What though ye be nameleſſe
               Ye ſhall not eſcape blameleſſe
               Nor yet ſhal ſcape ſhameleſſe
            
            
               Mayſter doctor in your degre
               Yourſelf madly ye ouer ſee
               Blame Iuuinall & blame not me
            
            
               Maiſter doctor diricum
               
                  Omne, animi uicium. &c.
               
               As Iuuinall doth record
               A ſmall defaute in a great Lorde
               A lytle cryme in a greate eſtate
               Is muche more inordinate
               And more horrible to beholde
               Than any other a thouſand fold
               Ye put to blame ye wo
                     •
                   nere whome
               Ye may weare a cockes coome
               Your fond hed in your furred hood
               Hold ye your tounge ye can no good
               And at more conuenient time
               I may fortune for to rime
               Somwhat of your madneſſe
               
                  
For ſmall is your ſadneſſe
               To put any man in lacke
               And ſay yll behynde hys backe
               And my wordes marke trulye
               That ye cannot byde thereby
               For Smigma non eſt ſinamomum
               
               But de abſentibus nil niſi bonum
               Complaine or do what ye will
               Of your complaint it ſhal not ſkill
               This is the tenor of my bil
               A daucocke ye be, and ſo ſhalbe ſtill
            
            
               Sequitur Epitoma
               
                  de morbilloſo Thoma
               
               
                  Nec non obſceno
               
               
                  de poliphemo. &c.
               
            
            
               POrro perbelle diſſimulatum
               Illum pandulohum tantum legatum
               Tam formldatum nuper prelatum
               Sen. Naman ſirum nunc longatum
               Inſolitudine iam commoratum
               Neapolitano morbo grauatum
               Malagmate, cataplaſmati ſtatum
               Pharma copoli ferro foratum
               Nihilo magis alleuiatum
               Nihilo melius aut medicatum
               Relictis famulis ad famulatum
               Quod tollatur infamia
               
                  
Sed maior patet inſania
               Amodo ergo Ganea
               Abborreat ille Ganeus
               Dominus male Cretecus
               Aptius Dictus Tetricus
               Phanaticus freneticus
               Graphicus ſicut Metricus
            
            
               Antumat.
               
                  HOc genus dictaminis
                  Non egit examinis
                  In centilo quio nec centimetro
                  Honorati Grammatici Mauri.
                  Decaſticon uirulentum in galeratum,
                  Licaonta marinum. &c.
                  Progh dolor, ecce maris lupus & nequiſſimus, urſus
                  Carnificis uitulus Britonumque dubulcus iniqus
                  Conſlatus, uitulus, uel Oreb uel
                  Salmana, uel zeb.
                  Garduus, & crudelis Aſaph que
                  Datan reprobatus
                  Blandus & Acchitiphel, regis ſcelus omne Britannum
                  Eccleſias, qui namque Thomas
                  Gonfundit ubique
                  Non ſacer iſte, Thomas
                  Sed duro corde, Goleas
                  
                     
Quem geſtat Malus
                  ſathane caret (obſero culus
                  Fundens Aſpaltum (precor)
                  hunc uerſum lege cautum
                  Aſperius nichil eſt miſero
               
               Apoſtropha an Londini ciues (citando mulum aſino aurco galerato) in occurſum aguile. &c.
            
            
               
                  EXitat eu aſinus multum
                  (mirabile, uiſu
                  Calcibus O ueſro ciues
                  Occurite Aſello
                  Qui regnum regemque regit
                  qui ueſtra gubernat
                  Predia diuitias, nummos
                  gaſas ſpoliando.
               
               Dixit alludens, immo illudens perodo xam de aſino aureo galerato. xxxiiii.
               Hec uatis ille, de quo loquntur utille.
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            
               Here after folovveth a litle boke called Colyn Clout compiled by Maſter Skelton Poete Laureate.
            
               Quis conſurgat mecum aduerſus malignantes? aut quis ſtabit mecum aduerſus operantes iniquita tem? Nemo domine.
            
            
               
                  WHat can it auaile
               To dryue forth a ſnayle
               Or to make a ſayle
               Of an herynges taile
               To ryme or to rayle
               To write or to indyte
               Eyther for delite
               Or els for deſpite
               Or bookes to compile
               Of diuers maner ſtyle
               Uyce to reuile
               And ſinne to exyle
               To teache or to preche
               As reaſon wyll reach
               Saye thys and ſaye that
               His head is ſo fat
               He wotteth neuer what
               Nor wherof he ſpeaketh
               
                  
He cryeth and he creketh
               He pryeth and he peketh
               He chydes and he chatters
               He prates and he patters
               He clytters and he clatters
               He medles and he ſmatters
               He gloſes and he flatters
               Or if he ſpeake plaine
               Than he lacketh brayne
               He is but a foole
               Let him go to ſcoole
               A three foted ſtoole
               That he may downe ſyt
               For he lacketh wit
               And if that he hit
               The nayle on the head
               It ſtandeth in no ſtede
               The Deuyll they ſay is dead
               The Deuill is dead,
            
            
               It may wel ſo be
               Or els they wold ſee
               Otherwiſe and flee
               From worldly vanitie
               And foule couetouſnes
               And other wretchednes
               Fickell falſeneſſe
               Uaryableneſſe
               
                  
With vnſtableneſſe
            
            
               And if ye ſtand i dout
               Who brought this ryme about
               My name is Colyn Clout
               I purpoſe to ſhake out
               All my conning bagge
               Lyke a clarkely hagge
               For though my rime be ragged
               Tattered and iagged
               Rudely rayne beaten
               Ruſtly and moothe eaten
               If ye talke well therewyth
               It hath in it ſome pith
               For as farre as I can ſee
               It is wrong with eche degree
               For the temporalty
               Accuſeth the ſpiritualty
               The ſpirituall agayn
               Doth grudge and complain
               Upon temporall men
               Thus eche of other blother
               The tone againſt the tother
               Alas they make me ſhoder
               For in hoder moder
               The churche is put in faulte
               The prelates ben ſo haut
               They ſay and loke ſo hye
               
                  
As though they wold flye
               Aboue the ſterry ſky
            
            
               Lay men ſay in dede
               How they take no hede
               Their ſely ſhepe to fede
               But plucke away and pul
               The fleces of their wull
               Unnethes they leue a locke
               Of wull amonge their flocke
               And as for theyr connyng
               A glumming and a mummyng
               And make therof a iape
               They gaſpe and they gape
               Al to haue promocion
               There is their whole deuocion
               With money, if it will hap
               To cath the forked cap
               Forſoth they are to lewd
               To ſay ſo all be ſhrewd
            
            
               What trow ye they ſay more
               Of the byſhoppes lore
               How in matters they be raw
               They lumber forth the law
               To herke Iacke and Gyl
               Whan they put vp a bil
               And iudge it as they will
               
                  
For other mens ſkill
               Expounding out their clauſes
               And leaue their owne cauſes
               In their principal cure
               They make but lytle ſure
               And meddels very light
               In the churches right
               But Ire and venire
               And ſol fa, ſo a lamire
               That the premenire
               Is like to be ſet a fire
               In their iuriſdictions
               Through temporall afflictions
               Men ſay they haue preſcriptions
               Againſt yt ſpiritual contradictions
               Accompting them as fictions
            
            
               And whiles the heades doe this
               The remnaunt is a mis
               Of the clergy all
               Both great and ſmall
               I wot neuer how they warke
               But thus the people carke
               And ſurely thus they ſay
               Byſhoppes if they may
               Smal houſes wold kepe
               But ſlumbre forth and ſlepe
               And aſſay to crepe
               
                  
Within the noble walles
               Of the kinges halles
               To fat their bodies full
               Their ſoules lame and dul
               And haue ful litle care
               How euil their ſhepe fare
            
            
               The temporality ſay plain
               How biſhoppes diſdain
               Sermons for to make
               Or ſuch labour to take
               And for to ſay trouth
               A great part is ful ſlouth
               But the greateſt part
               Is for they haue but ſmal art
               And right ſclender cunnyng
               Within their heades wunning
               But this reaſon they take
               How they are able to make
               With their gold and treaſure
               Clerkes out of meaſure
               And yet that is a pleaſure
               How be it ſome there bee
               Almoſt two or three
               Of that dignity
               Full worſhipful Clerkes
               As appeareth by their werkes
               Like Aaron and Ure
               
                  
The wolfe from the dore
               To wary and to kepe
               From their goſtly ſhepe
               And their ſpirituall lammes
               Sequeſtred from rammes
               And from the berded Gotes
               With their hery cotes
               Set nought by gold ne grotes
               Their names if I durſt tel.
            
            
               But they are lothe to mel
               And lothe to hang the bel
               About the cattes necke
               For dred to haue a checke
               They are fain to play, deuz de ck
               How be it they are good men
               Much harted lyke an hen
               Their leſſons forgotten they haue
               That Becket them gaue
               Thomas manum mittit ad forcia
               Spernit damna ſpernit opprobria
               Nulla Thomam frangit iniuria
               But now euery ſpirituall father
               Men ſay they had rather
               Spende muche of their ſhare
               Than to be combred with care
               Spende, nay but ſpare
               For let ſee who that dare
               
                  
Shoe the mockiſh mare
               They make her winch and kicke
               But it is not worthe a leeke
               Boldneſſe is to ſeeke
               The churche for to defende
               Take me as I intende
               For lothe I am to offende
               In thys that I haue pende
               I tell you as men ſay
               Amend when ye may
               For vſ que ad montem fare
               Men ſay ye cannot appare
               For ſome ſay ye hunt in parkes
               And Hanke on hobby Larkes
               And other wanton warkes
               Whan the night darkes.
            
            
               What hath laymen to doe
               The gray goſe for to ſhoe
               Lyke houndes of hell
               They cry and they yell
               How that ye ſell
               The grace of the holygoſt
               Thus they make their hoſt
               Through euery coſt
               How ſome of you do eat
               In Lenton ſeaſon fleſh meat
               Feſauntea Partriche and cranes
               
                  
Men call you therfore prophanes
               Ye picke no ſhrympes nor pranes
               Saltfiſſh, Stockfiſh nor Herring
               It is not for your wearing
               Nor in holy Lenton ſeaſon
               Ye wil neither Beanes ne Peaſon
               But ye looke to be let looſe
               To a pygge or to a Gooſe
               Your george not endewed
               Without a Capon ſtewed
               Or a ſtewed Cocke
               Under her ſurfled ſmocke
               And her wanton wodicocke
            
            
               And how when ye geue orders
               In your prouinciall borders
               As at ſicientes
               
               
                  Some are in ſufficientes
               
               
                  Some parum ſapientes
               
               
                  Some nichil intelligentes
               
               
                  Some ualde negligentes
               
               
                  Some nullum ſenſum habent
                        •
                     s
               
               But beſtially and vntaught
               But whan they haue once caught
               
                  Dominus vobiſcum by the hed
               Than renne they in euere ſtede
               God wot with drōken nolles
               Yet take they cures of ſoules
               
                  
And woteth neuer what they rede
               Pater noſter nor Crede
               Conſtrue not worth a whiſtle
               Nether goſpel nor piſtle
               Theyr Mattins madly ſayde
               Nothing deuoutly praid
               Their learning is ſo ſmall
               Their prymes and houres fal
               And lepe out of their lippes
               Lyke ſawduſt or dry chippes
               I ſpeake not now of al
               But the moſte parte in general
               Of ſuche vagabundus
               Speaketh totus Mundus
               How ſome ſyng let abundus
               At euerye ale ſtake
               With welcome hake and make
               By the bread that God brake
               I am ſory for your ſake
               I ſpeake not of the god wife
               But of their Apoſtles lyfe
               
                  Cum ipſis Vel illis
               
               
                  Qui manent in Villis
               
               
                  Eſt Vxor Vel ancilla
               
               Welcome Iacke and Gilla
               My prety Petronylla
               And you wil be stilla
               You ſhall haue your wylls
               
                  
Of ſuch Pater noſter pekes
               All the worlde ſpeakes.
            
            
               ¶ In you the faut is ſuppoſed
               For that they are not appoſed
               By iuſt examinacion
               In conning and connerſation
               They haue none inſtruction
               To make a true conſtruction
               A prieſt without a letter
               Without his vertue be greater
               Doutleſſe were much better
               Upon him for to take
               A Mattocke or a Kake
               Alas for very ſhame
               Some can not declyne their name
               Some cannot ſcarſly rede
               And yet wyll not drede
               For to kepe a cure,
               And in nothing is ſure
               This dominus Vobiſcum
               
               As wyſe as Tom a thrum
               A chaplayne of truſte
               Layth all in the duſt
            
            
               ¶ Thus I Colin Clout
               As I go about
               And wandryng as I walke
               
                  
I heare the people talke
               Men ſay for ſyluer and Golde
               Miters are bought and ſold
               There ſhall no clergy appoſe
               A myter nor a Croſſe
               But a full purſe
               A ſtraw for goddes curſe
               What are they the worſe
               For a ſimoniake,
               Is but a hermoniake
               And no more ye make
               Of Symony men ſay
               But a childes play
            
            
               ¶ Ouer this the forſayd laye
               Report how the Pope maye
               A holy anker call
               Out of the ſtony wall
               And hym a byſſhopp make
               If he on him dare take
               To kepe ſo hard a rule
               To ryde vpon a Mule
               Wyth golde all be trapped
               In purple and paule be lapped
               Some hatted and ſome capped
               Rychely be wrapped
               God wot to theyr great paynes
               In Rotchettes of fine raynes
               
                  
Whyte as morowes mylke
               Their tabertes of fine ſilke
               Their ſtirops of mixt golde begarded
               There may no coſt be ſpared
               Their Moyles Golde doth eate
               Theyr neyghbours dye for meat.
            
            
               What care they though Gill ſweat
               Or Iacke of the Noke
               The pore people they yoke
               With Sommons and Citacions
               And excommunications
               Aboute churches and market
               The byſhop on his carpet
               At home full ſoft doth ſyt
               This is afeareful fyt
               To heare the people iangle
               How warely they wrangle
               Alas why do ye not handle
               And them all mangle
               Full falſly on you they lye
               And ſhamefully you aſ
                     •
                  ry
               And ſay as vntruly
               As the butter fly
               A man might ſay in mocke
               Ware the Wethercocke
               Of thee ſteple of Poules
               And thus they hurt their ſoules
               
                  
In ſclaunderyng you for truth
               Alas it is great ruthe
               Some ſay ye ſit in trones
               Like prynces aquilonis
               And ſhryne your rotten bones
               With pearles and precious ſtones
               But how the commons grones
               And the people mones
               For preeſtes and for loues
               Lent and neuer payde
               But from day to day delaid
               The commune welth decayd
               Men ſay ye are tunge tayde
               And therof ſpeake nothing
               But diſſimuling and gloſing
               Wherfore men be ſuppoſing
               That ye geue ſhrewd counſel
               Againſt the commune wel
               By pollyng and pillage
               In cities and village
               By taxyng and tollage
               Ye haue monks to haue ye culerage
               For coueryng of an old cottage
               That committed is a collage
               In the charter of dottage
               Tenure par ſeruice de ſottage
               And not par ſeruice deſocage
               After olde ſegnyours
               
                  
And the learning of litletō tenours
               Ye haue ſo ouerth warted
               That good lawes are ſubutered
               And good reaſon peruerted
            
            
               ¶ Religious men are fayne
               For to turne agayne
               In ſecula ſeculorum
               
               And to forſake their corum
               And vacabundare perforum
               And take a fyne meritorum
               
                  Contra regulam morum
               
               
                  Aut blacke monacorum
               
               
                  Aut canonicor um
               
               
                  Aut Bernar dinorum
               
               
                  Aut crucifixorum
               
               And to ſynge from place to place
               Lyke apoſtataas
            
            
               And the ſelfe ſame game
               Begon and now with ſhame
               Amongeſt the ſely Nunnes
               My lady now ſhe runnes
               Dame Sybly our abbeſſe
               Dame Dorotho and lady Beſſe
               Dame Sare our Pryoreſſe
               Out of theyr clo yſter and quere
               With an heauye cheere
               Muſt caſt vp theyr blacke vayles
               
                  
And ſet vp their fucke ſayles
               To catch wind with theyr ventailes
               What Colin there thou ſhailes
               Yet thus wyth yll hayles
               The lay fee people rayles
            
            
               ¶ And all they laye
               On you prelates and ſay
               Ye do wrong and no righte
               To put them thus to flight
               No Matins at midnight
               Boke and chalis gone quite
               Plucke away the leades
               Ouer theyr heades
               And ſel away theyr bels
               And al that they haue els
               Thus the people tels
               Rayles lyke rebels
               Redeſhrewdly and ſpels
               And wyth foundations mels
               And talke lyke titiuelles
               How ye breake the deades willes
               Turne monaſteris into water millis
               Of an abbey ye make a graunge
               Your workes they ſay are ſtraunge
               So that theyr founders ſoules
               Haue loſt theyr beade roules
               The mony for theyr maſſes
               
                  
Spent among wanton laſſes
               The Diriges are forgotten
               Their founders lye there rotten
               But where theyr ſoules dwel
               Therwith I wil not mel
               What could the Turke do more
               Wyth all hys falſe lore
               Turke, Sarazen or Iew
               I report me to you
            
            
               ¶ O merciful Ieſu
               you ſupport and reſcite
               My ſtile for to directe
               It may take ſome effect
               For I abhorre to wryte
               How the lay fee diſpite
               You prelates that of ryght
               Should be lanternes of light
               ye liue they ſay in delyte
               Drowned in deliciis
               
                  In gloria et diuiciis
               
               Into honorable honore
               
                  In gloria et ſplendore
               
               
                  Fulgurantes haſte
               
                  Viuentes parum caſte
               Yet ſwete meat hath ſoure ſauce
               For after gloria laus
               
               Chriſt by crueltie
               
                  
Was nayled vpon a tree
               He payed a bitter pencion
               For mans redemption
               He dranke eiſel and gall
               To redeme vs withall
               But ſwete Ipocras ye drynke
               With let the Cat winke
               Ich wot what eche other thynk
               How be it per aſſimule
               Some men thinke that ye
               Shall haue penaltie
               For your iniquity
               Nota what I ſay
               And beare it wel awaye
               If it pleaſe not the ologys
               It is good for aſtrologis
               For Ptholme told me
               The ſunne ſomtime to bee
               In Ariete
               
               Aſcendent a degree
               Whaa Scorpion deſcending
               Was ſo then pretending
               All fatall for one
               That ſhall ſit on a trone
               And rule all thinges alone
               Your teeth whet on this bone
               Amongeſt you euery chone
               And let Collyn Cloute haue none
               
                  
Maner of cauſe to mone
               Lay ſalue to your owne ſore
               For els as I ſayd before
               After gloria laus
               May come a ſoure ſauce
               Sory therfore am I
               But trouth can neuer lye
            
            
               ¶ With language thus poluted
               Holy church is bruted
               And ſhamefully confuted
               My pen now wyll I ſharpe
               And wreſt vp my harpe
               With ſharpe twinking trebels
               Agaynſt al ſuch rebels
               That labour to confound
               And bring the church to ye ground
               As ye may daily ſee
               Howe the Laye fee
               Of one affinitee
               Conſente and agree
               Agaynſt the Churche to be
               And the dignitee
               Of the byſſhoppes fee
               ¶ And eyther ye be to bad
               Or els they are mad
               Of this to report
               But vnder your ſupporte,
               
                  
Tyll my dying day
               I ſhall bothe wryte and ſay
               And ye ſhall do the ſame
               How they are blame
               You thus to diffame
               For it maketh me ſad
               How that the people are glade
               The church to depraue
               And ſome there are that raue
               Preſuming on their wit
               Whan there is neuer a whit
               To maintaine axgumentes
               Againſt the ſacramentes
            
            
               Some make epilogation
               Of highe predeſtitation
               And of reſidenation
               They make interpretation
               Of an awquard facion
               And of the preſcience
               Of diuine eſſence
               And what Ipoſtatis
               Of Chriſtes manhodeis
               Such logike men wyl chop
               And in their fury hope
               When the good ale ſop
               Dothe daunce in their fore top
               Both women and men
               
                  
Such ye may wel Know and ken
               That agayn preſthode
               Their malice ſpred abrode
               Railing hainouſly
               And diſdainouſly
               Of prieſtly dignities
               But their malignities
            
            
               ¶ And ſome haue a ſmacke
               Of Luthers ſacke
               And a brenning ſparke
               Of Luthers warke
               And are ſomwhat ſuſpect
               In Luthers ſect
               And ſome of them barke
               Clatter and Carpe
               Of that Hereſy art
               Called wicleuiſta
               The Deueliſhe dogmatiſta
               And ſome behuſſians
               And ſome bee Arrians
               And ſome be pollegians
               And make much varians
               Betwene the clergy
               And the temporalty
               Hew the church hath to mickel
               And they haue to litel
               And bring him in maierialities
               
                  
And qualified qualities
               Of pluralities
               Of tryalities
               And of tot quottes
               They commune like ſcottes
               As commeth to their lottes
               Of prebendaries and deanes
               How ſome of them gleanes
               And gathered vp the ſtore
               For to catch more and more
               Of perſons and vicaries
               They make many out cryes
               They cannot kepe theyr wiues
               From them for theyr lyues
               And thus the loſels ſtriues
               And lewdly ſayes by Chriſt
               Agaynſte the ſely prieſt
               Alas and wel awaye
               What ayles theym thus to ſaye
               They mought be better aduiſed
               Then to be diſgiſed
               But they haue enterpryſed
               And ſhamefullye ſurmiſed
               How prelacy is ſold and bought
               And come vp of nought
               And where the prelates be
               Come of low degre
               And ſet in maieſty
               
                  
And ſpirituall dignity
               Farwel benignity
               Farwell ſimplicitye
               Farwel humilitye
               Farwel good charity
            
            
               Ye are ſo puffed wyth pryde
               That no man may abide
               Your high and lordly lokes
               Ye caſt vp then your bokes
               And vertue is forgotten
               For then ye wyl be wroken
               Of euery light quarel
               And cal a Lord a iauel
               A knight a knaue to make
               Ye boſte, ye face, ye crake
               And vpon you take
               To rule king and kayſer
               And if you maye haue layſer
               Ye bryng all to nought
               And that is all your thought
               For the Lordes temporall
               Their rule is very ſmall
               Almoſt nothing at al
               Men ſay how ye appal
               The noble bloud royal
               In erneſt and in game
               Ye are the leſſe to blame
               
                  
For Lordes of noble bloude
               If they wel vnderſtand
               How conning might them auaunce
               They would pype you another daūce
               But noble men borne
               To learne they haue ſcorne
               But hunt and blow an horne
               Leape ouerlakes and dikes
               Set nothing by politikes
               Therfore ye kepe them bace
               And mocke them ſo their face
               This is a petious caſe
               To you that ouer the wheele
               Lordes muſt couch and knele
               And breake theyr hoſe at the knee
               As daily men may ſee
               And to remembraunce call
               Fortune ſo turneth the ball
               And ruleth ſo ouer all
               That honour hath a great fall.
               ¶ Shal I tel you more, ye ſhal
               I am loth to tel all
               But the communalty ye call
               Idols of Babilon
               De terrazabuloe
               De terra Neptalym
               For you loue to go trim
               Brought vp of of poore eſtate
               
                  
Wyth pryde inordinate
               Sodaynly vpſtarte
               From the dong cart
               The Mattockes and theſhule
               To reygne and to rule
               And haue no grace to thynke
               How they were wont to drynke
               Of a lether bottell
               With a knauiſh ſtoppel
               Whan mamockes was your meate
               With mould bread to eat
               Ye would none other geate
               To chew and to gnaw
               To fil therwith your maw
               Lodged in the ſtrawe
               Couching your drouſy heades
               Somtime in louſy beddes
               Alas this is out of minde
               Ye grow now out of kynde
               Many one haue but winde
               And make the commons blinde
               But Qui ſe exiſtimat ſtar
                        •
                     
                  
               
               Let him wel beware
               Leaſt that his fote ſlip
               And haue ſuch a trip
               And falle in ſuch decay
               That all the world myght ſay
               Come down on the diuels way
               
                  
Yet ouer all that
               Of byſhops they chat
               That though ye roūd your heare
               An ynche aboue your eare
               And aures patentes
               And parum intendentes
               And your courſers be trapped
               Your eares they be ſtopped
               For maiſter adulator
               And doctour aſſentator
               And blandior blandiris
               With mentor mentiris
               They folow your deſyres
               That ye can not eſpie
               And ſo they blere your eye
               How the male doth wryte
            
            
               Alas for gods will
               Whye ſytte ye Prelates ſtyl
               And ſuffer all this yll
               Ye Byſſhoppe of eſtates
               Shoulde open the brode gates
               For your ſpirituall charge
               And confort at large
               Like lanternes of light
               In the peoples ſighte
               In pulpettes antentike
               For the wele publike
               
                  
Of pri eſthod in this caſe
               And alwayes to chaſe
               Suche manner of ſiſmatikes
               And halfe heretikes
               That wold intoxicate
               That wold conquinate
               That wold contaminate
               And that would violate
               And that would derogate
               And that would abrogate
               The church is high eſtate
               After this manner rates
               The whyche ſhoulde be
               Bothe franke and free
               And haue their liberty
               And of antiquity
               It was ratefyed
               And alſo gratefyed
               By holy finodals
               And buls papals
               As it is res certa
               Conte ygned in magna Carta.
            
            
               But maiſter Damian
               Or ſome other man
               That clerkely is, and can
               Wel ſcripture expound
               And textes grounde.
               
                  
His benefice worth ten pound
               Or ſkant worth twenty marke
               And yet a noble clerke
               He muſt do this werke
               As I know a part
               Some mayſters of Art
               Some doctours of law
               Some learned in other ſaw
               As in diuinitie
               That hath no dignitie
               But the pore degree
               Of the vniuerſitie
               Or elſſe Frere Fredericke
               Or els frere Dominike
               Or frere Hugulinus
               Or frere Aguſtinus
               Or frere Carmelus
               That goſtly can heale vs
               Or elſſe if we maye
               Get a frere Graye
               Or elſſe of the order
               Uppon Grenewiche border
               Called obſeruaunce
               And a frere of Fraunce
               Or elſſe the poore ſcot
               It muſte come to his lot
               To ſhote forth his ſhot
               Or of Babuell beſide Bery
               
                  
To poſtell vpon a kyry
               That woulde it ſhoulde be noted
               How ſcripture ſhould be coted
               And ſo clerkle promoted
               And yet the frere doted
            
            Men ſay
            
               But your auctority
               And your noble fee
               And your dignitie
               Should be imprinted better
               Then all the Freres letter
               For yf ye wolde take payne
               To preache a worde or twayne
               Though it were neuer ſo playne
               With clauſes two or three
               So as they mighte he
               Compendiouſlye conueyed
               Thoſe wordes ſhould be more weid
               And better peceyued
               And thankfully receyued
               And better ſhoulde remayne
               Amonge the people playne
               That wolde your wordes retayne
               And reherſe them agayne
               Than a thouſand thouſand other
               That blaber, barke and blother
               And make a Walſhmans hoſe
               
                  
Of the text and of the gloſe
            
            
               For proteſtation made
               That I will not wade
               Farther in this brooke
               Nor farther for to looke
               In deuiſing of this boke
               But anſwer that I may
               For myſelf alwaye
               Eyther analogice
               Or els rathagorice
               So that in diuinitee
               Doctors that learned be
               Nor bachelers of that faculty
               That hath taken degre
               In the vniuerſitie
               Shall not be obiected for me.
            
            
               But doctour bullatus
               
                  Parum litteratus
               
               Dominus doctoratus
               At the brode gatus
               Doctour daupatus
               And bacheler bacheleratus
               Dronken as a mouſe
               At the ale houſe
               Taketh his pillion and his cap
               At the good ale tap
               
                  
For lacke of good wyne
               As wyſe as Robin ſwine
               Under a notaries ſigne
               Was made a diuine
               As wiſe as waltoms calfe
               Muſt preache a goddes halfe
               In the pulpyt ſolempnly
               More meet in a pillory
               For by ſainct Hillary
               He can nothing ſmatter
               Of logike nor ſcole matter
               Neyther ſilogiſare
               Nor of emptimeniare
               Nor knoweth his eloquence
               Nor his predicamence.
            
            
               And yet he will mel
               To amend the Goſpel
               And wil preach and tel
               What they do in hel
               And he dare not wel neuen
               What they do in hauen
               Nor how far temple bare is
               From the ſeuen ſtarres
            
            
               Nowe will I goe
               And tel of other moe
               Semper proteſtandoe
               
                  
De non impugnandoe
               The foure orders of fryers
               Thoughe ſome of them be lyers
               As limiters at large
               Wyll charge and diſcharge
               As many a fryer God wot
               Preaches for his grote
               Flatterynge for a new cote
               And for to haue hys fees
               Some to gather cheeſe
               Lothe they are to leſe
               Eyther Corne or Mault
               Sometime Meale and Sault
               Sometime a bacon flicke
               That is three fingers thycke
               Of larde and of greace
               Their couent to e
                     •
                  crace
            
            
               I put you out of doubt
               This cannot be brought about
               But they their tonges file
               And make a pleaſaunt ſtyle
               To Margerye and to Maude
               Howe they haue no fraude
               And ſomtyme they prouoke
               Bothe Gyll and Iacke at noke
               Their duties to withdraw
               That they ought by the lawe
               
                  
Their curates to content
               In open time and in Lente
               God wot they take great payne
               To flatter and to fayne
               But it is and old ſayd ſaw
               That neede hathe no lawe
               Some walke aboute in melottes
               In gray ruſſet and hery cotes
               Some wil neyther golde ne grotes
               Some pluck a partrich in remotes
               And by the barres if her tayle
               Wil know a Rauen from a rayle
               A quail, the raile, and the old rauen
               
                  Sed libera nos a malo. Amen.
               
               And by dudum their clementine
               Againſte Curates repine
               And ſay proprely they are Sacerdotes
               To ſhryue, aſſoyle and reles
               Dame margeries ſoule out of hel
               But when the frier fel in the wel
               He could not ſing himſelfe therout
               But by the helpe of Chriſtian clout
            
            
               Another clementine alſo
               How frere Fabion, with other mo
               
                  Exiuit de paradiſo
               
               Whan they again thether ſhall come
               
                  Dc hoc petimus conſilium
               
               
                  
And through all the world they go
               With Dirige and Placebo.
               
            
            
               But now my minde ye vnderſtād
               For they muſte take in hand
               To preach and to with ſtand
               Al maner of abiections
               For biſhops haue protections
               They ſay to do corrections
               But they haue no affections
               To take the ſayd directions
               In ſuch maner of caſes
               Men ſay they beare no faces
               To occupy ſuch places
               To ſow the ſede of graces
               Their hartes are ſo faynted
               And they be ſo attaynted
               With coueitous and ambicion
               And other ſuperſticion
               That they be deafe and dum
               And play ſcylens and glum
               Canſay nothing but mum.
            
            
               They occupy theym ſo
               With ſinging placeho
               They wil no farther go
               They had leuer to pleaſe
               And take their wordly eaſe
               
                  
Than to take on hand
               Worſhyp to wythſtande
            
            
               Suche temporal war and bate
               As nowe is made of late
               Againſt holy churche eſtate
               Or to mayntayne good quarelles
               The lay men call them barelles
               Full of glotony
               And of hipocriſye
               That counterfaytes and paints
               As they were very ſaintes
               In matters that them lyke
               They ſhew them politiks.
            
            
               Pretending grauitie
               And ſygnyorytie
               With all ſolempnitie
               For their indempnitie
               For they will haue no leſſe
               Of a peny, nor of a croſſe
               Of their prediall landes.
               That cometh to their handes
               And as farre as they dare ſet
               Al is fyſhe that cometh to net
               Building royally
               Their mancions curiouſly
               With turrettes and with toures
               
                  
With halles and with boures
               Stretching to the ſtarres
               With glaſſe windowes & barres
               Hangyng about the walles
               Clothes of golde and palles
               Arras of ryche araye
               Freſhe as floures in Maye
               Wyth dame Dyana naked
               Howe luſtye Uenus quaked
               And how Cupide ſhaked
               His darte and bente hys bowe
               For to ſhote a Crowe
               At her tyrly tyrlowe
               And howe Paris of Troye
               Daunced a lege de may
               Made luſtye ſporte and ioye
               With dame Helyn the Queene
               With ſuch ſtoryes by deen
               Their chambres wel be ſeen
               With triumphes of Ceſar
               And of his Pompeius war
               Of renowne and of fame,
               By them to get a name
            
            
               Nowe all the world ſtares
               How they ryde in goodly chares
               Conueyed by Olyphantes
               With Lauriat garlantes
               
                  
And by vnycornes
               With their ſemely hornes
               Upon theſe beaſtes riding
               Naked boyes ſtriding
               With wanton wenches winkyng
               Now truly to my thinkyng
               That is a ſpeculacion
               And a mete meditacion
               For prelates of eſtate
               Their courage to abate
               From worldly wantonnes
               Their chambre thus to dres
               With ſuch parfetnes
               And all ſuch holynes
               How be it they let down fall
               Their churches cathedral
            
            
               Squire knight and Lord
               Thus the church remord
               With all temporal people
               They runne againſt the ſteeple
               Thus talkyng and tellinge
               Howe ſome of you are mellynge
               Yet ſofte and fayre for ſwellyng
               Beware of a queanes yellling
               It is a beſy thing
               It is a beſy thing
               For one man to rule a kyng
               Alorie and make rekenyng
               
                  
To gouerne ouer all
               And rule a realme royall
               By one mannes wit
               Fortune may chaunce to flit
               And whan he weneth to ſyt
               Yet may he myſſe the quiſſhon
               For I red a prepoſicion
               
                  Sum regibus amicare
               
               
                  Et omnibus dominare
               
               Et ſuprate prauare
               Wherfore he hathe good vre
               That can himſelfe aſſure
               How fortune wyl endure
               Than let reaſon you ſupport
               For the communalte
               That they haue great wonder
               That ye kepe them ſo vnder
               Yet they meruayle ſo muche leſſe
               For ye playſo at the cheſſe
               As they ſuppoſe and geſſe
               That ſome of you but late
               Hath played ſo check mate
               With Lordes of great eſtate
               After ſuch a rate
               That they ſhall mel nor make
               Nor vpon them take
               For king nor Rayſer ſake
               But at the pleaſure of one
               
                  
That ruleth the reſt alone.
            
            
               Helas, I ſaye Helas
               Howe maye this come to paſſe
               That a man ſhall heare a maſſe
               And not ſo hardy on his head
               To loke on god in forme of bread
               But that the paryſhe clerke
               There vpon muſt herke
               And graunt him at his aſkyng
               For to ſee the ſacryng
            
            
               And how may this acord
               No man to our ſouerayne Lorde
               So hardy to make ſute
               Nor to execute
               His commaundement
               Without the aſſent
               Of our preſident
               Nor to expreſſe to his perſon
               Without your aſſentacion
               Graunt him his licence
               To preace to his preſence
               Nor to ſpeake to him ſecretly
               Openly nor preuyly
               Without his preſident be by
               Or els his ſubſtitute
               Whome he wyldepute
               
                  
Neither Earle ne duke
               Permitted by ſainct Luke
               And byſweet ſainct Marke
               This is a wonderous warke
               That the people talke this
               Some what there is amis
               The deuill cannot ſtop their mouthes
               But they will talk of ſuche vncouthes
               All that euer they ken
               Againſt all ſpirituall men.
            
            
               Whether it be wronge or ryghte
               Or els for diſpighte
               Or howe euer it hape
               Theyr tounges thus do clap
               And through ſuch detraction
               They put you to your action
               And whether they ſay truely
               As they may abide therby
               Or els that they do lye
               Ye know better than I
               But now, debetis ſcire
               
               And groundlye audire
               In your conuenire
               Of this premenire
               Or els in the myre
               They ſay they wil you caſt
               Therfore ſtand ſure and faſt.
               
                  
Stand ſure and take good foting
               And let be al your moting
               Your gaſing and your toting
               And your parcial promoting
               Of thoſe that ſtand in your grace
               But olde ſeruauntes ye chaſe
               And put them out of their place
               Make ye no murmuracion
               Though I write after this facion
               Though I Colyn Clout
               Among the whole route
               Of you that clearkes be
               Take vpon me
               Thus copiouſly to write
               I do it not for no deſpite
               Wherfore take nodiſdaine
               At my ſtile rude and playne
               For I rebuke no man
               That vertuous is, why than
               Wreke ye your anger on me
               For thoſe that vertuous be
               Haue no cauſe to ſay
               That I ſpeake out of the way.
            
            
               Of no good byſhop ſpeake I
               Nor good preſt of the clargy
               Good Frere nor good Chanon
               Good Nunne, nor good Canon
               
                  
Good Monke, nor good Clerke
               Nor of no good werke
               But my recountyng is
               Of them that do amis
               In ſpeaking and rebelling
               In hindering and diſauailing
               Holy church our mother
               One againſt another
               To vſe ſuch diſpiſing
               Is all my whole wryting
               To hinder no man
               As neare as I can
               For no man haue I named
               Wherfore ſhould I blamed
               Ye ought to be aſhamed
               Againſt me to be greued
               And can tell no cauſe why
               But that I wryte trulye
            
            
               ¶ Then if any ther be
               Of high or low degree
               Of the ſpiritualty
               Or of the temporaltye
               That doth thinke or wene
               That his conſcience be not clene
               And feleth hymſelfe ſycke
               Or touched on the quicke
               Such grace god them ſend
               
                  
Themſelf to amend
               For I wyll not pretend
               Any man to offende
            
            
               Wherfore as thinketh me
               Great ydeottes they bee
               And lytle grace they haue
               This treatiſe to depraue
               Nor wil heare no preaching
               Nor no vertuous teaching
               Nor wil haue no reſiting
               Of any vertuous wryting
               Wil know none intelligence
               To refourme their negligence
               But liue ſtil out of facion
               To their owne damnation
               To do ſhame, they haue no ſhame
               But they wold no man ſhould theim blame
               They haue an euil name
               But yet they wil occupy the ſame
            
            
               With them the worde of God
               Is counted for no rod
               They count it for a railinge
               That nothing is anayling
               The preachers with euil hailing
               Shal they daunt vs prelates
               That be their prymates
            
            
               
               Not ſo hardy on their pates
               Harke how the loſel prates
               With a wide weſaunte
               Auaunt ſyr Guy of gaunt
               Auaunte lewde preeſt auaunt
               Auaunt ſyr doctoure dyuers
               Prate of thy mattens and thy maſſe
               And let oure matters paſſe
               How dareſt thou daucocke mel?
               How dareſt thou loſell
               Alligate the goſpel
               Againſt vs of the counſel
               Auaunt to the deuil of hel
            
            
               Take him warden of the Flete
               Set him faſte by the fete
               I ſay lyuetenaunt of the toure
               Make this lurden for to loure
               Lodge him in litle eaſe
               Fede him with Beanes and Peaſe
               The kinges bench or Marſhalſy
               Haue him thether by and by
               The villaine preacheth openly
               And declareth oure villany
               And of our fre ſimpleneſſe
               He ſayes that we are rechleſſe
               And full of wylfulneſſe
               Shameles, and merciles
               
                  
In corrigible and inſaciate
               And after this rate
               Againſt vs doth prate
            
            
               At Paules croſſe or els where
               Openly at Weſtminſter
               And ſaynt Mary ſpittel
               They ſet not by vs a whiſtel
               At the Auſten fryers
               They count vs for lyers
            
            
               And at ſaynt Thomas of Akers
               They carpe vs lyke crakers
               How we wyl rule al at will
               Without good reaſon or ſkyll
               And ſay how that we be
               Full of parcialitie
               And how at a pronge
               We turne right to wrong
               Delay cauſes ſo longe
               That right no man can fong
               They ſay many matters be born
               By the right of a rammes horne
               Is not this a ſhamefull ſcorne?
               To be teared thus and torne.
            
            
               ¶ How may we thus indure
               Wherfore we make you ſure
               
                  
Ye preachers ſhalbe yawde
               Some ſhalbe ſawde
               As noble Ezechias
               The holy prophet was
               And ſome of you ſhall dye
               Lyke holy Ieremy
               Some hanged ſome ſlayn
               Some beaten to the brayne
               And we wil rule and rayne
               And our matters maintaine
               Who dare ſay there agayne
               Or who dare dyſdaine
               At your pleaſure and wil
               For be it good or be it yll
               As it is, it ſhalbe ſtil
               For al maſter doctour of ciuil
               Or of oiuine, or doctour dryuil
               Let him cough, roughe or ſneuil
               Renne God, renne deuil
               Renne who may renne beſt
               And let take all the reſt
               We ſet not a nut ſhel
               The way to heauen or to hel,
            
            
               ¶ Lo, this is the giſe now a dayes
               It is to drede men ſayes
               Leaſt they bee ſaducies
               As they be ſayd ſayne
               
                  
Which determine playne
               We ſhoulde not riſe agayne
               At dreadful domes daye
               And ſo it ſemeth they play
               Which hate to be corrected
               When they bee infected
               Nor wyll ſuffer this boke
               By hooke ne by crooke
               Prynted for to be
               For that no man ſhoulde ſee
               Nor rede in any ſcrolles
               Of their dronken nolles
               Nor of their noddy polles
               Nor of theyr ſely ſoules
               Nor of ſome witles pates
               Ofdiuers great eſtates
               As well as other men
            
            
               Now to withdraw my pen
               And now a while to reſt
               Me ſemeth it for the beſte.
            
            
               The fore caſtel of my ſhip
               Shall glide and ſmothely ſlip
               Out of the waues wode
               Of the ſtormye floude
               Shote anker and lye at rode
               And ſayle not farre a brode
               Til the cooſte be clere
               
                  
That the lode ſtarre appere
               My ſhyp now wyl I pere
               towarde the port ſalu
               Of our ſauiour Ieſu
               Such grace that he vs ſende
               To rectify and amend
               Thinges that are amis
               Whan that his pleaſure is,
            
            
               In opere imperfecto
               In opere ſemper perfecto
               Et in opere pluſquam perfecto
            
         
         
            
               ❧ 
               Here after folovveth a Litle boke of Philip ſparow compiled by▪ maſter. Skelton Poet Laureate.
            
               PLa ce bo
               Who is there who
               Di le 
                     •
                  i,
               Dame Margery
               Fa re my my
               Wherefore and why why
               For the ſoule of philip ſparow
               That was late ſlaine at Carow
               Amonge the Nunnes blake
               
                  
For that ſweet ſoules ſake
               And for al ſparowes ſoules
               Set in our bead roules
               Pater noſter qui
               With an Aue mari
               And with the corner of a creed
               The more ſhalbe your meed.
            
            
               
                  WHan I remembre agayne
                  How my philip was ſlaine
                  Neuer halfe the paine
                  Was betwene you twayne
                  Pyramus and Theſhe
                  As than befell to me
                  I wept and I wayled
                  The teares down hayled
                  But nothing it auailed
                  To call Pptlip agayne
                  Whom Gib our cat hath ſlayne.
               
               
                  Gib I ſay our cat
                  Worrowed her on that
                  Which I loued beſte
                  It cannot be expreſt
                  My ſorowful heauynes
                  But al without redres
                  For within that ſtound
                  Half ſlumbryng in a ſounde
                  I fell downe to the ground
                  
                     
¶ Unneth I keſt mine eyes
                  Toward the cloudy ſkyes
                  But when I did behold
                  My ſparow dead and cold
                  No creature but that wold
                  Haue rewed vpon me
                  To behold and ſee
                  What heauines did me pange
                  Wherwith my hādes I wrange
                  That my ſenowes cracked
                  As though I had ben racked
                  So payned and ſo ſtrained
                  That no life welnye remained
                  ¶ I ſighed and I ſobbed
                  For that I was robbed
                  Of my ſparowes life
                  O mayden, widow and wife
                  Of what eſtate ye be
                  Of hye or low degre
                  Great ſorow then ye might ſe
                  And learne to wepe at me
                  Such paynes did me freat
                  That mine harte did beat
                  My viſage pale and dead
                  Wanne, and blue as lead
                  The panges of hateful death
                  wel nye ſtopped my breathe.
               
               
                  
                  Heu heu me
                  That I am woe for thee
                  
                     Ad dum cumtribularer clamaui
                  
                  Of god nothing els craue I
               
            
            
               
                  BUt Philips ſoule to kepe
                  From the marees deepe
                  Of Acherontes wel
                  That is a floud of hel
                  And from the greate Pluto
                  The prince of endles woe
                  And from foule Alecto
                  With viſage blacke and blo
                  And from Meduſa that 
                        •
                     are
                  That lyke a feende doth ſtare
                  And from Megeras edders
                  From rufflinge of philips fethers
                  And from her firy ſparklinges
                  For burning of his winges
                  And from the ſmokes ſoure
                  Of Proſerpinas boure
                  And from the dennes darke
                  Wher Cerberus doth baike
                  Whom Theſeus did afray
                  Whom Hercules did out tray
                  As Famous Poetes ſaye
                  For that hel hounde
                  That lyeth in chaynes bound
                  With gaſtly heades three
                  
                     
To Iupiter pray wee
                  That Phillip preſerued maye bee
                  Amen ſay ye wyth me,
               
               
                  Do mi nus
                  Helpe now ſweet Ieſus
                  
                     Leuaui oculos meos in montis
                  
                  Wold God I had zenophontis.
               
            
            
               
                  OR Socrates the wyſe
                  To ſhew me their deuiſe
                  Moderately to take
                  Thys ſorow that I make
                  For Philyp ſparowes ſake
                  So feruently I ſhake
                  I fele my body quake
                  So vrgently I am broughte
                  Into careful thought
                  Like andromaca hactors wife
                  Was weary of her lyfe
                  When ſhe had loſt her ioy
                  Noble Hector of Troy
                  In like maner alſo
                  Encreaſeth my deadly woe
                  For my ſparow is go
                        •••
                     
                  
                  It was ſo prety a foole
                  It wold ſyt on a ſtoole
                  And learned after my ſcoole
                  For to kepe his cut
                  
                     
With Phillip kepe your cut.
                  ¶ It had a veluet cap
                  And wold ſyt vpon my lap
                  And ſeke after ſmal wormes
                  And ſotime white bread crōmes
                  And many times and ofte
                  Betwene my breſtes ſoft
                  It wold lye and reſt
                  It was propre and preſt
                  ¶ Sometime he wold gaſpe
                  When he ſaw a waſpe
                  A flye or a gnat
                  He would fly at that
                  And pretely he would pant
                  When he ſaw an ant
                  Lord how he wold pry
                  After the butter fly
                  Lord how he wold hop
                  After the greſſop
                  And whan I, ſayd, phyp phip
                  Then he wold leape and ſkip
                  And take me by the lip
                  Alas it wyl me ſloe
                  That Philip is gone me fro
                  ¶ Si in i qui ta tes
               
               
                  Alas I was euil at eaſe
                  ¶ Deprofundis clamaui
                  When I ſaw my ſparow dye.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  NOwe after my dome
                  Dame Sulpicia at Rome
                  whoſe name regiſtred was
                  For euer in tables of bras
                  Becauſe ſhee did pas
                  In poeſy to endyte
                  And eloquently to write
                  Though ſhe wold pretend
                  My ſparow to commend
                  I trow ſhe could not amende
                  Reporting the vertues al
                  Of my ſparow royal
                  ¶ For it would come and go
                  And fle ſo to and fro
                  And on me it wold leape
                  Whan I was a ſleape
                  And his fethers ſhake
                  Wher wyth hee wold make
                  Me often for to wake
                  And for to take him in
                  Upon my naked ſkin
                  God wot we thought no ſyn
                  What though he crept ſo low
                  It was no hurt I trow
                  He did nothinge perdee
                  But ſyt vpon my knee
                  Philip though hee were niſe
                  In hym it was no viſe
                  
                     
Phillip had leaue to go
                  To pike my litle too
                  Phillip myght be bold
                  And do what he wold
                  Phillip wold ſeke and take
                  All the flees blake
                  That he could there eſpye
                  With his wanton eye
                  D pe ra
                  La ſol fa fa
                  
                     Cōfitebor tibi domiue toto corde me
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  Alas I wold ride and go
               
            
            
               
                  A Thouſand mile of grounde
                  If any ſuch might be founde
                  it were worth an hundreth pound
                  Of kyng Creſus golde
                  Or of Artalus the old
                  The ryche prynce of pargame
                  Who ſo liſt the ſtory to ſee
                  Cadinus that his ſiſter ſought
                  And he ſhould be boughte
                  For gold and ſee
                  He ſhould ouer the ſee
                  To wete, if he coulde bryng
                  Any of the ſprynge
                  Or any of the bloude
                  But who ſo vnderſtode
                  
                     
Of Medias arte
                  I wold I had a parte
                  Of her crafty magike
                  My ſparow thā ſhoulde be quycke
                  Wyth a charme or twaine
                  And play with me agayne
                  But al this is in vaine
                  Thus for to complaine
               
               
                  I toke my ſampler ones
                  Of purpoſe for the nones
                  To ſow wyth ſtitches of ſilke
                  My ſparow white as mylke
                  That by repreſentacion
                  Of his image and facion
                  To me it might Importe
                  Some pleaſure and comfort
                  For my ſolace and ſporte
                  But whā I was ſo wing his beke
                  Me thought my ſparow dyd ſpeake
                  And open his prety bill
                  Saying, maid ye are in wil
                  Again me for to kil
                  Ye pricke me in the head
                  With that my nedle ware red
                  Me thought of Philyps bloude
                  Mine here right vpſtode
                  And was in ſuch a fraye
                  My ſpeche was taken awaye
                  
                     
I keſt downe that there was
                  And ſayd alas, alas
                  How commeth this to pas
                  My fingers dead and cold
                  Could not my ſampler hold
                  My nedle and threde
                  I thrue awaye for drede
                  The beſt now that I may
                  Is for his ſoule to pray.
                  ¶ A porta inferi
                  
               
               
                  Good Lord haue mercie
                  Upon my ſparowes ſoule
                  Writen in my bede roule
                  ¶ Au di ui vo cem
                  Iaphet cam and Sem
                  Ma gni fi cat
                  Shew me the right path
               
            
            
               
                  TO the hilles of armonye
                  wherfore the birdes yet cry
                  Of your fathers bote
                  That was ſomtime a flote
                  And now they lye and 
                        •
                     ote
                  Let ſome poetes wryte
                  Deucalious floud it highte
                  But as verely, as ye be
                  The naturall ſonnes three
                  Of Noe the Patriarke
                  That made that great ar
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     
Wherin he had apes and owles
                  Beaſtes, byrdes and foules
                  That if ye can fynde
                  Any of my ſparowes kynde
                  God ſende the ſoule good reſt
                  I woulde yet haue a neſt
                  As prety and as preſt
                  As my ſparow was
                  But my Sparow dyd pas
                  All ſparowes of the wod
                  That were ſince Noes floud
                  Was neuer none ſo good
                  King Philip of Macedony
                  Had no ſuch Philip as I
                  No no ſir hardely.
               
               
                  That vengeaunce. I aſke & cry
                  By way of exclamacion
                  On al the whole nacion
                  Of Cattes wilde and tame
                  God ſend them ſorow and ſhame
                  That Cat ſpecially
                  That ſlew ſo cruelly
                  My litle prety ſparow
                  That I brought vp at Carow.
               
               
                  O cat of churlyſhe kynde
                  The feend was in thy minde
                  Whan thou my byrd vntwynde
                  I wolde thou haddeſt ben blynd
                  
                     
The leopardes ſauage
                  The lyons in their rage
                  Might catche the in their pawes
                  And gnaw the in theyr ia wes
                  Theſe ſerpentes of Libany
                  Might ſting the venemouſly
                  The dragons with their tunges
                  Might poiſon thy liuer and lunges
                  The manticors of the moūtaynes
                  Mighte feed them on thy braines
               
               
                  Melanchates that hound
                  That plucked Atteon to the groūde
                  Gaue him his mortal wound
                  Chaunged to a deere
                  The ſtory doth appere
                  Was chaunged to an harte
                  So thou foule cat, that thou arte
                  The ſelfe ſame hounde
                  Might the confound
                  That his own Lord bote
                  Mighte bite a ſunder thy throte
               
               
                  Of Inde the gredy gripes
                  Might teare out all thy tripes
                  Of Arcady the beares
                  Might plucke awaye thine eares
                  The wilde wolfe Licaon
                  Bite a ſondre thy backe hone
                  Of Ethna the brenning hyl
                  
                     
That day and night brenneth ſtyll
                  Set in thy tayle a blaſe
                  That al the world may gaſe
                  And wonder vpon thee
                  From Occion the greate ſea
                  Unto the Iles of Orchadye
                  From Tilbery fery
                  To the playne of Saliſberye
                  So trayterouſly my byrd to kyll
                  That neuer ought the euil will
                  Was neuer bird in cage
                  More gentil of corage
                  In doing his homage
                  Unto his ſoueraine
                  Alas I ſay agayne
                  Deate hath departed vs twayne
                  The falſe cat hath the ſlaine
                  Fare well Phillip a dewe
                  Our Lorde thy ſoule reſcewe
                  Farewell without reſtore
                  Farewell for euer more
                  And it were a Iew
                  It wold make one rew
                  To ſe my ſorow new
                  Theſe vilanus falſe cattes
                  Were made for miſe and rattes
                  And not for byrdes ſmall
                  Alas my face waxeth pale
                  
                     
Telling this pyteous tale
                  How my byrd ſo fayre
                  That was wont to repayre
                  And go in at myſpayre
                  And crepo in at my gore
                  Of my goune before
                  Flickering with his winges
                  Alas my hert it ſtynges
                  Remembring prety thynges
                  Alas myne hart it ſleeth
                  My Philips doleful death
                  Whan I remembre it
                  How pretely it wold ſit
                  Many tymes and oft
                  Upon my finger aloft
                  I played with him tittel tattel
                  And fed him with my ſpattell
                  With his bil betwene my lips
                  It was my prety Phips
                  Many a prety kuſſe
                  Had I of his ſwete muſſe
                  And now the cauſe is thus
                  That he is ſlayne me fro
                  To my great payne and wo
               
               
                  Of fortune, this the chaunce
                  Standeth an varyaunce
                  Oft time after pleaſaunce
                  Trouble and greuaunce
                  
                     
No man can be ſure
                  
                     
                        •
                     way to haue pleaſure
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      wel perceiue ye may
                  
                     
                        •
                     ow my diſport and playe
                  
                     
                        •
                     rom me was taken awaye
                  
                     
                        •
                     y Gyb our cat ſauage
                  
                     
                        •
                     hat in furious rage
                  
                     
                        •
                     aught Phillip by the head
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd ſlue him there ſtarke dead.
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        rie eleyſon Chriſt eleyſon.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        rye leyſon.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  FOr Philip ſparowes ſoule
                  Set in our bead roule
                  Let vs now whiſper
                  
                     Pater noſter.
                  
                  
                     Lauda anima mea dominum.
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     o weep with me loke yt ye come
                  
                     
                        •
                     ll maner of byrds in your kynd
                  
                     
                        •
                     ee none be left be hynd
                  To morning loke that ye fawl
                  With dolorous ſonges funerall
                  
                     
                        •
                     ome to ſing, and ſome to ſay
                  
                     
                        •
                     ome to weep and ſome to praye
                  
                     
                        •
                     uery bird in his lay
                  
                     
                        •
                     he Goldfinch the wagtaile
                  The iangling Iaye to rayle
                  The flecked Pye to chatter
                  
                     
Of this dolorous matter
                  And Robyn red breſte
                  He ſhalbe the preeſt
                  The Requiem maſſe to ſyng
                  Loftly warbeling
                  With helpe of the red ſparow
                  And the chattering ſwallow
                  This hearſe for to halow
                  The Larke with his long toe
                  The ſpinke & the Martinet alſo
                  The ſhouelar with his brode beck
                  The doterell that foliſh pecke
                  And alſo the mad coote
                  With a balde face to toote
                  The felde fare and the ſnyte
                  The crowe and the kyte
                  The rauen called rolfe
                  His playne ſonge to ſolfe
                  The partryche, the quayle
                  The plouer wyth vs to wayle
                  The wodhacke yt ſingeth churre
                  Horſly as hee had the murre
                  The luſty chaunting nightingale
                  The popingaye to tel her tale
                  That toteth oft in a glaſſe
                  Shal rede the Goſpel at maſſe
                  The mauis with her whiſtell
                  Shal rede there the piſtell
                  
                     
But with a large and a longe
                  
                     
                        •
                      kepe iuſt playne ſonge
                  Our chaūters ſhalbe yt Cuckoue
                  
                     
                        •
                     he Culuer, the ſtockedoue
                  With puwyt the Lapwing
                  
                     
                        •
                     he verſycles ſhal ſynge
                  The Bitter with his bumpe
                  The Crane with his trumpe
                  The ſwan of Menander
                  The Gooſe and the Gander
                  
                     
                        •
                     he ducke and the drake
                  Shal watche atthys wake
                  The Pecocke ſo proude
                  Becauſe hys voyce is loud
                  And hath a gloryous tale
                  He ſhal ſynge the grayle
                  The Owle that ſo foule
                  Muſt helpe vs to Houle
                  the Heron ſo gaunte
                  And the cormoraunte
                  Wyth the Feſaunt
                  And the gaglyng gaunte
                  And the churliſh Choughe
                  the rout and the kough
                  the barnacle the buſſard
                  With the wilde mallard
                  the diuendop to ſleep
                  the water ben to weep
                  
                     
Thhe puffin, and the tele
                  Money they ſhall dele
                  To pore folke at large
                  That ſhalbe theyr charge
                  The ſemew, and the titmoſe
                  The wodcocke with the long noſe
                  The thre ſtill with her warblinge
                  The ſtarling with her brablinge
                  The rooke, with the Oſpray
                  That putteth fiſſhes to afray
                  And the deinty curlew
                  With the turtil moſt true
               
               
                  At this Placebo.
                  
                  We may not well forgo
                  The countring of the co
                  The ſtorke alſo
                  That maketh his neſt
                  In chimneyes to reſt
                  Within thoſe walles
                  No broken galles
                  Maye there abide
                  Of cokoldry ſyde
                  Or els Philoſophy
                  Maketh a greatlye
               
               
                  The Eſtridge that wil eate
                  An horſhowe ſo greate
                  In the ſtede of meat
                  Such feruent heat
                  
                     
His ſtomake doth freat
                  He cannot wel fly
                  Nor ſynge tunably
                  Yet at abrayde
                  He hath well aſſayd
                  To ſolf a aboue Ela
                  
                     Fa lorell fa fa
                  
                  
                     Ne quaando
                  
                  
                     Male cantando
                  
                  The beſt that we can
                  To make him our belman
                  An let him ring the bels
                  He can do nothing els,
                  Chaunteclere our Cocke
                  Muſt tell what is of the clocke
                  By the aſtrologye
                  That he hath naturally
                  Conceyued and caught
                  And was neuer taught
                  By Al bumazer
                  The astronomer
                  Nor by ptholomy
                  Prince of Aſtronomer
                  Nor yet by Haly
                  And yet he croweth dayly
                  And nightly the tydes
                  That no man abides
                  With partlot his hen
                  
                     
Whome now and then
                  Hee plucketh by the hed
                  whan he doth her tred
               
               
                  The bird of Arabye
                  that potenciallye
                  May neuer dye
                  And yet there is none
                  But one alone
                  A phenix it is
                  this herſe that muſt blis
                  With armaticke gummes
                  that coſt great ſummes
                  the way of thurification
                  to make fumigacion
                  Swete of reflarye
                  And redolent of ayre
                  This corſe for ſence
                  With great reuerence
                  As Patriarke or Pope
                  In a blacke cope
                  Whiles he ſenſeth
                  He ſhal ſyng the verſe
                  
                     Libera me
                  
                  
                     In de la ſol re
                  
                  Softly bemole
                  For my ſparowes ſoule
                  Plinni ſheweth al
                  In his ſtory natural
                  
                     
What he doth finde
                  Of the Phenix kinde
                  Of whoſe incineracion
                  There riſeth a new creacion
                  Of the ſame facion
                  Wythout alteracion
                  Sauing that old age
                  Is turned into corage
                  Of freſh youth agayne
                  This matter true and playne
                  Playne matter in deed
                  Who ſo lyſt to rede
               
               
                  But for the Egle doth fly
                  Hyeſt in the ſky
                  He ſhalbe thy ſe deane
                  The quere to demeane
                  As prouoſt principall
                  To teach them their Ordinall
                  Alſo the noble fawcon
                  With the gerfawcon
                  The tarſel gentil
                  They ſhall morne ſofte and ſtill
                  In theyr amiſſe of gray
                  The ſacre with them ſhal ſay
                  Dirige for Philips ſoule
                  The Goſhauke ſhal haue a roul
                  The quereſtrers to controule
                  The lanners and marlions
                  
                     
ſhall ſtādī their mournīggounes
                  The hobby and the muſket
                  The ſēſers aud the croſſe ſhall fet
                  The keſtrel in al this warke
                  Salbe holy water clarks
                  And now the darke cloudy night
                  Chaſeth away phebus bryght
                  taking his courſe toward the weſte
                  God ſēd my ſparoes ſoule good reſt
                  
                     Rcquiē eternā dona eis domine
                  
                  Fa fa fa my re
                  A por ta in fe ri
                  Fa fa fa my my
               
               
                  ¶ Credo Videre bona domini
                  
                  I pray god philip to heuen may flie
                  
                     Domine exaudi or acionem me am
                  
                  to heauē he ſhal frō heuē he came
                  ¶ Do mi nus vo biſ cum of al good praiers god ſēd him ſum Oremus.
                  
                  
                     Deꝰ cui propreū eſt miſerere & percere
                  
                  On Phillips ſoule haue pity:
               
            
            
               
                  FOr he was a prety cocke
                  And came of a gentill ſtocke
                  and wrapt in a maidens ſmock
                  And cheriſhed full daintely
                  tyll cruel fate made him to dye
                  
                     
Alas for doleful deſteny
                  But where to ſhuld I
                  Lenger morne or cry?
                  To Iupiter I call
                  Of heauen emperial
                  That Philip may fly
                  Aboue the ſterryſky
                  To treade the pretywren
                  That is our Ladies hen
                  Amen, amen, amen
                  ¶ Yet one thing is behinde
                  That now commeth to mind
                  An Epitaphe I wold haue
                  For Phillips graue
                  But for I am a mayde
                  Timerous, halfe a frayde
                  That neuer yet a ſayde
                  Of Elycones well
                  Where the muſes dwell
                  Though I can rede and ſpell
                  Recount report and tell
                  Of the talles of Caunterbury
                  Some ſad ſtoryes, ſome mercy
                  As Palomon, and Arcet
                  Duke Theſeus and partelet
                  And of the wife of bath
                  That worketh much ſcathe
                  Whan her tale is told
                  
                     
Among huſwiues bold
                  How ſhe controld
                  Her huſbandes as ſhe wold
                  And theim to diſpiſe
                  In the homelieſt wiſe
                  Bring other wiues in thought
                  their huſbandes to ſet at naught
               
               
                  And though that red haue I
                  Of Gawen and ſyr Guy
                  And tel can a great peece
                  Of the golden fleere
                  How Iaſon it wan
                  Like a valiaunt man
                  Of Arturs round table
                  with his knightes commēdable
                  And dame Gaynour hys Quene
                  was ſomwhat wanton I wene
                  How ſyr Launcelote de lake
                  Many a ſpeare brake
                  For his Ladyes ſake
                  Of Triſtrom and kyng Marke
                  And al the whole warke
                  Of bele I ſold his wife
                  For whom was much ſtrife
                  Some ſay ſhe was lyght
                  And made her huſband knyght
                  Of the common hall
                  That cuckoldes men call
                  
                     
And of ſir Libius
                  Named Diſconius
                  Of quarter fylz Amunde
                  And how they were ſommond
                  To Rome to Charlemayne
                  Upon a great payne
                  And how they rode each one
                  On Bayard Mountalbon
                  Men ſe him now and then
                  In the foreſt Arden
                  What though I can frame
                  The ſtoryes by name
                  Of Iudas Machabeus
                  And of Ceſar Iulius
                  And of the loue betwene
                  Paris and viene
                  And of the duke of Hannyball
                  That made the Romaynes al
                  For drede and to quake
                  How Scipion did wake
                  The citie of Cartage
                  Which by his vnmerciful rage
                  He beat down to the ground
                  And though I can expound
                  Of Hector of Troy
                  That was al theyr ioye
                  Whome Achilles ſlue
                  Wherfore all Troy did rue
                  
                     
And of the loue ſo hote
                  That made Troylus to dote
                  Upon fayre Creſſeyde
                  And what they wrote and ſayd
                  And of their wanton wils
                  Pandaer bare the byls
                  From one to the other
                  His maiſters loue to further
                  Somtime a precious thynge
                  An ouche or els a ryng
                  From her to him agayn
                  Somtime a prety chain
                  Or a bracelet of her heare
                  Prayed Troylus for to weare
                  That token for her ſake
                  How hartely he did it take
                  And much therof did make
                  And al that was in vayne
                  For ſhee dyd but fayne
                  The ſtory telleth playne
                  He could not obtayne
                  Though his father wer a king
                  Yet there was a thynge
                  That made the male to wryng
                  She made him to ſing
                  The ſong of louers laye
                  Muſing night and daye
                  Mourninge al alone
                  
                     
Comfort had he none
                  For ſhe was quite gone
                  Thus in concluſion
                  She broughte him in abuſion
                  In earneſt and in game
                  She was much to blame
                  Diſparaged is her fame
                  And blemiſhed is her name
                  In maner half with ſhame
                  Troylus alſo hath loſt
                  On her muche loue and coſt
                  And now muſt kiſſe the poſt
                  Pandara that went betwene
                  Hath won nothyng I ween
                  But light for ſomer greene
                  Yet for a ſpeciall laud
                  He is named Troyllous baud
                  Of that name he is ſure
                  Whiles the world ſhal dure
               
               
                  Though I remembre the fable
                  Of Penelope moſt ſtable
                  To her huſband moſt trew
                  Yet long time ſhe ne knew
                  Whether he were on liue or ded
                  Her wit ſtode her in ſted
                  That ſhe was true and iuſte
                  For anye bodelye luſte
                  To Ulixes her make
                  
                     
And neuer wold him forſake
               
               
                  Of Marcus Marcellus
                  A proſſes I could tel vs
                  And of Anteocus
                  And of Ioſep hus
                  De antiquitatibus
                  
                  And of Mardocheus
                  And of great Aſſuerus
                  And of Ueſca his Queene
                  Whome he forſoke with teene
                  And of Heſter his otherwife
                  With whom he led a pleaſaunt life
                  Of kynge Alerander
                  And of kyng Euander
                  And of Porcena the greate
                  That made the romains to ſmart
               
               
                  Though I haue enrold
                  A thouſande newe and old
                  Of theſe hiſtoryous tales
                  To fil bougets and 
                        •
                     ales
                  With bookes that I haue red
                  Yet I am nothynge ſyed
                  And can but Iytle ſkyl
                  Of Ouid or Uergil
               
               
                  Or of Plutharke
                  Or of Fraunces Petrarke
                  Alcheus or Sapho
                  Or ſuche other Poetes moe.
                  
                     
As Linus and Homerus
                  Enphorion and Theocritus
                  Anacreon an Arion
                  Sophocles and Philemon
                  Pindarus and Dimonides
                  Philiſton & Phorocides
                  Theſe Poetes of auncientie
                  They are to diffuſe for me
               
               
                  For as I to fore haue ſayd
                  I am but a yonge mayd
                  And cannot in effect
                  My ſtile as yet direct
                  With englyſh wordes elect
                  Our naturall tonge is rude
                  And hard to be enneude
                  Wyth pollyſhed tearmes luſtye
                  Oure language is ſo ruſtye
                  So tankered and ſo ful
                  Of frowardes and ſo dul
                  That if I wold apply
                  To write ordinately
                  I wot not where to finde
                  Termes to ſerue my mynde
                  Gowers englyſhe is olde
                  And of no value is tolde
                  His matter is worth gold
                  And worthy to be enrold
               
               
                  In Chauſer I am ſped
                  
                     
His tales I haue red
                  His mater is delectable
                  Solacious and commendable
                  His engliſhe wel alowed
                  So as it is enprowed
                  For as it is employed
                  There is no englyſhe voyd
                  At thoſe dayes muche commended
                  And now men wolde haue amēded
                  His engliſhe where at they barke
                  And marre all they warke
                  Chaucer that famous Clarke
                  His tearmes were not darcke
                  But pleaſaunt eaſy, and playne
                  No worde he wrote in vayne
               
               
                  Alſo Ihon Lydgate
                  Wrytteth after an hyer rate
                  It is diffuſe to fynde
                  The ſentence of his mind
                  Yet wryteth he in his kind
                  No man that can amend
                  Thoſe maters that he hath pend
                  Yet ſome men finde a faut
                  And ſay he wryteth to haut
               
               
                  Wherfore hold me excuſed
                  If I haue not wel peruſed
                  Myne englyſh halfe abuſed
                  Thoughe it be refuſed
                  
                     
In worth I ſhall it take
                  And fewer wordes makē
                  
               
               
                  But for my ſparowes ſake
                  Yet as a woman maye
                  My wit I ſhall aſſay
                  An Epytaphe to wryghte
                  In latyne playne and lyght
                  Wherof the Elegy
                  Foloweth by and by
                  
                     Flos Volucrum formoſe Valo
                  
                  
                     Philippe ſub iſ to
                  
                  
                     Marmore iam recubas
                  
                  
                     Quis mihi carus cras
                  
                  
                     Semper erunt niido
                  
                  
                     Radiantia ſidera celo
                  
                  
                     Impreſſuſque meo
                  
                  
                     Pectore ſemper eris
                  
                  
                     Per me Laurigerum
                  
                  
                     Britanum Skeltonida Vaten
                  
                  
                     Hec ceciniſſe licet
                  
                  
                     Ficta ſub imagine texta
                  
                  
                     Cuius eris uolucris
                  
                  
                     Preſtanti corpore Vrgo
                  
                  
                     Candida Nais erat
                  
                  
                     Formoſior iſta Ioanna eſt
                  
                  
                     Docta corinna fuit
                  
                  
                     Sed magis iſta ſapit
                  
               
               Bien men ſouient.
            
            
               
               The commendacions.
               
                  
                     BEati immaculati in uia
                  
                  
                     O glo rio ſa femina
                  
                  Now mine hole imaginacion
                  And ſtudious meditacion
                  Is to take this commendacion
                  In this conſideracion
                  And vnder pacient tolleracion
                  Of that moſt godly mayd
                  That Placebo hath ſayd
                  And for her ſparow prayd
                  In lamentable wyſe
               
               
                  Now wyl I enterpryſe
                  Thorow the grace diuine
                  Of the muſes nine
                  Her beauty to commend
                  If Arethuſa wyll ſend
                  Me enfluence to endite
                  And with my pen to write
                  If Apollo will promiſe
                  Melodiouſlye it to deuiſe
                  His tunable harpe ſtringes
                  With armonye that ſynges
                  Of Princes and of kinges
                  And of all pleaſaunt thynges
                  Of luſt and of delyght
                  Thorow his godly might
                  To whome be the laud aſcrybed
                  
                     
That my pen hath enbibed
                  With the aureat droppes
                  As verelye my hope is
                  Of Thagus that golden floud
                  That paſſeth all the earthly good
                  And as that floud dothe pas
                  Al floudes that euer was
                  With hys golden ſandes
                  Who ſo that vnderſtandes
                  Coſmography: and the ſtremes
                  And the floudes in ſtraūge remes
                  Ryght ſo ſhe dothe excede
                  Al other of whom we rede
                  Whoſe fame by me ſhall ſprede
                  Into Perce and Mede
                  From britons Albion
                  To the toure of Babilon
               
               
                  I truſt it is no ſhame
                  And no manne wyl me blame
                  Thoughe I regeſter her name
                  In the courte of fame
                  For thys moſt goodly floure
                  This bloſſome of freſhe coloure
                  So Iupiter me ſuccoure
                  She floryſheth new and new
                  In beauty and vertue
                  
                     Hac claritate gemina
                  
                  
                     O glorioſa femina
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  Retribue ſeruo tuo uiuifica me.
                  L
                        •
                     bia mea laudabunt te.
               
               
                  BUt enforſed am I
                  Openlye to aſkry
               
               
                  And to make an out cry
                  Againſte odyous enuye
                  That euermore wyl lye
                  And ſaye curſedlye
                  With hys lether eye
                  And chekes drye
                  With vyſage wan
                  As ſwarte as tan
                  His bones crake
                  Leane as a rake
                  Hys gummes ruſtye
                  Are full vnluſtye
                  Hys harte with all
                  Bytter as gall
                  His liuer his longes
                  With anger is wronge
                  Hys ſerpentes tonge
                  That many one hath ſtonge
                  He frowneth cuer
                  He laugheth neuer
                  Euen nor morowe
                  But other mens ſorowe
                  Cauſeth him to grin
                  And reioice therein.
                  
                     
No ſlepe can hym catche
                  But euer doth watche
                  he is ſo bete
                  With malice and frete
                  Wyth anger and yre
                  his foule deſire
                  Wyl ſuffer no ſleep
                  In his head to creep
               
               
                  His foule ſemblaunte
                  Al diſpleaſaunte
                  Whan other are glad
                  Than is hee ſad
                  Franticke and mad
                  His tounge neuer ſtyll
                  For to ſaye yll
                  Writhing and wringing
                  Biting and ſtingyng
                  And thus this elf
                  Conſumeth him ſelfe
                  Hym ſelfe doth ſloe
                  Wyth payne and woe
                  Thys falſe enuy
                  Sayth that I
                  Uſe greate follye
                  For to indite
                  And for to wryte
                  And ſpende my time
                  In proſe and rime
                  
                     
For to expres
                  The noblenes
                  Of my mayſtres
                  That cauſeth me
                  Studious to be
                  To make a relation
                  Of her commendacion
                  And there agayne
                  Enuy doth complayne
                  And hath diſdaine
                  But yet certayne
                  I will be playne
                  And my ſtile dres
                  To this proſſes
               
               
                  Nowe Phebus me ken
                  To ſharpe my pen
                  And leade my fyſte
                  As him beſt lyſt
                  That I may ſay
                  Honoure alwaye
                  Of woman kynde
                  Trouthe dothe me bynde
                  And loyaltie
                  Euer to be
                  Their true bedel
                  To wryte and tel
                  How women excel
                  In noblenes
                  
                     
As my mayſtres
                  Of whome I thinke
                  With pen and ynke
                  For to compyle
                  Some goodly ſtile
                  For thys moſte goodly floure
                  This bloſſom of freſh colour
                  So Iupiter me ſuccour
                  She floriſheth new and new
                  In beautie and vertue
                  
                     Hac claritate gemina
                  
                  
                     O glorioſa femina
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Legem pone michi domine in uiam iuſtificationum tuarum.
                  Quemadmodum deſiderat ceruus ad fontes aquarum.
               
               
                  HOwe ſhall I reporte
                  Al the godly fort
                  Of her fetures cleere
                  That hath none earthly peere
                  Her fauoure of her face
                  Ennewed with al grace
                  Confort pleaſure and ſolace
                  Mine hart doth ſo enbrace
                  And ſo hath rauiſhed me
                  Her to behold and ſe
                  That in wordes playne
                  I cannot me refrayne
                  
                     
To loke to her agayne
                  Alas what ſhoulde I fayne
                  It were a pleaſaunte payne
                  Wyth her aye to remayne
               
               
                  Her eyen graye and ſtepe
                  Cauſeth myne harte to leepe
                  With her browes bente
                  She maye wel repreſente
                  Fayre Lucres as I weene
                  Or els fayre Polexene
                  Or els Caliope
                  Or els Penolope
                  For thys moſte goodly floure
                  This bloſſome of freſhe coloure
                  So Iupiter me ſuccour
                  She floriſheth new and new
                  In beauty and vertue
                  
                     Hac claritate gemina
                  
                  
                     O glorioſa femina
                  
                  
                     Memor eſto Verbi tui ſeruo tuo
                  
                  
                     Seruus tuus ſum ego
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THe Indy Saphyre blewe
                  Her vaynes doth ennew
                  The Orient pearle ſo cleare
                  The witnes of her lere
                  The luſty ruby ruddes
                  Reſemble the Roſe buddes
                  Her lippes ſoft and mery
                  
                     
Emblomed like the chery
                  It were an heauenly blyſſe
                  Her ſugred mouthe to kyſſe
               
               
                  Her beauty to augment
                  Dame nature hath her lente
                  A warte vpon her cheke
                  Who ſo lyſt to ſeeke
                  In her viſage a ſkar
                  That ſemeth from a far
                  Lyke to the radyant ſtar
                  Al with fauour fret
                  So proprely it is ſet
                  She is the violet
                  The daiſy delectable
                  The columbine commendable
                  This ielofer amiable
                  This moſte goodly floure
                  This bloſſome of freſhe coloure
                  So Iupiter me ſuccoure
                  She floryſheth new and new
                  In beauty and vertue
                  
                     Hac claritate gemina
                  
                  
                     O glorioſa femina
                  
                  
                     Bonitatē feciſti cū ſeruo tuo domina
                  
                  
                     Et ex precordus ſonant preconia.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  ANd whan I perceiued
                  Her wart and conceiued
                  It can not be denaid
                  
                     
But it was wel conuaid
                  And ſet ſo womanly
                  And nothing wantonly
                  But right conueniently
                  And full congruentlye
                  As nature could deuiſe
                  In moſte goodly wyſe
                  Who ſo lyſt behold
                  It maketh louers bold
                  To her to ſue for grace
                  Her fauour to purchaſe
                  The ſker vpon her chin
                  Enhached on her fayre ſkin
                  Whiter than the ſwan
                  It wold make any man
                  To forget deadly ſyn
                  Her fauour to wyn
                  For this moſt goodly flour
                  This bloſſome of freſhe coloure
                  So Iupiter me ſuccour
                  She floriſheth new and new
                  In beauty and vertue
                  
                     Hac claritate gemina
                  
                  
                     O glorioſa femina
                  
               
               
                  Defecit in ſalutate tuum anima mea quid petis filio, mater dulciſſima ba ba.
               
            
            
               
                  
SOft and make no din
               For now I wil begin
               To haue in remembraunce
               Her goodly dalyaunce
               And her goodly paſtaunce
               So ſad and ſo demure
               Behauing her ſo ſure
               With wordes of pleaſure
               She wold make to the lure
               And any man conuert
               To geue her his whole hart
               She made me ſore amaſed
               Upon her whan I gaſed
               Me thought mine hart was craſed
               My eyen were ſo daſed
               For this moſt goodly flour
               The bloſſome of freſh colour
               So Iupiter me ſuccoure
               She floryſheth new and new
               In beauty and vertew
               
                  Hac claricate gemina
               
               
                  O glorioſa femina
               
            
            
               
                  Quomodo dilixi legem tuam domina.
               
               
                  Recedant uetera noua ſunt omnia.
               
               ANd to amend her tale
               Whan ſhe lyſt to auale
               And with her fingers ſmall
               And handes ſoft as ſilke
               
                  
Whiter then milke
               That are ſo quickely vayned
               Wherwith my hand ſhe ſtrained
               Lord how I was payned
               Unneth I me refrayned
               How ſhe me had reclaymed
               And me to her retayned
               Enbraſyng ther with all
               Her goodly middle ſmall
               With ſides long and ſtreyt
               To tel you what conceit
               I had then in a trice
               The matter wer to nyce
               And yet there was no vyce
               Nor yet no villany
               But only fantaſy
               For this moſt goodly floure
               The bloſſome of freſh colour
               So Iupiter me ſuccour
               She floriſheth new and new
               In beautie and vertue
               
                  Hac claritate gemina
               
               
                  O glorioſa femina
               
               
                  ¶ Iniquos odio habui
               
               
                  Non calumnientur me ſuperbi.
               
            
            
               BUt wherto ſhold I note
               How often dyd I 
                     •
                  ote
               Upon her pretye fote
               
                  
It rayſed myne hart rote
               To ſee her treade the grounds
               With heles ſhort and round
               She is plainly expreſſe
               Egeria the goddeſſe
               And lyke to her ymage
               Importured with corage
               A louers pilgrimage
               There is no beſt ſauage
               Ne no tygre ſo wood
               But ſhe wold chaunge his mood
               Suche relucent grace
               Is formed in her face
               For this moſt goodly flour
               This bloſſome of freſhe coloure
               So Iupiter me ſuccour
               She floryſheth new and new
               In beauty and vertue
               
                  Hac claritate gemina
               
               
                  O glorioſa femina
               
               
                  Mirabilia teſtimonia tua
               
               
                  Sicut nouelle plantacōes in inuentute ſua
               
            
            
               SO goodly as ſhe dreſſes
               So properly ſhe preſſes
               The bryght golden treſſes
               Of her heare ſo fyne
               Lyke Phebus beames ſhyne
               Where to ſhould I diſcloſe
               
                  
The garteryng of her hoſe
               It is for to ſuppoſe
               Howe that ſhe can weare
               Gorgiouſlye her geare
               Her freſhe habilementes
               With other implementes
               To ſerue for all ententes
               Lyke dame flora queene
               Of luſty ſomer grene
               This moſte goodly flour
               This bloſſome of freſhe coloure
               So Iupiter me ſuccoure
               She floryſheth new and new
               In beauty and vertew
               
                  Hac claritate gemina
               
               
                  O glorioſa femina
               
               
                  Clamaui in toto corde exaudi me▪
                  
               
               
                  Mia tua magna eſt ſuper me.
               
            
            
               HEr kyrtel ſo goodly laſed
               And vnder that is braced
               Such pleaſures that I may
               Neither write nor ſay
               Yet thoughe I writ not with ink
               No man can let me thinke
               For thought hath liberti
               Thought is franke and free
               To thynke a mery thought
               It coſt me litle or nought
               
                  
Wold god mine homely ſtile
               Were polliſhed with the file
               Of Ciceros eloquence
               To prayſe her excellence
               The mooſt goodlye floure
               This bloſſome of freſhe coloure
               So Iupiter me ſuccoure
               She floryſheth new and new
               In beauty and vertue
               
                  Hac claritate gemina
               
               
                  O glorioſa femina
               
               
                  Principes perſecuti ſunt me gratis
               
               
                  Omnibus conſideratis. Paradiſus uoluptatis, hec uirgo eſt dulciſſima.
               
            
            
               MI pen it is vnable
               My hand it is vnſtable
               My reaſon rude and dull
               To prayſe her at the full
               Goodly maiſtres Iane
               Sobre, demure Diane
               Iane this maiſtres hight
               The lode ſtar of delight
               Dame Uenus of all pleaſure
               The wel of worldly treaſure
               She doth excede and paſſe
               In Prudence dame Pallas
               The moſt goodly floure
               This bloſſome of freſhe coloure
               
                  
So Iupiter me ſuccoure
               She floriſheth new and new
               In beauty and vertue
               
                  Hac cla
                        •
                     itate gemina
               
               
                  O glorioſa femina
               
            
            
               
                  RFquiem eternam dona eis domine
               
               With this pſalm. Domine probaſti me
               
               Shall ſaile ouer the ſea
               With tibi domine commendamus
               
               On pilgrimages to ſainct Iamys
               For ſhrympes, and for pranes
               And for ſtalkynge cranes
               And wher my pen hath offended
               I pray you it may be amended
               By diſcrete conſideration
               Of your wiſe reformacion
               I haue not offended I truſt
               If it be ſadly diſcuſt
               It were no gentle guyſe
               This treatiſe to diſpiſe
               Becauſe I haue writen and ſayd
               Honour of this fayre mayd
               Wherfore ſhould I be blamed
               That I Iaue named
               And famouſly proclamed
               She is worthy to be enrold
               With letters of golde.
               
                  
                  PEr me Laurigerum Britonum
               
               
                  Skeltonida latem
               
               
                  Laudibus eximiis merito, hec remedita puella eſt
               
               
                  Formoſam poc
                        •
                     cini qua non formoſior Vlla eſt
               
               
                  Formoſam pocius, quam commendaret homerus
               
               
                  Sic iuuat interdum regidos recreare labores
               
               
                  Nec minus hoc titulo terſa minerua mea eſt.
               
               
                  Rien que plaiſere.
               
               Thus endeth the boke of Philip ſparow, & here foloweth an adicion made by maſter Skelton.
               
            
            
               THe gyſe now a dayes
               Of ſome ianglyng iayes
               Is to diſcommend
               That they cannot amend
               Though they wold ſpand
               All the wyttes they haue
               What ayle them to depraue
               Phillip ſparowes graue
               His dirige: her commendacion
               Can be no derogacion
               But myrth and conſolacion
               
                  
Made by proteſtacion
               No man to miſcontent
               With Phillippes enterement
               Alas that goodly mayd
               Why ſhould ſhe be afrayd
               Why ſhould ſhe take ſhame
               That her goodly name
               Honorably reported
               Should be ſet and ſorted
               To be matriculate
               With Ladyes of eſtate
               I coniure the Phillip ſparow
               By Hercules that hel dyd harow
               And with a venemous arow
               Slewe of the Epidaures
               One of the Centaures
               Or Onocentaures
               Or Hipocentaurius
               By whoſe might and mayne
               An hart was ſlayne
               With hornes twayne
               Of glittering gold
               And the appels of gold
               Of Heſperides withhold
               And with a dragon kept
               That neuer more ſlept
               By marcial ſtrengthe
               He wan at lenght
               
                  
And ſlue Gerion
               With thre bodies in one
               With mighty corage
               Auaunted the rage
               Of a Lyon ſauage
               Of Dyomedes ſtable
               He brought out a rable
               Of courſers and rounſes
               With leapes and bounſes
               And with mighty lugging
               Wreſtlyng and tuggyng
               He plucked the bul
               By the horned ſkul
               And offred to Cornucopia
               And ſo forth per cetera
               Alſo by Ecates bower
               In Plutus gaſtly tower
               By the vglye Eumenides
               That neuer haue reſt nor eaſe
               By the venemous ſerpent
               That in hel is neuer brente
               In Lerna the Grekes 
                     •
                  en
               That was engendred then
               By Chemeras flames
               And all the deadly names
               Of infernal poſty
               Where ſoules fry and roſty
               By the ſtigial flood
               
                  
And the ſtreames wood
               Of Cocitus botumles wel
               By the feryman of hel
               Caron with his beard hore
               That roweth with a rude ore
               And with his fore top
               Gideth his bote with a prop
               I coniure Phillip and cal
               In the name of kyng Saul
               
                  Primo regum expreſſe
               
               He had the Phitoneſſe
               To wytchecraft her to dres
               And by her abuſions
               And damnable illuſions
               Of merueylous concluſions
               And by her ſuperſticions
               And wonderful condicions
               She rayſed vp in that ſtede
               Samuel that was deade
               But whether it were ſo
               He were, idem in numero
               
               The ſelfe ſame Samuel
               How be it to Saule dyd he tell
               The Philiſtines ſhuld him aſcry
               And the next day he ſhould dye
               I wil myſelf diſcharge
               To lettred men at large
               But Philip I coniure thee
               
                  
Now by theſe names three
               Diana in the woodes grene
               Luna that ſo bryght doth ſhyne
               Proſerpina in hell
               That thou ſhortly tell
               And ſhew now vnto me
               What the cauſe may be
               Of this perplexitie
               
                  Inferia phillippe Scroupe pulchra Iohanna
               
               
                  Inſtanter perſit, cur noſtri camis nis illam
               
               
                  Nunc puder, eſt ſero, minor eſt infamia Vero.
               
               Than ſuche as haue diſdayned
               And of thys worke complayned
               I pray God they be payned
               No worſe than is contayned
               In verſes two or three
               That folowe as ye may ſee
               
                  Luride cur liuor Voluctis pia funera damnas
               
               
                  Taliate rapiant, rapiunt que fata Volucrum
               
               
                  Eſt tamen inuidiu mors tibi contnua.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               Skelton Laureate againſt a comel Coyſtrowne that curiowſly chauntyd And curryſhly cowntred, And madly in hys Muſikes mokkyſhly made, Agaynſt the ix. Muſis of politike Poems and Poettys matriculat.
            
               
                  OF all nacyons vnder the heuyn.
                  Theſe frantyke foolys I hate moſt of all.
                  For though they ſtūble in ye ſinnes ſeuyn.
                  In peuyſhnes yet they ſnapper and fall.
                  Whiche men the. viii. deadly ſins call.
                  This peuyſh proud this prender geſt.
                  When he is well yet can he not reſt.
               
               
                  A ſwete ſuger lofe & ſowre bayards bun.
                  Beſumdele lyke in forme and ſhap
                  The one for a duke the other for dun.
                  A maunchet for morell theron to ſnap.
                  His hart is to hy to haue any hap.
                  But for in his game vt carp that he can.
                  Lo Iak wold be a Ientylman
               
               
                  Wyth hey troly loly lo whip here Iak.
                  Alumbek ſodyldym ſyllorym ben.
                  Curyowſly he can both counter and knak
                  Of Martyn ſwart and all hys mery men.
                  Lord how perkyn is proud of his Pohen.
                  But aſk wher he fyndyth amōg his monacordes.
                  
                     
An holy water clark a ruler of lordes.
               
               
                  He can not fynd it in rule nor in ſpace.
                  He ſolfyth to haute hys Trybyll is to hy.
                  He braggyth of his byrth that borne was ful bace
                  Hys muſyk withoute meſure to ſharp is his my.
                  He trymmyth in his tenor to counter pridewy.
                  His diſcant is beſy it is withoute a mene.
                  To fat is his fantſy his wyt is to lene.
               
               
                  He lūbryth on a lewde lewte roty bulle Ioyſe.
                  Rumbill downe tumbil downe hey go now now.
                  He fūblyth in his fyngering an vgly good noiſe.
                  It ſemyth the ſobbyng of an old ſow.
                  He wold be made moch of & he wyſt how.
                  Wele ſped In ſpyndels & turning of tauellys.
                  Abungler, a brawler, a pyker of quarellys.
               
               
                  Comely he clappyth a payre of clauycordys.
                  He whyſtelyth ſo ſwetely he makyth me to ſwet.
                  His deſcant is daſhed full of diſcordes
                  Ared angry man but eaſy to intrete.
                  An vſſher of the hall fayn wold I get.
                  To poynte this proude page a place and a rome
                  For Iak wold be a Ientilman that late was a grome
               
               
                  Iak wold Iet and yet Iyll ſayd nay.
                  He counteth in his coūtenaūce to check wt yt beſt.
                  A malaperte medler that pryeth for his pray
                  
                     
In a dyſh dare he ruſh at the rypeſt,
                  Dreming in dumpys to wrangill & to wreſt.
                  He findeth a proporcion in his prycke ſonge.
                  To drynke at a draught a larg and a long
               
               
                  Nay iape not with hym he is no ſmal fole
                  It is a ſolempne ſyre and a ſolayne.
                  For lordes and ladyes lerne at his ſcole
                  He techyth them ſo wyſely to ſolf and to fayne
                  That neither they ſinge wel prike ſōg nor plain
                  This docter dellias commenſyd in a cart.
                  A maſter, a mynſtrel, a fydler, a fart.
               
               
                  What though ye can cownter Cuſtodinos.
                  
                  As wel it becomith yow a paryſh towne Clarke.
                  To ſyng Supitati dedit Egros
                  
                  Yet bere ye not to bold to braule ne to bark
                  At me, that medeled nothing with youre wark.
                  Correct firſt thyſelfe, walk and be nought.
                  Deme what yu liſt thou knowiſt not my thought.
               
               
                  A prouerbe of old ſay well or be ſtill.
                  Ye are to vnhappy occaſion to fynde.
                  Uppon me to clater or els to ſay yll.
                  Now haue I ſhewyd you part of your proud mīd
                  Take this in worth the beſt is behynde.
                  Wryten at Croydon by Crowland in the Clay.
                  On Candelmas euyn the Kalendas of May.
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               
               
                  Contra alium Cantitatem & Organiſantem
                  Aſinum, qui impugnabat Skeltonida
                  Pierium, Sarcaſmos.
               
               
                  PRponenda meis non ſunt tua plectra camenis. Necquantum noſtra fiſtula clara tua eſt.
                  Sepelicet liricos modularis arundine pſalmos, Et tremulos calamis concinis ipſe modos:
                  Quamuis mille tuus digitus dat carmine plauſus, Nam tua 
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      tua uox eſt mage docta manus:
                  Quamuis cuncta facis tumida ſub mente ſuperbus, Gratior eſt Phaebo fiſtula noſtra tamen.
                  Ergo tuum ſtude as animo deponere faſtum, Et uiolare ſacrum deſine Stulte uirum.
               
            
         
         
            
               Skelton Laureat vppon a deedmans hed that was ſent to hym from an honorable Ientil woman for a token, Deuyſyd this goſtly meditacion in Englyſh, Couenable in ſentence Comendable, Lamentable, Lacrimable, Profitable for the ſoule.
            Youre vgly tokyn,
            My mynd hath brokyn,
            From worldly luſt.
            For I haue dyſcuſt,
            We are but duſt,
            And dy we muſt.
            
               It is generall
               To be mortall,
               
                  
I haue well eſpyde
               No man may hym hyde:
               From deth holow eyed.
               With ſinnews wyderyd,
               With bonys ſhyderyd,
               With hys worme etyn maw,
               And his gaſtly Iaw.
               Gaſpyng aſyde,
               Nakyd of hyde,
               Neyther fleſh not fell.
               Then by my councell,
               Loke that ye ſpel,
               Well thys goſpell.
               For wher ſo we dwell,
               Deth wil vs qwell,
               And with vs mell.
               For all our pamperde paūchis
               Ther may no fraunchys,
               Nor worldly blys,
               Redeme vs from this,
               Oure days be datyd,
               To be chek matyd,
               With drawttys of deth,
               Stoppyng oure breth,
               Oure eyen ſynkyng,
               Oure bodys ſtynkyng,
               Oure gummys grynnyng.
               Oure ſoulys brynnyng.
               
                  
To whom then ſhall we ſew,
               For to haue reſkew,
               But to ſwete Ieſu,
               On vs then for to rew.
               O goodly child,
               Of Mary mylde,
               Then be oure ſhylde.
               That we be not exyld,
               To the dyne dale,
               Of botemles bale,
               Nor to the lake,
               Of fendys blake.
               But graunt vs grace
               To ſe thy face,
               And to purchace,
               Thyne heuenly place.
               And thy palace,
               Full of ſolace.
               Aboue the ſky,
               That is ſo hy. Eternally.
               To beholde and ſe.
               The Trynyte. Amen.
               Mirres vous y.
            
         
         
            
               VUomanhod wanton ye want.
               Your medeling maſtres is manerles.
               Plenty of yll of goodnes ſkant.
               Ye rayll at ryot recheles.
               To prayſe youre porte it is nedeles.
               
                  
For all your draffe yet and youre dreggys.
               As well borne as ye full oft tyme beggys.
            
            
               Why ſo koy and full of ſkorne.
               Myne horſe is ſold I wene you ſay.
               My new furryd gowne when it is worne.
               Put vp youre purs ye ſhall non pay.
               By Crede I truſt to ſe the day.
               As proud a pohen as ye ſprede.
               Of me and other ye may haue nede.
            
            
               Though angelyk be youre ſmylyng.
               Yet is youre tong an adders tayle.
               Full lyke a Scorpyon ſtyngyng.
               All thoſe by whom ye haue auayle.
               Good maſtres Anne there ye do ſhayle.
               What prate ye praty pyggys ny.
               I truſte to quyte you or I dy.
            
            
               Youre key is mete for euery lok.
               Youre key is commen and hangyth owte.
               Youre key is redy we nede not knok.
               Nor ſtand long wreſtyng there aboute.
               Of youre doregate ye haue no doute.
               But one thyng is that ye be lewde.
               Holde youre tong now all be ſhrewde.
            
            
               To maſtres Anne that farly ſwete.
               That wonnes at the key intemmys ſtrete.
            
         
         
            
            
               The boke of three fooles M. Skelton poete Laureate, Gaue to my Lord Cardynall
            
               The fyrſt foole.
               The man that doth wed a wyfe
               For her goodes and her rycheſſe
               And not for lygnage femynatyfe
               Procureth doloure and dyſtreſſe
               With infynyte payne and heuyneſſe
               For ſhe wyll do hym moche ſorowe
               Bothe at euyn and at morowe.
            
            
               The ſeconde foole
               The dartes ryght curſed of enuye
               Hath rayned ſythe the worlde began
               Whiche bryngeth man euydently
               In to the bondes of Sathan
               Wherfore he is a dyſcrete man
               That can eſchewe that euyll ſynne
               Where body and ſoule is loſt in
            
            
               The thyrd foole
               Dyuers by voluptuouſnes
               Of women the which be preſent
               Be brought in to full great dyſtres
               Forgettyng vertues excellent
               Of god the whych is permanent
               And ſuffreth themſelfe to be bounde
               In cordes as it were a hounde.
            
            
               
                  
                  COme hyther & take this Boke & rede therein for your lernyng with clere iyeu, and loke in this boke yt ſheweth you folyſh Fooles, wtout wyt or vnderſtanding Pecunyous Fooles that bee auaryce, and for to haue good tyme, and to lyue meryly, weddeth theſe olde wyddred women, whych hath ſackes full of nobles, claryfye here your ſyghte, & ye ſhal know what goodnes cōmeth therby, and what Ioye and gladnes Some there be yt habandoneth themſelfe for to gather togyther the donge that yſſuethoute of theyr aſſes arſe, for to fynde euermore greſe, it is grete foly trulye, but yet the yonge man is more folyſſher, the whiche weddeth an olde wyfe, for to haue her golde & ſyluer. I ſay that he is a great Foole that taketh anne olde wyfe, for her goodes and is much to blame
               
                  
They the whiche do ſo, procureth all trybulations. For with her he ſhall neither haue ioy, recreacion, nor reſt. He noryſſheth ſtryfes, and greate debates, thoughte, payne, anguyſhe, & melancoly. And yf he wolde accomplyſſhe the workes of maryage, hee may not, for ſhee is ſo debylyte colde, vnpropyce, vnnaturall, and vndyſcur rente, for the coldenes that is in her. The huſbande of this olde wyfe hath none eſperaunce to haue lygnage by her, for he neuer loued her. The man is a verye Foole to make his demoraunce vpon ſuch an olde wife, whan he thinketh ſomtime vpon ſuch thynges, he leſeth his naturall wit, in curſynge hymſelfe more then a. M. tymes with the golde and the ſyluer, & the curſed haſarde of Fortune. And when he ſeeth his poore lyfe in ſuche dyſtreſſe, his hert is all oppreſſed with melancoly and dolour, but whan the

vnhappye man ſeeth that it is force and that hee is conſtrayneth to haue pacience, he puttteth his cure to draw to hym the money of the olde wyddred woman in makyng to her glade chere. And whan hee hath the money and the bagge wt nobles, God knoweeth what chere he maketh, wythoute thynkinge on them that gathereth it And when he hath ſpente al, he is more vnhappyer then hee was before, yf that the foole be vnhappye, it is well ryghte, for hee hath wedded auaryce, mother of all euylles, yf hee had taken a wyfe that had ben fayre and yonge after his complection, he had not fallen into ſo great an inconuenience. It is wryten in auncient bokes that hee whiche weddeth a wyfe by auaryce, and not for to haue lygnage, hath no cure of the honeſtie of matrymonye, and thynketh full euyll on his conſcience, The Unyon of maryage in decayed,

for vnder the coloure of good and loyall maryage is wedded auaryce as we ſecuery day by experience through the world And one wil haue a wife, and that hee marke his to be demaunded in maryage, they will enquyre of his ryches and conninge. And on the other ſyde he wyl demaū
                  de great goodes with her, to noryſſhe her with. For and her father and mother and frendes haue no greate ryches, he wyll not of her. But, and ſhe be ryche hee demaundeth none other thynge. It is written that one were better haue his houſe in deſerte, where as no mencion ſhoulde be of hym, thenne to bide with ſuche wyues, for they be replete wt all curſednes. And the pore foole breketh his hearte, he loſeth his ſoule and corrompeth his body. He ſelleth his youth vnto the olde wife that weddeth her for anaryce, and hath but noyſe and diſcention,

in vſyng his lyfe thus in ſynne Conſydre you fooles what ſeruytude ye put yourſelf in, when ye wedde ſuch wyues. I pray you be chaſt if that ye wyl lyue without vnhap. My frends whiche be not in that bande, put you not therin, and yee ſhalbe well happy Notwithſtanding I defende you not to mary but I exhorte you to take a wyfe that ye may haue progeny by, & ſolace bodely and goſtly, and thereby to wyn the ioyes of paradyſe.
            
            
               Of Enuye, the ſeconde Foole.
               
                  APproche you foly ſhe enuyous, the which can ſay no good by them that ye hate, come and ſe in this Booke, youre peruerſe and euyll condycions. O enuy that deuoureth the condycions of men, and dyſſypers of honour. Thou makeſt to haue rauiſſhynge heartes famyſhed, thou brenneſt

the deſyres, and ſleeth the ſoule in the ende, thou engendreſt the darte enuyronned with miſchefe that whiche traueyleth diuers folkes. Curſed foole howe haſte thou thy heart ſo replete with cruelte, for if I haue temporall goodes thou wilte haue enuye therat, or if that I can worke well, & that I apply mee vnto dyuers thynges the whiche be honeſt, or if that I haue caſtels, landes, and tenementes or if that I am exalted vnto honoure by my ſcience, or won it by hardynes truely and iuſtyle, or if that I am beloued of dyuers perſons whiche reclaymeth mee good & vertuous, and of a noble courage, thou wylt vilep ende me with thy wordes, thou wotteſt neuer in what maner thou mayſt adnychell mine honour, Thy malicious hert is hurt with a mortall wounde in ſuch wiſe that thou haſte no ioye nor ſolace in this world, for the darte

of Enuye perceth thy herte lyke a ſpere. Thou haſt wylde lycoure, the whiche maketh all thy ſtomacke to be on a flambe. There is no medicyne that maye hele thy mortall wounde. I beynge in a place, where as myne honoure was magnyfyed, thoughte for to haue taken alyaunce wt an odyffe raūt floure, but all ſodaynely I was ſmyten with a darte of enuye be hinde my backe, wherthroughe all tho that were on my partye turned theyr backes vpon me, for to agree to one of Uenus diſſolate ſeruauntes, procedynge, frome a hearte, enuenymed with enuye. Wherfore I ſhall ſpecyfye vnto you the condycyons of the enuyous. who that holdeth hym of the ſubgectes of enuye, ſhe conſtytueth to deuoure, and byte euery bodyegyuynge vnhappes and myſeryes vnto her ſeruaūtes. Suche folkes doth the innocente a thouſande wronges.

They be replenyſſhed with ſo many treaſons, yt they can not ſiepe in theyr beddes, they haue no ſwete cantycles nor ſonges. They haue theyr tonges honyed with ſwete words vnder the coloure of loue, they be lene, and infecte of rygoure: theſe enuyous more bytterer thenne the gall of the fyſhe Glauca, wyth theyr eyen beholdinge a trauers of ſtomackes chaufed ſyntillouſly, and without theſe mouthes as the vyne that is newe cut, they be enuyroned with rage and greate anguyſſhe, beholdynge euermore to deſtroy ſome body. Conceyue the hiſtory of Ioſeph in your myndes, the which had vii. brethren that were enuyous againſt him which was the yongeſte and ſolde hym vnto the marchauntes of Egypte by enuy, & betrayed him. The which were delybered of a longe time to haue deſtroyed him. Theſe euuious neuer laughe, but whā ſome

good man hath domage vpon the ſee or lande, or at the diſfortune of ſome body, he drynketh his bloud as milke, Notwithſtandinge, his heart is euer enbraced with enuy, and as longe as he lyueth it ſhall gnawe his hert. Hee reſembleth vnto Ethua whiche brenneth alwayes. As of Romulus and Remus his brother, the whiche Romulus edefyed firſt Rome, and gaue it to name Rome, after his owne name. Neuertheles they were paſt ours for they eſtablyſhed lawes in the citie And Romulus puniſhed euerye body egally. He dyd Inſtytute lymittes or markes aboute the citie, and ordeyned that he that paſſed the lymyttes ſhuld be put to death. His brother paſſed them, wherfore he was put vnto death incontinente in the ſame place. Wee rede alſo how Cayme ſlewe his owne brother by enuye. Haue we not enſample ſemblablye of Atreus, of

whom his brother occupyed ye parke, howe well that they were in the realme ſtronge and puyſſaunte, for to defende them, It was Theſius that expulſed his brother oute of the realme by enuy, and was called agayne bycauſe that he had taken the parke, & fynally was banyſhed, and by enuye and vnder the colour of peace he was ſent for. And when hee was commen vnto a Feaſt, he made his two children for to be reſted, and made them to drynke their bloude. O what horroure was it to ſee his twoo children dye that were ſo dyſcrete? In lykewiſe Ethiocles by his brethren receyued great enormyties by that curſed enuye. O thou prudent man if thou wilt be diſcrete, good, and wiſe flye from enuy, and thou ſhalt finde thyſelfe ſounde of body and ſoule.
            
            
               
               Of the voluptuouſnes corporall The third Foole.
               
                  RYghte heartely I beſeche you folyſſhe & Lecherous people, that it will pleaſe you for to come and make a litell Collacion in this Booke, and if there be any thinge, that I can do for you, I am all yours both body and goodes, for truelye I haue an ardaunte deſyre to doo you ſome meditorious dede, bicauſe that I haue euer frequented your ſeruyce.
               Nowe herken what I haue found you cautellous women. They that the Pappes be ſene all naked, their heyre combed and truſſed in dyuers places merueylouſly be vnreaſonable Fooles, for they dreſſe theim like voluptuous harlottes that make their heyre to appere at theyr browes yalowe as fine golde made in lytel treſſes for to drawe yonge folke to theyr

loue. Some for to haue their goodes preſenteth to theim their beddes for to take their carnall deſires And after that they haue taken all their diſportes, they pill theim as an Onion, The other for to haue their pleſures mōdayne cheſeth theim that we loue beſt & maketh ſygnyfyaunce to theim ſayeng yt ſhe is anamoured on theim Thou art a verye Idyot ſo to abandone thyſelfe vnto the vyle ſynne of Lecherye, for thou letteſt thyſelfe be wrapped therein, lyke as a calfe, or a ſhepe is bounde in a corde. In ſuche wiſe that ye can not vnbynde youreſelfe. O foole haue aſpecte vnto that whiche thou cōmytteſt for thou putteſt thy poore ſoule in great daunger of damnation eternall, thou putteſt thy goodes, thyne vnderſtandinge, and thy ioy, vnto dolorous perdicion and for all that yee bee in your wordly pleaſures, yet it is mengled with

dyſtres, or wt myſery, greate thoughte or melancoly. I requyre thee leue thy wordlye pleaſures that endureth no lenger then the Graſſe of the feelde Yf you haue ioye one only momente thou ſhalt haue twayne of ſorow for it. Wee rede of Sardanapalus that for his lecherye and lybidinoſite fell into hell, the whiche put himſelfe in the guiſe of a poore woman, his men ſeinge hym ſo obſtinate in that vile ſinne, ſlewe him, and ſo fyniſhed hee his dayes for folowinge of his pleaſaunce mondayne. The ſoueraigne creatour was more puyſſante thenne this wretched ſinner, let vs not apply ourſelfe therto ſith that hee punyſheth ſinners ſo aſprely, but with all our hertes enfarce we ourſelfe for to 
                     〈◊〉
                   againſte that vyle and abhom
                     •
                  n
                     ••
                  le ſinne of lechery, the whiche 
                     〈…〉
                   of enfeccion and bytternes, 
                     〈◊〉
                   it 
                     ••
                  ſtayneth the ſoule of man: flefrome

the fooliſſhe women that pylleth the louers vnto the harde bones, and you ſhal be beloued of GOD, and alſo of the worlde.
            
         
         
            
               En Parlement à Paris.
               
                  Iuſtice eſt morte & verité ſommeille,
               
               
                  Droit & raiſon ſont allez aux pardons
               
               
                  Les deux premiers: Nul ne les reſueille,
               
               
                  Et les derniers, ſont corrompus par dons.
               
            
            
               Out of Frenche into Latine.
               Abſtulit atra dies Astream: cana fides ſed ſomno praeſſa iacet: ius iter arripuit.
               Et ſecum ratio proficiſcens limite longo. Nemo duas primas euigilare parat;
               At
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   duo postrema abſunt, & numera tantum Impediunt, nequeunt ꝓ remeari domum.
            
            
               Out of Latine into Engliſhe.
               Iuſtice nowe is dead,
               Trouth with a drouſye head,
               As heuy as the leed
               Is leyd downe to ſlepe,
               
                  
And bidythe no kepe
               And ryght is euer fallow;
               Gon to ſeke halows
               With Reſon to gidder
               No man can tell whether
               No man woll vndertake
               The fyrſt twayne to a wake:
               And the tweyne laſte
               Be withholde ſo faſte
               Wyth mony, as men ſayne
               They can not come agayne,
            
         
         
            Epithaphe.
            
               This tretiſe devyſed it is
               Of two knaues ſomtyme of dis.
               Though this knaues be deade
               Full of myſchiefe and queed
               Yet where ſo euer they ly
               Theyr names ſhall neuer dye.
            
            
               ❧ 
               Compendium de duobus verſipellibus Iohn Iayberd & Adam ali. a knaue De
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   illorū notiſsima vilitate.
            
            
               ¶ A deuoute trentale for old Iohn Clarke, ſometyme the holy patriarke of dis.
               
                  
                  
                     Sequitur trigentale
                  
                  
                     Tale quale rationale
                  
                  
                     Licet parum curiale
                  
                  
                     Tamen ſatis est formale
                  
                  
                     Ioannis Clerc hominis
                  
                  
                     Cuiuſdam maltimonijs
                  
                  
                     Ioannes Iayberd qui vocatur
                  
                  
                     Clerc cleribus nuncupatur
                  
                  
                     Obijt ſanctus iſte pater
                  
                  
                     Anno domini. M. D. Sexto
                  
                  
                     In parochia de dis
                  
                  
                     Non erat ſibi ſimilis
                  
                  
                     In malicia vir inſignis
                  
                  
                     Duplex corde & bilinguis
                  
                  
                     Senio confectus
                  
                  
                     Omnibus ſuſpectus
                  
                  
                     Nemini dilectus
                  
                  
                     Sepultus est amonge the wedes
                  God forgeue hym his myſdedes
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Dulce melos penetrans Celos.
                  
                     Carmina cum cannis
                  
                  
                     Cantemus feſta Ioannis
                  
                  
                     Clerke obijt vere
                  
                  
                     Iayberde nomen quae dedere
                  
                  
                     Dis populus natus
                  
                  
                     Clerke cleribus est quae vocatus
                  
                  
                     
                     Hic vir caldeus
                  
                  
                     Nequam vir ceu Iebuſeus
                  
                  
                     In chriſtum domini
                  
                  
                     Fremuit de more cameli
                  
                  
                     Rectori proprio
                  
                  
                     Tam verba retorta loquende
                  
                  
                     Vnde reſultando
                  
                  
                     Quae acheronta boando tonaret
                  
                  
                     Nunquam ſincere
                  
                  
                     Solitus ſua crimina flere
                  
                  
                     Cui male lingua loquax
                  
                  
                     Quae dicax mendax quae fuere
                  
                  
                     Et mores tales
                  
                  
                     Reſident in nemine quales
                  
                  
                     Carpens vitales
                  
                  
                     Auras turbare ſodales
                  
                  
                     Et cines ſocias
                  
                  
                     Aſinus mulus velut & bos
                  
                  
                     O mne ſuum ſtudium
                  
                  
                     Rubium pictum per amictum
                  
                  
                     Diſcolor & victum
                  
                  
                     Faciens ſemper maledictum
                  
                  
                     Ex inteſtinis ouium
                  
                  
                     Quae boum quae caprorum
                  
                  
                     Tendens ad quae forum
                  
                  
                     Fragmentum colligit horum
                  
                  
                     Dentibus exemptis
                  
                  
                     Maſtigat cum quae polentis
                  
                  
                     
                     Lanigerum caput caput
                  
                  
                     Aut vacce mugientis
                  
                  
                     Quid petis? hic ſit quis
                  
                  
                     Iohn Iayberd. Nicolas de dis
                  
                  
                     Cui dum vixerat is
                  
                  
                     Sociantur iurgia vis lis
                  
               
               
                  
                     Iam Iacet hic ſtarke deed
                  Neuer a toth in his heed
                  A dieu. Iayberd. a due
                  I faith dikkon thou crue
                  
                     Fratres orate
                  
                  For this knauate
                  By the holy Rode
                  Dyd neuer man good
                  I pray you all
                  And pray ſhall
                  At this trentall
                  On knees to fall
                  To the fote ball
                  With fill the blak bowle
                  For Iayberdes ſowle
                  
                     Bibite multum
                  
                  
                     Ecce ſepultum
                  
                  
                     Sub pede ſtultum
                  
                  
                     Aſinum & mulum
                  
                  The deuill kis his culum
                  
                  Wit hey howe Rumbelowe
                  
                     
                     Rumpopulornm
                  
                  
                     Per omnia ſecula ſeculorum.
                  
                  Amen.
               
               
                  
                     Requiem, &c.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Per fredericum hely
                  
                  
                     Fratrem de monte carmeli
                  
                  
                     Qui condunt ſine ſale
                  
                  
                     Hoc deuotum Trigintale
                  
                  
                     Vale Iayberd, valde male.
                  
               
               Finis.
            
            
               Adam vdderſale. alias dictus Adam all. a knaue his Epitaph.
Foloweth deuoutly,
He was ſomtime the holy baillyue of dis.
               
                  Of dis.
                  
                     Adam degebat
                  
                  
                     Dum vixit falſa gerebat
                  
                  
                     namquae extorquebat
                  
                  
                     Quicquid natiuus habebat
                  
                  
                     Aut liber natus. Rapidus
                  
                  
                     Lupus inde vocatus.
                  
                  
                     Eccleſiam quae ſatus
                  
                  
                     De belial iſte Pilatus
                  
                  
                     Sub pede calcatus
                  
                  
                     Violauit nunc violatus
                  
                  
                     Perfidus iratus
                  
                  
                     
                     Numquam fuit ille beatus
                  
                  
                     Vdderſall ſtratus
                  
                  
                     Benedictus est ſpoliatus
                  
                  
                     Improbus inflatus
                  
                  
                     Maledictus iam laceratus
                  
                  
                     Sis tibi baccatus
                  
                  
                     Balians predominatus
                  
                  
                     Hic fuit ingratus
                  
                  
                     Porcus velut inſaciatus
                  
                  
                     Pinguis craſsatus
                  
                  
                     Velut aggag fit reprobatus
                  
                  
                     Crudelis quae cacus
                  
                  
                     Baratro peto ſit timulatus
                  
                  
                     Belſabub his ſoule ſaue
                  
                  
                     Qui iacet hic like a knaue.
                  
                     I am ſcio mortuus est
                  
                  
                     & lacet hic like a beſt.
                  
                     Anima eius,
                  
                  
                     De malo in peuis 
                  
                  Amen.
               
               
                  
                     De dis hec ſemper erit camena,
                  
                  
                     Adam vdderſall ſit anathema.
                  
               
               
                  Auctore Skelton Rectore de Dis.
               
            
            Finis. &c.
            
               Apud Trumpiton ſcripter per Curatum eiuſdem 
quinto die Ianuarij Anno domini ſecundum computat Anglie M. D. Vij.
               
            
            
               
                  Adam adam vbi es.
               Geneſis
               ℟ vbi nulla requies. Vbi nullus ordo, ſed ſempiternus horror inhabitat. 
               Iob.
            
            
               ❧ Finis.
         
         
            
               
                  Diligo ruſtincum cum portant bis duo quonintum
                  Et cantant delos est mihi dulce melos.
               
               1. Canticum doloroſum.
               
            
            Lamentatio vrbis Norvvicen.
            
               O lachrimoſa lues nimis O quàm flebile fatum
            
            
               Ignibus exoſis vrbs veneranda ruis
            
            
               Fulmina ſiue Iouis ſiue vltima fata vocabant 
            
            
               Vulcani rapidis ignibus ipſa peris
            
            
               Au decus au patrie ſpecie pulcherima dudum 
            
            
               Vrbs Norwicenſis labitar in cineres
            
            
               Vrbs tibi quid referam? breuiter tibi pauca reponam, 
            
            
               Proſpera raro manent, vtere ſorte tua.
            
            
               Perpetuum mortale nihil, ſors omnia verſat, 
            
            
               Vrbs miſeranda vale, ſors miſeranda tua est. 
            
            inifiranda. Skelton.
            
         
         
            Vilitisſimus Scotus dundas allegat caudas contra, Angligenas
            
               Caudatos Anglos, ſpurciſsime Scote quid effers?
               Effrons es, quo quae ſons: mendax, tua ſpureaquae bucca est.
            
            
               
                  Anglicus a tergo
               
               
                  Caudant gerit.
               
               
                  Est canis ergo.
               
               
                  Anglice caudate
               
               
                  
                  Cape caudam
               
               
                  Ne cadat a te.
               
               
                  Ex cauſa caude
               
               
                  Manet Anglica
               
               
                  Gens ſiue laude.
               
               
                  Skeltō 
                     nobilis Poeta,
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Gup Scot. ye blot,
               
               
                  Laudate Caudate
               
               Set in better
               Thy pentameter
               This dundas
               This Scottiſhe as
               He rymes and railes
               That Engliſhmē haue failes.
               
                  Skeltonus laureatus,
               
               
                  Anglicus natus,
               
               
                  Prouocat muſas
               
               
                  Contra Dundas
               
               
                  Norpaciſsimum Scotum,
               
               
                  Vndiquae notum,
               
               
                  Ruſticè fotum
               
               
                  Vapidè potum,
               
               Skelton Laureat
               After this rate
               Defendeth with his pen
               All Englyſh men. Agayn dundas
               That Scottiſhe aſſe
               Shake thy tayle Scot lyke a cur,
               For thou beggeſt at euery mannes dur.
            
            
               
                  Diffamas patriam qua non est melior vſqm
               
               
                  Cum cauda plaudis dum poſsis ad hoſtia pultes
               
               
                  Mendicans mendicus eris, mendax quae bilinguis,
               
               
                  Scabidus horribilis, quē vermes ſex quae pedales
               
               
                  Corrodunt miſere, miſeres genus est maledictum.
               
            
            
               
                  Tut Scot I ſey
               Go ſhake thy dog hey
               Dundas of Galaway
               With thy verſyfyeng rayles
               How they haue tayles.
               By Ieſu Chriſt, fals ſcot yu lyeſt,
               But behynd in our hoſe
               We bere there a roſe
               For thy Scottyſhe noſe,
               A ſpectacle caſe
               To couer thy face
               With tray deux aſe
               A tolman to blot
               A rough foted Scot
               Dundas ſir knaue
               Why doſte thow depraue,
               This Royall Reame,
               Whoſe radiant beame
               And relucent light
               Thou haſt in deſpite
               Thou donghyll knyght
               But thou lakeſt might
               Dundas, dronken, and drowſy
               Skabed ſcuruy and lowſy
               Of vnhappy generacion
               And moſt vngracious nacion.
               Dundas that dronke aſſe
               That ratis and rankis
               
                  
That prates and prankes
               On huntley bankes
               Take this our thankes
               Dunde bar,
               Walke Scot
               Walke ſot
               Rayle not to far.
            
         
         
            Admonitio Skeltonis vt omnes Arbores viridi Laureo concedant.
            
               
                  Fraxinus in ſiluis, altis in montibus Ornus Populus in fluuijs, Abies patuliſsima, Fagus
               
               
                  Lenta ſalix, platanus pinguis, Ficulnea Ficus, Gladifera & quercus, Pirus, Eſculus, Ardua pinus,
               
               
                  Baſamus exudans, Oleaſter, Oliua Mineruae, Iuniperus, Buxus, Lentiſcus cuſpide lenta
               
               
                  Botrigera, & domino, vitis gratiſsima, baccho, Ilex & ſterilis, Labruſta paroſa colonis,
               
               
                  Mollibus exudans fragrantia thura ſabeis Thus redolens, Arabis panter, notiſsima mirrha,
               
               
                  Et vos O Corili fragiles, humiles
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Mirice Et vos O Cedri redolentes, vos quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Mirti.
               
               
                  Arboris omne genu viridi concedite Lauro.
               
            
            Prenes en gre. The Laurelle.
         
         
            
               
                  
                     Diligo ruſticum cum portant bis duo quointum
                  
                  
                     Et cantant delos est mihi dulce melos
                  
               
               1. Canticum doloroſum.
               
            
            
               
                   
                  M. D. XVIII.
               
            
            In Bedell quondam Belial incarnātum, deuotum Epitaphium.
            
               
                  Iſmal eccae Bedel, non mel, ſed fel, ſibi des el. Perfidus acchitephel: Luridus atquae lorell:
               
               
                  Nunc olet iſte Iebal. Nabal. S. Nabal ecce Ribaldus Omnibus exoſus atquae peroſus erat.
               
               
                  In plateaquae cadens Animam ſpirauit oleto, Presbiteros Odiens ſic ſine mente ruit
               
               
                  Diſcite vos omnes quid ſit violare ſacratos Presbiteros, quia ſic corruit iſte canis.
               
               
                  Cocitus cui ſic petus per Tartara totus Sit peto promotus Cerberus hiuncquae voret
               
               
                  At mage ſancta tamen mea muſa precabiturum atros Hos limures ꝙ eat ſic bedel ad ſuperes
               
               
                  Non eat, immo ruat, non ſcandat ſed mage tendat, Inquae caput preceps mox acheronto petat.
               
            
            Bedel. Quāta malignatus est Inimicus in ſāctā. 
                  pſa. 73.
            
            
               
                  Mortus est aſinus
               
               
                  Qui vixit multum
               
               
                  Hic iacet barbarus
               
               The deuill kys his culum.
               
               Amen.
            
            
               
                  Hanc volo tranſcribas, tranſcriptam mox quae remittas
               
               
                  Pagellam: quia ſunt qui mea ſcripta ſciunt
               
               
                  Redde. Igitur quia ſunt qui mala cūcta frenuitur
               
               Redde. Igitur quia ſunt qui bona cūcta prenuitur
               
               
                  Nec tamen expaueo de fatuo labio,
               
               
                  Nec multum paueo de ſcolido Rabulo.
               
            
         
         
            
               ❧ 
               Poeta Skelton Laureatus Libellum ſuum metrice Aloquitur.
            
            
               
                  Ad dominum properato meum mea pagina percy, qui Northumbrorum iura paterna gerit. Ad nutum celebris tu prona repone Leonis, quequae ſuo patri triſtia iuſta. Aſt vbi perlegit dubiam ſub mēte volutet, fortunā cuncta quae male fida rotat, qui leo ſit felix & neſtoris occupet Annos, ad libitum cuius ipſe paratus ero.
               
            
            
               ❧ 
               Skelton Laureat vpon the doulours dethe and muche lamentable chaūce of the moſt honorable erle of Northumberlande.
            
            
               I Wayle, I wepe, I ſobbe, I ſigh fulſore
               The dedely fate. the dolefulle deſteny
               Of hym that is gone, alas without reſtore
               Of the bloud royall deſcending nobelly
               Whoſe lordſhyp doutles, was ſlayne lamentably
               Thorow treſon, again him compaſſed & wrought
               Trew to his prince, in word, in dede, & thought.
            
            
               
               Of heuenly poems. O. Clyo calde by name
               In the colege of muſis goddes hyſtoriall
               Adres the to me whiche am both halt I lame
               In elect vteraunce to make memoryall
               To the for ſouccour to the for helpe I call
               Mine homely rudnes & dryghnes to expell
               With the freſhe waters of Elyconys well.
            
            
               Of noble Actes Aunciently enrolde
               Of famous pryncis and lordes of aſtate
               By thy report ar wont to be extold
               Regeſtringe trewly euery formare date
               Of thy bountie after the vſuall rate
               Kyndell in me ſuche plenty of thy nobles
               Theſe ſorowfulle dites that I may ſhew expres.
            
            
               In ſeſons paſt who hath herde or ſene
               Of formar writyng by any preſidente
               That vilane haſtarddis in their furious tene
               Fulfylled with malice of froward entente
               Confetered togeder of cominion concente
               Falſly to ſlee theyr moſte ſinguler good lord
               It may be regeſtrede of ſhamefull recorde.
            
            
               So noble a man ſo valiaunt lord & knyght
               Fulfilled with honor as all the wold doth ken
               At his cōmaundemēt which had both day & nyght
               Knyghtes & ſquyers: at euery ſeaſon when
               
                  He calde vpon them, as meniall houſhold men
               Were not theſe cōmons vncurteis karlis of kind
               To ſlo their owne lord: god was not i their mynd
            
            
               And were not they to blame I ſay alſo
               That were a boute him his one ſeruants of truſt
               To ſuffre him ſlayn of his mortall fo
               Fled away from hym let hym ly in the duſt
               They bode not till the rekenyng were diſcuſt
               What ſhuld I flatter what ſhuld I gloſe or paint
               Fy fy for ſhame their hartes were to faint.
            
            
               In Englād & fraunce which gretly was redouted
               Of whō both Flaunders & Scotlād ſtode in drede
               To whom great eſtates obeyed & lowted
               Amayny of rude villayns made hym for to blede
               Unkyndly they flew him, that holp thē oft at nede
               He was their bulwark their paues & their wall
               Yet ſhafully they flew hym ye ſhame mot thē befal
            
            
               I ſay ye comoners why wer ye ſo ſtark mad
               What frantyk frenſy fyll in your brayne
               Where was your wit & reſon ye ſhould haue had
               What wilful foly made yow to ryſe a gayne
               Your naturall lord: alas I can not fayne
               Ye armyd you with will, & left your wit behynd
               Well may you be called comones moſt vnkynd.
               
                  He was your chefteyne your ſhelde your chef defence
               Redy to aſſyſt you in euery time of nede
               Your worſhyp depended of his excellence
               Alas ye mad men to far ye did excede
               Your hap was vnhappy to ill was your ſpede
               What moued you againe him to war or to fyght
               What aylde you to ſle your lord again all ryght.
            
            
               The groūd of his quarel was for his ſoueraī lord
               The well concerning of all the hole Lande
               Demandyng ſuche duties as nedes moſt acord
               To ye right of his prīce which ſhold not be wt ſtād
               For whoſe cauſe ye ſlew him we your owne hand
               But had his noble men done wel that day
               Ye had not bene able to haue ſayd hym nay
            
            
               But ther was fals packing or els I am begylde
               How be it the mater was euydent and playne
               For if they had occupied their ſpere & their ſhilde
               This noble man doutles had not bene ſlayne
               But men ſay they wer lynked wt a double chaine
               And held with the comones vnder a cloke
               Which kindeled ye wild fyr yt made al this ſmoke.
            
            
               The commons Renyed ther tares to pay
               Of them demaunded and aſked by the kynge
               With one voice importune they plaīly ſayd nay
               They buſkt thē on a buſhmēt thēſelfe in baile to bring
               
                  Againe the kyngs pleſure to wreſtle or to wring
               Bluntly as beſtis with boſte and with crye
               They ſayd they forſed not, nor carede not to dy.
            
            
               The nobelnes of ye north this valiāt lord & knight
               As man that was Innocent of trechery or traine
               Preſed forth boldly to withſtand the myght
               And lyke marciall Hector he faught thē a gayne
               Uygorouſly vpon them with might & with maine
               Truſtyng in noble men yt were with him there
               But al they fled from hym for falſhode or fere.
            
            
               Barones, knyghtes, ſquiers and all
               To gether with ſeruantes of his famuly
               Turned their backe, and let their maſter fal
               Of whome they counted not a flye
               Take vp whoſe wold for ther they let him ly
               Alas his gold, his fee, his Annual rent
               Upon ſuche a ſort was Ille beſtowd & ſpent.
            
            
               He was enuirond aboute on euery ſyde
               With his enemyes, yt wer ſtarke mad & wode
               Ye while he ſtode he gaue them woundes wyde
               Allas for ruth what thoughe his mynd wer gode
               His corage manly, yet ther he ſhed his blode
               Al left alone alas he foughte in vayne
               For cruelly among them ther he was ſlayne.
            
            
               Alas for pite that percy thus was ſpylt
               
                  
The famous Erle of Northumberland
               Of knyghtly prowes the ſword pomel & hylt
               The myghty Lyon doutted by ſe and Lande
               O dolorus chaunce of fortunes froward hande
               What man remembryng howe ſhāfully he was ſlaine
               Frō bitter weping himſelf cā reſtrain.
            
            
               O cruell Mars thou dedly God of war
               O dolorous tewiſday dedicate to thy name
               Whē thou ſhoke thy ſworde ſo noble a mā to mar
               O ground vngracious vnhappy be thy fame
               Which wert endyed with rede bloud of the ſame
               Moſt noble erle: O foule myſuryd ground
               Where on he gat his finall dedely wounde.
            
            
               O Atropos of the fatall ſyſters. iii.
               Goddes moſt cruel vnto the lyfe of man
               All merciles in the is no pite
               O homicide which ſleeſt, all that thou can
               So forcibly vpon this erle thou ran
               That with thy ſword enharpit of mortall drede
               Thou kit a ſonder his perfight vitall threde.
            
            
               My wordes vnpullyſht be nakide and playne
               Of Aureat poems they want ellumynynge
               But by them to knowlege ye may attayne
               Of this lordes dethe and of his murdrynge
               Which whils he lyued had fuyſon of euery thing
               
                  
Of knights of ſquyers chyf lord of toure & towne
               Tyl fykkell fortune began on hym to frowne
            
            
               Paregall to dukes with kynges he might cōpare
               Surmountinge in honor al erlis he did excede
               To all countreis aboute hym reporte me I dare
               Lyke to Eneas benigne in worde and dede
               Ualiant as Hector in euery marciall nede
               Prudent, diſcrete, circumſpect and wyſe
               Tyll the chaunce ran agayne hym of fortunes duble dyſe.
            
            
               What nedeth me for to extoll his fame
               With my rude pen enkankered all with ruſt
               Whoſe noble actes ſhow worſhiply his name
               Tranſendyng for myne homly muſe. that muſte
               Yet ſomwhat wright ſuppriſed wt herty luſt
               Truly reportyng his right noble eſtate
               Immortally whiche is immaculate.
            
            
               His noble blode neuer deſtayned was
               Trew to his prince for to defend his ryght
               Doblenes hatyng, fals maters to compas
               Treytory and treaſon he banyſht out of ſyght
               we truth to medle was al his holl delyght
               As all his coūtrey can teſtyfy the ſame
               To ſle ſuche a lorde alas it was great ſhame.
            
            
               If the hole quere of the muſis nyne
               
                  In me all onely wer ſet and compryſed
               Enbrethed with the blaſt of Influence deuyne
               As perfytly as could be thought or deuiſed
               To me alſo all though it were promiſed
               Of Laureat Phebus holy the eloquence
               All were to lytell for his magnificence
            
            
               O yonge Lyon but tender yet of age
               Grow and encreſe remembre thyn eſtate
               God the aſſyſt vnto thyn herytage
               And geue the grace to be more fortunate
               Agayn rebellyones arme the to make debate
               And as the Lyone whiche is of beſtes kynge
               Unto thy ſubiectes be curteis and benygne
            
            
               I pray God ſende the proſperous lyfe and long
               Stable thy mynde conſtant to be and faſt
               Ryght to mayntayn & to reſyſt all wronge
               All flateryng faytors abhor & from the caſt
               Of foule detraction God kepe the from the blaſt
               Let double delyngin the haue no place,
               And be not lyght of credence in no caſe.
            
            
               With heuy chere, with dolorous hart and mynd
               Eche man may ſorow in his inward thought
               This lords death whoſe pere is hard to fynd
               Al gife Englond & Fraunce were thorow ſaught
               Al kynges, all princes, al dukes, well they ought
               
                  Both temporall and ſpiritual for to complayne
               This noble man that crewelly was ſlayne.
            
            
               More ſpecially Barons and thoſe knygtes bold
               And al other Gentilmen with him enterteyned
               In fee: as menyall men of his houſold
               Whom he as lord worſhyply mainteyned
               To ſorowful weping they ought to be cōſtreſned
               As oft as they call to theyr remembraunce,
               Of ther good lord the fate and dedely chaunce.
            
            
               Perleſe prince of heuen Emperyall
               That with one word formed al thing of noughte
               Heuen, hell, and erthe, obey vnto thy call
               Which to thy reſēblaūce wōderſly haſt wrought
               All makynd, whom thou full dere haſt bought
               with thy bloud precious our finaūce thou did pay
               And vs redemed, from the fendys pray
            
            
               To the pray we as prince Incomparable
               As thou art of mercy and pyte the well
               Thou bring vnto thy Ioye eterminable
               The ſoull of this lorde from all daunger of hell
               In endles blys with the to byde and dwell
               In thy palace, aboue the orient
               Where thou art lord, and God omnipotent.
            
            
               O Ouene of mercy O lady full of grace
               
                  Mayden moſt pure & goddes moder dere
               To ſorowful hartes chef comfort and ſolace
               Of all women O flowre without pere
               Pray to thy ſon aboue the ſterr is clere
               He to voucheſaf by thy mediacion
               To pardon thy ſeruant & brynge to ſaluacion
            
            
               In Ioy triumphaunt the heuenly gerarchy
               With all the hole ſorte of that glorious place
               His ſoull mot receyue in to theyr company
               Thorow bounty of hym that formed all ſolace
               Wel of pite, of mercy, and of grace
               The father, the ſonn, and the holy ghoſt
               In Trinitate one God of myghts moſte.
            
            
               
                  Non ſapit humanis qui certam ponere rebus 
               
               
                  ſpem cupit est hominum Raraquae ficta fides
               
               
                  Tetraſticon Skelton Laureati ad magiſtrum Rukshaw 
               
               
                  Sacre Theologie aegregium profeſsorem
               
               
                  Accipe nunc demum doctor celeberrime Rukshaw 
               
               
                  Carmina: de calamo quae occidere meo,
               
               
                  Et quaqua placidis non ſunt modulata carmenis 
               
               
                  Sunt tamen ex noſtro pectore prompta pio.
               
            
            
               Vale feliciter, virorum,
            
            
               Laudatisſimè.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Elegia in Sereniſsimae principis & domine domine Margarete nuper Comitiſse de Darby Strenuiſsimi Regis Henrici Septimi matris funebre miniſterium. Per Skelonida Laureatum Oratorem Regium. 
               XVI. menſis Anguſti. Anno ſalutis. M. D. XVI.
            
            
               ASpirate meis eligis pia turma ſororum
               Et Margaretam collacrimate piam
               Hac ſub mole latet Regis celebrima mater
               Henrici magni quem locus iſte fouet
               Quem locus iſte ſacer celebri celebrat poliandro
               Illius en genitrix hac tumulatur humo
               Cui cedat tanaquil (titus hāc ſuper aſtra reportat)
               Cedat pennolope carus vlixis amor
               Hec Abigail velut Heſter erat pietate ſecunda
               En tres iam proceres nobilitate pares
               Pro domina precor implora pro principe tanta
               Flecte deum precibus qui legis hos apices
               Plura referre piget calamus torpore rigeſcit
               Dormit Micenas, negligitur probitas
               Nec iuuat aut modicum prodeſt nūc vltima verſu
               Facta recenſere (mortua mors reor est)
               Queris quid decus est? decus est modo dicier
               
                  
Cedit honos hirco, cedit honor que capro
               Falleris ipſe Charon iterum ſurrexit abyron
               Et ſtigios remos deſpicit ille tuos
               Viuitur ex voto: mentis precordia tangunt
               Nulla ſepulcra ducum nec monumenta patrum
               Non regum non vlla hominum labentia fato
               Tempora nec tociens mortua turba ruens.
               Hunc ſtatuo certe periturae parcere cartae
               Ceu Iuuenalis ouat eximius ſatirus.
            
            
               Diſticon execrationis in fagolidoros
               Qui lacerat, violat, ve rapit preſens Epitoma
               Hunc laceret
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   voret Cerberus abſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   mora.
            
            
               Calon. Agaton. cum Areta. Re. in. Pa.
               Hanc tecum ſtatuas dominam (precor) ô ſator orbis, 
               Quo regnas rutilans rex ſine fine manens:
            
         
         
            
            Orator Regius Skeltonis Laureatus in ſingulare meritis ſimum
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                praeconium nobiliſsim i principis Henrici Septimi nuper ſtrenuiſsime Regis Anglie hoc Epitaphium edidit. Ad ſinceram contemplationem reuerendi in Criſto patris ac domini Dompni Iohānis Iſlip Abbatis VVeſtmonaſtericij optime meriti Anno domini. M. D. XII. pridie domini Andree Apoſtoli. &c.
            
            
               
                  TRiſtia melpomenes cogor mode plectra ſonare
               
               
                  Hos elegos foueat Cinthius ille meos
               
               
                  Si quas fata mouent lacrimas: lacrimare vide
                        •
                     
                  
               
               
                  I am bene maturum ſi bene mente ſapis
               
               
                  Flos Britonum, regum ſpeculum Salamonis Ymago
               
               
                  Septimus Henricus mole ſub hac tegitur
               
               
                  Punica dum regnat (redolens roſa digna vocari
               
               
                  Iam iam Marceſcit ceu leuis vmbra fugit)
               
               
                  Multa nouercantis fortunae multa fauentis
               
               
                  Paſsus: & infractus tempus vtrumquae tulit
               
               
                  Nobilis anchiſes Armis metuendus Atrides
               
               
                  Hic erat: hunc Scottus rex timuit Iacobus
               
               
                  Spiramenta anime vegitans dum veſcitur aura
               
               
                  Francorum populus conticuit pauidus
               
               
                  Inmenſas ſibi diuicias cumulaſse quid horres
               
               
                  Ni cumulaſset opes forte Britainie Luas
               
               
                  
                  Vrgentes caſus tacita ſi mente volutes
               
               
                  Vix tibi ſufficeret aurea ripa thagi
               
               
                  Ni ſua te probitas conſulta mente laborans
               
               
                  Rexiſset ſatius: vix tibi tuta ſalus
               
               
                  Sed quid plura can o? meditans quid plura voluto
               
               
                  Quis quae vigil ſibi ſit mors ſine lege rapit
               
               
                  Ad domiuum qui cuncta regit pro principe tanto Funde preces quis quis carmina noſtra legis.
               
            
            
               Vel mage ſi placeat hunc
               Hunc timuit Iacobus
               Scottorum dominus
               Qui ſua fata luit
               Quem leo candidior
               Rubeum necatenſe Leonē
               
               Etiacet vſquę modo
               Non tumulatus humo.
            
            
               
                  Refrigerij ſedem quietis beatitudinem
               
                Luminis habeat claritatem.
            
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            
               Eulogium pro ſuorum Temporum Condicione Tantis principibus non indignum per Skeltonida Laure atum Oratorem Regium.
            
            
               
                  Hvc pia Calliope ꝓpera mea casta puella
               
               
                  Et mecum reſona carmina plena deo
               
               
                  Septimus Henricus britonum memorabilis heros
               
               
                  Anglica terra tuus magnanimus priamus
               
               
                  Attalus hic opibus rigidus Cato, clarus Aeſtes
               
               
                  Sub gelido clauſus marmore iam recubit
               
               
                  Hic honor omnis opes, probitas ſic gloria regum
               
               
                  Omnia nutabunt mortis ad nuperium
               
               
                  Anglia num lacrimas: rides: lacrimare quid obſtas?
               
               
                  Dum vixit lacrimas: dum moritur iubilas
               
               
                  Cauta tamen penſes, dum vixerat Angligenenſes
               
               
                  Vibrabant enſes. bella nec vlla timent
               
               
                  Vndiquae bella fremunt nunc vndiquae prelia ſurgunt
               
               
                  Noſter honor ſolus fiilius ecce ſuus
               
               
                  Noſter honor ſolus qui qondera tanta ſubire
               
               
                  Non timet: intrepidus arma gerenda vocat
               
               
                  Arma geranda vocat (ſuperi ſua cepta ſecundent)
               
               
                  Vt quatiat pallos egida ſepe rogat
               
               
                  Sors tamen eſt verſanda diu ſors vltima belli
               
               
                  Mirmidonum dominus mater ſilente ruit
               
               
                  Et quem non valuit validis ſuperare ſub armis
               
               
                  
                  Mars? tamen occubuit inſidijs Paridis
               
               
                  Nos incerta quidem pro certis ponere rebus
               
               
                  Arguit & prohibet delius ipſe pater
               
               
                  Omnia ſunt hominum dubio labencia fato
               
               
                  Marte ſub incerto militat omnis homo
               
               
                  Omne decus noſtrum noſtra & ſpes vnica tantum
               
               
                  Iam bene qui regnat hunc Iouis vmbra tegat
               
               
                  Vt quamuis mentem labor est inhibere volentem
               
               
                  Pauca tamen liceat dicere pace ſua
               
               
                  Pace tua liceat mihi nunc tibi dicere pauca
               
               
                  Dulce meum decus & ſola Britanna ſalus
               
               
                  Summa rei noſtre remanet celeberrime princeps
               
               
                  In te precipuo qui modo ſceptra geris
               
               
                  Si tibi fata fauent precor atquae precabor
               
               
                  Anglia tunc plaude ſui minus ipſe vale.
               
            
            Policronitudo Baſileos.
            
               Tetraſticon veritatis.
               
                  Felix qui buſtum torniaſti
               
               
                  Rex tibi cuprum
               
               
                  Auro ſetectus fueras
               
               
                  Fueras ſpoliatus
               
               
                  Nudus proſtratus
               
               
                  Tanta est rabioſo cupido
               
               
                  Vndique Nummorum
               
               
                  Rex pace precor requieſcas.
               
               Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            In the fleete made by me VVilliam Corniſhe otherwiſe called Nyſhewhete chapelman vvith the moſte famoſe and noble Kyng Henry the VII. his Reygne the. XIX. yere the moneth of Iuly
            
            A treatiſe bitwene Trouth, and Information.
            A. B. of. E how. C. for. T. was. P. in. P
            
               Prologue.
               
                  The hoole content.
                  The knowledge of God, paſſyth compariſon
                  The deuill knowith all il thing, cōſented or done
                  And man knoweth nothing, ſaue only by reaſon
                  And reaſon in man, is diuerſe of operation
                  How can then man be parfite of cognicion
                  For reaſon ſhall ſo reaſon that ſomtyme among
                  A man by informatiō may ryghtewiſly do wrōg
               
            
            
               Goſpell.
               The auctoriſed goſpel and reaſō holdeth ther wc
               
               Whoſe litterall ſence agreith to the fore ſeyng
               
                  Qui ambulat in tenebris neſcit quo vadit
               
               Now moralyſe ye farther & peyſe the contriuyng
               I meane, bytwene trowth and ſotele conueynge
               Who gothe in the darke, muſt ſtumble amonge
               Blame neuer a blynd man, thou he go wronge.
            
            
               Example.
               A Iuge to the Iury nedes muſt geue credence
               Now what yf they purpoſe fals maters to cōpaſe
               
                  
The iudge muſt procede yet in him non offence,
               For as they geue verdit, the iugemēt muſt paſſe.
               But wher the faulte is, non dormit Iudas
               
               For by fals informacion many tymes amonge
               Right ſhalbe rewled & ye righteouſe ſhal do wrong
            
            
               Euell information.
               But woo to ſuche informers who they be
               That maketh their malice yt mater of the power
               And cruelly without conſcience right or pity
               Diſgorgith theyr venome vnder that colowre
               Alas not remembryng their ſoules doloure
               When, dies illa, dies ire, ſhalbe their ſonge
               
                  Ite maledicti, take that for your wronge.
            
            Aparable betwen informacion & Muſike
            
               The examples.
               Muſike in his Melody requiereth true ſoundes
               Who ſetteth a ſong, ſhould geue him to armony
               who kepeth true his tuenes may not paſſe his ſōds
               His alteraciōs & prolaciōs muſt be pricked treuly
               For muſike is trew though minſtrels maketh mayſtry
               The harper careth nothīg but reward for his ſōg
               Merily ſoūdith his mouth whē his tōg goth all of wrong.
            
            
               The Harpe.
               A harpe geueth ſounde as it is ſette
               The harper may wreſt it vntunablye
               Yf he play wrong good tunes he doth lette
               Or by myſtunyng the very trew armonye
               A Harpe well playde on ſhewyth ſwete melody
               
                  
A harper wt his wreſt maye tune the harpe wrōg
               Mys tunyng of an inſtrument ſhal hurt a true ſonge
            
            
               A ſonge.
               A ſonge that is trewe and ful of ſwetnes
               May be euyll ſonge and tunyd amyſe
               The ſonge of hymſelfe yet neuer the les
               Is true and tunable, and ſyng it as it is
               Then blame not the ſong, but marke wel this
               He that hath ſpit at an other mans ſonge
               Will do what he can to haue it ſong wronge.
            
            
               A claricorde.
               The claricord hath a tunely kynde
               As the wyre is wreſted hye and lowe
               So it tuenyth to the players mynde
               For as it is wreſted ſo muſt it nedes ſhowe
               As by this reſon ye may well know
               Any Inſtrumēt myſtunyd ſhall hurt a trew ſōg
               Yet blame not the claricord ye wreſter doth wrōg.
            
            
               A trompet.
               A trompet blowen hye with to hard a blaſt
               Shal cauſe him to vary from the tunable kynde
               But he that bloweth to hard muſt ſuage at yt laſt
               And fayne to fall lower with a tēperat wynde
               And then the trompet the true tune ſhall fynde
               For an inſtrument ouer wynded is tuned wrōg
               Blame none but the blower, on him it is longe.
            
            
               True counſell.
               Who plaieth on the harpe, he ſhould play trew
               Who ſyngeth a ſonge, let his voye be tunable
               
                  
Who wreſteth the claricorde myſtunyng eſchew
               Who bloweth a trōpet let his wind be meſurable
               For inſtrumentes in themſelf be ferme & ſtable
               And of trouth, wold trouth to euery manes ſoge
               Tune them then truly for in thē is no wronge.
            
            
               Colours of Muſyke.
               In Muſyke I haue learned iiij. colours as this
               Blake, ful blake, verte, and in lykewyſe redde
               By theſe colours many ſubtill alteraciōs ther is
               That wil begile one tho in cunīg he be wel ſped
               With a prike of Indicion frō a body that is dede
               He ſhal try ſo his nombre wt ſwetnes of his ſong
               That the eare ſhalbe pleaſed, and yet he al wrōg.
            
            
               The practiſer
               I pore man vnable of this ſcience to ſkyll
               Saue litel practiſe I haue by experience
               I meane but trouth and of good will
               To remembre the doers, that vſeth ſuch offence
               Not one ſole, but generally in ſentence
               By cauſe I can ſkyll of alitle ſonge
               To try the true corde to be knowen fro the wrōg
            
            
               Treuth.
               Yet trouth was drownde he not ſanke
               But ſtill dyd fleete a boue the water
               Informacion had played hym ſuche a pranke
               That with power the pore had loſt his mater
               Bycauſe that trouſhe begane to clater
               Informacion hath taught hym to ſolfe his ſonge
               Paciens parforce, content you we wronge
            
            
               
               Truth.
               I aſſayde theis tunes me thought thē not ſwete
               The concordes were nothynge Muſicall
               I called Maſters of Muſike cunyng and diſcrete
               And the firſt prynciple whoſe name was tuballe
               Guido 
                     •
                  oice Iohn de Murris, vitr
                     •
                  ace & them al
               I prayed them of helpe of this combrous ſonge
               Priked with force and l
                     •
                  ttred with wronge
            
            
               True anſwere.
               They ſayd I was horce I myght not ſynge
               My voice is to pore it is not awdyble
               Informacion is ſo curyous in his chauntynge
               That to bere the trew plainſong, it is not poſible
               His proporcions be ſo hard wc ſo highe a quatrible
               And ye playn ſong in the margyn ſo craftely boūd
               That yt true tunes of tuball cā not haue ye ryght ſounde.
            
            
               Truthe.
               Well quod treuth, yet ones I truſt verely
               To haue my voyce and ſynge a gayne
               And to flete out treuth and clarify truly
               And ete ſuger candy adaye or twayne
               And then to the deſke to ſynge true and playn
               Informacion ſhall not alwaye entune hys ſong
               My parts ſhalbe true, whē his coūtreuers ſhalbe wrong.
            
            
               Information.
               Information hym enbolded of the monacorde
               Frō cōſonaunts to cōcordes he Muſyd his maſtry
               I aſſayde the Muſyke both knyght and lord
               But none wold ſpeke, the ſounde bord was to hie
               Thē kept I ye plain keyes y• marred al my melody
               
                  
Enformacion draue a crochet ye paſt al my ſong
               With proporcion parforce, dreuen on to longe.
            
            
               Dialoge.
               Sufferance came in, to ſyng a parte
               Go to quod trouth, I pray you begyne
               Nay ſofft quod he, the giſe of my parte
               Is to reſt a longe reſt or I ſet in
               Nay by long reſtyng ye ſhall nothing wynne
               For informaciō is ſo crafty & ſo hye in his ſonge
               That yf ye fal to reſting infayth in wilbe wrong
            
            
               Trevveth.
               Informacion wil teche a doctor his game
               From ſuperacute to the noble dyapaſon
               I a ſayd to acute and when I came
               Enformacion was mete for a doble dyateſſaron
               He ſong by a pothome yt hath two kyndes in one
               with many ſubtel ſemetnēs moſt-met for his ſōg
               Pacience parforce, content you with wronge
            
            
               Trouth.
               I kepe he rounde and he by ſquare
               The one is bemole & the other bequare
               If I myght make tryall as I could and dare
               I ſhould ſhow why theſe. ij. kyndes do varye
               But God knowyth al, ſo doth not kyng Harry
               For yf he dydde thanchaunge ſhold this. iiii. ſong
               Pytye, for pacience, and conſience, for wronge
            
            
               Nenyſſvvhete Parabolam
            
            
               FINIS, Finis.
         
         
            
            
               SKELTON. LAVreate Oratoris Registertius. Againſt venemous tongues enpoyſoned with ſclaunder and falſe detractions. &c.
            
               Quid detur tibi aut quid apponatur tibi ad linguam doloſam?
               Pſalm. C. xlij.
               Deus deſtruet te, in finem euellet te, & emigrabit te de tabernaculo tuo. & radicem tuam de terra viuentium.
               Pſal. lxvii.
            
            AL maters wel pondred, & wel to be regarded
            How ſhuld a fals lying tung thē be rewarded
            Such tunges ſhuld be torne out by yt harde rootes
            Hoyning like hogges that groynis and wrotes.
            Dilexiſti omnia verba precipitationis lingua doloſa. vbi. ſ. &c.
            For as I haue rede in volumes olde
            A fals lying tunge is harde to withholde.
            A ſclaunderous tunge, a tunge of a ſkolde
            Worketh more miſchiefe than can be tolde.
            That if I wiſt not to be controlde
            Yet ſomwhat to ſay I dare well be bolde
            
               
                  •
               ow ſome delite for to lye, thycke and threfolde.
            
               
                  Ad ſannam hominem redigit comite & graphice.
            
            For ye ſaid, that he ſaid, that I ſaid, wote ye what
            I made (he ſaid) a windmil of an olde mat.
            If there be none other mater but that,
            Than ye may cōmaunde me to gētil Cok wat.
            
               
                  Hic notat (purpuraria arte) intextas literas Romanas in amictibus poſt ambulonum ante & retro.
               
            
            For before on your breſt, & behind on your back,
            In Romaine letters I neuer founde lack.
            In your croſſe rowe, nor Chriſt croſſe you ſpede,
            your Pater noſter, your Aue, nor your Crede.
            Who ſoeuer that tale vnto you tolde,
            He ſaith vntruly, to ſay, that I would
            Controlle the cogniſaunce of noble men:
            Either by language, or with my pen.
            
               Pedagogium meum de ſublimiori Minerua conſtat eſſe. ergo. &c.
            
            My ſcole is more ſolem, & ſomwhat more haute
            Than to be founde in any ſuch faute.
            
               Pedagogium meum male ſanos maledicos (ſibulis, conploſi
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   mantibus) explodit. &c.
            
            My ſcoles are not for vnthriftes vntaught,
            For frantick faitours half mad, & half ſtraught
            But my learning is of an other degrée,
            To taūt theim like liddrous, lewde as thei 
                  •
               ée
            
               Laxentergo antemnam elationis ſue infla
                     •••
                  
                   vento vanitatis. li. ille. &c.
            
            For though ſome be lidder, and liſt for to rayle,
            Yet to lie vpon me they can not preuayle.
            Then let them vale a bonet of their proud ſayle.
            And of their taunting toies reſt with il hayle.
            
               Nobilitati ignobilis cedat vilitas. &c.
            
            There is no noble man wil iudge in me,
            Any ſuch foly to reſt or to be.
            I care muche the leſſe what euer they ſay,
            For tunges vntayde be renning a ſtray.
            But yet I may ſay ſafely, ſo many wel lettred
            Embraudred, enlaſid together, and fettred.
            And ſo litle learning, ſo lewdly alowed:
            What fault find ye herein but may be auowed?
            But ye are ſo full of vertibilite,
            And of frenetyke folabilite.
            And of melancoly mutabilite.
            That ye would coarte, and enforce me.
            Nothing to write, but hay the gy of thre.
            And I to ſuffre you lewdly toly,
            Of me, with your language full of vilany.
            
               Sicut nouocla acuta feciſti dolum, vbi. ſ.
            
            Malicious tunges, though they haue no bones,
            Are ſharper thē ſwordes, ſturdier then ſtones.
            
               
                  Lege philoſtratum de vita tyanei Apollonij.
               
            
            Sharper then rayſors, that ſhaue & cut throtes.
            More ſtinging thē ſcorpions yt ſtang Pharaotis
            Venenum aſpidum ſub labiis eorum. Pſ.
            
            
               
More venemous and much more virulent,
            Then any poyſoned tode, or any ſerpent.
            
               
                  Quid peregrinis egemus exemplis, ad domeſtica recurramus. &c. li. ille.
               
            
            Such tunges vnhappy hath made great diuiſion.
            In realmes, in cities, by ſuche fals abuſion.
            Of fals fickil tunges, ſuche cloked colluſion.
            Hath brought nobil princes to ertreme cōfuſiō.
            Quicquid loquantur vt effeminantur ita effantur. &c.
            Somtime women were put in great blame,
            Men ſaid they could not their tunges atame.
            But men take vpon theim nowe all the ſhame.
            with ſkeldig & ſklaūderig make their tūgs lame
            
               Nouarum rerum cupidiſsimi. captatores. delatores. adulatores. inuigilatores. deliratores. &c. id genus li. ille.
            
            For men be now trailers and tellers of tales,
            what tidings at Totmā, what newis in wales?
            What ſhippis are ſailing to Scalis malis
            And all is not worth a couple of nut ſhalis
            But lering and lurking here and there like ſpies.
            The deuil tere their tūges & pike out their ies.
            Then ren they wc leſinges, and blow them about.
            With he wrate ſuche a bil withouten dout.
            With, I can tel you what ſuch a man ſaid,
            And you knew all, ye would be ill apayd.
            
               
                   De more vulpino gannientes ad aurem, fictas fabellas fabricant. li. ille.
            
            
               In auſpicatum. male ominatum. infortunatū
                  ſe fateatur habuiſſe horoſcopum quicunque maledixerit vati Pierio. S. L. &c.
            
            But if that I knewe what his name hight,
            For clatering of me, I would him ſone quight.
            For his falſe lying, of that I ſpake neuer,
            I could make him ſhortly repent him for euer.
            Although he made it neuer ſo tough,
            He might be ſure to haue ſhame ynough.
            
               Cerberus horrendo baratri latrando, ſub antro. Te rodat
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   voret lingua doloſa (precor)
            
            A fals double tunge is more fiers and fell,
            Thē Cerberus yt cur couching in ye kenel of hel
            Wherof hereafter, I thinke for to write,
            Of fals double tunges in the diſpite.
            
               
                  ¶ Recipit ſe ſcripturum opus ſancte, laudabile, acceptabile, memorabile
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , & nimis honorificādū.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ Diſperdat dominus vniuerſa labia doloſa & linguam magniloquam.
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶Why were ye Calliope, embrawdred with letters of golde?
            
               Skelton Laureate Orato. Reg. maketh this aunſwere. &c.
            
            
               
                  CAlliope
               As ye may ſe
               Regent is ſhe
               Of poetes al
               Whiche gaue to me
               The high degre
               Laureat to be.
               Of fame royall
               Whoſe name enrolde
               With ſilke and golde
               I dare be bolde
               Thus for to were
               Of her I holde
               And her houſholde
               Though I waxe olde
               And ſomdele ſere
               Yet is ſhe fayne
               Uoyde of diſdayn
               Me to retayne
               Her ſeruiture.
               With her certayne
               I wyll remayne
               As my ſouerayne
               Mooſt of pleaſure.
               ¶ Maulgre touz malheureux.
               
            
            
               
                  Latinum carmen ſequitur. Cur tibi contexta eſt aurea Calliope? Reſponſio eiuſdem vatis.
               CAndida Calliope vatum regina, coronans 
               Pierios lauro, radiante intexta ſub auro, 
               Hanc ego Pierius, tanto dignabor honore 
               Dum mihi vita manet, dum ſpiritus hos regit artus 
               Quamquam conficior ſenio marceſco
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſenſim 
               Ipſe tamen geſtare ſua haec pia pignora certo, 
               Aſſenſu
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſuo placidis parebo camenis 
               Inclita Calliope & ſemper mea maxima cura eſt.
               ¶ Haec Pierius omni Spartane liberior.
            
            
               CALLIOPE,
               Muſarum excellentiſsima,
               ſpecioſiſsima, formoſiſsima,
               Heroic is preeſt verſibus.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ Imprinted at London in Fleteſtreate, neare vnto S. Dunſtones churche by Thomas Marſhe.
         
      
   