
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE SINFVLL MANS SEARCH: OR SEEKING OF GOD. Preached by Henrie Smith, and published according to a true corrected Copie, sent by the Author to an Honorable Ladie.
                  
                  LONDON, Printed for Cuthbert Burby. 1592.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE SINFVLL MANS SEARCH.
                  
                     
                        IOB. 8.5.6.7.
                        
                           5. If thou wilt earlie seeke vnto God, and pray to the Almightie.
                        
                           6. If thou be pure and vpright: then surelie hee will awake vnto thee, and make the habitations of thy righteousnes prosperous.
                        
                           7. And though thy beginning be but smal: yet thy latter end shall greatlie encrease.
                     
                  
                  
                     IN a sick and euill affected bodie (dearely beloued) we vsuallie see preparatiues ministred, that the maladies may bee made more fit and pliable, to receiue wholesome medicines. The like, yea and

greater regarde ought wee to haue of our solues, which being not crasie onelie, or lightlie affected with sinne, but sick euen vnto death: had neede to be prepared with threats and exhortations, comforts and consolations, one way or other, that they may bee made fit not to receiue the preparatiue, but the perfection of happie saluation. And for this cause haue I made choise of this part of Scripture, as of a light to shine vnto vs in darkenesse, a direction to our steps, and a Lanthorne to our pathes; while we wander through the boistrous waues of this wicked world. The Text is plaine, and obiect to euerie mans capacitie, naturallie budding into blossomes: The first containing our dutie which wee are to performe towards God: The second, Gods promises, if we performe this dutie.
                  Our dutie towards God is implied in these three conditions. First, If thou wilt earlie seeke vnto God. Secondlie, If thou wilt pray vnto the Almightie. Thirdlie,

                     If thou be pure and vpright:
                        Diuision.
                      so that the whole consisteth on these three points. First, what it is that God requireth, namelie, a diligent and speedie searche in these words: If thou wilt seeke earlie. Secondlie, how thy search is to be made in praier, in these words. If thou wilt pray to the Almightie. Thirdlie, what effect these thinges ought to worke in vs, a puritie and sinceritie of life, in these words: If thou bee pure and vpright.
                  
                  As our dutie towards God consisteth in three points, so Gods blessings towards vs, is also threefold answerable to the same. First for seeking, hee promiseth; he will awake vnto thee. Secondlie, for praying vnto him, hee will make the habitations of thy righteousnes prosperous. Thirdly, for being pure and vpright, hee will make thy latter end encrease exceedinglie: yea, though thy beginning be but small.
                  First therfore concerning the search,
                        Concerning the search.
                      it is a worke both in desire and labour

to bee ioyned to God. In the Psalme this standeth for the burthen of the song:Psalm. 107. 
                     They called vpon the Lord in the time of their trouble and he deliuered them. It is but Aske and haue,
                     Math. 6. 
                     seeke and finde, knock and it shall be opened vnto you. Sauing that heere these things are to bee regarded, to wit: how, by whom, and when we must seeke the Lord. How? First,Matt. 17, 20 Eccle. 35. faithfully: for if yee haue but as much as a graine of Mustard seede, and say vnto this mountaine, remooue, it shall remooue, and nothing shall be vnpossible vnto yee. Then next, humblie, for it is the humble petition that pierceth the skies and that shewed the Publican to depart home to his house, more iustified then the boasting Pharisie: and they alone that be humble and meeke finde rest for their soules. And last of all, continually, for wee must not faint in well dooing: because the rewarde is not promised to him that dooth, but to him that continueth to do.
                     Gal. 6. 1. Thess. 
                           •
                        .
                  
                  But wee may long seeke and neuer

finde, except wee seeke the father by the sonne: For no man knoweth the Father but the Sonne, and hee to whome the Sonne shall disclose him, he is the waye,
                     
                        1. Tim. 2. 
                     the truth, and the life, and no man commeth to the Father but by him. There is one God,
                     
                        1. Iohn 2. 
                     and one mediatour betwixt God and man: the man Christ Iesus. So that if we sinne, we haue an aduocate, Iesus Christ the iust, and hee is the propitiation for our sinnes, onely let vs seeke the Lorde while he may be found.
                  And to this end the word Seeking is vsed in this place, that we may learne, that as the heauens, & the planets, and the whole frame of nature, were ordained to finish their course by motions and operation: so man, as he was ordained to a most blessed and happie end, should attaine therevnto, not by sloth and idlenesse, but by an earnest seeking of the same. The kingdom of heauen is like vnto a treasure,
                     Mat. 13, 14. 
                     which cannot be found without seeking and digging for it. It is like the precious Pearle, for which

the wise Merchant was content not onely to seek, but to sell all that he had to buie it. God hath placed vs heere in this world as husbandmen, to plough vp the fallow of our hearts; as labourers to worke in his vineyard: as trauailers to seeke a countrie, as souldiours to fight the battaile of the Lord against the flesh, the world, and the deuil. And for this purpose hath he proposed vnto vs, an vntilled land, a vineyard, a triple enemie to fight against: that wee might remember, that we must till the ground, if we will reape the fruit: that wee must prune the Vine, if wee will drinke of the grape: that we must fight if we will ouercome.Prou 28. 
                     He that tilleth the land (saith the wise man) shall be satisfied with bread: but he that followeth idlenesse, shalbe filled with pouertie. Idlenesse is a moath or canker of the minde, and the fruites thereof are wicked cogitations, euill affections, and worse actions: corrupt trees without fruite,Iude. 1. Pro. 24. twice dead, and plucked vp by the roote, engendring

in the minde a loathing of God and godlinesse.
                  Eschue therefore idlenesse I beseech yee, and by the want ye find in others, learne instructions for your selues. Be not forgetfull how busie your enemie is, if he finde yee idle: first hee putteth yee in minde of some vanitie: then offereth opportunitie to practise: then he craueth consent; and if yee graunt him that, hee triumpheth by adding practise: hee leaueth no meanes vnattempted, whereby he may subuert and bring yee to perdition.Gen. 3. To one (as to Eua) hee promiseth the knowledge of good and euill: Another he seduceth with lying speeches,Exo. 7.27. as he did Pharaoh the king, whom hee deceiued by false Prophets. To the Iewes he pretended the Temple of the Lord.1. King 13. To the Heathen hee shewed vniuersalities and antiquities. And to omit particulers,1. Chro. 28 hee leaueth no meane vnattempted, wherby hee may entangle the soules of the simple, and wrap them in the snares of

death. Flie idlenesse therefore, and seeke vertue, and the way therof: seeke learning as for a iewell, make diligent search and inquisition after hir: seeke earlie and seeke late. In the morning sowe thy seede, and in the euening let not thy hand rest: seeke him in the day of trouble, and hee will deliuer thee, and thou shalt glorifie him. Seeke him; there is the commaundement: hee will deliuer thee; there is the promise: and thou shalt glorifie him; there is the condition. To disobey the commaundement is rebellion, to distrust the promise is infidelitie, to refuse the condition is vile ingratitude. Wherefore let vs seeke, and seeke earnestlie, with a feruent spirit, and humblenes of heart; and let vs perswade our selues, that there is no seeking without finding, no opening without knocking.
                  
                      The second circumstance to be considered in this point, is to whome wee must seeke for these things. Our direction is made vnto God:Iam. 1.17. 
                     For euery good

and perfect gift is from aboue, descending from the father of lights. And as for manie causes we are to seeke to God, and to God alone, so especiallie for these foure.
                  First, because wee haue nothing of  our selues, nor of any other creature, but whatsoeuer wee haue, wee haue it of God: for what hast thou, that thou hast not receiued? in him wee liue, we mooue, and haue our beeing.1. Cor. 2. Rom. 1. Art thou wise in thine owne conceit? O remember that the wisdome of the world is foolishnes with God! O consider that the naturall man vnderstandeth not the thinges of God! these things are hid from the wise and prudent, and are reuealed to babes and sucklings. Alas, what were man if hee were once left to himselfe? a map of miserie, and a sinck of calamitie. Alas, howe were hee able to resist the fierie dartes of the aduersarie,2. Pet. 5. Reue. 12. who continually goeth about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom hee may deuoure?

Heere yee may note first his malice, for hee dailye accuseth vs before the cheefe Iudge of the Kings benche: when he cannot preuaile in this court, but seeth his billes of accusation repelled: then hee remooueth the matter to the Court of our owne consciences, where on the one side he laieth the bookes of the lawe and statutes made against sinne: on the other side, the billes of accusation brought in against vs out of the bookes of the lawe, alledging these strict places against vs: The soule that sinneth, shall dye the death: Curssed is hee that abideth not in euery pointe of the lawe, to doo it. On the other side, hee bringeth in consciences to witnesse against vs, and then inferreth this harde conclusion: Therefore there is no hope of saluation.
                  
                  Then if hee see that wee appeale from iustice to mercie, and say; At what time soeuer a sinner repenteth, the Iudge putteth all his wickednesse

out of his remembrance, hee dealeth with vs as craftie worldlings deale in matters of lawe, who when they see their matters passe against them in higher Courtes: bring downe their case into the countrie, to bee decided by the neighbours, who, either for their simplicitie cannot, or for their fauour dare not iudge of the trueth of the matter.
                  So our aduersarie, though GOD himselfe doo discharge vs, though our conscience testifie our innocencie: yet hee accuseth in the third Courte before men, where hee is bolde to powre out his whole venome, and poyson of his malice against vs, and to forge what lyes, and slaunders, and Libels hee list, because hee knoweth they shall bee receiued as true. Thus hee accused Christ Iesus our blessed Lorde and Sauiour before Poncius Pilate, and caused diuers false and vntrue witnesses to come in against him.
                  
                     
                      But if hee were malicious onely to wish our destruction, and not mightie to wreake his mallice, we should haue little cause to feare:Luke 11. Ephe 6. Reue. 12. but hee is mightie therefore hee is termed a Lyon, the power of darknes, the great Dragon, which drew to the earth the third part of the starres of heauen: that is, with earthlye temptation to haue ouerthrowne them, which seemed to shine in the Church of God as Lampes and starres. O then how easie is our ouerthrow, if the Lord did not hold vs vp, which shine not as starres in heauen, but creepe like wormes on earth!
                  
                      Yet if hee were but malitious and mightie, it were better with vs: but he is fierce, and therefore called a roaring Lyon, who laying waite for the bloud of the godly, stirreth vp bloud-thirstie persecuters, to make themselues drunk with the bloud of the Saints: as most grieuouslie hee did from the time of Iohn Baptist, to the reigne of Maxentius, the space of 294. yeares, slaying

some by the sworde, burning other with fire, hanging some on the Gallowes, drowning some in Riuers, stabing some with forkes of Iron, pressing others to death with stones, deuouring many thousands of the tender Lambs of Christs flock.
                  To this mallice, might, and rage, is  added his subtile policie, which hee vseth in circumuenting the faithfull, he dooth not pitch his tentes in anye one place: but walketh about from place to place, to spie out his best aduantage,Ioh. 1. in the night hee soweth Tares, and in the daye hee hindereth the growth thereof.
                  Hee proceedeth after further, and  added to his pollicie, industrie, he considereth our natures, & dispositions, & to what sinnes wee doe most incline: and therevnto hee applyeth himselfe, sometimes by flatterie, sometimes by feare, sometimes by feeding our humours hee subtillie entiseth vs, sometimes by violence hee goeth about to

enforce vs, somtime by changing himselfe into an Angell of light, hee endeuoureth to betraye our soules into his hands, and in whatsoeuer estate hee findeth vs, he thereby taketh occasion to lay siedge to our soules.
                  Thus yee see noted in a worde, the force of our aduersarie, examine nowe your selues, whether yee haue anye thing in your selues, and you shall find nothing but weakenesse and corruption. It is God that giueth strength to the mightie, wisdom to the prudent, & knowledge to the vnderstanding: hee teacheth Dauids hand to fight, and his fingers to battaile,Psal. 144. hee giueth strength to his armes to breake a bowe, euen a bow of steele: wherfore let neither the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength: but let him that glorieth, glory only in the Lord.
                  Secondly, we are to seeke vnto God alone, because none is so present as he: for God because hee is almightie, and with his power filleth both heauē and

earth, is present alwaies with them that feare him, and readie to succour them in distresse. The Lorde is neere to all that call vpon him in truth, he heareth our gronings and sighes, and knoweth what things are necessary for vs before we aske.
                  The third reason why we must seeke  vnto God, is, none is so able to helpe vs as he: but of this I shall haue particular occasion to speake when I come to this point, and pray to the Almightie.
                  
                  The fourth reason why wee must  seeke Christ alone, is, because there is none so willing to helpe vs as he. It is a great courage to vs to make sute, when we are perswaded of the willingnesse of him to whome we make sute: and I pray yee, who was euer more carefull for our saluation, and more watchfull ouer vs, then the Lord? who euer put his trust in him, and was confounded? In this respect he is called a Father, because as the father tendreth his sonne: so the Lorde dooth all those that put

their trust in him. Can there bee any more willing to helpe vs then Christ? whose whole head was sicke, and whose heart was heauie for our sakes? yea, in whose bodie, from the sole of the foote to the crowne of the head, was nothing but woundes, and swellings, and sores? but alas this was nothing to that he suffered for our sakes.
                  He was compassed about with feares and horrors, till his sweat was drops of bloud, & his bones brused in the flesh: hee was whipped, and scourged, and chastised with sorrows, till he cried out in the bitternes of his soule: O Lord, if it be possible let this cup passe from me. The heauie hand of God was so grieuous vpon him, that it brused his very bones and rent his reines a sunder: he could finde no health in his fleshe, but was wounded, yea, wounded to the death, euen the most bitter death vpon the crosse. His tender fingers were nayled to the crosse, his face was wrinkled with weeping & wailing, his sides embrued

and gored with his own bloud. spurting & gushing fresh from his ribs, the shadow of death was vpon his eies.
                  O what greefe could bee like to this, or what condemnation could bee so heauie, sith there was no wickednes in his hands? sith he was the brightnes of his fathers glorie, & the sonne of righteousnes that shined in the world: as to see his dayes at an end, to see such throbing, sighes, and carefull thoughts (without cause of his) so deeply engrauen in the tables of his brest. But was this all? no my brethren, sith his excellency was such aboue al creatures, that the world was not worthy to giue him breath, it was a greater greef vnto him, to see himselfe made a worme and not a man, a shame of men, and contempt of the people; to see his life shut vp in shame and reproches, how could it but shake his bones out of ioint, & make his heart melt in midst of his bowels: who was euer so ful of wo? & who euer bin brought so low into the dust of death?

vpon whom did the mallice of Sathan euer get so great a conquest?
                  This though it were exceeding, yet it was not all, no, it was but a taste of greefe in comparison of the rest: behold therfore (if your watrie eyes will suffer yee to behold) the depth of all miseries yet behinde: the sinne that he hated he must take vpon his owne bodie, and beare the wrath of his father powred out against it. This is the fulnesse of all paines that compassed him round about, which no tongue is able to vtter, nor heart conceiue: the anger of the father burneth in him, euen to the bottome of hell, and deepe sincke of confusion: it wrapped him in the chaines of eternall death: it crucified him, and threw him downe into the bottomlesse pit of calamitie, and made his soule by weeping and wayling to melt into these bitter teares trickling from his eyes. O God my God, why hast thou forsaken me?
                  
                  O that my head were a Well of waters,

and a fountaine of teares, that I might weepe day and night at the remembrance heereof: but least I linger too long about one floure, while I haue many to gather, I will conclude this point thus in a word. Sith Christ hath suffered these, and an infinite number such like torments for our sakes: it is blasphemous once to dream or imagine any to bee more willing to helpe vs then he: nay, he is more readie to heare our prayers, then we to offer them vnto him, insomuch that hee complaineth by the Prophet Esay: I haue beene found of them that sought mee not,
                     Esay. 65. 
                     all the day long haue I stretched out my hand vnto a rebellious people, which walked in a way that was not good, euen after their owne imaginations. And vnto Ierusalem hee saith. O Ierusalem, Ierusalem,
                     Math. 23. 
                     how often would I haue gathered you together, as the Hen gathereth hir Chickens, and you would not? wherefore to ende this point: Seeke for knowledge as for a treasure, and for wisdome, as for the

wedge of golde of Ophir. No mention shall be made in comparison of it, of Corrall, Gabish, or that precious Onix,Iob. 28 
                     For wisdome is more precious then Pearles. But aboue all things, seeke it where it may bee found, and where is this place of vnderstanding? Surely man knoweth not the path therof: the depth saith, it is not in me; the sea saith, it is not in mee: death and destruction say, wee haue heard the fame thereof with our eares: all creatures say, it is not with vs: but God vnderstandeth the way therof, and vnto man he saith: The feare of the Lorde is the beginning of wisedome,
                     Prou 9. 
                     and to depart from euill is vnderstanding.
                  
                  
                      The third circumstance is, when we must seeke vnto God; and holy Dauid answereth,Psal. 32 
                     Earlie, euen in a time when he may be found. Let vs redeeme this day, which wee haue foreslowed so many daies, wherein we haue so long hardened our hearts: let vs take vp this day, and make it the day of our repentance;

let vs make it a day of newnes of life, as it is the first day of the new yeere: let euen this moment bee the last of a sinfull life, and the first day to godlinesse. And as the wise man saith: Make no long tarrying to turne vnto the Lord,
                     Eccle. 5. 
                     and put not off from day to day, for suddenly shal the Lords wrath breake, and in thy securitie thou shalt bee destroyed, and shalt perish in the time of vengeance.
                  
                  Art thou a Magistrate, placed in high roome and authoritie, and seated in the throne of dignitie? then vse not this thy might to wrong and oppression, grinde not the faces of the poore, swell not with pride, despising his lowe estate:Amos. 8 
                     Sell not thy righteousnesse for siluer, preferring the Merchants of Babilon, before the Cittizens of Ierusalem.
                  
                  Art thou a priuate labouring man? Doo thy dutie truelie, bee subiect, and liue in dread to displease the good Magistrate.
                     1-Pet. 3. Art thou olde, and hast consumed the floure of thy youth in wantonnesse?

Breake off the course, and frame thy selfe to sobrietie: giue the water no passage, no not a little: for if it haue neuer so little issue, it will ouer-flow thee; and if thou doo slack the reynes neuer so little, thy sinnes will carrie thee (like a wilde horsse) thorow brambles and bushes, and will leaue no soundnesse in thy flesh, worke this reformation in thy selfe betimes, euen to day, euen this first day of the new yeare: If ye will heare my voyce, harden not your hearts.
                  
                  Art thou young, and doost begin to flourish like the young Palme tree? O consider, that the only way to retaine the blossome of thy beautie, and to keepe thy floure from withering, and thy leafe from fading away: is to seeke earlye vnto GOD, and to applie thy minde to vnderstanding; to preuent the morning watches, and to giue thy body to be moystened of the morning dew! For beside the good houres that are well imployed in some good studie and holie exercise: earlye rising

bringeth health to the body, and encreaseth the number of thy dayes.
                  Seeke therefore, and seeke earlie, consecrate your selues Nazarites vnto the Lorde, touche no vncleane thing, giue no prouocation to the flesh. Striue with the Cock in watchfulnes,
                     Eccle. 12. 
                     and rise with the chirping of the birds: sacrifice your bodie a sweet smelling sacrifice vnto the Lord. This sacrifice is like a sacrifice of fine floure: it is like the fatte taken from the peace offering: yea, it is better then any sacrifice,Eccle. 32, 47.50 it is like the flower of Roses in the spring of the yeere, and as the Lillies by the springs of waters, and as the branches of Frankensence in the time of Summer: and as a vessell of massie gold beset with pretious stones, as a faire Oliue that is fruitfull, and as the tree that groweth vp to the clowds. Hauing spoken of the Search, it followeth that I speake of the manner how it is to bee made: In prayer, by these wordes; If thou pray vnto the Almightie.
                  
                  I shewed ye before the force of our

aduersarie; receiue nowe a Sheeld against his force, euen the shield of praier. Hee is not to be resisted by ringing an hallowed bell, not by sprinkling of holy water, not by the relikes of saints, not by our owne workes & merits, for these are weapons of his own making: but by an earnest seeking to GOD, which search and seeking must bee made by prayer, against which his poisoned venome taketh no effect.
                  It is his mallice that accuseth? praier pleadeth thy case before God; and repelleth all his accusations: for all the prophets doe witnes,Math. 2. that whatsoeuer we aske in praier, if we beleeue we shal receiue it. It is his rage and furie that should terrifie vs? nay, that prayer that strengthened Sampson to rent a yong Lion, as one should haue rent a Kid, hauing nothing in his hande, shall smite and shutte vp the mouth of this Lion. As for his pollicie, and walking vp and downe, seeking to deuoure vs: it cannot preuaile,Iam. 5.25. 
                     for the prayer of the

faithfull shall saue them, & the Lord shall raise them vp; & if they haue committed sin, it shalbe forgiuen them: & after this conflict ended, they shall triumph for euer with Iesus Christ our Sauiour.
                  But in any case, see you vnite to your praier, knowledge, that ye be not seduced to offer your petitions to strange gods, as Saints, stockes or stones.Iohn. 16. Then consent, that we aske only in the name of Christ Iesus, not for any desert of our own: for whosoeuer beleeueth in Christ, shall haue remission of sins,Acts. 15.1
                           •
                        
                      hee shall not perish; but haue life euerlasting, he shall not come into iudgement, but shall passe from death to life. Lastlie, a confidence, which is, a certaine perswasion of Gods fauour and mercy towards vs: this is that praier, of which the Lambe testifieth;Math. 18. 
                     that whatsoeuer we ask by this praier, it shalbe giuē to vs by God the father. A thing (dearly beloued) so precious, that nothing is more accepted in heauen, nothing more gratefull to God: a seruice commanded of God

himselfe, taught by Christ our Sauiour, and frequented by the Angels: a thing of more force with God, then any oration of the eloquent.
                  Hast thou not heard how the Sunne stood still in the firmament,Iosu. 10. and was not suffered to run his course? Iosua and Ezechias prayed, and the Sunne stood still.2. King. 20 Hast thou not heard of the stopping of the Lyons mouthes?Dan. 6. Daniell praied, and his praier stopped the Lyons greedy and deuouring throtes. the waters of Iorden were dryed vp, yea the Israelites prayed, and the waters stood about them like vnto a wall. Hast thou not heard of the deuiding of the red sea?Exod. 24. the Israelites praied, and Hast thou not heard howe the fierie furnace lost his heate?Dan. 3. the three children prayed,1. King. 8. and the fier lost his heate. Hast thou not heard how the heauens were opened and shut? Elyas prayed, and the heauens were shutte vp three yeeres; Elyas prayed, and the clowdes powred downe raine from heauen.
                  
                     O sure Fortresse, more forcible then anye engine, and stronger then the gates of hell, and to conclude the sum and substance of all in few words: the only thing whereby mortall men haue the clouds, and the stars, & the Angels, and all the powers of heauen at commandement.Iud. 5. For as Deborah sung in her song: They fought from heauen, euen the starres in their courses fought against Sisera: so all creatures haue been subiect to the prayers of the faithfull, to reuenge the Lordes quarrell, to helpe the Lorde, to helpe the Lorde against the mightie. Prayer hath euer bin the cognisance, & the victorie, and the triumph of the faithfull: for as the soule giueth life to the body, so prayer giueth life to the soule.
                  O that I could engraue the loue of it in your hearts, as with a Diamond, and so instill your mindes, that my wordes might bee prickes vnto your consciences, and thereby giue yee occasion to pray often. It is a wonderfull

mater to be able to perswade men, but if praier be able to perswade the liuing God: oh how great is the force therof? it goeth through the clowds, and ceaseth not till it come neere, and will not depart, till the most high haue respect therevnto. O that you would therfore pray often, and learne of Christ (the most absolute patterne of our life) to pray continually. He praied in his baptisme,Luke. 9. Luke 5 Luke. 6. Iohn. 11. Math. 26. Iohn. 18. Luke. 22. Luk. 23. Math. 19. in the wildernesse, in preaching, in working of miracles, in his passion, on the mount, in the Garden, in his last supper, in cōmending his spirit to God at al times, & in al places, that he might leaue vnto vs an example of the same.
                  It followeth; and to pray to the Almightie. To those three former reasons which I brought, why wee must seeke and pray to God alone: I added this as a fourth, because there is none so able to help vs as the Lord.Psal. 39 He that putteth his trust in the Lord, shall be as mount Sion.Rom. 8. If God bee on our side, who can be against vs? It is God that iustifieth,

who condemneth?2. Tim. 4 The Lord destroieth the counsaile of the Heathen, hee maketh their deuises to be of no effect. Christ is the Angel of great counsaile,Psalm. 33 Esay. 9. Prou. 2. wisedome and vnderstanding, and there is no deuise against the Lord.
                  The world (notwithstanding is come to that frame, that euery man hath gotten him a strange kind of beleef. Some beleeue not the law but the prophets: some be perswaded in the supremacie, but not in the sacrament: some in free will, but not in merit: some in inuocation vpon saints, but not in purgatorie; some in pilgrimages and pardons, but not in Images: some like the doctrine wel enough, but not the preachers: the most beleeue little, yet many beleeue somwhat, few beleeue all: therefore to deale plainly, because plaine dealing is best, you must not beleeue by the halfes; I meane, you must not repose some trust in God, and some in Saints, but all in the Lorde.Psal. 10 5. 
                     The Gods of the Gentiles they haue mouthes and speake not, eyes and see not, eares and heare not, then

what can be looked for at their hands? But the Lorde is strong and mightic, a mercifull God: and therefore thorow the Scriptures, hee is called a Rocke, a Fortresse,Psalm. 18 a strong Tower, a Sheeld, a horne of saluation, a refuge, the Lorde of Hoastes, with other such like appellations, that we might bee assured, that our helpe and deliuerance commeth from the Lord.
                  Puttest thou any trust in man, whose breath is in his nosthrils? Curssed is he that maketh man his strength,Iere. 77. and flesh his arme.2. King. 16 Surely Pharaoh, and all princes are a broken staffe, on which if a man leane, it will strike into his hande and pierce it, and lay him groueling in the dust: It is better therefore to trust in the Lorde,
                     Psal. 118. 
                     then to put anye confidence in Princes. Thinkest thou that Angels, or Saints, or Images, can helpe thee? O foolish and impious pietie, to attribute more vnto the Angels, then they dare arrogate vnto themselues. The Angell in the Reuelation,Reue. 19 forbiddeth

Iohn to worship him. As for the Image, we read, that to turne the glory of the incorruptible God, into the similitude of a corruptible creature, is idolatrie.Rom. 1. Well may I then affirme with Moses,Deu. 27. 
                     curssed be the Image and the Image maker. The conclusion therefore of this point, is this, that we seeke the Lord and his strength euer more, that we pray vnto God in humilitie and sinceritie, and in full assurance of faith continually: who without end is to be sought, because without end he is to be beloued.
                  The third thing contained in our dutie is, what effect this seeking and praying ought to worke in vs, comprehended in these wordes: If thou be pure and vpright. If the clowdes bee full, they will powre foorth raine vpon the earth: and vnpossible is it, that a man that seeketh after God and prayeth to the Almightie, should not bring foorth the fruites of a godly life; for if the tree be good, the fruits cannot be bad: and if the head of the water be pure, it will send foorth pure waters into the Cesterns. Wherefore as good

motions are stirred vp by prayer, so must they be fostered by practise of life, according to that of the Apostle: Quenche not the spirit,
                     1. Thes. 5. 
                     nor greeue the holy one of God, by whom yee are sealed to the day of redemption.
                  
                  Hee quencheth dearely beloued the spirit,Ephe. 4. which being once lightened with the sparckles of faith, and felt Gods motions in his heart: dooth neglect to encrease the one to a flame, and the other to good workes in his lyfe, but with the dogs turneth to his vomit, and with the Sow that was washed, to her wallowing againe in the mire. Therefore (beloued) loue and seeke the Lord, pray to the Almightie, be pure and vpright in conuersation, flie from sinne as from a serpent; for if thou come neere, it will bite thee. The teeth therof are as the teeth of a Lion, to slay the soules of men, & all iniquitie is as a two edged sword, the wounds that it giues cannot be healed. I dare not scand as I would vpon these points, fearing tediousnes: wherfore let this suffice for the former generall part, concerning the dutie we owe vnto God.
                  
                     Now Gods promises for the performance hereof, yeeld vnto vs most plentifull matter of doctrine and consolation. First, of his iustice, that as hee will suffer no sinne vnpunished: so he will leaue no good worke vnrewarded, but giueth to euery seuerall action his seuerall hyre, & iust recompence of rewarde. Shall the hower come, in which all that are in their graues shall heare a voyce, & come foorth: they that haue doone well, to the resurrection of life, they that haue done euill, to the resurrection of condemnation? Shall the Lorde search Ierusalem with Lanthorns? Shall all foule corners be swept, and all pleits and wrinckles be vnfolded? Shall the sea, graue, death and hell, giue vp all that is in them? and shall all the dead (both great and small) stand before GOD, when the bookes are opened? and shall euery man haue praise of God according vnto his deseruing? Shall wee then discerne betweene the vessels of honour and of wrath, betweene Sheepe and Goates, the iust and vniust? Finallie, shall there bee an

infallible, generall, and incorrupt iudgement, wherein the booke of al our offences shall be laide wide open? Now God bee mercifull vnto vs:Psal. 2. bee fauourable O Lord, be fauourable. But to proceed, is it thy nature (O Lorde) to gather vp the wheat,Math 13.15 30, 41 and burne the tares; to cut down all frutlesse trees, and cast them into the fire: yea, into a fierie furnace, that neuer shall bee quenched; into an vtter darknesse, where is weeping, wayling, and gnashing of teeth; then bee fauourable O Lord, be fauourable.
                  Dooth not the Lorde spare Dauid a king and a prophet, for murther? dooth he not spare the Sichemites for adultery; nor Absolon for treason? nor Saule for tyrannie? nor Elie for negligence? nor Achab, Ieroboam, nor Iezabell for crueltie? nor Herod, Nabuchadnezar, and Lucifer for pride; nor Paraoh for incredulitie: then be fauourable O Lord, bee fauourable to vs, in whom almost euery one of these sinnes do dwell & remaine.
                  Did the Lord for corruption ouerflow the world with water? did he burne Sodome

for her villanie? did he cast Adam and Eue out of Paradise, for eating of the forbidden frute? did hee stone a poore wretch to death, for gathering chips on the Sabaoth day? then be fauourable O Lord, be fauourable vnto vs. But dooth not the Lord spare the Cedar tree for his height? nor the Oake for his strength? nor the Poplar for his smoothnes? nor the Lawrell for his greennes? No verely, from the Cedar that is in Lybanon, euen to thy Hysope that groweth out of the wall, yea, euery one that bringeth not forth good fruit, is hewen down and cast into the fire: it is a righteous thing with God, to render vengeance to those that disobey him, and to destroy such as haue forsaken the law by euerlasting perditiō.
                  Behold,Reue. 1.7. the Lorde shall come in the great and latter day of iudgement, when none shall escape his iudgement seate,2. Cor. 5. with clowds shall hee come, and euery eye shall see him, euen they which pierced him thorow, shall also wayle before him, being summoned all to appeare moste fearefullye before his imperiall

throne of Maiestie: then be fauorable O Lord, be fauourable. Alas, with whateies shall we miserable sinners behold him, so gloriouslie sitting in his royall kingdom, with all his mighty and holy Angels, and whole number of Saints,2. Pet. 3. sounding with the voice of the archangell, & trumpet of God: causing the heauens to passe away with a noyse, and the elements to melt like waxe, and the earth to burne with the woorkes thereof? yea, with what eyes shall wee behold him, when we see the Sunne darkened, the Moone eclipsed, and the starres fall downe from heauen? But alas when he taketh the furbished blade into his hand, when he is readie to throwe the fierie thunderbolts of his wrath, when hee summoneth before him the worme that neuer dyeth, the fire that neuer shall be quenched, to reuenge on the wicked: into what a plight are they then driuen? then leaue they off; be fauourable O Lord, be fauourable, and say to the hilles: O ye mountaines, come and couer vs, O ye waters, come & ouerwhelme vs: wo, wo, wo, how great is this

darknesse? The godly on the other side, are bathed in such streames of blisse, and aduaunced to such happines, as neither tongue can vtter, nor heart conceiue.
                  The second thing wee haue to note in his promises, is his mercie, which exceedeth all his workes. For God, though he haue giuen a cursse of the lawe against sinners, yet seeing Christ for the penitent hath borne the cursse, wherby his iustice is not impaired: he is content to accept our weakenes as our strength, to recompence our imperfections with reward of greatest perfection, & that which we can performe but in small part, he is content to accept as whole: not for any desert of ours, but in the satisfaction of his sonne, who paid with the seale of his own blod, the ransome for our sins, he hath cancelled the hand writing that was against vs. Wherfore we are to pray vnto God, that whensoeuer our sins shal come in question before him: that he would looke vpō Christ Iesus, the true loking glas, in whō he shall find vs most pure & innocent, & to shine most cleerly in the righteousnes

which hee hath giuen vs by faith: so that we appeare not in our owne righteousnes, but in the righteousnes of the lambe, who hauing taken away the sinnes of the world, and hauing made vs as white as snow, though wee were as red as Crimson: saith, he will be mercifull to our iniquities, and wil remember our sinnes no more. Of him doe all the Prophets beare witnesse, that thorow his name, all that beleeue, shall receiue remission of theyr sinnes. Againe drinke yee all of this, for this is my bloud, which is shed for the remission of sinnes. Christ gaue himselfe for our sinnes, that hee might deliuer vs from the cursse of the law, euen according to the will of his father. Christ bare our sinnes in his owne bodie on the tree, that we being deliuered from sin, might liue in righteousnes: by whose stripes we are healed, for we were as sheepe going astray, but are now returned to the shepheard and Bishop of our soules. It is no more but beleeue, and be saued; beleeue and receiue remission; beleeue, and lay of thine owne righteousnes, and inuest

thy selfe with the righteousnesse of the vnspotted Lambe.
                  Dauid was young, and after was old: yet in all his daies he neuer saw the righteous forsaken. Sometimes he scourgeth his children; but like a louing father: hee layeth no more vpon them then they are able to beare; for hee afflicteth them for his own iustice, because they are sinners; for his wisedome, to exercise their faith; for his mercie, to cause them to repent: but this is the end of all, he helpeth them in their distresses, he reuengeth himselfe vpon his enemies, and giueth to his people rest and quietnes. O that we would therefore praise the Lord, and forget not all other his singular benefits: O that we would confesse, that his mercie endureth for euer.
                  The third thing to note in his promises, is his bountifull kindnesse, in requiring so small a thing, with so great and liberall blessings: and bindeth himselfe by obligation (as it were) that as sure as we perfome the one, so hee will not faile to accomplish the other.
                  
                     The fourth, is his patience and long suffering, which is not slacknesse, as some men account slacknesse: but is patience, because willinglie hee would haue no man to perish, but gladly would haue all men come to repentance. He is content to stay our leysure, till we seeke and pray vnto him: and neuer smiteth, till there be no hope of redresse.
                  The fist, is his loue, in that he is content to stirre vs vp to holy exercises, and puritie of life, and to allure vs with faire promises of aide, & prosperous encrease of all his blessings in this world. The particular examination of these blessings, would require a large discourse, then (fearing tediousnes) I dare presume to trouble yee withall: wherefore a worde of ech, and so I end.
                  Touching the first, where it is said, God will awake vp vnto thee, it is a greater benefit then the words import: for it signifieth not onely that he will heare thee; but that he will also doo what thou desirest, and satisfie thy request. As long as the sinner sleepeth, the Lord is said to bee a

sleepe: but assoone as the sinner awaketh from sinne,Psal. 78. God will arise (sayth Dauid) and his enemies shall bee scattered: and they that hate him, shall flie before him, as the smoake vanisheth before the wind, and as the wax melteth against the fire, euen so shall the wicked perish at the presence of God. Wherfore, as Paul exhorted the Ephesians, so I exhort you: Awake thou that sleepest, stand vp from the dead,
                     Ephe. 5. 
                     & Christ shal giue thee light: awake vnto God and God will awake vnto thee, & Christ euen the sonne of God, the bright morning star, shall giue thee the light of life.
                  In the second, he promiseth abundance of worldly blessings, in recompence of prayer, for it is said: He will make the habitations of thy righteousnes prosperous:
                     Reue. 22.
                           •
                        
                      that is,Psal. 112. the Lord will make peace within thy walles, and prosperitie within thy pallaces:Deu. 28. hee will commaund his blessings to bee with thee in thy store house, and in all thou settest thy hand vnto: he will open vnto thee his good treasures, euen the Heauens to giue raine on thy lande in due season. Thou shalt laye vp

golde,Iob. 22. as the dust, and the gold of Ophir, as the flint of the riuer:Iob. 29. thou shalt wash thy pathes with butter, and thy rockes shall powre out riuers of Oyle: thou shalt call saluation thy wall, and praise shall be in thy gates.Psal. 128. Loe, thus shall the man be blessed that feareth God.
                  Lastly, for being pure and vpright: hee will make thy latter end greatly encrease, and that thou maist the lesse mistrust his promise, hee will doe it, though thy beginning be but small.
                  Heere (brethren) ye see what a sea of matter is offered mee, wherevnto if I would commit my selfe, I might discourse vnto yee, what straunge euents (by Gods prouidence) haue happened in the world, what great Kings and Potentates haue been plucked downe from their thrones, and what contemptible persons in the eye of the world, haue beene aduanced to their roomes. How Mardocheus a straunger was exalted into Hamons place:Hest. 8. how Ioseph and Daniell,Gen. 30. the one a bond-man in Egipt, the other a Captiue in Babilon,Dan. 6. were made

Princes in those kingdomes. But because I will not ouermuch transgresse the bondes of modestie, or hold ye longer then in this place I haue beene accustomed: onely remember what the Prophet saith; Hee raiseth the needy out of the dust, and lifteth the poore out of the mire,
                     Psal. 113. 
                     that he might set him with the Princes, euen with the princes of the world.
                  
                  Remember the example of Dauid, whome the Lord chose, and tooke from the Ewes great with young: that hee might feede his people in Iaacob,Psal. 78. and his inheritance in Israell. Remember the example of Iob,Iob. 42. how the Lord turned the captiuitie of Iob, as the riuers in the south, how he blessed the last dayes of Iob more then the first, how he gaue him sheepe, and Camels, and Oxen,Psal. 126. and shee Asses in more aboundance then hee had before;Psal. 42. howe hee encreased him with sonnes and daughters, euen to the fourth generation, so that hee dyed being olde and full of dayes. Remember euen our owne estate, for whome the Lorde hath doone great things already: as created

vs, and redeemed vs, and sanctified vs, and not long since delyuered vs from the gaplng iawes of those that sought to suck our bloud. Vppon some hee hath bestowed humilitye, whereby their mindes are adorned with vertue: honor vppon others, whereby their persons are inuested with maiestie: vppon others comlinesse, whereby the other two are graced: vppon others Orchards which they planted not, or at least to which they gaue no encrease: vppon others, encrease of vertuous children, whereby their posteritie is preserued: vppon others, the free passage of his word, which along time had beene obscured by ignoraunce, the mother of deuotion, as the shauelings call it, but vnder a stepdame of destruction as wee perceiue it: and though hee bestowe but some one or two of his blessings vppon vs, yet howe much are wee bounde for these blessings,Reue. 9. to sing prayse, and honour, and glorye, vnto him that sitteth vppon the throne, and vnto the Lambe for euer. But vppon whome hee hath bestowed

all these blessings: O howe strictlye by good cause are they bounde to magnifie the Lord, and to reioyce in God theyr Sauiour. Examine then your owne consciences, I beseech yee, whether GOD hath bestowed all these blessings vppon you, or no, and if he haue: O what great cause haue yee to come before his face with prayse,Psal. 95. Psal. 96 to sing lowd vnto him with Psalmes, to worship and to fall downe before him, to giue vnto the Lorde the glorie of his name, to bring an offering of thankes giuing, and to enter into his Courts with praise. And yet who knoweth, whether the Lord hath greater blessings for ye in store, yee may be sure hee will pull downe the mightie from their seat, and exalt the humble and meeke, Surely, the Lorde dooth vse vertue as a meane to bring vs to honour, and whosoeuer you shall see endued with the vertues of this text, I meane, with seeking vnto God, with prayer and puritie of life: yee may bee sure there is a blessing reserued for him of the Lorde, yea, such a blessing, as though his beginning

be but small, yet his latter end shall greatlie encrease.
                  God encrease the loue of these things in our hearts, and make vs worthie of Christs blessings, which hee hath plentifully in store for vs: that after hee hath heaped temporall blessings vpon vs, hee would giue vs the blessing of all blessing, euen the lyfe of the world to come.
                  The time is spent, &c. let vs end with prayer, &c.
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  MARIES CHOISE. With prayers written by the same Author. By Henrie Smith.
                  
                  LONDON 
                        ••
                     inted by T. Scarlet, for Cuthbert Burby, 1592.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  MARIES CHOISE.
                  
                     
                        LVKE. 10.38, 39, &c.
                        
                           38 Now it came to passe as they went, that he entered into a certaine towne, and a certaine woman named Martha, receiued him into her house.
                        
                           39 And she had a sister called Marie, which also sate at Iesus feete, and heard his preaching.
                        
                           40 But Martha was combered about much seruing, and came to him, and said, Master, doest thou not care, that my sister hath left me to serue alone? bid her therefore, that she helpe me.
                        
                           41 And Iesus answered, and sayde vnto

her, Martha, Martha, thou carest and art troubled about many things:
                        
                           42 But one thing is needfull, Marie hath chosen the good part, which shall not be taken awaie from her.
                     
                  
                  
                     AS Christ had shewed himselfe louing vnto Lazarus and his sisters,Iohn. 11. in raysing him from the death of the body, and then from the death of the soule: so doe they heere shew their thankful minds to Christ againe, the one by receiuing him into hir house, and the other by entertaining him into hir heart. As he was God hee was receiued of Mary: as hee was man hee was receiued of Martha. They both desired to entertaine our Sauiour as Iacob and Esau desired to please their aged father,Gen. 27. but Mary made choise of the better part, and was preferred before hir sister, as Iacob sped soonest of most daintie

Venison, and preuented his brother of the blessing. And although the care of Martha in the entertaining of Christ be not to be misliked; yet Maries diligence in hearing his doctrine is of purpose preferred, to teach vs, that it is much better with Marie to studie in the worde,Math. 6, 33 and first to seeke the kingdom of God, then with Martha to labour in the worlde, and to neglect that heauenly kingdom. And yet notwithstanding, such is the corruption of this rustie age, that our greatest care is to prouide for this present life, as the rich man, Luk. 12. that enlarged his barnes wherein to put his store for many yeares: but we neuer or very late remember to prouide for the life to come, like that other rich man, Luk. 16. that neuer thought of heauen, till hee was tormented in the flames of hell.
                  In the 11. of Iohn, Christ is said to loue his whole familie; and heere he is said to come vnto them. For whom

he loueth he cannot choose but visit,Iob. 2. like the friends of Iob that came to comfort him in his great aduersitie, yea and the greater loue hee beareth vnto any, the oftner he will resort vnto them, yea hee will come and dwell with them.Gen. 47. Iohn. 14.23. Like Iacob that came downe into Egipt, to his beloued sonne Ioseph, and dwelt in Goshen. But Christ is yet more kinde then Iacob was,Gen. 45. for hee came not till he was sent for with horses and Chariots, but Christ came of his owne accord to this beloued familie. Thus dooth he alwayes preuent vs with his blessings: before hee was desired hee came into the world, hee called his Apostles before they came to him, and before he was requested he came vnto this noble house. O happy house that enterteyned such a guest, but thrise happie inhabitants to whome such a guest woulde vouchsafe to come! When hee came vnto the swinish Gadarenes, they desired him to

depart out of their coasts, preferring their Swine aboue their Sauiour:Luke. 8. but this godly family receiued him into their house, preferring their God before their golde, and the health of their soules, before their worldlye wealth.Matth. 8.19 They receiued him into their house, who had not a house wherein to put his head.Matt. 25. Wherein their hospitalitie is commended, and shall certainely be rewarded at that dreadfull day: for with this and such like works of mercie, the Lord shall answere the sentence of iudgement, which is to be denounced against the wicked, that neuer exercised those workes of mercie. Let vs learne by their example to be harberous and giuen to hospitalitie, which is so often commended vnto vs in the Scripture, and shall bee so richly rewarded at the last day. Those godly Fathers Abraham and Lot,Gen. 18. Gen. 19. enterteyned Angels in the habite of strangers: So wee may dayly entertaine Christ Iesus▪ in the habite of a

poore man, of a blinde man, of a lame man, and whatsoeuer is doone vnto any of these that are his members, he accompteth and accepteth as doone vnto himselfe. Now as this vertue of hospitalitie is commendable in all sorts of men: so is it more specially commended to the ministers, who are expressely commanded by the Apostle among other things,1. Tim. 3.2 to bee giuen to hospitalitie.Num. 35. Vnto the Leuites in the time of the lawe, the Lorde appointed citties of refuge, to signifie that the Ministers house should bee the poore mans harbor, and his store their treasurie: but the true ministers of our dayes haue no citties of refuge for others, for they haue none for themselues: they haue not wherewith to releeue the wants of others, for they haue not to releeue theyr owne.
                  When Martha had thus enterteyned Christ as hee was man into hir house, Marie began to enterteine him

as he was God into her heart, shee sat at his feete to heare his preaching, for no sooner was Christ come into the house, but that hee tooke occasion to teach and instruct the family, and in steede of bodily food which they bestowed vppon him, to giue vnto them the foode of the soule. Thus dooth he alwayes shew himselfe a thankfull guest, into what house so euer hee entreth, he leaueth better things behind him then he findeth, hee loues not to be in Zacheus debt for his dinner,Luke. 19. for insteed thereof he bringeth saluation to his house, neither dooth hee leaue his supper vnpaide for heere, for insteed thereof hee bestoweth vppon them a heauenly sermon. This should be the exercise of faithfull ministers when they are inuited to great feasts, that as they are called the salt of the earth,Matth. 5.13 which serueth to season the meates to make them sauery, and preserue them from putrifaction, so they should season the table talke with

some godly conference, to minister grace vnto the hearers, Ephe. 4, 29.
                  These sisters were godly women, and both earnest fauourers of Iesus Christ, and yet in the manner of their deuotion there is such difference, that the worldly affection of the one may in some sort be misliked, in respect of the godly exercise and practise of the other: Martha is sore encumbred with much seruing, where a little seruice had beene sufficient: But Marie is attentiue to heare the worde of God which neuer can be heard sufficiently.
                  
                     Matth. 5.Marie sitteth to heare the word, as Christ vsed to sitte when he preached the word,Luke. 4. to shew that the word is to bee preached and heard with a quiet minde.Iohn. 8. In a still night euery voyce is heard, and when the body is quiet, the minde most commonly is quiet also. But Martha is troubled with other affayres, and therefore vnfit to heare the word: as the ground that is

surcharged with stones,Math. 5.13. or ouergrowne with weedes and thornes, is vnfit to receiue the seed, or yeeld any fruite to him that tilleth it. As often therefore as wee come to heare the word of God, wee must not come with distracted mindes, wee must not trouble our selues with the cares of this lyfe,Luke. 8.14. which (as our sauiour saith) are thornes to choake the worde, and to make it vnfruitfull.Exod. 3. For as Moses was vnfit to talke with God till he had put off his shooes,Marke. 1
                           •
                        . and the blind man vnfitte to come to Christ till hee had throwne away his cloake, so we must thinke our selues vnfit to heare the word, and vnapt for euery heauenly exercise, til we haue put off our shoes, that is, our worldly cogitations and affections, and till we haue cast away our cloake, that is, all lets and impediments which might hinder vs from profiting in our profession.
                  When our mindes are quiet,Luke. 3. we are fitte to deale with heauenly matters,

therefore the Doctors conferred sitting in the Temple: and God delighteth to deale with vs when wee are most priuate:Gen. 18. hee appeared to Abraham sitting in the doore of his Tent. The holy Ghost came downe vpon the Apostles,Acts. 2. and filled all the house where they were sitting. The Eunuch sitting in his charret,Acts. 8. was called and conuerted by Philips preaching.
                  Marie sat at Iesus feete, yet sat shee not sleeping as many sit at the Preachers feete, but shee sate at Christ his feete and heard his worde. As Paul was brought vp at the feete of Gamaleell,Acts. 22. and was perfectly instructed in the law of the Fathers.
                  Hir humilitie is commended, in that she sat at Iesus feete, to shew that the word is to bee heard with all humilitie: hir diligence and earnestnes appeareth, in that shee would not depart to helpe hir sister, to signifie that the hearing of the word must be preferred before worldly businesse.
                  
                     Hir diligence and humilitie, serueth to condemne our negligence, and contempt of Christ and his word: we doo not sit at Christ his feete, nay we rather set Christ at our feet, when wee are so negligent in hearing of his worde.
                  Wee are as slowe to come to the Church,Gen. 8. as the Rauen was to come to the Arke, and as loth to spend any time in the seruice of God,Exod. 8.32. as Pharao was loth to let the Israelites goe to serue the Lord. If a commoditie were to bee seene whereout some profit might arise, how carefull would wee be to procure it? what paines would wee take to get it? Absalon was not more desirous of a kingdome,2. Sam. 15. then the rich men of our time are desirous of golden gaine. But if it bee a matter of coste or trouble, if they cannot heare the worde preached without some hinderance to their worldlye businesse, and some extraordinarie charge to their pursse, then like the

Gadarenes,Luke. 8. Matt. 13.45 they are content to take their leaue of Christ and his worde, and had rather loose that heauenly Pearle, then they would parte from their earthly pelfe.
                  Thus in Christ wee haue the patterne of a good Pastor, and in Marie the patterne of a good hearer: Let Ministers learne by his example, to take all occasions to preach the word,2. Tim. 4.2. to be instant in season and out of season, and let Christians learne by hir example,Matth. 6. first to seeke the kingdome of God and his righteousnesse, and then to prouide for the things of this lyfe.
                  While Marie was carefull for the foode of the soule, Martha was curious to prouide foode for the bodie, hir greatest care was to enterteyne Christ and to make him good cheere, to testifie hir thankfull minde vnto him that had doone so great things for them, hee had raysed hir brother Lazarus from death to life, therefore

hee was worthye to bee well enterteyned.
                        1. King. 17.
                  
                  If Elias deserued to bee well dealt withall at the hande of his hostesse, whose sonne he had restored to life:2. King. 
                           •
                        . or Elysa deserued such enterteynement for hir sonnes reuiuing; then surelie our Sauiour Christ was worthie to be welcome hither, where hee had raysed Lazarus out of his graue, wherein hee had lyne by the space of foure dayes before.Iohn. 11. It was well doone therefore of Martha to shewe hir thankefull minde vnto Christ, but it was not well doone at that time to shewe her selfe thankefull in that manner, it was then time to heare the worde: for at that time Christ preached the worde, it was no time for hir to spende that time in other affayres, and to neglect the greatest affaire, the meanes of hir owne saluation.
                  It was not vnlawfull for Martha to labour, no more then it was vnlawfull

for Peter to sleepe, but when Christ was preaching, it was no time for hir to bee so busie in seruing, no more then it was time for Peter to sleepe when Christ willed him so earnestly to watch and praye.Matth. 26. When Christ preached out of Symons ship to the people that stoode vppon the shore,Luke. 5. it was no time for Peter to play the Fisherman. But when Christ had left speaking and commanded him to launch into the deepe, then it was time for Peter to let downe the net. There is a time wherein we ought to labour in our vocation, and a time wherein we ought to heare the word, and as we may not vtterly neglect our lawfull callings, to followe sermons, so must wee not bestow the Sabaoth which is consecrated to the seruice of God, in following the workes of our vocation.Eccle. 3. All things haue their appointed time (saith the wise man) Eccle. 3. and euery thing is seemely in his conuenient season; but when

things are doone preposterously and out of order, there followeth confusion.
                  Although Martha did not heare Christ, yet did she labour for Christ: many in our dayes will neyther labour for Christ, nor heare of Christ, but as the Israelites were wearye of their iourney in the wildernesse,Num. 21. and lothed that heauenly Manna, so these men are wearie of euery godly exercise, and are soone cloyed with the word of God.Matth. 25. The fiue foolish Virgins wasted their Oyle to no purpose, and while they went to buie, were excluded the marriage, and these foolish men spende this time of grace vainely and wantonly, as though after this life there were no time of iustice and vengeance to be feared. The daye serueth for their pride or profit, the night is spent in sporte and pleasure, and no time is left to heare the worde. When wee are praying they are playing; when we are preaching

they are eating and drinking, like the old world,Gen. 6. Luke. 17. that eate and dranke, that marryed wiues, and gaue in mariage while Noah was preparing the Arke, for the sauing of his houshold. And as Baals Priests wounded themselues to serue their Idoll,Hebr. 11. 1. King. 18. so these men take dangerous courses, and strangely trouble themselues to serue the diuell.
                  Nowe Martha findeth hir selfe agreeued, and begins to enuie hir sisters exercise,Gen. 37. as Iosephs brethren enuyed him for his dreames, and the sonnes of Ishai that disdained theyr brother Dauid for his forwardnesse in the combat with Goliath.1. Sam. 17.
                  
                  These two sisters, that in other things agreed so well togither, in this doo differ so much, that Christ must haue the hearing of the matter, and decide the controuersie; Martha plaieth the Plaintife and accuseth hir sister; Marye the defendant, answereth by hir Aduocate, and Christ himselfe

that tooke vppon him the office of an Aduocate, is become the Iudge, and giueth sentence on Maryes side; Martha complaineth of hir sisters slothfulnesse, and seemeth after a sorte to blame our Sauiour for winking at it, requiring him to see the matter redressed speedily. But Christ first reprooueth Marthaes curiositie, and then excuseth, yea and commendeth Maries care. In Martha it appeareth howe willing wee are to please our selues in our owne conceits, and how ready to conceiue amisse of others dooings, yea sometime to prefer our owne defects, before the perfections of other men. If Dauid chasten his soule with fasting,Psal. 69. it shall bee turned to his reproofe; if hee put on Sackcloth to testifie his contrition, they iest at him, and the drunkards make songs of him:Luke. 7.33. if Iohn Baptist be temperate in his apparrell and dyet, they will say hee hath a diuell.Acts. 25 If Paul answere discreetely for himselfe, he shall

bee charged to bee mad with ouermuch learning;Luke. 7.34. yea if our Sauiour Christ himselfe frequent the companie of sinners, to reclaime them from sinne, they will not sticke to call him a friend and companion of Publicans and sinners. Among vs, if there be any that be more forward in religion then the rest, and more diligent to heare the worde, as Marie was, there shall not want some or other to censure them at their pleasure, yea to finde faulte and to condemne them for so doing: yet are not the godly to bee discouraged herewith, or to desist from theyr godly exercises: for as the Lorde answered for Mary when shee held hir peace; so the Lorde will defend their cause, and take their part against their aduersaries. The Lorde cannot abide to heare his seruants ill spoken off, but is alwayes ready to mainteine their right, and to answere for them.Gen. 31.24. He will not suffer Laban to speake an ill worde to his seruant Iacob.

And if Aaron and Myriam murmure against Moises,Num. 12. the Lorde will punish it with leprosie, what a comfortable thing is this to the godly, that the king of kings will take their parts, and will not suffer them to susteyne any wrong. Hee is a most sure and trustie friend, that will not abide his friend to bee backbited or ill spoken of, but eyther hee will answere in their defence, or hee will finde some meanes to stop the mouthes, and restraine the slanderous toungs of their enemies, as somtime he stopt Balaams passage,Num. 22 when hee went to curse his people, and caused the dumbe beast to speake, and to reprooue the madnesse of the Prophet, rather then he woulde haue his people to bee curssed.2. Pet. 2.1
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  The repitition of Marthaes name, argueth the vehemencie and earnestnesse of this admonition. The Lord is faine to be very earnest and importunate with vs, before hee can reclaime

vs.Gen. 22 So when God spake vnto Abraham, hee calleth him twise by name; Christ called Peter thrise by name, Iohn. 21. to cause him make his three-fould confession, to make amends for his threefold deniall. And when the Lorde spake vnto Samuel,1. Sam. 3. hee called him foure seuerall times by name before hee answered; for such is the great mercie of GOD, that he is content to admonish vs often of our dutie, and such is the dulnesse and peruersenesse of our crooked nature, that wee cannot bee gayned by the first admonition: but the Lord must call vs often and earnestly, before we will harken vnto him.
                  There are two things in this speach of Christ to be obserued. The first is his modest reprehension, of Marthaes immoderate care: the other is, his friendly defence of Maries choise.
                  Though Martha was very carefull to entertaine Christ in the best manner, yet if he perceiue any thing in hir

worthie of reprehension, he will not stick to tell hir of it: he will not sooth hir in hir saying, nor smooth hir in hir owne conceit, for all the trouble and cost that she bestowes vpon him. If we be often inuited to some mans table, and kindely enterteyned, it would bee vnkindlye taken, if wee should finde fault with any disorder, but forasmuch as all Christ his actions are the instructions of Christians, therefore euery Christian, but especially Preachers, whome it more specially concerneth, must learne by this example how to behaue themselues, when they are inuited to great feasts: namely to speake their conscience freely when they see a fault. The best requitall that wee can make for our good cheere, is to giue good counsell and wholsome admonition to them that inuite vs. When Christ dined with the Pharisey, Luke. 11. and was misliked for not washing before dinner, hee tooke occasion to reprooue

their hypocrisie, their outward show of holinesse, which was the sinne of the Pharises: and at another time he noteth them, for preasing to the chiefe places at banquets,Luke. 14. and sheweth what modestie is to bee obserued in sitting downe to meate, and what guests should be bidden to our table. So should Preachers behaue themselues towards those that inuite them to great feasts, where they see perhaps some fault or disorder, either in the Maister of the house, or in some other of the guests; to saye vnto them thus or otherwise, as the case requireth: I will warne you of one thing that will doo you good, that you would leaue your vsurie and extortion, your couetousnesse and oppression, that you would leaue your swearing and blaspheming the name of God, that you would forbeare to prophane the Lords Sabaoth, that you would leaue your pride and excesse in your dyet and apparrell: that you would forbeare

to speake ill of any behind their backes, or to beare any malice or hatred to any of your neighbors. These are the faults which are easie to be espyed almost in euery place, and these are the faultes which the faythfull minister of Christ Iesus should not leaue vnreprooued wheresoeuer he commeth,
                        1. King. 18. but as Elias tould Ahab of his Idolatrie, though hee were his king, and Iohn Baptist tould Herod of his adulterie,Math. 14 Mark. 6.20 though he did many things for him, and heard him gladly: so should the preacher reprooue the people for their notorious offences, notwithstanding some fauours and curtesies receiued from them.
                  If Christ had cause to finde faulte with Martha for hir too much diligence in his enterteinement, it seemes hee was not curious of his dyet, but would haue beene content with simple cates: he was no delicate or daintie guest, hee did not affect or delight in sumptuous banquets, or costly fare,

he rather requireth a religious heart, a constant faith, a willing mind to heare the word,Luke. 11.28. with an earnest care to liue thereafter. These are the things wherin the Lorde delighteth, these are the iuncates which hee desireth, and which he preferreth before all earthly cheere. Thus is Martha reprehended for hir curiositie: now let vs see how Marie is excused and commended for hir godly care. One thing is necessary (saith Christ) and what is that one thing? euen to heare the word preached,Rom. 1.16. which is the power of God to saluation, to euery one that beleeueth. A man may better want all things then that one needful thing, and yet we desire all other things, and neglect that one thing which is so needfull. This one thing hath Marie chosen; and therefore hath chosen the better part. Marthaes part is good bicause it prouideth for this present life: but Maries part is better, bicause it leadeth to eternall life. It is good

to be occupyed about our calling, to get our liuing: but it is better to bee occupied in hearing the word, which is able to saue our soules. As the head and the foot are both needfull in the body, so Marie and Martha are both needfull in a commonwealth: man hath two vocations, the one earthlye by his labour, the other heauenly by his prayer. There is the actiue life, which consisteth in practising the affayres of this life, wherein man sheweth himselfe to bee like himselfe, and there is the contemplatiue life, which consisteth in the meditation of diuine and heauenly things, wherein man sheweth himselfe to bee like the Angels: for they which labour in their temporall vocations, do liue like men; but they which labour in spirituall matters, liue like Angels: When they heare the word; God speaketh vnto them: when they pray, they speake vnto God; so that there is a continual conference betweene God and them,

bicause they are continually exercised in hearing or praying.
                  Christ loued Martha for hir hospitalitie, as Isaac loued Esau for his Venison. So did he loue Mary for hir diligence in hearing his word, as Rebecca loued Iacob for harkning to hir voice.Gen. 25, 28. A nursse which hath hir brest full of milke, doth loue the child that sucks it from hir: and Christ which hath his brest full of heauenly milke, is glad when he hath children to suck the same.1. Pet. 2.1.2. Let vs therfore (as the Apostle willeth vs, 1. Pet. 2.1.2.) laying aside all maliciousnesse, and all guile, and dissimulation, and enuie, and all euill speaking, as new borne babes desire that sincere milke of the worde; that we may grow thereby to bee perfect men in Christ Iesus: let vs breath after the fountaine of liuing water, which springeth vp vnto eternall life, as the faintie Hart desireth the water brook to quench his thirst,Psal. 4
                           •
                        , 1. and for as much as many things are so troublesome, and

one thing is so needefull, let vs seeke that one needfull thing,Ecol. 12, 13. the end of all things, euen to feare God and keepe his commandements, which we must learne by hearing the word of God,Heb. 11.6. whereby faith (without the which it is impossible to please God) is begotten & nourished in the hearts of men.Rom. 10.17
                  
                  This is that good part which Marie hath chosen, by so much better then hir sisters choise, bicause it concerneth a better life, and hath the fruition of this present life. Mary hath a double portion: She heard the word;
                        1. Tim. 4.8. and eate of the meate, which hir sister dressed, for godlinesse hath the promise of this life, & of the life to come. As for all other things, whether they be honors, promotions, pleasures, and what not, they serue onely for the maintenance of this present lyfe, which is so short, and subiect to mutabilitie: but the word of God is the foode of the soule, the bread of life,
                        1. Pet. 1, 13 that immortall seede which bringeth

foorth fruite vnto eternall life. Let the worde of God therefore be precious vnto vs,Luk. 21, 33 because it is so permanent, for heauen and earth must passe,1. Pet. 1, 25 but the worde of God endureth for euer. If we make choise of any thing beside, it must be taken from vs, or we shal be taken from it: but if we make choise of this one thing, it shall neuer bee taken from vs neither in this world nor in the world to come. The Lord grant that wee be not only hearers but doers of the word,Iames. 1, 22. that it may be truly sayd of vs, as Christ said of his disciples, that heard his preaching, Behold my brother, my sister, and mother:Math. 12, 50 or as hee answered the woman that commended his carnall kindred;Luk. 11, 28. 
                     Blessed are they that heare the word of God, and keepe the same.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  
                  A Godly Prayer, to bee said at all times.
                  
                     BEcause I haue sinned ô Lord, and doone wickedly in thy sight, and prouoked thee to anger by my abhominable wickednes, making my bodie which thou hast ordained a vessell for thine honor, an instrument to most detestable filthines, ô Lord be merciful vnto me, and pardon mee this great wickednes: looke not vpon mee good father, with the eyes of iustice, neither do thou drawe against me the sword of iudgement, for then how shall I that am but dust, stand in thy presence, when thy wrathfull indignation commeth foorth as a whirlewind, and thy heauie displeasure as a mightie tempest: seeing the earth trembleth, the depths are discouered, and the verie heauens are shaken when thou art angrie? Exercise not therefore thy furie against me, that am but as chaffe before the winde, and as stubble against a flaming fire: though I haue sinned grieuouslie in thy sight, preferring my wicked desire, before thy holy commandement: esteeming the pleasute of a moment, before eternall and euerlasting ioyes: nay, which is worse, making more account of vilenesse and vanitie, and extreame folly, and madnes, then

of the glory and maiesty of the most excellent, wonderfull, and blessed God, nothing dreading his displeasure, whose wrath maketh the diuels to quake, and burneth vnquenchable vnto the bottomlesse pit of hell; whose might is so great, that by the breath of his nosthrils he is able in the twinkling of an eye to destroy a thousand worlds: yet am I bold, prostrating my selfe before the throne of thy maiestie, heartily to beseech, and humblie to entreate thee, that thou wilt not deale with me according to my merites, for I haue deserued that thou shouldst raine downe fire and brimstone from out of heauen vpon me to deuour me, or to open the earth vnderneath me, to swallow me vp quick vnto hell: but thou art gratious and full of compassion, and rich in mercies, therefore do men put their trust vnder the shadow of thy wings. I haue none in heauen to flie vnto but thee, nor in earth, of whom I may receiue any comfort, but at thy fauourable hands, which are stretched out day and night, to receiue all that by earnest repentance turne vnto thee, being readie to ease all those that are laden with the burthen of their sinne, and to refresh their distressed consiences. In the multitude of thy mercies I approche vnto thee ô Lord, desiring thee to looke downe from the height of thy sanctuarie, vppon me poore and wretched sinner, and to wipe away mine offences,

and to blotte out my misdeedes, especiallie this my vngratious, vncleane, and vngodlye act, that it may not come vppe in remembrance with thee, nor bee imputed to mee for euer, for 'thy sonnes sake ô Lorde, in whome thou art well pleased, in whom thou wast fully satisfied vppon the crosse for my sinnes: graunt mee free pardon and remission of that I haue so foolishlie by my exceeding frailtie, committed against thee in this shamefull deed. But ô thou my vncleane and vnthankfull soule! my vngodly and rebellious heart! what did I sinfull wretch, and execrable caitife, so blindlie and desperatlie attempt? Howe art thou become quite sencelesse, that thou wast so readie to anger thy most louing God, and to prouoke thy most mightie iudge, that thou mightest satisfie thy filthie fleshe, suborned both by thine and Gods moste malitious aduersarie, to grieue and vex the spirit of the Lord, and to damne thy selfe for euer? Hath not God of his singular fauour, made the heauens of old, and placed the sunne and moone in them, two glorious lights, with innumerable starres, a wonderfull workmanship for thy vse and benefit? Hath hee not lifted vp the clouds by his strong arme, and heaped treasures of raigne, haile, and snow, to doe thee seruice? Hath hee not in the midst of the world, laid the foundations of the earth, that

thou mightest haue a stable habitation, and mightest from thence behold euery way, thou lookest the walles of his beautifull pallace. Hath hee not gathered the waters into one place, and made the drie land appeare, and drawne foorth by his powre a pure substance of aire betweene heauen and earth, that fishes might multiplie in the seas, foules in great aboundance, flie in the open face of the firmament, tender plants, hearbs, flowers, and tree
                        •
                      in all varietie, growe and fructifie vpon the ground: yea creeping things, cattell and beasts increase in infinite number, in pastures, fields, gardens, orchards, and groues; and all these to doe thee pleasure? Hath he not further giuen thee springs and riuers, gold and siluer, pearles and iewels; euen plentie of streames, stones, and mettall, to furnish thee with whatsoeuer for profite thou needest, or for pleasure desirest? Hath hee not made thee Lord and ruler ouer all his craatures, euen ouer the huge Elephants, the Whale, the strong Lion, and Vnicorne, and horse of warre? ouer the sauage Tigars, Beares, and Wolues? ouer the mightie Eagle, Griffin, Vultur, Ostrich, and Haulke? Art thou not clad and defended, fed and enriched, cheered and renowned by these his creatures, and that all the partes of thy bodie, and sences of thy minde might be partakers of his goodnes, and with his sweetnes refreshed,

comforted & delighted in great measure? Yea aboue all this, hath hee not breathed into thy bodie an immortall soule, that thou mightest remaine with him in glorie for euer? Did hee not at the first frame thee like vnto himselfe, that he might therefore loue thee as his sonne? Did hee not cast into thy spirit the beames of his wisedome, that thou through thy vnderstanding mightest behold him and his glory, and stirred vp sparkes of goodnes in thy heart, that thou mightest by thy affection imbrace him and his bountie, and bee made perfectly blessed by his infinite happinesse, who when Adam thy vngratefull father by distrusting him that had faithfully promised, was throughlie able to fulfill his will▪ and resolutely determined, exceedingly to aduance him, hauing giuen him this whole worlde in testimonie thereof, by discontenting his minde with the excellent estate he was placed in of vnspeakeable loue, vnlesse he might be as good as God himselfe, proudly desiring to make dust the fellow of him who was from euerlasting, infinitely full of wisedome, power, grace and maiestie, and had doone all this at the perswasion of the most traiterous rebell of his right gratious king, & spitefull enemie of his most bountifull master, euen then when this most villanous conspiring with Gods notorious aduersarie, had deserued immortall hatred against

him, and all that pertained vnto him: yea thee as yet vnborne, but contained in him, whose whole masse by this impious disobedience became by iust iudgement a temple of curssed estate for euer, and for euer: thou also thy selfe bringing foorth fruite of contempt of his law, who is most holy, mercifull and mightie: yet euen then I say, of vnspeakeable pittie and compassion intended, nay promised, nay laboured to deliuer him & thee from that dreadfull vengeance which yee had purchased by your owne wicked and vngratious demerits, and to reconcile you base abiects and vile cast awayes, and yet stubborne and spightfull haters of the great God Iehouah, who when there was no meanes to bee found in heauen, nor seas, nor in the earth, nor vnder the earth, but that he should damne his onely begotten sonne, the verie brightnes of his glorie, who neuer offended him, but was an eternall delight vnto his soule, and reioycing vnto his spirit, that thou mightest be saued, a grosse lumpe of slime and clay, still vexing him by thy wickednes; yet deliuered his sonne into the full power of Sathan, to put him to a most shameful death, by the hands of most detestable persons, and did cast him farre away out of his fauour, and threw him downe into the bottomlesse pit of his vnsupportable wrath and indignation, that thou mightest be placed between

his owne armes in the kingdome of heauen, in all roialtie and glorie, as his deere and entirely beloued sonne. Whie therfore wast thou ô my vnholy and vnthankfull nature, so readie and prone, so violent and headlong to commit things highly displeasant in his sight, who in a manner, and as farre as it was possible, slewe himselfe for thy safetie, when he had no creature so disobedient vnto him as thee? O thou my inward soule, and spirite of my minde awake, and stand vp to defend thy selfe, for thou art besieged with mightie enimies, the prince of darknesse, the rulers of the aire, the spirituall craftinesse and pollicies of hell! why arisest thou not thou sluggard? thy foes in great number are prepared with manie ambushments, hauing a huge armie all maliciouslie bent, with venemous dartes to pearce thorowe thy heart: they are entred thy hold, at all fiue gates of thy outward sences: yea they haue broken downe thy inward doores, and haue left thee but one windowe towardes heauen to escape by, euen thy praiers, whereto the spirit of God waighteth thy speedie comming: make hast ó thou heauie with sleepe, or thou art taken by thy cruell enimies, whose handes are of iron, and their teeth of steele, to grinde thy verye bones to powder: harken no longer to that stinking harlot, thy wicked appetite, which lying in thy bosome, desireth nothing but thy

vtter destruction; shee perswadeth thee that thou art in no present danger, that she may reioyce at thy miserable end. It may bee thou thinkest ô thou chiefe of fooles, and Oxe that art fed to the slaughter, that though thou goe on a little way in thy pleasant path, thou maist returne backe when thou wilt, and thy little wandring wil not greatly be regarded. O thou vnwise and sottish of heart! when wilt thou vnderstand? Hath the sonne of God indured such paine for the smallest of thy sinnes, and makest thou so light account of so grieuous crimes? Dooth the lawe thunder curses, and plagues, and euerlasting torments against thy least vnordinate motions, and didst thou not dread to performe so shamelesse a practise? Knowest thou not that the eyes of God, and his Angels behold the dooing that thou wouldest be ashamed to doe in the presence of vngodly men, or vncleane beasts? or doest thou not consider how thou diddest grieue the spirite of God, who hath vouchsafed of his infinite mercie, to dwell in thy bodie to this end, chieflye that hee might mortifie thy carnall lusts? Why didst thou then defile his temple, which hee hath sanctified to bee an house for himselfe to dwell in? take heed thou driue not out so worthie and noble a guest, by such swinish and fleshly behauiour, who if he once depart, then shalt thou be an hold for diuels, and

legions of damned spirites, that they may stuffe thee full of all manner of iniquitie, and then at length become pitch and Brimstone, to maintaine the fire of Gods scorching wrath in thy sinewes, spirits, and inward bowels, drinking out in full measure the dregs of the wine of his rage and fury: and canst thou be so blind and retchlesse, that for the vaine pleasure of sinne for a little while, thou wilt constraine God to torment the euerlastingly, who it may be euen at this instant, if thou wilt still trie his patience and long sufferance, will sodainly take thy spirite from thee, or come in iudgement to recompence to all sinners by his finall sentence in the burning of the whole world, the stipend of horror, shame, confusion, and vtter reprobation: & waigh with thy selfe, that to approach to God is the chiefest ioy of the chosen, to behold his glorious countenance in the face of his sonne, whereas thy sinnes do separate thee from him, and make thee afraide to speake to him by prayers, which is thy chiefest and greatest solace in this mortal life. How much more will thy vngodlines make thee wish delay of the last iudgement, the speedie and present comming whereof is a chiefe proppe of our fight, in the midst of so manie troubles and temptations: and withall, remember how the diuell that roring lion laboreth by this impure act, to make thee most filthie & lothsome

in the sight of God, and reioyceth to see thy gracious father, mercifull Sauiour, and comfortable sanctifier, so abused and withstood, and angered by thee whom he hath wonderfully made, carefully preserued, and deerely redeemed, and tenderlie loued, that if it may bee thou shouldest by vtter apostasie, dishonour him in the face of the world, who hath aduanced thee in the presence of all his Angels: and though thou be so sure in faith that thou canst not vtterly fall (the consideration whereof should make thee more dutifull, and not incourage thee in a sinfull course) yet maist thou by little and little, and by often falling, bring thy selfe into a better liking, both of the wicked, & of wickednes it selfe, whom thou oughtest to hate with a perfect hatred, & then God by iust iudgement, cast thee into a sure sleepe, that thy filthinesse may be seene of men, and thou condemned to the griefe of the righteous, and scorned to the shame of the vngodly, and in the meane season, by prouoking Gods iudgment, be spoiled of thy goodly ornamēts: of thy godly desires, of religious thoughts, of zealous affections, of christian communication, of holy indeuours, of assured perswasions of faith, of stedfast waitings through hope; of constant suffering by patience, and heartie reioysings from loue. In the perfect consummation of which things, because al happines consisteth,

beware thou carelesse wretch, least sodainly by thy abhominable filthinesse, thou either for a time wholy depriue thy selfe of comfortable feeling of these things, or much diminish thy present graces and blessings receiued of the holy spirit, to the glorie of God the Father. But why doe I vtter my voice, or striue to make a dead carkas moue? ô quicken thou me that art the fountaine of life, and call thou out of heauen thy dwelling place, that my wandring soule may heare the voice of hir shepheard, and followe thee whither soeuer thou leadest: nay of thy tender compassion take me vp vpon thy shoulders, and carrie mee gentlie into thy fold again: for theeues haue stolne me away, & haue bound my feete so that I cannot go, and they watch for me vntil thou art gone, that they may carrie me away quick from thy pastures: ô do thou therefore presently deliuer me, and giue me thy helping hand: ô cast thou downe by thy spirit my raging lust, and by thy grace subdue mine vntamed affection. I am weake ô Lorde, and vnable to resist the force of my mightie aduersarie: sende thy helpe from aboue, and saue mee out of the iawes of the cruell Lion: thou hast deliuered me out of the mouth of hell; ô let not the gates thereof anie more preuaile against mee: let mee not anye longer bee occupyed in vngodlinesse, least mine enimie triumph ouer mee, saying

in his malicious heart, there, there, so would I haue it. Let this sinne be farre from me ô Lord, that I should defile my selfe anie more with this notorious wickednesse: worke therefore in mine heart an vtter detestation of it, that I may euer hereafter keepe my selfe pure and vnspotted for thy kingdom. Thou that art able to make of stones children to Abraham, mollifie I pray thee my stonie heart, that all manner of sonne like affections may bee imprinted therein: plucke vp ô good father these rootes of bitternesse, that no vnsauorie fruite may come of the tree, which thou by thine owne hand hast planted. I desire, I looke, I call, I crie, for thy assistance, that I may conquer this vnruly motion. O blessed sauiour, that hast granted so manie petitions vppon earth, to them that were carefull for the bodie: fulfill I pray thee, this my desire; not for health, nor strength, nor riches, nor honour, nor for food, nor apparell, but for thine heauenlie grace and inspiration: yea let mee lose all those, rather then be left to my sinfull flesh, that I should be ruled anie longer thereby. Mortifie good father in me the old bodie of sinne, and giue vnto me a new bodie, purged from these dead works to serue the liuing God: renew my spirit dayly, that I may cast away these workes of darknesse: let it be enough ô mercifull Father, that my weaknesse in failing heeretofore, hath

chased, so mightely, so gratiouslie, and so dearlie for vs: we beleeue and know, that one drop of his bloud, is sufficient to heale our infirmities, pardon our iniquities, and supplie our necessities, but without thy grace, our light, our strength, our guide, we are able to do nothing, but sinne, as wofull experience hath taught vs too long, and the example of them which are voide thereof, whose life is nothing else but the seruice of the world, the flesh and the diuell. Therefore good father, as thou in speciall fauour hast appointed vs to serue thee, like as thou hast ordained all other creatures to serue vs: so may it please thee to send downe thy heauenly spirit into this earthly mansion, to iluminate our mindes, mollifie our hearts, change our affections, subdue our reason; regenerate our wils, and purifie our nature to this dutie; so shall not thy benefits, nor thy chastisments, nor thy word returne voide, but accomplish that for the which they were sent, vntill we be renued to the image of thy sonne. Good Lord we beseech thee, looke downe in the multitude of thy compassions, vppon thy militant Church, this sinfull Realme, thy gratious Handmaide our dread Soueraigne, her Honourable Counsell, the ciuill Magistrates, the paynefull Ministers, the two Vniuersities, the people that sit in darkenesse, and all that beare thy crosse. Gather vs into one communion

of thy truth, and giue vnto euerie man a spirit to his calling, that we being mindfull of the accompt, and that wee are called Christians, may firmely resolue, speedely begin, and continually perseuer in dooing and suffering thy holy will. Good Lord blesse and sanctifie our meeting, that no temptation hinder me in speaking, nor them in hearing, but that thy word may be heard and spoken as the word of God, which is able to saue our soules in that day, howsoeuer it pleaseth thee by weake and foolish things to magnifie thy selfe. There is no cause ô God most iust, why thou shouldest heare sinners, which art displeased with sinne, but for his sake which suffered for sinne, and sinned not: in whose name we are bold to lift vp our hearts, hands, and voices vnto thee, praying as he hath taught vs: Our Father which art in heauen, &c.
                  
                  FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
      
   