
      
         
            
            The benefit of
Contentation.
            Taken by Characterie, and examined
after.
            
            
               LONDON.
Printed by Roger Ward, for Iohn Proctor,
and are to be ſolde at his ſhop vppon
Holborne bridge. 1590.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE BENEFITE OF CONTENTATION.
            
               1. TIM. 6. 6.
               Godlineſſe is great gaine, if a man be
content with that he hath.
            
            
               BEcauſe when we preach, we
knowe not whether wee ſhall
preache againe, my care is to
chooſe fit and proper textes
to ſpeake that which I would
ſpeake, and that whiche is neceſſarie for
you to heare. Therefore thinking with
my ſelf what doctrine were fitteſt for you,
I ſought for a text which ſpeakes againſt
couetouſneſſe, which I may call the Londoners
ſume. Although God hath giuen
you more then other, whiche ſhould turne
couetouſneſſe into thankefulneſſe, yet as
the Iuie groweth with the Oke, ſo couetouſneſſe
hath growen with riches: euerie
man wiſheth the Philoſophers ſtone, and

who is within theſe wals that thinkes he
hathe inough, though there be ſo manie
that haue to much?Exod. 16. 2. As ye Iſraelites murmured
as muche when they had Mamma
as when they were without it,Nom. 11. 4 ſo they
which haue riches couet as much as they
which are without them: that conferring
your mindes and your wealth together, I
may truly ſay, this Citie is rich, if it were
not couetous. This is the deuil which bewitcheth
you, to thinke that you haue not
enough, when you haue more then you
neede. If you cannot chooſe but couet riches,
I will ſhewe you riches which you
may couet. Godlineſſe is great riches.
In which words, as Iacob craued of his
wiues and his ſeruants to giue him their
Idols,Cene. 35. 4 that hee might burie them, ſo
Paule craueth your couetouſneſſe, that
hee might burie it: and that yee might be
no looſers hee offereth you the vantage,
in ſtead of gaine, hee propoſeth great
gaine. Godlineſſe is great gaine: as if
hee ſhoulde ſay, Will you couet little
gayne before great? You haue found little
ioy in money, you ſhall finne great ioy in

the holy Ghoſt: you haue founde little
peace in the world, you ſhall finde great
peace in conſcience. This ſeeing ye world
ſtriue for the worlde, like beggers thruſting
at a dole, Lawyer againſt Lawyer,
brother againſt brother, neighbor againſt
neighbor for the golden apple, that poore
Naboth cannot holde his owne,1. King. 21. 4. becauſe
ſo manie Achabs are ſicke of his vineyard:
when he hath found the diſeaſe, like
a ſkilfull Phiſtian, hee goeth about to
picke out the greedie worme whiche maketh
men ſo hungry, and ſets ſuch a glaſſe
before them, that will make a ſhilling
ſeeme as great as a pound, a cottage
ſeeme as faire as a Pallace, a plough
ſeeme as godly as a diadem, that hee
which hath but twentie poundes, ſhall be
as merrie as hee which hath an hundred,
and hee whiche hath an hundred, ſhall be
as iocund as hee which hath a thouſand:
and he which hath a thouſand: ſhall be
as well contented, as hee whiche hath
a miſſion: euen as Daniel did thriue with
water and pulſe,Dan. 1. 12. as well as the reſt did
with their wine and iunkets. This is the

vertue and operation of theſe wordes: if
you heare them with the ſame ſpirite that
Paule wrote them, they will ſo worke vpon
your heartes, that you ſhall goe away
euery man contented with that which hee
hath, like Zacheus, which before hee had
ſeene Chriſt,Luke. 19. 8. knew nothing but to ſcpane,
but as ſoone as hee had heard Chriſt, all
his mind was ſet vpon giuing: this was
not the firſt day that Zacheus ſeemed rich
to others, but this was the firſt day that
Zacheus ſeemed rich vnto himſelf, when
riches ſeemed dung, & Godlineſſe ſeemed
riches. Chriſt doth not will other to giue
all their goods away to the poore, as hee
bad the yoong man,Mat. 19. 21. to ſee what he would
doe, but he which forbad him to keepe his
riches, forbiddeth vs to loue riches, which
makes our riches ſeeme pouertie,1. Tim. 6, 17. When
ye contenme riches, yee ſhall ſeeme rich,
becauſe no manhath inough but he which
is contented: but if yee couet, and grone,
and chriſt:Gen. 49. 4. as Iacob gaue Ruben a bleſſing,
but ſaid thou ſhalt not be excellent,
ſo God may giue you riches, but hee
ſaith, you ſhall not be ſatisfied. For yee

will be couetous vntill ye be religious. He
that wil haue contentation muſt leaue his
couetouſneſſe in pawne for it. This is the
ſpirite which we would eaſt out, if ye wil
leaue but this one ſinne behinde, you ſhall
depart out of the Churche like Naaman
out of Ioraan,
               2. King. 5, 14. as if you had bene waſhed,
& all your ſms ſwepe away like the ſeales
frō 
               Paules eyes.Actes 9. 18. For what hath brought
vſurie, and ſimonie, and briberie, and crueltie,
and ſubtiltie, and enuy, and ſtrife, and
deceite into this Citie, and made euerie
houſe an Inne, and euerie ſhoppe a market
of othes and lies, and fraud, but the ſuperfluous
loue of money? Name couetouſneſſe,
and thou haſt named the mother
of all theſe miſchiefes: other ſinnes are
but hirelinges vnto this ſinne: vſurie and
briberie, and ſimonie, and extortion, and
deceite, and lies and othes, are factors to
couetouſneſſe, and ſerue for porters to
fetche and bring her liuing in. As the receiuer
makes a theefe, ſo couetouſneſſe
makes an vſurer, and extortioner, and
deceiuer: becauſe ſhe receiueth the bootie
which they ſteale.Gen. 30. 1. Euen as Rachel cryed

to her huſband, Giue me Children or
elſe I die: ſo couetouſneſſe crieth vnto
vſurie and briberie, and ſimonie, and crueltie,
and deceipt, ant lies, Giue me riches
or elſe I die. Howe they may ſaue a
little, and how they may get much, & how
they may prolong life, is euerie mans
dreame from ſunne to ſunne, ſo long as
they haue a knee to bowe vnto Baal:
               Rom. 11. ſo
manie vices bud out of this one that it is
called The root of all euil,
               1. Tim. 6. 10. as if he would
ſay, the ſpawne of all ſ
                  〈…〉
               es. Take away
couetouſneſſe and hee will ſell his wares
as cheape as hee: hee will bring vp hys
Children as vertuouſly as he: he will refuſe
bribes as earneſtly as hee: hee will
ſuccour the poore as heartily as hee: hee
will come to the Church as lightly as he.
If ye could feele the pulſe of euerie heart,
what makes Gehezi take the bribe, which
Eliſha refuſed?2, King. 5, 17. What makes Demetrius
to ſpeake for images,Actes 19, 24, which Paule condemned?
What makes Nabal deme
Dauid that whiche Abigali gaue hym?1. Sam. 5. 10.
what makes Iudas grudge the oyle which
Mary tendered?Math. 26, 
                     •
                  . Nothing but couetouſneſſe.

When thau ſhouldſt giue, ſhe ſaith
it is too much: when thou ſhould receaue,
ſhe ſaith it is too litle: when thou ſhould
remit, ſhe ſaith it is too great: when thou
ſhould repent, ſhe ſaith it is to ſoone: when
thou ſhould heare, ſhee ſaith it is to farre:
like Pharao whiche found one buſineſſe or
other to occupie the Iewes,
               Exod. 5, 6. when they
ſhould ſerue God.
            Thus euery labour hath an ende, but
couetouſneſſe hath none, like a ſuiter
in law which thinkes to haue an end
this fearne and that tearme, and the
lawyer which ſhuld procure his peace
prolongeth his ſtrife, becauſe he hath
an action to his purſe, as his aduerſarie
hath to his land: ſo hee which is
ſet on coueting doth drinke brine
whiche makes him thirſt more, and
ſeeth no hauen till he arriue at death:
when he hath lied, hee is readie to lye
agayne: when he hath ſworne, hee is
readie to ſweare againe: when he hath deceiued,
he is readie to deceiue again: when
the day is paſt, he would it were to begin
again: When the tearme is ended, he wiſheth

that it were come againe: and
though his houſe be full, and his ſhop
ful, and his coffers ful, and his purſe
full, yet his heart is not full, but
lanke and emptie, like the diſeaſe
which wee cal the Woolfe, that is
alwaies eating, and yet keepes the
body leane. The Ant dooth eat the
foode which ſhée findeth: the Lyon
doth refreſh himſelfe with the pray
that hée taketh, but the couetous
man lieth by his money as a ſicke
man ſits by his meate, and hath no
power to take it, but to looke vpon
it, like the Prince to whome Eliſha
ſaid that he ſhould ſee the corne with
his eies, but none ſhuld come within
his mouth. Thus the couetous
man makes a foole of himſelfe. Hee
coueteth to couet: hée gathereth to
gather: hée laboureth to labour: he
careth to care, as though his office
were to fill a coffer full of angels,
and then to dy, like an aſſe which carieth
treaſures on his back all day,

and at night they are taken from
him, which dyd him no good but
lode him, Howe happie were ſome
if they knewe not golde from lead?
If thou be vviſe (ſayth Salomon) thou
ſhalt bee vviſe for thy ſelfe,
               Prou. 9. 12. but hée
which is couetous, is couetous againſt
himſelfe. For what plague
is this (vnleſſe one woulde kill
himſelfe) for a man to ſpend all his
life in carking, and pining, and ſcraping,
(as though hee ſhoulde doo
nothing but gather in this world, to
ſpend in the next) vnleſſe he be ſore
that he ſhall come againe when hee
is dead, to eate thoſe ſcraps which
hee hath gotten with all this ſtyrre?
Therefore couetouſneſſe may well
bee called miſerie, and the couetous
miſerable, for they are miſerable
indeed.
            Of them which ſéeme to bee wiſe,
there be no ſuch fooles in the world
as they which loue money better
then themſelues, but this is a iudgment

of God, that they which deceiue
other ſhould deceiue thēſelues
& liue like Cain which was a vagabond
vpon his owne landes,Gen. 4. 14. ſo they
are beggers in the middeſt of their
wealth. For though they haue vnderſtanding
to know riches, and a
minde to ſeeke them, and wit to
finde them, and pollicie to keepe
them, and life to poſſeſſe them, yet
they haue ſuche a falſe ſight and
bleare eye, that when their riches
lie before them, they ſeeme pouertie,
and hee which hath not halfe ſo
much ſeemes richer then they wil
you know how this comes to paſſe,
to ſhewe that the couetous men belong
to hell, they are like hel while
they liue.Pro. 30. 15. Hell is neuer filled and
they are neuer ſatiſfied, but like
the horſe-leath which cryeth giue,
giue, ſo their heartes crie bring,
bring, and though the tempter
ſhoulde ſay to them as hee ſaid to
Chriſt,Mat. 4. 
               All theſe vvill I giue thee,
               
yet 
                  〈◊〉
                would not content them no
more then heauen contented him:Luke. 16.
but as the glutton in hell deſired a
drop of water & yet a riuer woulde
not ſatiſfie him, for if a drop had bin
granted him he would haue deſired
a drop more, and a drop more, and
a drop to that, ſo they will lie and
ſweare and deceiue for a droppe
of riches. The deuill need not offer
them all as hee did to Chriſt, for
they will ſerue him for leſſe, but if
he coulde giue them all, all would
not content them, no more then
the worlde contented Alexander.
For it is againſt the name and nature
of couetouſneſſe to be content,
as it is againſt the name and nature
of contentation to bee couetous.
            Therefore one ſayth, that no
mans heart is like the couetous
mans heart, for hys heart is without
a bottome, like a fire which
hath neuer woode inough.
            
               
A prentiſe is bound, but for nine
yéere and then hee is free: but if
the couetous might liue longer
then Methuſalah,
               Gen. 5. 25. yet they woulde
neuer be free men, but prentiſes to
the world while they haue a foote
out of the graue.
            It is a woonder to ſee, as the
deuill compaſſeth about, ſeeking
whome hee may deuour: ſo men
compaſſe about ſeeking what they
may deuour, ſuch loue is betweene
men and money that they which
profeſſe good wil vnto it from their
heartes, will not take ſo muche
paynes for their life as they take
for gaine.
            Therefore no maruaile if they
haue no leyſure to ſanctifie themſelues,
whiche haue no leyſure to
refreſhe themſelues. Chriſt knewe
what hee ſpake when hee ſaide No
man can ſerue two maiſters,
               Mat. 16. 24. (meaning
God & the worlde) becauſe ech
would haue all. As ye angel & deuil

ſtroue for Moſes bodye,Iudg. 1. not who
ſhould haue a part but who ſhoulde
haue the whole ſo they ſtriue ſtil for
our ſoules who ſhal haue al. Therfore
the Apoſtle ſaith, the loue of
this world is enmitie to God.
               1 Ioh. 2. 15 Signifieng
ſuche emulation betweene
theſe two, that God cannot abide
the worlde ſhould haue a part, and
the worlde cannot abide that God
ſhould haue a part. Therefore the
loue of the worlde muſt needes be
enmitie to God, and therefore the
louers of the world muſt needes be
enemies to God, and therefore no
couetous man is Gods ſeruant, but
Gods enemie.Epheſ. 5. 5. For this cauſe couetouſnes
is called Idolatrie which is
the moſt contrary ſinne to God, becauſe
as treaſon ſetteth vp another
king in the kings place, ſo Idolatrie
ſetteth vp another God in Gods
place. This word doth ſignifie, that
the couetous make ſo much of mony,
that they euen worſhip it in

their hearts, and would do aſmuch
for it, as the idolaters doe for their
idols. Paul ſeing ſuch ſins committed,
and ſuch paine taken for gaine,
thought with himſelfe if they could
be perſwaded, that godlineſſe is
gaine, it is like that they woulde
take as much paines for godlines,
as they take for gaine. Therefore
hee taketh vppon him to proue this
ſtrange paradoxe. that godlines is
gaine, againſt all them in the verſe
before, which hold that gain is godlineſſe:
Theſe two opinions are verie
contrarie, and here are manie
againſt one. A man woulde thinke
that Paule ſhould be very eloquent
and ſharpe witted, and that he had
neede to vſe ſome Logicke: For he
hath choſen an hard text: what
Paul, wil you proue that godlineſſe
is gaine? You ſhal haue moe opponentes
againſt you,1. King. 22. 17. then Michaia
had when he forbad Achab to ſight:
if you had taken the former verſe

which ſaith that gaine is godlines,
then you ſhoulde haue had matter
and examples inough, the marchant
and mercer and lawyer, and landlord,
and patrene, and all woulde
come in and ſpeake for gaine, as the
Epheſians cryed for Diana:
               Act. 19. 28. but if
you will be croſſe to all and preach
godlineſſe is gaine, to them which
count gaine godlines. Men will
thinke of you as Feſtus did,Acts. 25. that you
ſpeake you know not what. Theſe
leſſons are for Paul himſelfe.Mat. 19. As
Chriſt ſaith, All doe not receiue
this word,
               Luke. 12, 18. ſo all doe not count this
gaine but loſſe, we count him riche
which hath his barnes full like theLuke. 16. 14.
churle,Dan. 5. 1. his coffers ful like the glutton,
his table full like Baltaſar, his
ſtable ful like Salomon,
               1. King. 4. 26. his grounds
full like Iob, his purſe full like
Creſſus.
               Iob. 1. 3. you ſpeake againſt your
maiſter: for Chriſt ſent worde vnto
Iohn that the poore receiue the
Goſpell,Luke. 7. 22. as though the godly were

of the poorer ſorte,Pſal. 73. 38. 5. 12. and Dauid calleth
the wicked rich, they proſpeand
floriſh, their ſeed blaſteth not,
their cowe caſteth not, as if hee
ſhoulde ſay, it is not as you take it
Paul, that godlines doth make men
riche. For this I haue obſerued in
my time, that the wicked are the
wealthieſt,Luke. 16. and good Lazarus is the
poore man and wicked Diues is the
rich man. Againe we read that the
blinde man was aſked, vvhich of
of the Scribes or the Phariſees or the
Elders did follovv Chriſt, yet theſe
were counted rich men, though they
had no godlineſſe: and if ye ſhould
examine your ſelfe, it ſeemes you
were no riche man for all your
godlineſſe, when you did worke
with your handes for your liuing:1. Theſ. 2. 9.
therefore if Godlineſſe bee ſuche
gayne, how happeneth it, that your
ſhare is no better: So they which
are like Nicodemus (when Chriſt
ſaith they muſt be borne agayne)Iohn. 3.
               
thinke that hee can haue no other
meaning but that they muſt returne
againe into their mothers
wombe:Iohn. 6. and when he calleth hymſelfe
bread, that hee muſt needes
meane ſuch bread as theydine with
As the Iews hearing the prophets
ſpeake ſo oft of Chriſtes kingdom,Math. 20. 20.
and call him a king, looked for a
temporal king which ſhould bring
them peace, and ioy, and glory, and
make them like kings themſelues:
ſo the carnall eares whē they heare
of a kingdome, and treaſures, and
riches, ſtraight their minds runne
vpon earthly, and worldly, and tranſitory
thinges, ſuch as they loue: to
whome Paul anſwereth as Chriſt
aunſwered hys Diſciples. I haue
an other meate vvhich you knovve
not of:
               Iohn. 4. 32. ſo there is another gaine,
which you know not of, I ſayd not
that godlineſſe is earthly, or worldly,
or tranſitorie gaine, but great
gaine. Godlineſſe is great gayne.

He will not prooue Godlineſſe to
be gaine, but great gaine: Godlines
is great gaine, as if he ſhoulde ſay,
more gainful then your wares, and
rents, and fines, and intereſt: as
though he would make the Lawyer
and Marchant, and Mercer, & Draper,
and Patrone, and Landlord, &
all the men of riches beléeue that
Godlines wil make thē rich ſooner
then couetouſnes.Aba. 1. 5. I feare this ſaying
may be renued.Pſal. 14. 2. & 43. 2 
               If a man tel you,
ye vvil not beleeue it, nay if God tel
you, yet ye wil not beleeue it. As the
Lord looked down vpon earth, to ſee
if any did regard him, & ſaith, there
is not one, ſo this ſentence may go
from court to citie, from citie to
countrie, and ſay there is ſcarce one
in a towne that will ſubſcribe vnto
it. Many (ſaith Dauid, Pſal. 4.)
aske vvho vvill ſhewe vs any good,
meaning riches, and honour, and
pleaſure, which are not good, but
when he came to goodneſſe it ſelfe,

hée leaues out Many, and prayeth in
his owne perſon, Lord lift vp the
light of thy countenance vpon vs.
as though none woulde ioyne with
him, yet Wiſedome is iuſtified of
her ovvn children, and the godlye
call Godlines gaine. To make vs
loue Godlineſſe, he calleth it by the
name of that we loue moſt: that is,
Gaine. As the Father calleth his
ſonne which hee would loue more
than the reſt by his owne name, to
put him in minde of ſuch a loue as
he beareth to himſelf. Here we may
ſee that God dooth not commannd
men to be godly onely, becauſe it
makes for his glory, but becauſe
Godlineſſe is profitable to vs. For
Godlines is not called Gaine in reſpect
of him, but in reſpect of vs: it
is gain to vs, but it is dutie to him.
So it is not called health in reſpect
of God, but in reſpect of vs, becauſe
it is the health of the ſoule. ſo it is
not called a kingdome in reſpect of

God, but in reſpect of vs, becauſe
we are intituled to the kingdome
by this difference from the reprobates.
But all the good thinges in
the world together, and the goodneſſe
of all is found in Godlineſſe:
and therefore godlineſſe is called
by the names of thoſe thinges that
men count. beſt, to ſhewe that the
Godlie are as well, as merrie, as
content with their loue towarde
God, and Gods loue toward them,
as other are with health, and
wealth, and pleaſures. Therefore
it is ſaid of the Godly. Eſay. 33. The
feare of the Lord is his treaſure.
Therefore ſaith Ieremy, 3. Lament.
The Lord is my portion.
                as though
he deſired nothing els: and therfore
it is ſaid of Moſes. Heb. 11. 26. That
he eſteemed the rebuke of Chriſt
greater riches thē al the treaſures of
Egypt.
                If croſſes be riches, as Moſes
thought, what riches are in Godlines?
but is this al? ſhal godlines be

our riches in this life only. Nay
(ſaith Paule, 1. Tim, 4) Godlineſſe
hath the promiſes of this life and of
the life to come. And therfore chriſt
ſaith, Firſt ſeeke the kingdome of
God, and all the reſt ſhall bee caſt
vpon you,
               Mat. 6. Ruth. 2. 16. euen as the ſheaues fel before
Ruth: ſo riches ſhall fall in
your way, as they did to Abraham,
and Lot, and Iacob, and Iob, and Ioſeph,
riches wer caſt to thē they knewe
not how, but as if God had ſaid, Be
rich, and they were rich ſtraight.
For all good thinges were created
for the good, and therefore they are
called good. Gen, 1. Becauſe the
good God created them for good
men to good purpoſe:Gene. 25. 30 Gen. 27. 8 and therfore
as Iacob got the bleſsing, ſo he got
the inheritance alſo: to ſhew that
as the faithfull haue the inwarde
bleſſing, ſo they haue the outward
bleſſings too, when they are good
for thē. For (ſayth Dauid, Pſal. 34)
They vvhich ſeeke the Lord ſhall

vvant nothing that is good. He ſayth
not, that they ſhall vvant nothing,
but, that they ſhall vvant nothing
that is good. Now God knowes
better then wee what is good for
vs: as the Nurſe knoweth better
then the child when the milke is
ready for it. Therefore Chriſt ſaith,
Your heauenly Father knovveth
vvhat you haue need of: he ſaith not
that vve know vvhat vve haue need
of, but that our father knovveth: as
if he ſhoulde ſay, when you haue
neede of health, your Father will
ſende you health: when you haue
neede of riches your Father will
ſend you riches: whē you haue néede
of l
                  ••
               ertie, your Father will ſend
you libertie: for he ſaith not onely,
that his Father knovveth vvhat
vve haue neede of, but he vvill giue
vs the things vvhich vve need. Therfore
as childrē take no care for their
apparell, what cloathes they ſhould
weare, nor for their victuals, what

meat they ſhould eat, but leaue this
care for their father, ſo ſaith Chriſt,
Take you no care, for my father careth
for you.
            
            Hee was not content to call
Godlineſse gain, but hee calleth
it great gaine, as if hee would ſay
Gaine, and more then Gaine: riches,
and better then riches: a
Kingdome, and greater then a
Kingdome.
            As when the Prophetes woulde
diſtinguiſh betweene the Idol gods
and the liuing GOD, they call
him the great God: ſo the gaine of
Godlineſſe is called greate gaine.
The riches of the worlde are called
earthlye, tranſitorye, ſnares,
thornes, dung, as though they
were not worthye to bee counted
Riches: and therefore to draw the
earneſt loue of men from them,
the holy Ghoſte bringes them in
with ſuch names of diſdaine, to diſgrace
them with their louers: but

when hee comes to Godlineſſe,
which is the riches of the ſoule, he
calleth it great riches, heauenlye
riches, vnſearcheable riches, euerlaſting
riches, with all the names
of honor, and al the names of pleaſure,
and all the names of happineſſe.
As a woman trimmes and
deckes her ſelfe with an hundred
ornaments, onelye to make her
amiable, ſo the holy Ghoſt ſetteth
out Godlineſſe with names of honour,
and names of pleaſure, and
names of happineſſe, as it were in
her iewels with letters of commendation,
to make her to hee loued.
Leaſt any riches ſhoulde compare
with Godlineſſe, hee giues it a
name aboue other, and calleth it
Great Riches, as if, hee woulde
make a diſtinction betweene Riches
and Riches: betweene the
gaine of Couetouſneſſe, and the
gain of Godlineſſe, the peace of the

world and the peace of conſcience,
the ioy of riches, and the ioy of the
holy Ghoſt. The worldly men haue
a kind of peace, and ioy, and riches,
but I cannot call it great, becauſe
they haue not enough, they are not
contented as the Godly are, therefore
onely Godlineſſe hath this honour,
to be called great riches. The
Gaine of couetouſnes is nothing
but wealth, but the Gaine of Godlineſſe
is wealth, and peace, and ioy,
and loue of God, and the remiſſion
of ſins and euerlaſting life. Therefore
onely Godlines hath this honour
to by called great gaine. Riches
make bate, but Godlineſſe
makes peace: Riches breede couetouſneſſe,
but Godlineſſe bringes
contentation: Riches make men
vnwilling to die, but Godlineſſe
makes men ready to dy: Riches often
hurt the owner, but Godlineſſe
profiteth the owner & other. Therfore
onely Godlineſſe hath this honour

to be called great riches, ſuch

                  ••
               ine, ſuch ioy, ſuch peace is in
Godlineſſe, and yet no man couets
it: for this is the qualitie of vertue,
it ſeemeth nothing vnto a man vntil
he hath it, as Salomon ſaith of the
buier, while he is in buying he diſpiſeth
the thing which he buyeth, &
ſaith,Pro. 20. 14. 
               It is naught, it is not woorth
the price which ye aſk, but when he
hath bought it, ſo ſoon as he is gon,
he boaſteth of his peniworths, and
ſaith it is better, then his mony. So
Godlines, before a man haue it, hee
ſaith it is not woorth his labor, and
thinkes euery houre too much that
he ſpendeth about it, but when hee
hath found it, he would not looſe it
againe for al the world, becauſe hee
is now come to that, which followeth,
to be contented vvith that hee
hath. Riches come, and yet the
man is not pleaſed, honour comes
and yet the man is not pleaſed: libertie

comes, and yet the man is
not pleaſed, pleaſure comes, and yet
the man is not pleaſed,Pſal. 23. 5 vntill God
come, & then he ſaith, My cup is ful.
Shevv vs thy father (ſaith Phillip)
& it ſufficeth.
               Iohn. 14. 7 nay ſhew vs thy truth
and it ſuffiſeth. Novv my ſoul (ſaith
the Churle) take thy reſt: nay, now
my ſoule take thy reſt,Luke. 12. 19 for thou haſt
layd vp for many yeares. The godly
man hath founde that which the
world dooth ſeeke, that is inough, euery
word may be defined, & euery
thing may be meaſured, but enough
cannot be meaſured nor defined: it
changeth euery year: when we had
no thing, we thoght it enough if we
might obtaine leſſe then we haue:
whē we came to more, we thought
of an other enough: nowe we haue
more, we dream of another enough:
ſo enogh is alwais to come, though
too much be there already. This is
becauſe we ſéek contentation in the
things, when it is in the mind, for

Godlines is in the mind, and the
gaine of Godlines is contentation.
The apoſtle ſpeakes as though hée
had founde a new kinde of riches,
which the world neuer thought of
that are of ſuch a nature, that they
will ſatiſfie a man like the water
that Chriſt ſpake of,Iohn. 4. 
               he that drinkes
of this vvater ſhall thirſt no more:
ſo they that taſt of theſe riches ſhall
couet no more: but as the holy ghoſt
filled all the houſe,Act. 2. (Act. 2) ſo ye grace
and peace, and ioy of the holy ghoſt
filleth all the hart, that as Ioſeph had
no neede of Aſtronomy becauſe hee
had the ſpirite of Prophecie,Gen. 44. 15 ſo hée
which hath contentation hath litle
need of riches. Such a ſweet thing
is Godlineſſe that it ſeaſoneth al eſtates,
like the Vnicornes horue,
which dippeth in ye foūtain, & maks
the waters which were corrupt &
noiſom clear & wholſome vpon the
ſuddaine: ſo whatſoeuer eſtate godlineſſe
comes vnto, it ſaith like the

Apoſtles, Peace bee to this houſe,
peace be to this heart, peace bee to
this man.
            I may liken it to the fiue loauesLuke. 5. 9
and two fiſhes wherewith Chriſt
fed fiue thouſand perſons, and yet
there were twelue baſkets full of
that which was left, which coulde
not fill one baſket when it was
whole: ſo their litle feaſt was made
a great feaſt: ſo the godlye though
they haue but litle for themſelues,
yet they haue ſomething for other,
like the wyddowes Myte, that they
may ſay as the Diſciples ſaide toMark. 12.
Chriſt,Math. 10 they want nothing, though
they haue nothing. Contentation
wanteth nothing, and a good heart
is worth all: For if ſhe want bread,
ſhe can ſay as Chriſt ſaid, I am another
bread:
               Iohn. 4. 32. If ſhe want riches, ſhe
can ſay, I haue other riches: If
ſhee want ſtrength, ſhe can ſay, I
haue other ſtrength: If ſhee want
friends, ſhe can ſay, I haue other

friends. Thus the Godly and all
within, that the Godleſſe ſéek without.
Therfore if you ſée a man contented
with that which hée hath, it
is a great ſigne that Godlineſſe is
entred into him, for ye hart of man
was made a Temple for God, and
nothing can fill it but God alone.
Therefore Paule ſaith after his conuerſion
that which he coulde neuer
ſay before his conuerſion,Phil. 4. 
               I haue
learned to be contēt, Firſt he learned
godlines, then godlines taught
him contentatiō. Now (ſaith Paul)
I haue learned to be content, as
though this were a leſſon for euery
Chriſtian to learn, to be content
For thus he muſt thinke, that as
God ſaid to Moſes, when he coulde
not obtaine leaue to goe to Canaan,
Let this ſuffice thee to ſee Canaan:
               Deut. 26.
ſo whatſoeuer he giueth, he giueth
this charge with it, Let this ſuffice
thee. As Ieremy ſaith, This is my ſorrow,
and I vvil beare it,
               Ier. 10. 19 ſo thou muſt

ſay, This is my portiō & I wil take
it. This is the ſigne, whether Godlines
be in a man, if he haue ioy of yt
which he hath: for ye thinges which
god giueth to ye righteous, Paul ſaith
yt he giueth thē to enioy, 1. Tim. 6. 17.
yt is, if he haue much, he can ſay with
Paul, I haue learned to abound: if he
haue litle, he can ſay with Paule, I
haue learned to vvant: yt is, if he haue
much as Abraham, & Lot, & Iacob, &
Iob, and Ioſeph, yet it cannot corrupt
his mind, but as the net was ful of
fiſhes, and yet did not rent, becauſe
they caſt it in at Chriſts cōmaund:Iohn. 21. 11.
ſo though ye godly man be full of riches,
yet his heart is not rent, his
mind is not troubled, his coūtenāce
is not chaunged, becauſe hée remē
               breth
yt theſe thinges were geuen
him to doo good, as Heſter thought of
her honor: if hée haue litle,Heſt. 4. 14. it is like
the litle oyle, which ſerued the widdow
as little as it was,2. King. 4. 7. 
               For a litle to
the righteous
               Pſal. 34. (ſaith Dauid) is better

then great riches to the vngodly: for
when a man hath found ye heauenly
riches, hee careth not for earthly riches
no more then he that walketh
in the Sun, thinks not whether the
Moon ſhine or no, becauſe he hath no
néed of her light. Therfore we conclude
wt Chriſt (Math. 5)Mat. 5 
               Bleſſed are
they vvhich thirſt after rigteouſnes,
for they ſhall be ſatisfied: Not they
which thirſt after riches, nor they
which thirſt after honour, nor they
which thirſt after pleaſure, they ſhal
not be ſatiſfied, but thirſt more, as
the ambitious, voluptuous and couetous
do, but they that thirſt after
righteouſnesſhalbe ſatisfied, though
they haue no riches, nor honor, nor
pleaſure:Gen. 2 euen as Adam was warm
though he had no cloaths, though he
was naked, yet he did not ſée his nakednes,
ſo long as he was innocent:
but when he began to rebel, then he
began to want cloaths, ſo thogh a man
be pore, yet he doth not ſee his pouerty

ſo long as hee is contented, but
when hee beginnes to couet, then
he beginnes to want riches, and
from that day the curſe (in the firſt
of Agge. 6.) takes holde vpon him,
Ye eat, but ye haue not inough: ye
drinke, but ye are not ſatisfied: ye
cloath your ſelues but ye are not
vvarme. Indeed the couetous man
ſéemeth to drawe the world to him
with cordes, his coffers are of lodeſtones,
his handes like nettes, his
fingers like lime-twigges, there it
comes, and there it comes, one
would thinke that this man ſhould
be happie one day.
            When the Churles barnes wer
full, hee bad his ſoule reſt, thinking
to gaine reſt by couetouſneſſe,Luke. 12. 8.
that hee might ſay Riches gaine
reſt aſwell as Godlineſſe, but ſee
what happened that night when he
began to take his reſt, riches & reſt,
and ſoule and all were taken from
him. Did he not gaine faire? would

he haue taken ſuche paines if hee had
thought of ſuch reſt, couetouſneſſe may
gaine riches, but it cannot gaine reſt,
ye may thinke iike this churle to reſt,
when your barnes and ſhoppes and
coffers are full: but yee ſhall finde it
true which Eſay ſaith,Eſay. 41. 
               there is no reſt
to the vngodly, therefore the wiſe
man to preuent anie hope of reſt, or
honour or profite, by ſinne, ſpeakes as
though he had tried,Pro. 12. 3. 
               a man cannot be
eſtabliſhed by iniquitie. Therefore
hee cannot be quieted nor ſatiſfied by
the gaine of deceipt, or bribes, or lies,
or vſurie,Pro. 10. 2. which is iniquitie: therefore
bleſſed is the man whome godlineſſe
doth make riche, for vvhen the bleſſing
of the Lord maketh rich (ſaith
Salomon) he doth ad no ſorrovv to
it,
               Pro. 13. 6 but (ſaith he) the reuenevves of the
vvicked is trouble, as though his
money were care: wherefore let patrone,
and landlord, and lawyer, and
all ſay, that Paul hath choſen the better
riches, which theefe, nor moth,

nor canker can corrupt. theſe are the
riches at leaſt which wee muſt dwell
with, when all the reſt which wee haue
lied for, and ſworne for, and fretted for,
and coſoned for, and broken our ſleepe,
and loſt many ſermons, forſake vs.
Like ſeruauntes which chaunge theyr
maiſters: then godlineſſe ſhall ſeeme
as great gaine to vs as it did to Paul,
and hee which loued the worlde moſte,
would giue all that he hath for a dram
of faith, that he might be ſure to go to
heauen when hee is dead, though hee
went towardes hell ſo long as hee
liued.
            It is ſaid of this citie that manie citizens
of London haue good willes, but
bad deedes, that is, you doe no good
till that ye die.
            Firſt you are vngodly, that you may
be riche, and then you part from ſome
of your riches to excuſe for your vngodlineſſe,
it may be, that ſome heere
haue ſet down in their willes, when I
die I bequeath an hundreth pound to a

colledge, and an hundreth pound to an
hoſpitall, and an hundreth gownes to
poore men. I doe maruaile that you
giue not more when you are at that
poynt,Mat. 27. 3 for Iudas when hee died returned
all agayne: ſo yee die and thinke
when ye are goue, that God wil take
this for a quittance: bee not deceiued
for God doth not looke vppon that
whiche yee doe for feare, but vpon
that which yee doe for loue. If you can
finde in your heart to doe good while
yee are in healthe, as Zacheus did,
then God hathe reſpect vnto your offering,
but before God hearken howe
you giue your riches, firſt hee examines
howe ye come b
                  •
                them.
            Thus you ſee the fruites of Godlineſſe
and the fruits of couetouſneſſe
if yee bee couetous you ſhall neuer
haue inough though ye haue too much.
If ye be godly, yee ſhall haue inough
though yee ſeeme to haue nothing.
            Therefore what counſell ſhall I
giue you, but as Chriſt counſelled hys

diſciples,Lnk. 16. 9 
               be not friendes to riches,
but make you friendes of riches, and
knowe this, that if hee cannot ſay as
Paul ſaith,Phil. 9 
               I haue learned to be content,
Godlineſſe is not come into your
houſe yet, for the companion of Godlilineſſe
is contentation. Therefore as
Chriſt ſaith,Iohn. 8. 39. 
               if the ſonne make you
free, you ſhall be free in deede,
ſo I ſay, if godlineſſe make
you rich, ye ſhalbe rich
indeede.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   