
      
         
            
            
            THE
SINNERS CONuersion.
            By Henrie Smith.
            Math. 18. verse, 3.
            Verily, I ſay vnto you, except yee be
conuerted, and become as little children,
y
                  ••
                
               
                  ••
               all not enter into the kingdome of
Heauen.
            
               ET VSQVE AD NVBES VERITAS TVA·
               printer's or publisher's device
               PS
            
            At London printed for William
Leake, and are to be ſolde at his ſhop in
Paules Church-yard, at the
ſigne of the Crane.
1594.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The Text.
            
               Luke, 19. verſes, 1. 2. 3. 4 5.
               ¶1. Nowe when Ieſus entred and paſſed through Iericho,
2. Beholde, there was a man named Zaccheus,
which was the chiefe receiuer of the trybute,
and he was rich. 3. And hee ſought to ſee
Ieſus, who hee ſhoulde be, and coulde not for the
preaſe, becauſe he was of a lowe stature. 4. Wherefore
he ranne before, and climbed vp into a wilde
figge tree, that hee might ſee him: for hee ſhoulde
come that way. 5. And when Ieſus came to the place,
he looked vp, and ſawe him, and ſaide vnto him,
Zaccheus, come downe at once: for to day I must
abide at thine houſe.
            
            
               IN the ende of
the Chapter before
going, wee may ſee
how Chriſt healed a
man, blinde in his bodily
ſight, namely
Bartimeus, wherby he
ſheweth himſelfe to be the phiſition of the
body: Heere we ſhall ſee how he cured one
blind in mind, namely Zaccheus, whereby
he ſheweth himſelfe to be the Phiſition of
the ſoule,Epheſ. 5. 23 and therefore the Sauiour of the
whole man.
            
               
In ſpeaking of Zaccheus and his conuerſion,
wee will obſerue foure circumſtances.
Firſt, the place where he was called, which
was Iericho. Secondly, the perſon that was
called, Zaccheus the Publican. Thirdly, by
whom and how he was called, by the voice
of Chriſt. And laſtly, the effect and fruite of
his calling, his good confeſsion.
            
               The firſt Circumſtance.
               Firſt therefore for the place where he was
conuerted, it appeareth to be Iericho, a Cittie
not farre diſtant from Ieruſalem. It was
ſometime a notable Citie, till it was ſubuerted
and ruinated by the Lordes Champion
Ioſua.
                  Ioſua, 6, It was builded againe in the dayes of
Ahab,
                  1. Reg. 16, 34 by Hiel the Bethelite, and remaineth
at this day with the reſt of that holy-land,
vnder the Turkiſh Empire. Vnto this Iericho,
the Lord of heauen and earth vouchſafeth
to come, in the likeneſſe of a ſeruaunt.
And as Ioſua compaſſed Iericho ſeuen
times, minding to deſtroy it, ſo Chriſt the
true Ioſua, reſorted oftentimes to Iericho,
minding to ſaue it. But as in the deſtruction
of Iericho, Ioſua ſpared none but Rahab the
harlot: ſo Ieſus in his iourney to Iericho,
                  
conuerted none but Zaccheus the Publican.
When Ioſua had conquered and raſed Iericho,
hee ſowed ſalt in it to make it barren,
and curſed him that ſhould attempt to build
it vp: yet in thys barren ſoyle Chriſt hath his
ſpirituall haiueſt, and in this curſed Cytty he
hath a holy Temple a bleſſed building. Samaria
that wicked Citty affordeth many
that belieue in Chriſt.Iohn, 4, 49. 
                  Iohn, 4, 39. And out of
Galile,
                  Iohn, 1, 46 from whence they thought no good
thing might come.Iohn, 7, 52, 
                  Iohn, 1, ver. 46. Chriſt
called diuers of his Apoſtelles, and euen in
Iericho this curſed Cittie, Chriſt hath a rich
man that is to be ſaued. In euerie place
Chriſt hath his choſen. There is neither Iewe
nor Gentile, Barbarian nor Scythian, bound
nor free,Rom, 10, 12 but Chriſt is all in all, to all that call
vpon him. Rom. 10, 12.
            
            
               The ſecond circumſtance.
               Now followeth the deſcription of Zaccheus,
which is moſt plainlie and fully ſette
forth vnto vs. The holy Ghoſt ſpeaking of
Zaccheus and his conuerſion, comes in with
an Ecce, behold, as if it were a wonder that
Zaccheus ſhold be conuerted. Zaccheus was
a Gentile, a Publican, and a rich man, and

therefore behold a miracle, as if in the conuerſion
of Zaccheus, theſe three ſhould be
conuerted al once.
               
                  Zaccheus was a Gentile, a meruaile to ſee
a Gentile become a Iew:Rom. 2. 28. that is, to belieue
in Chriſt. He was a principall Publican. A
ſtrange thing to ſee a chiefe Cuſtomer to
giue ouer his office: and he was rich alſo, a
rare matter to ſee a rich man to enter into
the kingdome of God:Mat. 19. 23. and therefore behold
a miracle, as if at this day, the Turck: the
Pope, and the King of Spaine, were at once
perſwaded to forſake their Idolatry and ſuperſtition.
Chriſt going to Ieruſalem, conuerteth
a Gentile, to ſignifie the calling of
the Gentiles: he conuerteth a Publican, to
ſhewe that notorious ſinners may hope to
be ſaued, if they repent and amend, as Zaccheus
did. He cōuerteth a rich man, to ſhew
that all rich men are not excluded from the
kingdome of heauen,
               Hee was called Zaccheus before his conuerſion,
but he was neuer trulie called Zaccheus
till Chriſt called him ſo. His name
ſignifieng, ſimple, pure honeſt, but his lyfe
was ſubtile, impure, and moſt deteſtable.
Thus manie are called by honeſt names,
whoſe deedes bewray their diſhonest natures,

and vices oftentimes are ſhrowded
in the habites of vertue, like Eſops Aſſe,
masking in the Lyons ſkinne, till hys long
eares detect his folly; or like the Crowe
that is decked in other plumes, till euerie
byrd doe plucke his feather.
               
                  Zaccheus by his profeſſion was a Publican,
and therefore much deteſted of the
Iewes: for Publicans were the Romaine
Officers, appoynted to gather and receiue
publique cuſtome or tribute of the Iewes,
who were at that tyme in ſubiection vnto
the Romaines. And amongſt theſe Officers,
Zaccheus was the chiefe, and (as it ſeemeth)
Ouer-ſeer of the reſt that where in Ierico,
and therefore in chiefe hatred among
the Iewes, as one that chiefely fauored the
Romans tiranny, and ſerued to abridge their
Country liberty, which ought not be ſubiect
to any Nation.
               Beſides, he contemned the ceremonies of
the Iewes, and regarded not their Religion,
nor liued after theyr Lawe, and therefore
with the reſt of the Heathen Publicans,
was excommunicate out of theyr Sinagogue
Math.
                  Math. 18. 18.
               Thus was he hated for his profeſſion, becauſe
he was a Publican, & for his religion,

becauſe he was a Heathen. Yet was hee beloued
for his wealth, for rich men haue manie
friends.Prou. 14, 20 
                  Prou. 14. 20. And though they
doe neuer ſo wickedly, yet haue they ſome
to take theyr parts. If they ſpeake neuer ſo
proudly, yet are there ſome to prayſe their
ſaying.Eccle, 13, 23 24. 
                  Eccle 13, 23, 24.
               
                  Zaccheus was a Publican, and therefore
riche: for Publicanes muſte needes he rich,
and Vſurers will be welthy. But rich Publicans
make poore princes, and wealthy Vſurers
make many beggers. In euery Prouince
there were many Publicans, and
therefore much poore people in euery place:
for where there be many Caterpillers, the
fruit is ſoone conſumed, and where there be
many extorcioners, beggers muſt needes abound.
               By the Law of God,Deut. 15 there might be nobegger
in Iſraell, but when ſo many Publicans
were ſuffered to receiue tribute of the
Iewes contrarie to Gods Law, no maruaile
though ſo many ſate and begged, contrarie
to Gods Law.Luke, 18 
                  Luke. 18. Iohn, 9. Acts. 3 By
the Lawe of God.Iohn, 9 There ought to bee no
beggers among Chriſtians.Acts, 3 Pſal, 37, 25 
                  Pſal. 3. 2. 25. but
when ſo manie Vſurers are tollerated in a
Chriſtian Common-wealth, contrarie to

the Law of Chirſt,Luke, 6. 35. 
                  Luke. 6. 35. no meruaile
though we haue ſo many beggers,Leuit. 25. 36. 37. contrarie
to the minde of Chriſt.Mark. 14. 7. 
                  The poore (ſayth
Chriſt) yee ſhall haue alwaies with you, but
when you will you may doe them good: and
we ſhall be ſure to haue the poore amongſt
vs alwaies,Pſalm. 37. but wee muſt make ſuch good
prouiſion for them, that they be not faine to
begge theyr bread.
               Thus was Zaccheus rich to himſelfe,Luke, 12. 21 for
he was a Publican, but he was rich towarde
God alſo, for he had a deſire to ſee Chriſt.
Almightie God,Ephe, 2. 
                  who is rich in mercie, Eph. 2.
hath ſo inſpyred his hart with the deſire of
heauenlie riches, that whereas before, hys
whole delight was in ſeeking of worldlie
wealth, now his greateſt care is to ſeeke
for heauenlie treaſure. He now forgetteth
what his profeſſion is, and begins to be of a
newe profeſſion: and he whoſe hart was
whollie ſette vpon earthlie profit, is now like
old Simeon, moſt deſirous to ſee his Sauiour.
The Tetrach Herod deſired to ſee Chriſt,
and deſpiſed him when hee ſaw him.Luke, 23. 8. 
                  Luke.
23. 8. 11. but Zaccheus the Publican, deſired
to ſee Chriſt, and reioyced when hee ſawe
him, like Abraham that deſired to ſee the
day of Chriſt.Iohn, 8, 56. 
                  Iohn. 8. 56. and therefore of

the ſeruant of Sathan, Zaccheus is nowe become
the childe of Abraham, which reioyced
to ſee the day of Chriſt. Happie were
his eyes that ſawe ſo bleſſed a ſight, for manie
Prophets and righteous men haue deſired
to ſee and to heare thoſe thinges that
Zaccheus both ſaw and heard,Luke. 10. and coulde
not ſee nor heare the ſame. If Iacob thought
himſelfe happy,Gene. 45. if that hee might but ſee his
Sonne Ioſeph before his death, then ſurelie
thriſe happie Zaccheus, whoſe hap it was,
not onely to ſee (as Iacob did) but to reioyce
(as Marie did) in Chriſt his Sauiour.
               As Zaccheus was deſirous to ſee Chriſt in
earth, ſo I would haue the riche men of our
time, deſirous to ſee Chriſt in heauen. For
although with the eies of our bodie we cannot
ſee Chriſt as Zaccheus did, yet with the
eies of our faith wee may beholde him as
Stephen did.Acts. 7. 
                  Actes. 7. But if our faith be ſo
weake ſighted that wee cannot ſee Chriſt,
yet let vs haue a deſire to heare Chriſt in his
word, whereby our faith may be increaſed,
for faith commeth by hearing the worde of
God.Rom. 10. And as the Queene of the South deſired
to heare the wiſedome of Salomon,
                  1. Reg. 10. ſo let
vs bee deſirous to heare the wiſedome of
Chriſt our Sauiour.
               
                  
King Salomon left ſome bookes in writing,
wherein is ſeene ſome part of his wiſedome,
and Chriſt our king, hath left vnto vs
his moſt ſacred word, as it were a taſt of his
wiſedome,Iohn. 20. 31 ſufficient matter for our ſaluation.
This is that heauenly foode,Math. 4, 4 
                  Math. 4.
4. whereby our ſoules are fedde vnto eternall
life, let vs therefore labour for that heauenly
foode: and as the Iſraelites were carefull
to gather Manna to ſuſtaine their bodies,Exod. 16
ſo let vs be as carefull to heare the word
to feede our ſoules. The people in the time
of Chriſt,Iobn, 6, 24 
                  Iohn, 6. 24. tooke great paines to
follow Chriſt both by land and ſea, and many
nowe a dayes (I confeſſe) are verie forward
to follow his faithfull Miniſters, but as
they followed Chriſt ſo faſt toIoh. 6, 26 fill their bellies,
ſo theſe frequent Sermons for faſhion to
ſerue the time.
               
                  Zaccheus is deſirous to ſee Chriſt, a godly
care, but yet hee coulde not obtaine his purpoſe:
a thing common, for euerie one that
hath any good motion, hath alwaies ſome
hinderaunce to croſſe the ſame,Two impediments. and Zaccheus
hath a double impediment to hinder
his honeſt enterpriſe: The preaſe of the
people, And his little ſtature. Whereof the
former, that is, the multitude, is alwaies

wont to be an enemie to thoſe that woulde
come to Chriſt. This hindered the blinde
man from receiuing his ſight.Luke, 18 
                  Luke, 18. for
the people rebuked him that he ſhould hold
his peace, till Chriſt called him and opened
his eyes. This hindered them that brought
the man ſicke of the Palſie.Marke, 2 
                  Marke, 2. for
they could not come at Chriſt for ye preaſe,
till they vncouered the roofe of the houſe,
and let downe the bed wherein the ſicke of
the Palſey lay.
               This hindered the healing of the deafe
and dumbe,Marke, 7 
                  Marke, 7. till Chriſt tooke
him aſide out of the multitude and cured
him. This hindered the raiſing of the Rulers
daughter.Math. 9 
                  Mathew, 9. till Chriſt had
thruſt out the Minſtrels and the multitude,
and then reſtored the maid to life. Finally,
this hindered Zaccheus here from comming
vnto Chriſt, till Chriſt vouchſafed to call
him to himſelfe. Thus alwaies a multitude
that is prone to euill, doth withdrawe and
hinder vs from approching vnto Chriſt: and
therefore wee muſt not followe a multitude
to doe euill, nor decline after many to ouerthrow
the trueth.Exod. 23 
                  Exod. 23.
               The ſecond impediment that hindereth
Zaccheus from ſeeing Chriſt, is his little ſtature.

Hee was ſo lowe of ſtature, that hee
coulde not ſee Chriſt aboue the multitude:
but Chriſt was aboue the multitude, and
therefore coulde ſee Zaccheus though hee
were ſo lowe of ſtature. For God looketh
not on the countenance,Sam. 16. 7 nor on the height
of a mans ſtature, but the Lord beholdeth
the heart, and preferreth little Dauid before
Eliab his eldeſt brother,1. Sam. 16 12. becauſe he findeth
in him a better heart to ſerue the Lord. And
Zaccheus in his little bodie, hath a heart and
minde prepared to ſeeke and ſee the Lord.
Zaccheus was ſo lowe that he could not ſee
Chriſt, but many amongeſt vs are ſo high
that they will not ſee Chriſt. The common
people in the time of Chriſt, were ſo deſirous
to followe Chriſt, that neither lameneſſe,
nor blindnes, nor ſicknes, coulde ſtaie
them from comming to him: but the Common
people in our time, are more readie to
follow their ſport and paſtime, then to come
to the Church to heare of Chriſt. And as
for our rich men, who ſeeth not that they
will make great haſt to ſee a commoditie,
but will ſcarce come out of doores to heare
a Sermon?
               They come to Church,Iohn, 32 as Nichodemus
came to Chriſt by night, as if they were aſhamed

to come to Church: but they runne
after profite to gette riches,2. King. 5 as Gehezi ran
after Naaman the Syrian to get a bribe.
               Thus hath Zaccheus two lettes, that hee
could not ſee Chriſt, the one in the people,
the other in himſelfe: and wee haue many
lettes to withdrawe vs from Chriſt, ſome are
externall and without vs, as the inticementes
of the world, and ſome are internall
and within vs, as the luſtes of our owne
fleſhe. The preaſe of the people, hindereth
Zaccheus from ſeeing Chriſt in his humilitie,
and the multitude of our ſinnes,Eſay. 59. 2 doe
preſſe vs downe that wee cannot ſee Chriſt
in glorie. Zaccheus was a man of little ſtature,
and that hindered him from ſeeing
Chriſt in earth, and we are men of little faith,
and that is the cauſe wee cannot beholde
Chriſt in heauen.
               Though Zaccheus was a man of little ſtature,
yet it appeareth that hee was not a
man of little wit: For when hee coulde not
come to the ſight of Chriſt for the multitude,
he had the wit to runne before, and to
clime vp into a tree to obtaine his purpoſe.
And for the moſte part it falleth out, that
men of lowe ſtature, are men of high conceite,
and the ſhorteſt bodies, haue the

ſharpeſt wittes, God ſo prouiding, that the
defectes of their bodies, might bee ſupplied
with the giftes of their minde. Nowe Zaccheus
that before was loth to moue his foote
from the Cuſtom-houſe for looſing his profite,
beginnes to runne after Chriſt for feare
of a greater loſſe, like Eliſa that left his plowing,
and ranne after Elias to followe his
newe vocation.1, Reg. 19 But Zaccheus doth not
onely runne, but alſo clymbe vp into a Tree
to ſee Chriſt: A ſtrange thing, that Zaccheus
a rich man, and a chiefe Cuſtomer, ſhoulde
behaue himſelfe ſo childiſhly in the ſight of
ſo great a multitude: but the deſire hee had
to ſee Chriſt, made him forget himſelfe, and
to commit ſuch thinges as were not fitting
for his ſtate and credite. So they that wil follow
Chriſt, muſt make account to doe manie
thinges contrarie to theRom. 12 faſhion of the
worlde, and their owne liking. If Chriſt
himſelfe were content to leaue the glorie
which he had with his father to come down
to vs, ſhall not wee be content to leaue the
reputation which wee haue with men, to go
vp to him?
               But alas where is there any almoſt, that
preferreth not the fruition of this earthly priſon,
before the poſſeſſion of that heauenlie

manſion: and had rather hazard the
hope which they haue of eternall glory, then
leeſe the preſent enioying of theyr fading
pleaſure.
               The ambitious man hunteth after honor,
and will not leeſe an inche of his eſtimation.
The couetous man ſeekes after profit, and
counts (like Iudas) all loſt that comes not
to his bags. And the voluptuous man beſtowes
his time in pleaſure,Iohn. 12. 6. and thinketh
that hys chiefe felicittie. Thus euerie man
makes his heauen of that wherein he moſt
delighteth, & is content to take great paines
to accōpliſh his fond deſires. But here Zaccheus
is of another minde, for being a publique
officer, he climbes into a tree, which
ſtoode not with his grauitie: and being a rich
man, he runnes to ſee Chriſt, which was not
for his worldly profit; yea hee takes great
paines to ſee Chriſt, not reſpecting his eaſe
or pleaſure.
               Thus muſt we be affected if we deſire to
come to Chriſt, that neither honours nor
preferments, nor profit nor pleaſure, nor
kyndred nor freends, be able to holde vs
backe.Mat. 8. 22. We muſt be readie not only to run,Luk. 14. 26.
but alſo to climbe (if need require) as Zaccheus
dyd: that is, to take ſome payne and

trauaile to haue a ſight of Chriſt.
               The Queene of the South,1. King. 10. vndertooke a
great and tedious iourney, to heare the wiſedome
of Salomon, but we are lothe to take any
paine to heare one that is greater then Salomon.
               
               The people in Dauids tyme, brought ſo
much treaſure,1. Chr. 29. 9. and ſo many gyfts to the building
of Gods Temple, that the Prieſtes were
fayne to byd them ceaſe, but a great part of
the people in our tyme, are ſo ſparing of their
paynes and coſt, that they thinke that very
time miſpent whiche is imployed in the ſeruice
of God: and that money ill beſtowed,
which is gyuen to the maintenaunce of his
Miniſters.
               When Zaccheus could not ſee Chriſt for
the multitude, he climbes vp into a tree, that
groweth in the way where he was to paſſe,
that from a tree he might behold him, which
was to ſuffer on a tree for mans ſaluation. So
when wee cannot drawe neere to Chriſt by
reaſon of our ſinnes that preſſe vs downe, we
muſt clymb vp by a liuely faith, whiche is the
tree of life, that groweth in the waie to eternall
life, that ſo with the eyes of our fayth, we
may behold him that dyed for our ſinnes vpon
a tree.
               
                  
It was a wilde figge tree that Zaccheus
clymbed,Math. 21, 19 but not like that vnfruitfull one
which our Sauiour curſed: for this bare moſt
pretious fruite, euen ſuch as Chriſt himſelfe
vouchſafed to plucke. A happie tree that
bare ſuche pretious fruite as Zaccheus was,
but thriſe happie Zaccheus, that ſo happily
clymbed on that happie tree.
               This tree grewe in the way that Chriſt
was to paſſe, for elſe Zaccheus might haue
climbed to no purpoſe: So if wee deſire to
finde Chriſt, we muſt ſeeke him in the waie
where hee hath promiſed to ſhewe himſelfe
vnto vs, that is, in his holy Temple, where
his word is duely preached,Math. 18, 20 and his Sacramentes
reuerently adminiſtred, for where
two or three are ſo gathered together, hee
hath promiſed to be preſent amongſt them.
            
            
               The third Circumſtance.
               When Chriſt came to the place, he looked
vp and ſaw Zaccheus.
               
               As Zaccheus ranne before to ſee Chriſt,
ſo Chriſt followed after to ſee Zaccheus.
Sathan for his part, went about like a roaring
Lyon,
                  1, Pet. 5, 8 
                  ſeeking to deuoure him, but Chriſt for
his part,Iohn, 10 goeth about like a good Sheepeheard,

minding to ſaue him.Luke, 11, 21 And although
Sathan a ſtrong armed man, had taken ſome
poſſeſsion in ye heart of Zaccheus, yet Chriſt
a ſtronger then he, commeth vnarmed, and
taketh from him his harneſſe wherein hee
truſted, and reſcueth the ſpoyle.
               Chriſt comes to the place where Zaccheus
was, becauſe otherwiſe, it had been
vnpoſsible for Zaccheus to come to his preſence:
for vnleſſe the Lorde vouchſafe to
come vnto vs, we cannot attaine to the preſence
of God. As no man might haue anie
acceſſe to King Aſſuerus,
                  Heſter. 4 except hee ſtretched
out his golden Scepter, ſo no man may
come to Chriſt, vnleſſe hee be called by the
golden ſcepter of his ſacred word.
               
                  Chriſt looked vp and ſaw Zaccheus, before
Zaccheus could looke down to behold him.
Thus doth the Lord preuent vs with his mercie,
whome hee might caſt off in his iuſtice:
and if hee perceiue in vs a willing minde
to come vnto him, he is content to come
firſt vnto vs. And like that good Father,
Luke,
                  Luke, 15 15. to beholde vs while wee are
yet a great way off, and to haue compaſsion
on vs.
               When Iobs three friends that came to viſite
him in his great calamitie,Iob. 2. 12. lift vp their

eyes a farre of, they knewe not Iob, becauſe
he was ſo ſore afflicted: but Chriſt who is the
myrror of true friendſhip, cannot ſo ſoone
forget his friendes, howſoeuer they be diſguiſed.
He knoweth his owne ſheepe where
ſoeuer hee ſeethe them.Iohn, 10, 
                  Iohn 10. whether
they be vnder the figge-tree as Nathaniell
was,Iohn. 1. or vppon the figge-tree as Zaccheus
was, he hath reſpect vnto them. And if they
haue a deſire to ſeeke, they ſhall be ſure to
find.Math. 7. 
                  Math, 7. And if they labour and are
heauie laden,Math. 11. he will refreſh them. Math.
11. Chriſt is nowe come to the place where
Zaccheus is to be called, and as Abraham,
Gene.
                  Gene. 22. 22. lift vp his eyes and ſaw in the buſhe
a Ramme that was to be ſacrificed, ſo Chriſt
lifting vp his eyes, ſawe in the tree, Zaccheus
the ſinner that was to bee conuerted. And
now beginnes the conuerſion of Zaccheus,
for now Chriſt beginnes to ſpeake vnto
him.
               
                  Zaccheus deſired onely to ſee Chriſt, but
now Chriſt calleth him by name, and offereth
hys owne ſelfe vnto him. This was
more then Zaccheus expected, and yet no
more then Chriſt vouchſafeth, namelie, to
giue more then is deſired. The ſicke of the
Palſey that asked health,Luke. 5. obtained alſo forgiueneſſe

of ſinnes. Salomon deſired wiſedome,1. Kings, 3, 12. 13.
and the Lord gaue him wiſedome &
aboundance of wealth beſide. Iacob asked
but meate and clothing,Gen. 28 20. and God made
him a great rich man. And Zaccheus deſired
onely to haue a ſight of Chriſt, and was
ſo happie as to entertaine him into hys
houſe.
               Thus the Lord that is rich in mercy to all
that call vppon him,Rom. 10. 12. pheſ. 2. 4. vſeth oftentimes to
giue more then wee aske: and hee that is
alwaies found of them that ſeeke him with
their whole heart,Ierem, 29. is founde alſo ſometime
of Gentiles that knew not God.Eſay, 65. 1. 
                  Eſa. 65. 1.
Let vs therefore that were ſometime ſinners
of the Gentiles,Rom. 10. 20 ſeeke the Lord as Zaccheus
did while he may be founde,Eſay, 55. and call
vppon him while hee is nigh. Hee will be
found of them that ſeeke him heartilie, and
is nigh to all them that call vppon him faithfully.
Pſalm.
                  Pſalm, 145, 145. 18.
               
                  Zaccheus come downe at once. Now Chriſt
begins to call Zaccheus from the tree to be
conuerted, as God called Adam from among
the trees of the Garden to be curſed.Gene, 3.
                  Gene, 3. Before, Zaccheus was too lowe, and
therefore was faine to climbe, but nowe he
is too high, and therefore hee muſt come

downe. And we (for the moſt part) are either
too high, or too low, too hot or too cold,
too quick, or too ſlothfull in the Lords buſines.
Somtime wee flock together to heare a
Sermon,Luke. 5 like the people Luke, 5, that preſſed
vpon Chriſt to heare the word: and anone
wee runne to ſee ſome pleaſant paſttime,
like the Athenians,
                  Acts. 17 whoſe eares alwaies
itched to heare ſome newes. Who
make more ſhewe of conſcience and religion,
then they that ſhewe themſelues moſt irreligious
and vnconſcionable? Who ſeemed
more confident and vertuous in Chriſt hys
cauſe then Peter?
                  Math, 26 and not long after, who
more trayterous and faint-harted.
               Many can ſaie with Peter, that they will
not ſtick to die before they will denye
Chriſt, but when it comes to the tryall they
are readie to abiure Chriſt and his religion,
before they will hazarde either life or lyuing.
               He that will come to Chriſt, muſt come
at once, without delay, for delays (ſpecially
in the matter of our ſaluation) are moſt
daungerous, & repentance may not be deferred.
We muſt make no tarrying to turne vnto
the Lord,
                  Eccle, 5, 7 
                  nor put off from day to day, leaſt
the wrath of the Lord breake forth ſudainelie

and we be deſtroyed in our ſecuritie and periſh
in the time of vengeance. When the Lord is
minded to doe vs good, he wil haue vs come
quickly like Ioſeph, Gene,
                  Gene. 45 45. 6. that in the
tyme of famine, would haue his Father Iacob
to come downe quickly vnto him, to ſoiourne
in Egypt, where there was ſome plentie
of foode.
               As the children of thys world are verie
nimble to worke wickednes, ſo the children
of light, ſhoulde be as nimble to followe
goodneſſe. Iudas was nimble to betraie
Chriſt, Iohn. 13. 27. and the badde debters,
Luke.
                  Ioh, 13, 27 16.Luke, 16 could ſitte downe quickly to misreckon
their creditor: ſo let vs come quicklie
to heare of Chriſt, that Chriſt may accept
of vs quicklie, let vs be nimble to make
our account before,Luke, 14. 28 that we doe not (lyke
the fooliſh builder) come ſhort of our reckoning.
               But why muſt Zaccheus come downe ſo
haſtily? euen to entertaine Chriſt into hys
houſe. For to day (ſayth Chriſt) I muſt abide
with thee. This was ioyfull newes to
little Zaccheus. Not long before, he wanted
meanes to ſee Chriſt, but now he hath opportunitie
to entertaine him into his houſe.
There was more humanitie in Chriſt then

in Zaccheus, for if Chriſt had not bidden
himſelfe to dinner, hee had not been bidden
for Zaccheus. So if Chriſt doe not offer
himſelfe vnto vs in his afflicted members,
hee may go long enough before we will offer
him any entertainment.Math, 25, 40 As often as the
poore craueth anie reliefe at our handes, let
vs imagine that Chriſt asketh ſomething of
vs: but as Zaccheus muſt entertaine him
preſently without delay, ſo let vs be readie
to helpe them preſently, becauſe they ſtand
in neede of preſent helpe. And as hee muſt
receiue Chriſt into his houſe, ſo wee muſt
make account to receiue his needie members
into our houſes:Luke, 16. And as the vniuſt
Steward procureth himſelfe friendes with
his maiſters goodes, ſo let vs make the poore
to be our friendes, by our beneficence and
bountie towards them, that ſo receiuing thē
(when they haue neede) into our earthly
houſes, they may receiue vs when we ſtand
in greateſt neede, into euerlaſting habitations.
               They that were inuited to the marriage,
Math.
                  Math. 22. 22. refuſed to come, but Chriſt is
content to come to Zaccheus houſe before
he was inuited. Wherein alſo, hee ſheweth
his great humilitie, in comming before hee

was requeſted, as they bewrayed their great
arrogancie, in refuſing to come beeing ſolemnely
bidden. It was a part of great humilitie,
that he that was moſt free from ſinne,
woulde vouchſafe to come into a ſinners
houſe: but it was a ſigne of greater humilitie,
that he would be wray his great neceſſitie, &
ſeeke for ſuccour at a ſinners hand.
               Alas poore humble Sauiour, who though
thou be Lord of heauen and earth, as thou art
the ſonne of God, yet as thou art the ſonne
of man, haſt not whereon to lay thy head,
Math.
                  Math. 8. 8. How iuſtly did thy Prophet Ieremy
wonder at thy humble pouerty, ſaying.
O thou hope of Iſraell, the Sauiour thereof in
the time of trouble,
                  Iere. 14. 
                  why art thou as a ſtraunger
in the land, or as one that paſſeth by to tarry for
a night? The ſonne of GOD vouchſafeth to
come and that vnrequeſted, to a ſinfull mans
houſe, a ſpeciall fauour: but hee diſdaineth
not to make his neceſsity knowne vnto him,
O ſtraunge humilitie!
               Heere therefore appeareth the ſinguler
humanitie and great humilitie of Chriſt to
ſinfull men; he offereth himſelfe to bee their
gueſt if he finde them willing to entertaine
him for their gueſt. And Zaccheus no doubt
was willing to entertaine him: for although

Chriſt heard not the voyce, yet he heard the
affection of Zaccheus inuiting him to dynner.
As therefore Zaccheus was willing to
receiue Chriſt into his houſe, ſo let vs be ready
to receiue him into our harts. For as Chriſt
ſayd to Zaccheus: This day I muſt abide at
thy houſe, ſo he ſaith to euery one of vs, This
day I muſt abide in your harts.
               
               Wherefore as the Prophet Dauid ſayth,Pſalm, 24
                  Open your gates that the King of glorie may
come in, ſo I ſay vnto you, Open your hartes
that the word of God may enter in. This daie
the word of God may abide in your harts,
for thys day the word is preached vnto you,
and who knoweth whether he ſhall liue to
heare it the next Saboth.Pſal, 95 
                  To day therefore if ye
will heare his voyce, harden not your hearts: as
did ye Iſraelites, leaſt if you harden your harts,
his voice be heard no more amōgſt you. This
day you may gather this heauenlie Manna,
as the Iſralites might gather theyr Manna
ſixe dayes together,Exod, 16 but to morrow (perhaps)
and ſixe dayes after you, may not gather
it, as on the ſeauenth day Manna might
not be found.
               The Lord graunt that you may gather
ſufficient foode for the ſuſtentation of your
ſoules, that as Elias the Prophet iournied in

the ſtrength of the meate that the Angell
brought him,1, Reg. 19. euen vnto Horeb the Mount
of God, ſo you in the ſtrength of this ſpirituall
meate which heere I bring you, may
be able to paſſe thorowe the daungerous
wayes of this troubleſome worlde, vnto
Gods holy Mountaine, the Hauen of all
happineſſe, whither hee bring vs that hath
deerely bought vs with his precious bloud,
euen Chriſt Ieſus the righteous: to whome
with the Father and the holy Ghoſt, three
perſons and one GOD, be giuen all glorie
and maieſtie, world without, end Amen.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   