
      
         
            
            
            THE VVEDDING Garment.
            
               ROM. 13. 14.
               Put yee on the Lorde Iesus Christ.
            
            
            LONDON. Printed for W. Wright.
            1590.
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            
               TO controll those false coppies of this Sermon, whiche were printed without my knowledge (patched as it seemeth) out of some borrowed notes, and to stoppe the Printing of it againe without my corrections, as it was intented, because they had gotte it licensed before, although vtterly vnwilling for some respects to haue it published, which made mee withstand their importunity so long, yet seeing more inconuenience then I

thought of, I suffered that which I could not hinder. And nowe hoping that it is Gods will to profit some by it, as Iaakob parted from Gen. 43. 11. 
               Beniamin, so that which must be let hee, and the Lorde geue thee a blessing with it.
         
      
      
         
            
            The Wedding Garment.
            
               Rom. 13. 14.
               Put yee on the Lorde Iesus Christ.
            
            
               I Haue chosen a Text which is the sum of the Bible. For al Scripture runneth vpon Christ like the title of a booke, Reu. 1. 8. because Christ is the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end of mans saluation, therefore hee is figured in the law, foretolde in the Prophets, and fulfilled in the Gospell. Some places point to his Diuinity, some to his humanity, some to his kingdome, some to his

Priesthoode, some to his Prophecy, some to his Conception, some to his birth, some to his life, some to his miracles, some to his passion, some to his resurrection; some to his Ascention, some to his glorification, all point vnto the Sauiour like Iohn Baptiste, Ioh. 1. 29. when hee sayde, This is the Lambe of God, which taketh away the sinnes of the world. Therefore learne Christ, and learne all. Now to teach vs how we shoulde heare, and how wee should loue, and how wee should feare, & how we should beleeue, & how we should follow Christ, that we may know when wee haue learned him. The Apostle saith, Put ye on the

Lorde Iesus Christ: as though this worde did containe all our duties vnto Christ, To put him on, (which seemes to bee the leuell of this phrase, if you mark how it commeth in, for before Paul saith, Cast away the workes 
               vers. 12. 
               of darknes, and put on the Armour of light. Then hee nameth the workes of darkenes, which wee shoulde cast off: viz. gluttony, drunkennes, strife, enuy, chambring, vers. 13. wantonnes, after hee nameth the armour of light, vers. 14. which we shoulde put on, and calleth it by the name of the giuer, The Lorde Iesus Christ. In sted of gluttony, and dronkennesse, and strife, and enuy, and chambering, and wantonnesse, and other

patches of the deuill, wherewith man clotheth himselfe Psal. 109. 18. as with a garment. The Apostle giueth him another garment, which hee calleth Iesus Christ. He doth not oppose vertue to vice, as one would thinke when hee had said, Cast off gluttonie, he should haue said, Put on sobriety, when hee had said, Cast off wantonnes, hee shoulde haue saide, Put on continency, when he had said, Cast off enuy, hee should haue said, Put on loue, but in steade of all vertues, hee commendeth the example of Christ for euery vertue, and opposeth it to euerie vice, as if he should say, Hee which thinketh onely to follow Christ, needeth not bee

lead by the hande from vertue to vertue, but his example will teach him what hee shall follow, and what hee shal flee better then all preceptes in the world. Therefore this is the best thought in euery action for a man to think, what Christ would do, which was made not onely redemption and saluation to saue vs, but wisedom and 1. Cor. 1. 30. Mat. 11. 29. Mar. 10. 21. example to guide vs. Therfore he saith, Learne of mee, and follow mee, as though we shoulde thinke before wee speake, whether hee woulde speake so, and consider before we doe whether hee woulde doe so, and doe all by his example as the scholler writeth by his copie, or else we do not learne of

him, but of our selues, and then wee goe awry, like a childe which scribleth without a rule. If thou resoluest to speak & doe no otherwise then Christ wold speake and doe himselfe, thou shalt bee sure to doe all thinges well, because thou followest a straight patterne. Therefore study what this meaneth. To put on Christ. It is a straunge speeche, Ioh. 3. 4. and a straunge Garment, they which cannot tell like Nichodemus, what Christ meaneth when he sayth, that we must be borne againe, cannot tell what Paul meaneth, when he sayth, Put on Christ: as if one man shoulde put on another. I think many heere may goe to the Apostle, as the Apostles went to

Christ, and aske, What is the Luk. 1. 9. Gal. 3. 27. parable? This phrase is read in none but Paul, which hath writtē most of Iustification by Christ: & therefore he vseth all phrases to expresse how wee should applye Christ vnto vs, and in no tearmes he hath shewed it more liuely then in thys phrase, Put on Christ. For it signifieth that Christe doeth couer vs like a Garment, and defende vs like an armoure. Hee hideth our vnrighteousnesse Rom. 4. 7. with his righteousnesse, he couereth our disobedience with his obediēce, hee shadoweth our death with his death, that the wrath of God cannot find vs, iudgement cannot spye vs, the curse cannot see vs, for

the garment which couereth & hideth vs. But as Iaakob got Gen. 37. 29. the blessing in the name and apparell of Esau his elder brother: so in the name and apparel of Christ our elder brother, we receiue the blessing, and are receued into fauour like Christ himselfe. For God saith not, This is my beloued Sonne which pleaseth mee, but In whome I am pleased: meaning Mar. 3. 17. that not onely Christ pleaseth God, but we please God in Christ, For Christ is our head. Therefore as one looking in the face of a man, doth like 1. Cor. 11. 3. Ephe. 5. 23. him straight, if he like his face: so God beholding vs in the face of Christ, doeth loue vs straight, because the face doth

please him: But Christ is not our head, vnles we be his mē
               bers: Christ is not out Garmēt, vnles we put him on: as Christ did put on our garment, when he cloathed himselfe with our flesh, & toke our infirmities, & bore our curse: So we must put on his garmēt, that is, his righteousnesse, his merites, and his death, which is as strange a vesture to vs, as our flesh was to him, & much adoe we haue to Reue. 3. 4. put it on, & when it is on, there is greate cunning to weare it cleanly & comely, from soyling and renting that such a precious garment be not taken from Mat. 22. 11. Mat. 7. 23. vs again. Therefore many seem to weare this Garment which shall be thrust from the banket,

because they weare it not: as those which will say when the Lord shal come to iudgement. We haue seene thee in our streetes, 
               Luk. 13. 26. 
               wee haue hearde thee in our sinagoges, we haue prophesied, we haue cast out deuils, wee haue wrought miracles by thy name: As though if any had put him on, or borne his marks, they were the men which were marked like his seruauntes, therefore who but they shall enter into heauen? Yet Christ sayth, I know 
               
                  
                     •
                  uk. 13. 27. 
               you not, there is their rewarde, I know you not,, as if he shoulde answere, you weare not my liuery, you weare not my cognisance for al your shewes, therefore depart from me: so he put them off because they had

not put him on: for thoughe they had seene his person, and hearde of his vertues, yet they had not faith to apply his mercies, his merits, his death and his righteousnesse vnto them, without which no man can put on Christ nor weare him. Faith is the hand which putteth him on. Faith taketh first his righteousnes & couereth hir vnrighteousnes, then she taketh his obedience, and couereth hir disobedience, then she taketh his patience, & couereth hir impatiency, then shee taketh his temperance, and couereth hir intemperancy, then she taketh his continency, and couereth her incontinency, then she taketh his constancy, and couereth her inconstancy, then shee

taketh his faith, & couereth hir diffidence, then she taketh his humility, and couereth her pride, then she taketh his loue, and couereth her rancor. And so taketh one roabe after another, and tricketh her selfe vntil she haue put on Iesus Christe, that is, vntill she appeare in the sight of God, like Iesus Christ, clothed with his merits & graces: that God hath no power to be angrie with her, because she cōmeth so like his Sonne. This is to put on Iesus Christ, as you shal see more liuely, whē you haue taken a view of the garment, for we are to speak of Christ the Garment, & of our putting it on. There bee many fashiōs of apparell, but they are too light, or too heauy, or too

sad, or too course, or too stale, and all weare out. At last the Apostle founde a fashion, that surpasseth them all: it is neuer out of fashion, meete for all seasons, fitte for all persons, and such a profitable weed, that the more it is worn, the fresher it is. What fashion haue you seene comparable to this? Is it not like the clothes of Dauids ambassadors, which 2. Sam. 10. 4. couered their vpper parts, but not their lower partes: nor like Sauls armour, which tyred Dauid 1. Sam. 17. 29. when he should fight with it: Nor like the counterfaite of 2. King. 14. 2. Ieroboams wife, which disguised her selfe to goe vnknowen, Ioh. 9. 4. 5. nor like the olde rags of the Gibeonites, which deceiued

Iosua, nor like the paultry sute of Michah which hee gaue once a yeare to his Leuite, nor like the gluttons flaunte which ietted in purple euerye day, nor like the light cloaths which Christ saide are in kings Iud. 17. 10. Mat. 11. 8. Courts, and make them lighter that were them. But it is like the garment of the highe priest, which had all the names Luk. 16. 19. Exod. 28. 21, of the Tribes of Israell written vpon his brest: so al the names of the faithfull are writtē in the brest of Christ, and registred in the boke of his merites. It is like Elias mantell which deuided Mal. 3. 16. 2. Kin. 2. 8. the waters: So he deuideth our sins & punishmentes that they which are clothed with Christ, are armed both against sin and

death. It is like the Garments Deut. 29. 5. of the Israelites in the wildernes, which did not weare: forty yeares together they wandered in the desert, and yet saith Moses, theyr shooes were not worne, but their apparell was as when they came out of Egypt: Psal. 136. 1. so the righteousnes of Christ doth last for euer, and his mercies are neuer worne out. As Mardochai shined in the kings robes before the people: Hest. 6. 11. So and more glorious are the faithfull in the robes of Christ before God. When Christ was transfigured vppon the mount. Mat. 17. 2. 
               Mat. saith, that his face shined like the Sun, & his clothes were as white as the light: So when wee are transfigured into the image

of Christ, we shall shine before other men like lights: & therefore Christs disciples are called Lights, because they were Mat. 5. 14. clothed with light, and shined to the worlde. Salomon was Mat. 6. 29. not so glorious in all his royaltie, nor the lillyes which are brauer then Salomon, as hee which is clothed with Christ, because the apparell vpon him is better then all the worlde about 2. Sam. 1. 14. him. Therefore if Dauid sayde, Weepe yee daughters of Israell for Saul which clothed you in purple. I may say, reioyce ye daughters of Israell, for Christ which hath clothed you with righteousnesse, as it were with a vesture, before you come to the banquet.
            
               
This is the wedding garment Math. 22. 12. without which no man can feast with the Lord. This garmēt is called an Armour, because Ephe. 6. 11. it defendeth vs from all the assalts of the diuel, the flesh the world, the heate of persecution, and the cold of defection. This Garment is called Light, because it is the beautie & glory of them which weare Rom. 13. 12. it. This Garment is called a Kingdome, because none but Kinges doe weare it, that is, Mat. 6. 33. they are inthroned in the kingdom of Christ, and made kings ouer the worlde, the flesh and sathan: which weare this Garment, like the haire Samson, 
               Iud. 16. 6. which while hee wore, hee was like a King, and all his

enemies had no power to hurte him.
            This Garment Paul hath sent vnto you, to goe before the king of heauen & earth, a holy Garment, a roiall Garment, an immaculate Garment, an euerlasting Garment: a Garment Rom. 5. 1. whereof euery hem is peace of conscience, euerie pleat is ioye in the holy Ghost, euery stitch Rom. 14. 17. is the remission of some sin, and saueth him which weareth it. Mat. 9. 20. If shee which touched the hem of Christs garmēt was healed, he which weareth the garment nay, hee which weareth Christ himselfe, shall not he be healed of all his sores, though he were wounded from head to foote? You neede not cloth him now

which sayth, When I was naked 
               Maih. 25. 43. 
               ye did not cloath mee, nor cast your garments in his way, as Math. 21. 8. they did, when hee came to Ierusalem, but take his garmentes & suffer your selues to be cloathed, Gen. 9. 23. Luk. 10. 34. This Sama ritane doth not signifie Christ, but yet may be resembled to Christ. as Noah did, to couer your nakednes. As the good Samaritane put him vppon his owne beast, which was spoiled with theeues, and bound vp his sores when hee was wounded: So Christ IESVS mounteth the faithfull vppon his righteousnesse, and healeth their sins, as though hee should couer them with his garments, whom the world, the flesh, and the diuell haue robbed of their Gen. 3. 1 garments, that is, the righteousnes which they had in Paradice

before the serpēt came: so if we put on Christ, wee are clothed with his obedience, wherby our wickednesse is couered: we are clothed with his merits, whereby our sinnes are forgiuen: we are clothed with his death, whereby our punishment is released: wee are clothed with his spirite, whereby our heartes are mollified and sanctified, and renued till wee resemble Christ himselfe. This is the Apostles meaning, to put on Christ, as it is vnfolded in Col. 3. 12. Where hee brigns Col. 3. 12. forth all the robes of Christ, and sortes them, & saith, put on mercy, put on meeknes, put on vers. 30. humilitie, put on patience, put on loue, all which before hee

called the new man. So that to put on Christ, is to put on the new man with all his vertues, vntill wee be renued to the image of Christ, which is like a new man amongst men. They which labour to bee righteous, and yet belieue that Christes righteousnesse shall saue them, haue put on Christ as Paule woulde haue them. Wee are not taught to put on Aungels, nor Saintes, nor the virgin Mary, nor Paule himself to couer our sinnes with their righteousnesse, as the Papistes doe, but wee are commaunded to put on Christ, & couer our sinnes with his riygteousnesse. The body hath many Garments, but the soule hath

one Garment. Euery cloute will couer our sores, but the finest silke will not couer our sinnes. Therfore when we seem braue to others, wee seeme foule to God, because his eie is vppon our sinnes, which lye naked, when all the rest is couered, vntill we put on Christ, and then wee heare that voice, Thy sinnes are couered. And then Math. 9. 2. Psal. 32. 1. we haue that blessing: Blessed is the man whose sinne is couered. So wee are clothed and blessed together. Yet this Garment is out of request, too roughe for some, too graue for others, too base for others. And therefore in steade of putting on Christ, they put him off, in sted of welcomming him, they discharge

him, like the Gadarens, that Luk. 8. 37: Math. 8. 34. they may keepe theyr swine, that is, their beastly pleasures, which hee would cast into the Math. 27. 35. sea: These are like the foolish souldiours which shoulde haue made Christ their Garment, and they cast lots vpon his garments, and diuided them, and so spoiled them. So doe the Papists deale with this Garment, they say it is not fit for them, & therefore they break it & mangle it, and peece it with rags of their owne inuentions: they say it is too light, and not able to beare off the stormes of death, and heate of hell, and therefore choose rather to make themselues Garmentes of theyr merites, and theyr masses, and

their penance, and their pardons, and their pilgrimages: like Adam and Eue, which made them selues coats of figleaues, Gen. 3. 7. and 21. which God destroyed againe, to shew that when men haue patched al their leaues of masses, of pardons, of pilgrimages, and satisfactions together, yet they will not couer their nakednes, nor keep of the heate of Gods wrath, but are like the curtall skitrs of Dauids 2. Sam. 10. 4. Ambassadours, which hid not their shame. Therefore when we may goe in our maisters attire, shall we scrubbe like beggars patched in our rags? Mine owne Garmentes defile me, saith Iob: Our owne Garments, Iob. 9. 31. our owne righteousnesse

defileth vs, for what garment, what righteousnes haue wee of our owne, but that Isa. 64. 6. which like a monstruous cloth, which had more neede to bee washed it selfe, then to wipe that which is foule. Therfore Christ must make vs garmentes, or else when our backs flant it like courtiers, our souls shall strippe like beggars. And the Diuels will sport themselues Gen. 9. 22. lyke Cham, to see our nakednesse.
            First, the Father made vs Gen, 3. 21. Garmentes in paradise, nowe the Sonne makes vs garments in the wildernesse: nay, the Sonne is made our Garment, as Paul sayth, Christ is made vnto 
               1. Cor. 1. 3
                     •
                  
                
               vs righteousnesse: that is,

Christes righreousnesse, must bee our Garment, or else wee shall bee ashamed when our righteousnes doth not reache to couer our nakednesse, but stil some part will peepe bare vntil hee cast his righteousnesse vppon it, and then all is couered. Sam. 17. 40. As Dauid needed no other armour against the Gyant, then a sling: so we need no other garment against sinne then Christ. There wāteth nothing but this to put it on.
            Now let vs see howe to put this Garment on. Many sumble about it, like children which had neede of one to put on their clothes. Some put on Christ as a cloake, which hangeth vppon their shoulders, and

couereth them when they goe abrode to be seene of men: they can cast on the cloke of holynes & seeme for a while as holy as the best, but so soone as they come home, the cloake goeth of, and the man is as hee was, whose vizarde was better then his face. Thus hypocrites put on Christ, as many retaine vnto noble men, not to doe them any seruice, but to haue their countenance. Many put on Christ like a hat, which goeth off to euerie one which meetes them: so euery temptation which meets thē, makes them forget what they hearde, what they promised, what they resolued, & change their way, as though they had not

repented at all. So the common people like your selues, put on Christ, they are zealous so long as they are in the Church, and beate their breastes, and cast vp Luke. 18. 11. their eyes, like the Publican, when they heare a sentence which moues them, as though they wold do no more against that saying while they liue. But the next busines putteth all out of minde, till they come to the Church againe. Some put on Christ as a gloue, which coueteth but the hand, so they put on the face of Christ, or the tong of Christ, but their hands worke, and their feete walke as they did before. So many professors of Religion put on Christ, which call but for discipline

and reformation, that they might get a name of zeale and sinceritie, to couer some fault, which they would not be suspected of. Thus euerie man woulde couer himselfe with Christe, but they haue not the skill, or they haue not the will to put him on. What will you doe then? Though the Garment be neuer so good yet it is not good to them that do not weare it. For what profite haue wee of the garmentes which wee neuer weare, they neither keepe vs from heat nor colde. Therefore Paul doth not bring you a Garment to laye by you for the mothes, but he bids you put it on. Heere is the cunning now in putting it

on. If Paul had taught vs this, then you would hearken vnto him. Well, you shall heare what Paul saith to the putting of it on. First (saith Paul) you must cast away the workes of darkenes, und then put on the Armour of light. First you must vers. 12. put off, and then put on: As the Eagles feathers will not lie with any other feathers, but consume them, which lie with them: So the Wedding Garment will not weare with filthy garmentes, but scornes like the Arke, that Dagon shoulde stand by it. If any man may 1. Sam. 5. 8. not weare womens apparel for lightnesse, may hee weare the Deut. 22. 5. diuells apparell, and cloath himselfe with pride, with coueteousnes,

with enuy, with hipocrisie, with vncleannes, and when he is like the diuell sit at Gods table? No man saith Mat. 2. 21. Christ, patcheth a new peece to an olde garment, & wilt thou patch an olde peece to a newe Leuit. 19. 19. garment? God forbad his people to weare linsey wolsey, because it was a sign of inconstancy, but this is inconstancy it selfe. Hee doeth not put on Reu: 3. 15. Ioh. 19. 23. Christ, but putteth off Christ, and putteth on Belial, which fashions himselfe to God and the worlde too. As Christs coat was without seame, so they must bee without staine, that weare it. For when a man putteth on faire clothes, hee maketh himselfe faire too, and auoideth

euery foule thing, least it should foule his clothes: So must hee which putteth on Christ, for the finest garment is soonest stayned. Therefore when thou hast put on this Garment, thou must washe thy selfe, and pick thy way, and choose thy workes, and handle nothing that is foule for marring thy clothes, that is, thou must not thinke as thou didst, nor speake as thou diddest, nor liue as thou didst, but remember that thou hast changed thy maister, and serue him with whom thou art bound. For if God & the diuell could not agree Iud. 9. vpon Moses body, for one to haue one part, and the other another part, but God would

haue all. Much lesse will God agree that the diuel shuld haue part of the soule, which would not yeeld him part of the body. Thus haue you hearde what you must put off: nowe heare how Christ must bee put on. As the Angel taught Iohn to Reu. 10. 9. reade the booke when hee bad him eate it: So we must put on Christ, as if wee did eate him, not as the Papists doe in their Masse, but as the meate is turned into the substance of the body, and goeth through euery part of man: So Christ & his worde should goe from part to part, from eare to heart, from heart to mouth, from mouth to hand, till wee be of one nature with them, that they bee the

very substance of our thoughts & speeches, and actions, as the meate is of our bodies. This is to eate Christ and his word, or els wee doe not eate them, but chew them, and when our tast is satisfied, spue them out againe. Thus wee must put on Christ, for the word signifyeth so to put him on, as if thou wouldest put him in, that hee Ephe. 3. 30. may bee one with thee, and thou with him, as it were in a body toherher. As hee hath put on all our infirmities, so we must put on all his graces, not halfe on, but all on, and claspe him to vs, and girde him about vs, and weare him euen as wee weare our skinne, which is alway about vs. Then there shall

be no neede of wiers, nor curls, nor periwigges, the husbandes shall not force to racke theyr rentes nor inhance their fines, nor sell their landes, to decke 2. King. 2. 13. their wiues. But as the poore mantle of Eliah seemed better to Elisha then all the robes of Salomon, so the wedding Garment shall seeme better then all the flants of vanity, and put euery fashion out of fashion, which is not modest and comly like it selfe. If you will knowe farther howe to put on Christ, you shall see how your text will Catechise you (in three names of God) Lorde, Iesus, Christ. The Apostle seemeth to spell out the way vnto vs, how wee should wear this garment. First

we must put him on as Lorde, then we must put him on as Iesus: Lastly, we must put him on as Christ. Thou must put him on as Lord, that is, thy ruler to command thee, and thy Tutor to gouerne thee, thy maister to direct thee, thou must bee no mans seruant but his, take no Act. 4. 19. mans part against him, but say with the Apostle, Whether is it meete to obey God or you? Thou must put him on as Iesus, that is, thy Sauiour, in whom thou trustest, thy protector on whō thou dependest, thy redeemer in whom thou belieuest. Thou must not looke for thy saluation Iosua hath the likê name, but not frō God nor to that end. from Angell, nor Saint, nor any thing beside him. For the name of Iesus signifyeth a Sauiour,

and is giuen to none but him, and he is not onely called the Sauiour, but the saluation, in the song of Simeon, to shew Luke. 1. 69. that hee is the onely Sauiour, for there may bee many Sauiours, Iud. 3. 9. but there can bee but one saluation: as there may bee many tortures, and yet but one death. Therefore when hee is called the saluation, it implyeth that there is no Sauiour beside him. Thou must put him on as Christe, that is, a Kinge to rule, a Prophet to Luke. 3. 33 teach, a Priest to praye, and sacrifice, and pacify the wrath of Act. 3. 22. God for thee. For this name Heb. 8. 3, Christ doth signifye that hee Mat. 1. 16. was annointed a King, a Priest and a Prophet: for man, a king Heb. 1. 8.
               
to rule him, a Priest to offer sacrifice for him, a Prophet to teach him, so that hee putteth on Christ as Lord, which worshipeth none but him. He putteth on Christ as Iesus which beleeueth in none but him, and hee putteth on Christ as Christ which worshippeth none but Cal. 3. 27. him, beleeueth in none but him and heareth none but him. You put on Christe first, when you are baptised: then you were sealed and consecrated to his seruice: so soone as you came into the worlde, you vowed to renounce the worlde, and follow God: howe many haue put on Christ so, and since haue put him off againe, which haue broken the first promise that euer

they made, & were neuer Rom. 6. 3. faithfull to God since. You put on Christ againe, when you are called and sanctifyed, that is, Ephe. 4. 22. when you cast off the old man, which is corrupt with the lusts of the flesh, the pride of life, & the cares of this world, and put on the new man, which is regenerate in righteousnes & holines to the image of Christ, or likenes of Adam in his innocē
               cy, for to put on the new man, is to become a new man, as if thou were borne againe and conceiued of the holy Ghost. Rom. 12. 2. Iob. 29. 14. Of this Iob speaketh when hee sayth, I put on iustice, and it couereth mee. You put on Christ again, when you receiue his holy 1. Cor. 10. 16. Sacrament, & are partakers

of his body and bloud, that is, the merits of his obedience & passion by faith, which heareth him, as if hee did see him, and seeth him, as if shee did feele him, and feeleth him, as if shee did tast him, and tasteth him as if she did digest him, thē Christ is become yours, and dwelleth in you, and feedeth you with his grace to eternall life, as the bread and wine sustaineth the life present, Lastly, when you haue put on Christe in these three sortes, which is your garment for this world, after you Phil. 3. 21. 1. Cor. 15. 49. shall put on Christ in heauen, and be clothed with his glory, and that shall bee your last vesture, which shall neuer weare out.
            
               
Thus haue you hearde what is meant by putting on Christ, first to cloth our selues with righteousnes and holines like Christ, and then because our owne righteousnesse is too short to couer our armes, and legges, and thighs of sinne, but still some bare place will peere out and shame vs in the sight of God: therefore we must borrow Christs garments, as Iacob Gen. 27. 15. did his brothers, and couer our selues with his righteousnesse, that is, beleeue that his righteousnes shall supplie our vnrighteousnes, and his sufferings shall stand for our sufferings, because hee came to fulfill the lawe, and beare the curse, & satisfie his Father for vs, that all

which beleeue in him might not die, but haue life euerlasting. Ioh. 3. 16.
            
            Now I haue shewed you this goodly Garmēt, you must goe to another to helpe you to put it on, and none can put this Garment vppon you, but hee which is the Garment, the Lord Iesus Christ. Therefore to him let vs pray.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   