
      
         
            
            
            A
DESCRIPTION
of New England:
OR
THE OBSERVATIONS, AND
diſcoueries, of Captain Iohn Smith (Admirall
of that Country) in the North of America, in the year
of our Lord 1614: with the ſucceſſe of ſixe Ships,
that went the next yeare 1615; and the
accidents be fell him among the
French men of warre: With the proofe of the preſent benefit this
Countrey affoords: whither this preſent yeare,
1616, eight voluntary Ships are gone
to make further tryall.
            
               At LONDON
Printed by Humfrey Lownes, for Robert Clerke; and
are to be ſould at his houſe called the Lodge,
in Chancery lane, ouer againſt Lincolnes
Inne. 1616.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE HIGH
HOPEFVL CHARLES,
Prince of Great Britaine.
            
               SIR:
            
            
               SO fauourable was your moſt
renowned and memorable
Brother, Prince Henry, to all
generous deſignes; that in my
diſcouery of Virginia, I preſumed
to call two nameleſſe
Headlands after my Soueraignes
heires, Cape Henry, and Cape Charles.
Since then, it beeing my chance to range ſome other
parts of America, whereof I heere preſent
your Highneſs the deſcription in a Map; my humble
ſute is, you would pleaſe to change their Barbarous
names, for ſuch Engliſh, as Poſterity may
ſay, Prince Charles was their Godfather. What here
in this relation I promiſe my Countrey, let mee

liue or die the ſlaue of ſcorne & infamy, if (hauing
meanes) I make it not apparent; pleaſe God to
bleſſe me but from ſuch accidents as are beyond
my power and reaſon to preuent. For my labours,
I deſire but ſuch conditions as were promiſed me
out of the gaines; and that your Highneſſe
would daigne to grace this Work, by
your Princely and fauourable
reſpect vnto it, and
know mee
to be
            
               Your Highneſſe true
and faithfull ſeruant,
Iohn Smith.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT HOnourable
and worthy Lords,
Knights, & Gentlemen, of his Maieſties
Councell, for all Plantations
and diſcoueries; eſpecially, of
New England.
            
               SEeing the deedes of the moſt iuſt,
and the writings of the most wiſe,
not onely of men, but of God himſelfe,
haue beene diuerſly traduced
by variable iudgements of the
Times opinioniſts; what ſhall ſuch
an ignorant as I expect? Yet repoſing my ſelfe on your
fauours, I preſent this rude diſcourſe, to the worldes
conſtruction; though I am perſwaded, that few do think
there may be had from New England Staple commodities,
well worth 3 or 400000 pound a yeare, with
ſo ſmall charge, and ſuch facilitie, as this diſcourſe will
acquaint you. But, leſt your Honours, that know mee
not, ſhould thinke I goe by heareſay or affection; I intreat
your pardons to ſay thus much of my ſelfe: Neere
twice nine yeares, I haue beene taught by lamentable
experience, aſwell in Europe and Aſia, as Affrick,
and America, ſuch honeſt aduentures as the chance
of warre doth cast vpon poore Souldiers. So that, if

I bee not able to iudge of what I haue ſeene, contriued,
and done; it is not the fault either of my eyes, or foure
quarters. And theſe nine yeares, I haue bent my endeauours
to finde a ſure foundation to begin theſe enſuing
protects: which though I neuer ſo plainely and ſeriouſly
propound; yet it reſteth in God, and you▪ ſtill to
diſpoſe of. Not doubting but your goodneſſe will pardon
my rudeneſſe, and ponder errours in the balance of good
will▪ No more: but ſacring all my beſt abilities to the
good of my Prince, and Countrey, and ſubmitting
my ſelfe to the exquiſit iudgements of
your renowned vertue, I
euer reſt
            
               Your Honours, in
all honeſt ſeruice,
I. S.
            
         
         
            
            To the right VVorſhipfull Aduenturers
for the Countrey of New England,
in the Cities of London, Briſtow, Exceter,
Plimouth, Dartmouth, Baſtable, Totneys,
&c. and in all other Cities and
Ports, in the Kingdome
of England.
            
               IF the little Ant, & the ſillie Bee
ſeek by their diligence the good
of their Commonwealth; much
more ought Man. If they puniſh
the drones and ſting them
ſteales their labour; then blame
not Man. Little hony hath that hiue, where there
are more Drones then Bees: and miſerable is that
Land, where more are idle then well imployed.
If the indeauours of thoſe vermin be acceptable,
I hope mine may be excuſeable; Though I confeſſe
it were more proper for mee, To be doing
what I ſay, then writing what I knowe. Had I returned
rich, I could not haue erred: Now hauing
onely ſuch fiſh as came to my net, I muſt be taxed.
But, I would my taxers were as ready to aduenture
their purſe
                  •
               , as I, purſe, life, and all I haue:
or as diligent to furniſh the charge, as I know they
are vigilant to crop the fruits of my labours. Then
would I not doubt (did God pleaſe I might ſafely
arriue in New England, and ſafely returne) but to

performe ſomewhat more then I haue promiſed,
& approue my words by deeds, according to proportion.
            I am not the firſt hath beene betrayed by Pirats:
And foure men of warre, prouided as they
were, had beene ſufficient to haue taken Sampſon,
Hercules, and Alexander the great, no other way
furniſht then I was. I knowe not what aſſurance
any haue do paſſe the Seas, Not to bee ſubiect to
caſualty as well as my ſelfe: but leaſt this diſaſter
may hinder my proceedings, or ill will (by rumour)
the behoofefull worke I pretend; I haue
writ this little: which I did thinke to haue concealed
from any publike vſe, till I had made my
returnes ſpeake as much, as my pen now doth.
            But becauſe I ſpeake ſo much of fiſhing, if any
take mee for ſuch a deuote fiſher, as I dreame of
nought elſe, they miſtake mee. I know a ring of
golde from a graine of barley, aſwell as a goldeſmith:
and nothing is there to bee had which fiſhing
doth hinder, but furder vs to obtaine. Now
for that I haue made knowne vnto you a fit place
for plantation, limited within the bounds of your
Patent and Commiſsion; hauing alſo receiued
meanes, power, and authority by your directions,
to plant there a Colony, and make further ſearch,
and diſcouery in thoſe parts there yet vnknowne:
Conſidering, withall, firſt thoſe of his Maieſties
Councell, then thoſe Cities aboue named, and
diuerſe others that haue beene moued to lend

their aſsiſtance to ſo great a worke, doe expect (eſpecially
the aduenturers) the true relation or euent
of my proceedings which I heare are ſo abuſed; I
am inforced for all theſe reſpects, rather to expoſe
my imbecillitie to contempt, by the teſtimonie of
theſe rude lines, then all ſhould condemne
me for ſo bad a Factor, as could neither
giue reaſon nor account of
my actions and
deſignes.
            
               Yours to command,
Iohn Smith.
            
         
         
            
            In the deſerued Honour of the Author,
Captaine Iohn Smith,
and his Worke.
            DAmn'd Enuie is a ſp'rite, that euer haunts
            Beaſts, miſ-nam'd Men; Cowards or Ignorants.
            But, onely ſuch ſhee followes, whoſe deere WORTH
            (Maugre her malice) ſets their glorie forth.
            If this faire Ouerture, then, take not; It
            Is Enuie's ſpight (dear friend) in men-of-wit;
            Or Feare, leſt morſels, which our mouthes poſſeſſe,
            Might fall from thence; or elſetis Sottiſhneſſe.
            
            If either; (I hope neither) thee they raiſe;
            ThyHioderers. Letters are as Letters in thy praiſe;
            Who, by their vice, improue (when they reprooue)
            
            Thy vertue; ſo, in hate, procure thee Loue.
            Then, On firme Worth: this Monument I frame;
            Scorning for any Smith to sorge ſuch fame.
            
            
               Io: Dauies, Heref:
               
            
         
         
            
            To his worthy Captaine the Author.
            THat which wee call the ſubiect of all Storie,
            Is Truth, which in this Worke of thine giues glorie
            To all that tho-haſt done. Then, ſcorne the ſpight
            of Enuie; which doth no mans merits right.
            My ſword may helpe the reſt: my Pen no more
            Can doe, but this; I'aue ſaid enough before.
            
               Your ſometime ſouldier,
I. Codrinton, now Templer.
            
         
         
            To my Worthy friend and Coſon,
Captaine Iohn Smith.
            It ouer-ioyes my heart, when as thy Words
            Of theſe deſignes, with deeds I doe compare.
            Heere is a Booke, ſuch worthy truth affords,
            None ſhould the due deſert there of impare;
            Sith thou, the man, deſeruing of theſe Ages,
            Much paine haſt ta'en for this our Kingdoms good,
            In Climes vnknowne, Mongſt Turks and Saluages,
            T'inlarge our bounds; though with thy loſſe of blood.
            Hence damn'd Detraction: ſtand not in our way.
            Enuie, it ſelfe, will not the Truth gaineſay.
            
               N. Smith.
            
         
         
            
            To that worthy and generous Gentleman,
my verie good friend,
Captaine Smith.
            MAy Fate thy Proiect proſper, that thy name
            May be eterniſed with liuing fame:
            Though ſoule Detraction Honour would peruert,
            And Enuie euer waits vpon deſert:
            In ſpight of Pelias, when his hate lies colde,
            Returne as Iaſon with a ſleece of Golde.
            Then after-ages ſhall record thy praiſe,
            That a New England to this Ile didſt raiſe:
            And when thou dy'ſt (as all that liue muſt die)
            Thy fame liue heere; thou, with Eternitie.
            
               R: Gunnell.
            
         
         
            To his friend Cap: Smith, vpon his
deſcription of New England.
            SIr; your Relations I haue read: which ſhewe,
            Ther's reaſon I ſhould honour them and you:
            
            And if their meaning I haue vnderſtood,
            I dare to cenſure, thus: Your Proiect's good;
            And may (if follow'd) doubtleſſe quit the paine,
            With honour, pleaſure and a trebble gaine;
            Beſide the benefit that ſhall ariſe
            To make more happie our Poſterities.
            
               
For would we daigne to ſpare, though 'twere no more
            Then what o're-filles, and ſurfets vs in ſtore,
            To order Nature's fruitfulneſſe a while
            In that rude Garden, you New England ſtile;
            With preſent good, ther's hope in after-daies
            Thence to repaire what Time and Pride decaies
            In this rich kingdome. And the ſpatious Weſt
            
            Beeing ſtill more with Engliſh blood poſſeſt,
            The Proud Iberians ſhall not rule thoſe Seas,
            To checke our ſhips from ſayling where they pleaſe;
            Nor future times make any forraine power
            Become ſo great to force a bound to Our.
            
            Much good my minde fore-tels would follow hence
            With little labour, and with leſſe expence.
            Thriue therefore thy Deſigne, who ere enuie:
            
               England may ioy in England's Colony,
            
               Virginia ſeeke her Virgine ſiſters good,
            Be bleſſed in ſuch happie neighbourhood:
            Or, what-ſoere Fate pleaſeth to permit,
            Be thou ſtill honor'd for firſt moouing it.
            
               George Wither,
 è ſocietate Lincol.
            
         
         
            
            In the deſerued honour of my honeſt
and worthie Captaine, Iohn Smith,
and his Worke.
            CAptaine and friends when I peruſe thy booke
            (With Iudgements eyes) into thy heart I looke:
            And there I finde (what ſometimes-Albyon) knew)
            A Souldier, to his Countries-honour, true.
            Some fight for wealth; and ſome for emptie praiſe;
            
            But thou alone thy Countries Fame to raiſe.
            With due diſcretion, and vndanted heart,
            
            I (oft) ſo well haue ſeene thee act thy Part
            In deepeſt plunge of hard extreamitie,
            As forc't the troups of proudeſt foes to flie.
            Though men of greater Ranke and leſſe deſert
            
            Would Piſh-away thy Praiſe, it can not ſtart
            From the true Owner: for, all good-mens tongues
            Shall keepe the ſame. To them that Part belongs.
            If, then, Wit, Courage, and Succeſſe ſhould get
            Thee Fame; the Muſe for that is in thy debt:
            
            A part whereof (leaſt able though I bee)
            Thus heere I doe diſburſe, to honor Thee.
            
            
               Rawly Croſhaw.
            
         
         
            
            Michael Phettiplace, William Phettiplace, &
Richard Wiſfing, Gentlemen, and
Souldiers vnder Captaine Smiths
Command: In his deſerued
honor for his Worke,
and worth.
            VVHy may not we in this Worke haue our Mite,
            That had our ſhare in each black day and night,
            When thou Virginia foildſt, yet kept'ſt vnſtaind;
            And held'ſt the King of Paſpeheh enchaind.
            Thou all alone this Saluage ſterne didſt take.
            
               Pamunkes king wee ſaw thee captiue make
            Among ſeauen hundred of his ſtouteſt men,
            To murther thee and vs reſolued; when
            Faſt by the hand thou ledſt this Saluage grim,
            Thy Piſtoll at his breaſt to gouerne him:
            Which did infuſe ſuch awe in all the reſt
            (Sith their drad Soueraigne thou had'ſt ſo diſtreſt)
            That thou and wee (poore ſixteene) ſafe retir'd
            Vnto our helpleſſe ships. Thou (thus admir'd)
            Didſt make proud Powhatan, his ſubiects ſend
            To lames his Towne, thy cenſure to attend:
            And all Virginia's Lords, and pettie Kings,
            Aw'd by thy vertue, crouch, and Preſents brings
            To gaine thy grace; ſo dreaded thou haſt beene:
            And yet a heart more milde is ſeldome ſeene;
            So, making Valour Vertue, really;
            Who haſt nought in thee counterfet, or ſlie;
            
               
If in the ſleight bee not the trueſt art,
            That makes men famouſed for faire deſert.
            Who ſaith of thee, this ſauors of vaine-glorie,
            Miſtakes both thee and vs, and this true ſtorie.
            If it bee ill in Thee, ſo well to doe;
            Then, is it ill in Vs, to praiſe thee too.
            But, if the firſt bee well done; it is well,
            To ſay it doth (if ſo it doth) excell!
            Praiſe is the guerdon of each deere deſert,
            Making the praiſed act the praiſed part
            With more alacritie: Honours Spurre is Praiſe;
            
            Without which, it (regardleſſe) ſoone decaies.
            And for this paines of thine wee praiſe thee rather,
            That future Times may know who was the father
            Of this rare Worke (New England) which may bring
            Praiſe to thy God, and profit to thy King.
         
      
      
         
            
            A DESCRIPTION OF
New-England, by Captaine
Iohn Smith.
            
               IN the moneth of Aprill,My firſt voyage to new-England. 1614.
with two Ships from London, of
a few Marchants, I chanced to arriue
in New-England, a parte of
Ameryca, at the Ile of Monahiggan,
in 43 of Northerly latitude:
our plot was there to take Whales and make
tryalls of a Myne of Gold and Copper. If thoſe failed,
Fiſh and Furres was then our refuge, to make
our ſelues ſauers howſoeuer: we found this Whalefiſhing
a coſtly concluſion: we ſaw many, and ſpent
much time in chaſing them; but could not kill any:
They beeing a kinde of Iubartes, and not the
Whale that yeeldes Finnes and Oyle as wee expected.
For our Golde, it was rather the Maſters deuice
to get a voyage that proiected it, then any
knowledge hee had at all of any ſuch matter. Fiſh
& Furres was now our guard: & by our late arriual,
and long lingring about the Whale, the prime of
both thoſe ſeaſons were paſt ere wee perceiued it;
we thinking that their ſeaſons ſerued at all times:

but wee found it otherwiſe; for, by the midſt
of Iune, the fiſhing failed. Yet in Iuly and Auguſt
ſome was taken, but not ſufficient to defray ſo great
a charge as our ſtay required. Of dry fiſh we made
about 40000. of Cor fiſh about 7000. Whileſt
the ſailers fiſhed, my ſelfe with eight or nine others
of them might beſt bee ſpared; Ranging the coaſt
in a ſmall boat, wee got for trifles neer 1100 Beuer
ſkinnes, 100 Martins, and neer as many Otters;
and the moſt of them within the diſtance of twenty
leagues. We ranged the Coaſt both Eaſt and Weſt
much furder; but Eaſtwards our commodities were
not eſteemed, they were ſo neare the French who affords
them better: and right againſt vs in the Main
was a Ship of Sir Frances Popphames, that had there
ſuch acquaintance, hauing many yeares vſed onely
that porte, that the moſt parte there was had by
him. And 40 leagues weſtwards were two French
Ships, that had made there a great voyage by trade,
during the time wee tryed thoſe concluſions, not
knowing the Coaſt, nor Saluages habitation. With
theſe Furres, the Traine, and Cor-fiſh I returned
for England in the Bark: where within ſix monthes
after our departure from the Downes, we ſafe arriued
back. The beſt of this fiſh was ſolde for fiue pound
the hundreth, the reſt by ill vſage betwixt three
pound and fifty ſhillings. The other Ship ſtaied to
fit herſelfe for Spaine with the dry fiſh which was
ſould, by the Sailers reporte that returned, at forty
ryalls the quintall, each hundred weighing two
quintalls and a halfe.
            
               
               New England is that part of America in the Ocean
Sea oppoſite to Noua Albyon in the South
Sea;The ſituation of New England. diſcouered by the moſt memorable Sir Francis
Drake in his voyage about the worlde. In regarde
whereto this is ſtiled New England, beeing
in the ſame latitude. New France, off it, is Northward:
Southwardes is Virginia, and all the adioyning
Continent, with New Granado, New Spain,
New Andoloſia and the Weſt Indies. Now becauſe
I haue beene ſo oft aſked ſuch ſtrange queſtions, of
the goodneſſe and greatneſſe of thoſe ſpatious
Tracts of land, how they can bee thus long vnknown,
or nor poſſeſſed by the Spaniard, and many
ſuch like demands; I intreat your pardons, if
I chance to be too plaine, or tedious in relating
my knowledge for plaine mens ſatiſfaction.
            
               Florida is the next adioyning to the Indes,
               Notes of Florida. which
vnproſperously was attempted to bee planted by
the French. A Country farre bigger then England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, yet little knowne to
any Chriſtian, but by the wonderful endeuours of
Ferdinando de Soto a valiant Spaniard: whoſe writings
in this age is the beſt guide knowne to ſearch
thoſe parts.
            
               Virginia is no Ile (as many doe imagine) but
part of the Continent adioyning to Florida;
               Notes of Virginia. whoſe
bounds may be ſtretched to the magnitude thereof
without offence to any Chriſtian inhabitant.
For from the degrees of 30. to 45. his Maieſtie
hath granted his Letters parents, the Coaſt extending
South-weſt and North-eaſt aboute 1500

miles; but to follow it aboard, the ſhore may well
be 2000. at the leaſt: of which, 20. miles is the
moſt giues entrance into the Bay of Chiſapeak,
where is the London plantation: within which is
a Country (as you may perceiue by the deſcription
in a Booke and Map printed in my name of that
little I there diſcouered) may well ſuffice 300000
people to inhabit. And Southward adioyneth
that part diſcouered at the charge of Sir Walter
Rawley, by Sir Ralph Lane, and that learned Mathematician
Mr. Thomas Heryot. Northward ſix or
ſeauen degrees is the Riuer Sadagahock, where was
planted the Weſterne Colony, by that Honourable
Patrone of vertue Sir Iohn Poppham Lord chief
Iuſtice of England. Ther is alſo a relation printed
by Captaine Bartholomew Goſnould, of Elizabeths
Iles: and an other by Captaine Waymoth, of
Pemmaquid. From all theſe diligent obſeruers, poſterity
may be bettered by the fruits of their labours.
But for diuers others that long before and
ſince haue ranged thoſe parts, within a kenning
ſometimes of the ſhore, ſome touching in one
place ſome in another, I muſt entreat them pardon
me for omitting them; or if I offend in ſaying
that their true deſcriptions are concealed, or neuer
well obſerued, or died with the Authors: ſo that
the Coaſt is yet ſtill but euen as a Coaſt vnknowne
and vndiſcouered. I haue had ſix or ſeauen ſeuerall
plots of thoſe Northren parts, ſo vnlike each to
other, and moſt ſodiffering from any true proportion,
or reſemblance of the Countrey, as they did

mee no more good, then ſo much waſte paper,
though they coſt me more. It may be it was not
my chance to ſee the beſt; but leaſt others may be
deceiued as I was, or through dangerous ignorance
hazard themſelues as I did, I haue drawen a
Map from Point to Point, Ile to Ile, and Harbour
to Harbour, with the Soundings, Sands, Rocks, &
Land-marks as I paſſed cloſe aboard the Shore in a
little Boat; although there bemany things to bee
obſerued which the haſte of other affaires did cauſe
me omit: for, being ſent more to get preſent commodities,
then knowledge by diſcoueries for any
future good, I had not power to ſearch as I would:
yet it will ſerue to direct any ſhall goe that waies,
to ſafe Harbours and the Saluages habitations:
What marchandize and commodities for their labour
they may finde, this following diſcourse ſhall
plainely demonſtrate.
            Thus you may ſee, of this 2000. miles more
then halfe is yet vnknowne to any purpoſe: no not
ſo much as the borders of the Sea are yet certainly
diſcouered. As for the goodnes and true ſubſtances
of the Land, wee are for moſt part yet altogether
ignorant of them, vnleſſe it bee thoſe parts about
the Bay of Chiſapeack and Sagadahock: but
onely here and there wee touched or haue ſeene a
little the edges of thoſe large dominions, which
doe ſtretch themſelues into the Maine, God doth
know how many thouſand miles; whereof we can
yet no more iudge, then a ſtranger that ſaileth betwixt
England and France can deſcribe the Harbors

and dangers by landing here or there in ſome Riuer
or Bay, tell thereby the goodneſſe and ſubſtances
of Spaine, Italy, Germany, Bohemia, Hungaria &
the reſt. By this you may perceiue how much they
erre, that think euery one wch hath bin at Virginia
vnderſtandeth or knowes what Virginia is: Or that
the Spaniards know one halfe quarter of thoſe Territories
they poſſeſſe; no, not ſo much as the true
circumference of Terra Incognita, whoſe large dominions
may equalize the greatneſſe and goodnes
of America, for any thing yet known. It is ſtrange
with what ſmall power hee hath raigned in the
East Indes; and few will vnderſtand the truth of
his ſtrength in America: where he hauing ſo much
to keepe with ſuch a pampered force, they neede
not greatly feare his furie, in the Bermudas,
Virginia, New France, or New England; beyond
whoſe bounds America doth ſtretch many
thouſand miles: into the frozen partes whereof
one Maſter Hutſon an Engliſh Mariner did make
the greateſt diſcouerie of any Chriſtian I knowe
of, where he vnfortunately died. For Affrica, had
not the induſtrious Portugales ranged her vnknowne
parts, who would haue ſought for wealth
among thoſe fryed Regions of blacke brutiſh Negers,
where not withſtanding all the wealth and admirable
aduentures & endeauours more then 140
yeares, they knowe not one third of thoſe blacke
habitations. But it is not a worke for euery one, to
manage ſuch an affaire as makes a diſcouerie, and
plants a Colony: It requires all the beſt parts of

Art, Iudgement, Courage, Honeſty, Cōstancy, Diligence
and Induſtrie, to doe but neere well. Some
are more proper for one thing then another; and
therein are to be imployed: and nothing breedes
more confuſion then miſplacing and miſimploying
men in their vndertakings. Columbus, Cortez,
Pitzara, Soto, Magellanes, and the reſt ſerued more
then a prentiſhip to learne how to begin their moſt
memorable attempts in the West Indes: which to
the wonder of all ages ſuccesfully they effected,
when many hundreds of others farre aboue them
in the worlds opinion, beeing inſtructed but by relation,
came to ſhame and confuſion in actions of
ſmall moment, who doubtleſſe in other matters,
were both wiſe, diſcreet, generous, and couragious.
I ſay not this to detract any thing from their
incomparable merits, but to anſwer thoſe queſtionleſſe
queſtions that keep vs back from imitating
the worthineſſe of their braue ſpirits that aduanced
themſelues from poore Souldiers to great Captaines,
their poſterity to great Lords, their King to
be one of the greateſt Potentates on earth, and the
fruites of their labours, his greateſt glory, power
and renowne.
            That part wee call New England is betwixt the
degrees of 41.The deſcription of New England. and 45: but that parte this diſcourse
ſpeaketh of, ſtretcheth but from Pennobſcot to Cape
Cod, ſome 75 leagues by a right line diſtant each
from other: within which bounds I haue ſeene at
leaſt 40. ſeuerall habitations vpon the Sea Coaſt,
and ſounded about 25 excellent good Harbours;

In many whereof there is ancorage for 500. ſayle
of ſhips of any burthen; in ſome of them for
5000: And more then 200 Iles ouergrowne
with good timber, of diuers ſorts of wood, which
doe make ſo many harbours as requireth a longer
time then I had, to be well diſcouered.
            The principall habitation Northward we were
at,The particular C
                     •
                  untries or Gouernments. was Pennobſcot▪
                Southward along the Coaſt and
vp the Riuers we found Mecadacut, Segocket, Pemmaquid,
Nuſconcus, Kenebeck, Sagadahock, and Aumoughaawgen;
And to thoſe Countries belong the
people of Segotago, Paghhuntanuck, Pocopaſſum,
Taughtanakagnet, Warbigganus, Naſſaque, Maſheroſqueck,
Wawrigweck, Moſhoquen, Wakcogo, Pasſharanack,
&c. To theſe are allied the Countries of Aucociſco,
Accominticus, Paſſataquack, Aggawom, & Naemkeck:
all theſe, I could perceiue, differ little in
language, faſhion, or gouernment: though moſt be
Lords of themſelues, yet they hold the Baſhabes of
Pennobſcot, the chiefe and greateſtamongſt them.
            The next I can remēber by name are Mattahunts;
two pleaſant Iles of groues, gardens and corne
fields a league in the Sea from the Mayne. Then
Totant, Maſſachuſet, Pocapawmet, Quonahaſsit, Sagoquas,
Nahapaſſumkeck, Topeent, Seccaſaw, Totheet,
Naſnocomacack, Accomack, Chawum; Then Cape
Cod by which is Pawmet and the Ile Nawſet, of the
language, & alliance of them of Chawum: The others
are called Maſſachuſets; of another language,
humor and condition: For their trade and marchandize;
to each of their habitations they haue

diuerſe Townes and people belonging; and by
their relations and deſriptions, more then 20
ſeuerall Habitations and Riuers that ſtretch themſelues
farre vp into the Countrey, euen to the borders
of diuerſe great Lakes, where they kill and
take moſt of their Beuers and Ouers. From Pennobſcot
to Sagadahock this Coaſt is all Mountainous
and Iles of huge Rocks, but ouergrowen with all
ſorts of excellent good woodes for building houſes,
boats, barks or ſhippes; with an incredible abundance
of moſt ſorts of fiſh, much fowle, and
ſundry ſorts of good fruites for mans vſe.
            Betwixt Sagadahock and Sowocatuck there is but
two or three ſandy Bayes,The mixture of an excellent ſoyle. but betwixt that and
Cape God very many: eſpecialy the Coaſt of the
Maſſachuſets is ſo indifferently mixed with high
clayie or ſandy cliffes in one place, & then tracts of
large long ledges of diuers ſorts, and quarries of
ſtones in other places ſo ſtrangely diuided with
tinctured veines of diuers colours: as, Free ſtone
for building, Slate for tiling, ſmooth ſtone to
make Fornaces and Forges for glaſſe or iron, and
iron ore ſufficient, conueniently to melt in them:
but the moſt part ſo reſembleth the Coaſt of Deuonſhire,
I thinke moſt of the cliffes would make
ſuch lime-stone: If they be not of theſe qualities,
they are ſo like, they may deceiue a better iudgement
then mine; all which are ſo neere adioyning
to thoſe other aduantages I obſerued in theſe
parts, that if the Ore proue as good iron & ſteele

                  〈◊〉
                thoſe parts, as I know it is within the bounds of

the Countrey, I dare engage my head (hauing but
men ſkilfull to worke the ſimples there growing)
to haue all things belonging to the building
the rigging of ſhippes of any proportion, and
and good marchandize for the fraught, within a
ſquare of 10 or 14 leagues: and were it for a good
rewarde, I would not feare to prooue it in a leſſe
limitation.
            And ſurely by reaſon of thoſe ſandy cliffes and
cliffes of rocks,A proofe of an excellent temper. both which we ſaw ſo planted with
Gardens and Corne fields, and ſo well inhabited
with a goodly, ſtrong and well proportioned people,
beſides the greatneſſe of the Timber growing
on them, the greatneſſe of the fiſh and the moderate
temper of the ayre (for of twentie fiue, not any
was ſicke,A proofe of health. but two that were many yeares diseaſed
before they went, not withſtanding our bad
lodging and accidentall diet) who can but approoue
this a moſt excellent place, both for health
& fertility? And of all the foure parts of the world
that I haue yet ſeene not inhabited, could I haue
but meanes to tranſport a Colonie, I would rather
liue here then any where: and if it did not maintaine
if ſelfe, were wee but once indifferently well
fitted, let vs ſtarue.
            The maine Staple, from hence to bee extracted
for the preſent to produce the reſt,St
                     •
                  ple commodities preſent. is fiſh; which
howeuet it may ſeeme a mean and a baſe commoditie:
yet who who will but truely take the pains
and conſider the ſequell, I thinke will allow it well
worth the labour. It is ſtrange to ſee what great

aduentures the hopes of ſetting forth men of war
to rob the induſtrious innocent, would procure;
or ſuch maſsie promiſes in groſſe: though more
are choked then well fedde with ſuch haſtie hopes.
But who doth not know that the poore Hollanders,The Hollanders fiſhing.
chiefly by fiſhing, at a great charge and labour
in all weathers in the open Sea, are made a
people ſo hardy, and induſtrious? and by the
venting this poore commodity to the Eaſterlings
for as meane, which is Wood, Flax, Pitch, Tarre,
Roſin, Cordage, and ſuch like (which they exchange
againe, to the French, Spaniards, Portugales,
and Engliſh, &c. for what they want) are
made ſo mighty, ſtrong and rich, as no State
but Venice, of twice their magnitude, is ſo
well furniſhed with ſo many faire Cities, goodly
Townes, ſtrong Fortreſſes, & that aboundance of
ſhipping and all ſorts of marchandize, as well of
Golde, Siluer, Pearles, Diamonds, Pretious ſtones,
Silkes, Veluets, and Cloth of golde; as Fiſh, Pitch,
Wood, or ſuch groſſe commodities? What Voyages
and Diſcoueries, Eaſt and Weſt, North and
South, yea about the world, make they? What
an Army by Sea and Land, haue they long maintained
in deſpite of one of the greateſt Princes of
the world? and neuer could the Spaniard with
all his Mynes of golde and Siluer, pay his debts,
his friends, & army, halfe ſo truly, as the Hollanders
ſtil haue done by this contemptible trade of
fiſh. Diuers (I know) may alledge, many other aſsiſtances:
But this is their Myne; and the Sea the

ſource of thoſe ſiluered ſtreames of all their vertue;
which hath made them now the very miracle
of induſtrie, the pattern of perfection for theſe
affaires: and the benefit of fiſhing is that Primum
mobile that turnes all their Spheres to this height of
plentie, ſtrength, honour and admiration.
            Herring, Cod, and Ling, is that triplicitie that
makes their wealth & ſhippings multiplicities, ſuch
as it is, and from which (few would thinke it) they
yearly draw at leaſt one million & a halfe of pounds
ſtarling;Which is fifteen hundred thou and pound. yet it is moſt certaine (if records be true):
and in this faculty they are ſo naturalized, and of
their vents ſo certainely acquainted, as there is no
likelihood they will euer bee paralleld, hauing 2
or 3000 Buſſes, Flat bottomes, Sword pinks,
Todes, and ſuch like, that breedes them Saylers,
Mariners, Souldiers and Marchants, neuer to be
wrought out of that trade, and fit for any other.
I will not deny but others may gaine as well as
they, that will vſe it, though not ſo certainely, nor
ſo much in quantity; for want of experience. And
this Herring they take vpon the Coaſt of Scotland
and England; their Cod and Ling, vpon the Coaſt
of Izeland and in the North Seas.
            
               Hamborough, & the East Countries, for Sturgion
and Cauiare, gets many thouſands of pounds from
England, and the Straites: Portugale, the Biskaines,
and the Spaniards, make 40 or 50 Saile yearely
to Cape-blank, to hooke for Porgos, Mullet, and
make Puttardo: and New found Land, doth yearely
fraught neere 800 ſayle of Ships with a ſillie leane

skinny Poore-Iohn, and Corfiſh, which at leaſt
yearely amounts to 3 or 400000 pound. If from
all thoſe parts ſuch paines is taken for this poore
gaines of fiſh, and by them hath neither meate,
drinke, nor clothes, wood, iron, nor ſteele, pitch,
tarre, nets, leades, ſalt, hookes, nor lines, for
ſhipping, fiſhing, nor prouiſion, but at the ſecond,
third, fourth, or fift hand, drawne from ſo many
ſeuerall parts of the world ere they come together
to be vſed in this voyage: If theſe I ſay can gaine,
and the Saylers liue going for ſhares, leſſe then
the third part of their labours, and yet ſpend as
much time in going and comming, as in ſtaying
there, ſo ſhort is the ſeaſon of fiſhing; why
ſhould wee more doubt, then Holland, Portugale,
Spaniard, French, or other, but to doe much better
then they, where there is victuall to feede vs,
wood of all ſorts, to build Boats, Ships, or Barks;
the fiſh at our doores, pitch, tarre, maſts, yards,
and moſt of other neceſſaries onely for making?
And here are no hard Landlords to racke vs with
high rents, or extorted fines to conſume vs, no tedious
pleas in law to conſume vs with their many
years diſputations for Iuſtice: no multitudes to
occaſion ſuch impediments to good orders, as in
popular States. So freely hath God & his Maieſty
beſtowed thoſe bleſsings on thē that will attempt
to obtaine them, as here euery man may be maſter
and owner of his owne labour and land; or the
greateſt part in a ſmall time. If hee haue nothing
but his hands, he may ſet vp this trade; and by induſtrie

quickly grow rich; ſpending but halfe that
time wel, wch in England we abuſe in idlenes, worſe
or as ill. Here is ground alſo as good as any lyeth in
the height of forty one, forty two, forty three, &c.
which is as temperate and as fruitfull as any other
paralell in the world.Examples of the altitude comparatiuely. As for example, on this ſide
the line Weſt of it in the South Sea, is Noua Albion,
diſcouered as is ſaid, by Sir Francis Drake.
Eaſt from it, is the moſt temperate part of Portugale,
the ancient kingdomes of Galazia, Biskey,
Nauarre, Arragon, Catalonia, Caſtilia the olde,
and the moſt moderateſt of Caſtilia the new, and
Valentia, which is the greateſt part of Spain: which
if the Spaniſh Hiſtories bee true, in the Romanes
time abounded no leſſe with golde and ſiluer
Mines, then now the West Indies; The Romanes
then vſing the Spaniards to work in thoſe Mines,
as now the Spaniard doth the Indians.
            
            In France, the Prouinces of Gaſconie, Langadock,
Auignon, Prouince, Dolphine, Pyamont, and Turyne,
are in the ſame paralel: which are the beſt & richeſt
parts of France. In Italy, the prouinces of Genua,
Lumbardy, & Verona, with a great part of the moſt
famous Sate of Venice, the Dukedoms of Bononia,
Mantua, Ferrara, Rauenna, Bolognia, Florence, Piſa,
Sienna, Vrbine, Ancona, and the ancient Citie and
Countrey of Rome, with a great part of the great
Kingdome of Naples. In Slauonia, Iſtrya, and Dalmatia,
with the Kingdomes of Albania. In Grecia,
that famous Kingdome of Macedonia, Bulgaria,
Theſſalia, Thracia, or Romania, where is ſeated

the moſt pleaſant and plētifull Citie in Europe, Conſtantinople.
In Aſia alſo, in the ſame latitude, are
the temperateſt parts of Natolia, Armenia, Perſia,
and China, beſides diuers other large Countries
and Kingdomes in theſe moſt milde and temperate
Regions of Aſia. Southward, in the ſame height,
is the richeſt of golde Mynes, Chily and Baldiuia,
& the mouth of the great Riuer of Plate, &c: for all
the reſt of the world in that height is yet vnknown.
Beſides theſe reaſons, mine owne eyes that haue
ſeene a great part of thoſe Cities and their Kingdomes,
as well as it, can finde no aduantage they
haue in nature, but this, They are beautified by the
long labour and diligence of induſtrious people
and Art. This is onely as God made it, when he
created the worlde. Therefore I conclude, if the
heart and intralls of thoſe Regions were ſought:
if their Land were cultured, planted and manured
by men of induſtrie, iudgement, and experience;
what hope is there, or what neede they doubt,
hauing thoſe aduantages of the Sea, but it might
equalize any of thoſe famous Kingdomes, in all
commodities, pleaſures, and conditions? ſeeing euen
the very edges doe naturally afford vs ſuch
plenty, as no ſhip need returne away empty: and
onely vſe but the ſeaſon of the Sea, fiſh will returne
an honeſt gaine, beſide all other aduantages; her
treaſures hauing yet neuer beene opened, nor her
originalls waſted, conſumed, nor abuſed.
            And whereas it is ſaid,The particular ſtaple commodities that may be had. the Hollanders ſerue the
Easterlings themſelues, and other parts that want,

with Herring, Ling, and wet Cod; The Eaſterlings,
a great part of Europe, with Sturgion and
Cauiate; Cape-blanke, Spaine, Portugale, and the
Leuant, with Mullet, and Puttargo; New found
Land, all Europe, with a thin Poore Iohn: yet all is
ſo ouerlaide with fiſhers, as the fiſhing decayeth,
and many are conſtrained to returne with a ſmall
fraught. Norway, and Polonia, Pitch, Tar, Maſts,
and Yardes; Sweathland, and Ruſsia Iron,
and Ropes; France, and Spaine, Canuas, Wine,
Steele, Iron, and Oyle; Italy and Greece, Silks,
and Fruites. I dare boldly ſay, becauſe I haue
ſeen naturally growing, or breeding in thoſe parts
the ſame materialls that all thoſe are made of,
they may as well be had here, or the moſt part of
them, within the diſtance of 70 leagues for ſome
few ages, as from all thoſe parts; vſing but the
ſame meanes to haue them that they doe, & with
all thoſe aduantages.
            Firſt,The nature of ground approoued. the ground is ſo fertill, that queſtionleſs it
is capable of producing any Grain, Fruits, or Seeds
you will ſow or plant, growing in the Regions
afore named: But it may be, not euery kinde to
that perfection of delicacy; or ſome tender plants
may miſcarie, becauſe the Summer is not ſo hot,
and the winter is more colde in thoſe parts wee
haue yet tryed neere the Sea ſide, then we finde in
the ſame height in Europe or Aſia; Yet I made
a Garden vpon the top of a Rockie Ile in 43. ½, 4
leagues from the Main, in May, that grew ſo well,
as it ſerued vs for ſallets in Iune and Iuly. All ſorts

of cattell may here be bred and fed in the Iles, or
Peninſulaes, ſecurely for nothing. In the Interim
till they encreaſe if need be (obſeruing the ſeaſons)
I durſt vndertake to haue corne enough from the
Saluages for 300 men, for a few trifles; and if
they ſhould bee vntoward (as it is moſt certaine
they are) thirty or forty good men will be ſufficient
to bring them all in ſubiection, and make
this prouiſion; if they vnderſtand what they doe:
200 whereof may nine monethes in the yeare be
imployed in making marchandable fiſh, till the
reſt prouide other neceſſaries, fit to furniſh vs with
other commodities.
            In March,The ſeaſons for fiſhing approoued. Aprill, May, and halfe Iune, here is
Cod in abundance; in May, Iune, Iuly, and Auguſt
Mullet and Sturgion; whoſe roes doe make
Cauiare and Puttargo. Herring, if any deſire
them, I haue taken many out of the bellies of
Cods, ſome in nets; but the Saluages compare
their ſtore in the Sea, to the haires of their heads:
and ſurely there are an incredible abundance vpon
this Coaſt. In the end of Auguſt, September, October,
and Nouember, you haue Cod againe, to
make Cor fiſh, or Poore Iohn: and each hundred
is as good as two or three hundred in the Newfound
Land. So that halfe the labour in hooking,
ſplitting, and turning, is ſaued: and you may haue
your fiſh at what Market you will, before they can
haue any in New-found Land; where their fiſhing
is chiefly but in Iune and Iuly: whereas it is heere
in March, Aprill, May, September, October, and

Nouember, as is ſaid. So that by reaſon of this
plantation, the Marchants may haue fraught both
out and home: which yeelds an aduantage worth
conſideration.
            Your Cor-fiſh you may in like manner tranſport
as you ſee cauſe, to ſerue the Ports in Portugale
(as Lisbon, Auera, Porta port, and diuers others,
or what market you pleaſe) before your Ilanders
returne: They being tyed to the ſeaſon in the open
Sea; you hauing a double ſeaſon, and fiſhing
before your doors, may euery night ſleep quietly
a ſhore with good cheare and what fires you will,
or when you pleaſe with your wiues and familie:
they onely, their ſhips in the maine Ocean.
            The Mullets heere are in that abundance, you
may take them with nets, ſometimes by hundreds,
where at Cape blank they hooke them; yet thoſe
but one foot and a halfe in length; theſe two, three,
or foure, as oft I haue meaſured: much Salmon
ſome haue found vp the Riuers, as they haue paſſed:
and heer the ayre is ſo temperate, as all theſe at
any time may well be preſerued.
            Now,Imployment for poore people and fatherleſſe children. young boyes and girles Saluages, or any
other, be they neuer ſuch idlers, may turne, carry,
and return fiſh, without either ſhame, or any great
paine: hee is very idle that is paſt twelue yeares of
age and cannot doe ſo much: and ſhe is very olde,
that cannot ſpin a thred to make engines to catch
them.
            For their tranſportation,The facility of the plantation. the ſhips that go there
to fiſh may tranſport the firſt: who for their paſſage

will ſpare the charge of double manning their
ſhips, which they muſt doe in the New-found Land,
to get their fraught; but one third part of that
companie are onely but proper to ſerue a ſtage,
carry a barrow, and turne Poor Iohn: notwithſtanding,
they muſt haue meate, drinke, clothes, &
paſſage, as well as the reſt. Now all I deſire, is but
this; That thoſe that voluntarily will ſend ſhipping,
ſhould make here the beſt choiſe they can,
or accept ſuch as are preſented them, to ſerue them
at that rate: and their ſhips returning leaue ſuch
with me, with the value of that they ſhould receiue
comming home, in ſuch prouiſions and neceſſarie
tooles, armes, bedding and apparell, ſalt,
hookes, nets, lines, and ſuch like as they ſpare of
the remainings; who till the next returne may
keepe their boates and doe them many other profitable
offices: prouided I haue men of ability to
teach them their functions, and a company fit for
Souldiers to be ready vpon an occaſion; becauſe
of the abuſes which haue beene offered the poore
Saluages, and the liberty both French, or any
that will, hath to deale with them as they pleaſe:
whoſe diſorders will be hard to reforme; and the
longer the worſe. Now ſuch order with facilitie
might be taken, with euery port Towne or Citie,
to obſerue but this order, With free power to conuert
the benefits of their fraughts to what aduantage
they pleaſe, and increaſe their numbers as they
ſee occaſion; who euer as they are able to ſubſiſt
of themſelues, may beginne the new Townes in

               New England in memory of their olde: which
freedome being confined but to the neceſsity of
the generall good, the euent (with Gods helpe)
might produce an honeſt, a noble, and a profitable
emulation.
            Salt vpon ſalt may aſſuredly be made;
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   commodities. if not at
the firſt in ponds, yet till they bee prouided this
may be vſed: then the Ships may tranſport Kine,
Horſe, Goates, courſe Cloath, and ſuch commodities
as we want; by whoſe arriuall may be made
that prouiſion of fiſh to fraught the Ships that they
ſtay not: and then if the ſailers goe for wages, it
matters not. It is hard if this returne defray not
the charge: but care muſt be had, they arriue in the
Spring, or elſe prouiſion be made for them againſt
the Winter.
            Of certaine red berries called Alkermes which
is worth ten ſhillings a pound, but of theſe hath
been ſould for thirty or forty ſhillings the pound,
may yearely be gathered a good quantitie.
            Of the Musk Rat may bee weil raiſed gaines,
well worth their labour, that will endeuor to make
tryall of their goodneſſe.
            Of Beuers, Otters, Martins, Blacke Foxes, and
Furres of price, may yearely be had 6 or 7000:
and if the trade of the French were preuented, many
more: 25000 this yeare were brought from
thoſe Northren parts into France; of which trade
we may haue as good part as the French, if we take
good courſes.
            Of Mynes of Golde and Siluer, Copper, and

probabilities of Lead, Chriſtall and Allum, I could
ſay much if relations were good aſſurances. It is
true indeed, I made many trials according to thoſe
inſtructions I had, which doe perſwade mee I need
not deſpaire, but there are metalls in the Countrey:
but I am no Alchymiſt, nor will promiſe
more then I know: which is, Who will vndertake
the rectifying of an Iron forge, if thoſe that buy
meate, drinke, coals, ore, and all neceſſaries at a
deer rate gaine; where all theſe things are to be had
for the taking vp, in my opinion cannot loſe.
            Of woods ſeeing there is ſuch plenty of all ſorts,
if thoſe that build ſhips and boates, buy wood at
ſo great a price, as it is in England, Spaine, France,
Italy, and Holland, and all other prouiſions for
the nouriſhing of mans life; liue well by their
trade: when labour is all required to take thoſe neceſſaries
without any other tax; what hazard will
be here, but doe much better? And what commoditie
in Europe doth more decay then wood?
For the goodneſſe of the ground, let vs take it fertill,
or barren, or as it is: ſeeing it is certaine it
beares fruites, to nouriſh and feed man and beaſt,
as well as England, and the Sea thoſe ſeuerall
ſorts of fiſh I haue related. Thus ſeeing all good
prouiſions for mans ſuſtenance, may with this facility
be had, by a little extraordinarie labour, till
that tranſported be increaſed; and all neceſſaries
for ſhipping, onely for labour: to which may bee
added the aſsiſtance of the Saluages, which may
eaſily be had, if they be diſcreetly handled in their

kindes; towards fiſhing, planting, and deſtroying
woods. What gaines might be raiſed if this were
followed (when there is but once men to fill your
ſtore houſes, dwelling there, you may ſerue all Europe
better and farre cheaper, then can the Izeland
fiſhers, or the Hollanders, Cape blank, or New found
Land: who muſt be at as much more charge, then
you) may eaſily be coniectured by this example.
            2000.An example of the gains vpon euery yeare or from one thes returne. pound will fit out a ſhip of 200. & 1 of a
100 tuns: If the dry fiſh they both make, fraught
that of 200. and goe for Spaine, ſell it but at ten
ſhillings a quintall; but commonly it giueth fifteen,
or twentie: eſpecially when it commeth firſt,
which amounts to 3 or 4000 pound: but ſay but
tenne, which is the loweſt, allowing the reſt
for waſte, it amounts at that rate, to 2000 pound,
which is the whole charge of your two ſhips, and
their equipage: Then the returne of the money,
and the fraught of the ſhip for the vintage, or any
other voyage, is cleere gaine, with your ſhippe of a
100 tuns of Train and oyle, beſides the beuers,
and other commodities; and that you may haue
at home within ſix monethes, if God pleaſe but to
ſend an ordinarie paſſage. Then ſauing halfe this
charge by the not ſtaying of your ſhips, your victual,
ouerplus of men & wages; with her fraught thither
of things neceſſarie for the planters, the ſalt being
there made: as alſo may the nets & lines, within a
ſhort time: if nothing were to bee expected but
this, it might in time equalize your Hollanders
gaines, if not exceed them: they returning but

wood, pitch, tarre, and ſuch groſſe commodities;
you wines, oyles, fruits, ſilkes, and ſuch Straits
commodities, as you pleaſe to prouide by your
Factors, againſt ſuch times as your ſhippes arriue
with them. This would ſo increaſe our ſhipping
and ſailers, and ſo employ and encourage a great
part of our idlers and others that want imployments
fitting their qualities at home, where they
ſhame to doe that they would doe abroad; that
could they but once taſte the ſweet fruites of their
owne labours, doubtleſſe many thouſands would
be aduiſed by good diſcipline, to take more pleaſure
in honeſt induſtrie, then in their humours of
diſſolute idleneſſe.
            But,A deſcription of the Countries in particular, and their ſituations. to returne a little more to the particulars
of this Countrey, which I intermingle thus with
my proiects and reaſons, not being ſo ſufficiently
yet acquainted in thoſe parts, to write fully the
eſtate of the Sea, the Ayre, the Land, the Fruites,
the Rocks, the People, the Gouernment, Religion,
Territories, and Limitations, Friends, and Foes:
but, as I gathered from the niggardly relations in a
broken language to my vnderſtanding, during
the time I ranged thoſe Countries &c. The moſt
Northren part I was at, was the Bay of Pennobſcot,
which is Eaſt and Weſt, North and South,
more then ten leagues: but ſuch were my occaſions,
I was conſtrained to be ſatisfied of them I found
in the Bay, that the Riuer ranne farre vp into the
Land, and was well inhabited with many people,
but they were from their habitations, either fiſhing

among the Iles, or hunting the Lakes and
Woods, for Deer and Beners. The Bay is full of
great Ilands, of one, two, ſix, eight, or ten miles in
length, which diuides it into many faire and excellent
good harbours. On the Eaſt of it, are the Tarrantines,
their mortall enemies, where inhabit the
French, as they report that liue with thoſe people,
as one nation or family. And Northweſt of Pennobſcot
is Mecaddacut, at the foot of a high mountaine,
a kinde of fortreſſe againſt the Tarrantines,
adioyning to the high mountaines of Pennobſcot,
againſt whoſe feet doth beat the Sea: But ouer all
the Land, Iles, or other impediments, you may
well ſee them ſixteene or eighteene leagues from
their ſituation. Segocket is the next; then Nuſconcus,
Pemmaquid, and Sagadahock. Vp this Riuer where
was the Weſterne plantation are Aumuckcawgen,
Kinnebeck, and diuers others, where there is planted
ſome corne fields. Along this Riuer 40 or 50
miles, I ſaw nothing but great high cliffes of barren
Rocks, ouergrowne with wood: but where
the Saluages dwelt there the ground is exceeding
fat & fertill. Weſtward of this Riuer, is the Countrey
of Aucociſco, in the bottome of a large deepe
Bay, full of many great Iles, which diuides it into
many good harbours. Sowocotuck is the next, in
the edge of a large ſandy Bay, which hath many
Rocks and Iles, but few good harbours, but for
Barks, I yet know. But all this Coaſt to Pennobſcot,
and as farre I could ſee Eaſtward of it is nothing
but ſuch high craggy Cliffy Rocks & ſtony

Iles that I wondered ſuch great trees could growe
vpon ſo hard foundations. It is a Countrie rather
to affright, then delight one. And how to deſcribe a
more plaine ſpectacle of deſolation or more barren
I knowe not. Yet the Sea there is the ſtrangeſt fiſhpond
I euer ſaw; and thoſe barren Iles ſo furniſhed
with good woods, ſprings, fruits, fiſh, and foule,
that it makes mee thinke though the Coaſt be rockie,
and thus affrightable; the Vallies, Plaines, and
and interior parts, may well (notwithſtanding) be
verie fertile. But there is no kingdome ſo fertile hath
not ſome part barren: and New England is great enough,
to make many Kingdomes and Countries,
were it all inhabited. As you paſſe the Coaſt ſtill
Weſtward, Accominticus and Paſſataquack are two
conuenient harbors for ſmall barks; and a good
Countrie, within their craggie cliffs. Angoam is the
next; This place might content a right curious
iudgement: but there are many ſands at the entrance
of the harbor: and the worſt is, it is inbayed
too farre from the deepe Sea. Heere are many
riſing hilles, and on their tops and deſcents many
corne fields, and delightfull groues. On the Eaſt,
is an Ile of two or three leagues in length; the one
halfe, plaine moriſh graſſe fit for paſture, with many
faire high groues of mulberrie trees gardens:
and there is alſo Okes, Pines, and other woods to
make this place an excellent habitation, beeing a
good and ſafe harbor.
            
               Naimkeck though it be more rockie ground (for
Angoam is ſandie) not much inferior; neither for the

harbor, nor any thing I could perceiue, but the
multitude of people. From hence doth ſtretch into
the Sea the faire headland Tragabigzanda, fronted
with three Iles called the three Turks heads: to the
North of this, doth enter a great Bay, where wee
founde ſome habitations and corne fields: they report
a great Riuer, and at leaſt thirtie habitations,
doo poſſeſſe this Countrie. But becauſe the French
had got their Trade, I had no leaſure to diſcouer it.
The Iles of Mattahunts are on the Weſt ſide of this
Bay, where are many Iles, and queſtionleſſe good
harbors: and then the Countrie of the Maſſachuſets,
which is the Paradiſe of all thoſe parts: for,
heere are many Iles all planted with corne; groues,
mulberries, ſaluage gardens, and good harbors:
the Coaſt is for the moſt part, high clayie ſandie
cliffs. The Sea Coaſt as you paſſe, ſhewes you all
along large corne fields, and great troupes of well
proportioned people: but the French hauing remained
heere neere ſixe weekes, left nothing, for vs
to take occaſion to examine the inhabitants relations,
viz. if there be neer three thouſand people vpon
theſe Iles; and that the Riuer doth pearce many
daies iourneies the intralles of that Countrey. We
found the people in thoſe parts verie kinde; but in
their furie no leſſe valiant. For, vpon a quarrell wee
had with one of them, hee onely with three others
croſſed the harbor of Quonahaſsit to certaine rocks
whereby wee muſt paſſe; and there let flie their arrowes
for our ſhot, till we were out of danger.
            Then come you to Accomack, an excellent good

harbor, good land; and no want of any thing, but
induſtrious people. After much kindneſſe, vpon a
ſmall occaſion, wee fought alſo with fortie or fiftie
of thoſe: though ſome were hurt, and ſome
ſlaine; yet within an houre after they became
friendes. Cape Cod is the next preſents it ſelfe:
which is onely a headland of high hils of ſand, ouergrowne
with ſhrubbie pines, hurts, and ſuch traſh;
but an excellent harbor for all weathers. This Cape
is made by the maine Sea on the one ſide, and a
great Bay on the other in forme of a ſickle: on it
doth inhabit the people of Pawmet: and in the bottome
of the Bay, the people of Chawum. Towards
the South and Southweſt of this Cape, is found a
long and dangerous ſhoale of ſands and rocks. But
ſo farte as I incircled it, I found thirtie fadom water
aboard the ſhore, and a ſtrong current: which
makes mee thinke there is a Channell about this
ſhoale; where is the beſt and greateſt fiſh to be had,
Winter and Summer, in all that Countrie. But, the
Saluages ſay there is no Channell, but that the
ſhoales beginne from the maine at Pawmet, to the
Ile of Nauſit; and ſo extends beyond their knowledge
into the Sea. The next to this is Capawack,
and thoſe abounding Countries of copper, corne,
people, and mineralls; which I went to diſcouer
this laſt yeare: but becauſe I miſcarried by the way,
I will leaue them, till God pleaſe I haue better acquaintance
with them.
            The Maſſachuſets,
               A good Countrie. they report, ſometimes haue
warres with the Baſhabes of Pennobskot; and are not

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
alwaies friends with them of Chawun and their alliants:
but now they are all friends, and haue each
trade with other, ſo farre as they haue ſocietie, on
each others frontiers. For they make no ſuch voiages
as from Pennobskot to Cape Cod; ſeldom to Maſſachewſet.
In the North (as I haue ſaid) they begunne
to plant corne, whereof the South part hath
ſuch plentie, as they haue what they will from
them of the North; and in the Winter much
more plenty of fiſh and foule: but both Winter
and Summer hath it in the one part or other all the
yeare; being the meane and moſt indifferent temper,
betwixt heat and colde, of all the regions betwixt
the Lyne and the Pole: but the furs Northward
are much better, and in much more plentie,
then Southward.
            The remarkeableſt Iles & mountains for Landmarkes
are theſe;The landmarkes. The higheſt Ile is Sorico, in the Bay
of Pennobskot: but the three Iles and a rock of Matinnack
are much furder in the Sea; Metinicus is alſo
three plaine Iles & a rock, betwixt it & Monahigan:
Monahigan is a rounde high Ile; and cloſe by
it Monanis, betwixt which is a ſmall harbor where
we ride. In Damerils Iles is ſuch another: Sagadahock
is knowne by Satquin, and foure or fiue Iles
in the mouth. Smyths Iles are a heape together,
none neere them, againſt Accominticus. The three
Turks heads are three Iles ſeen fa
                  •
                to Sea-ward in
regard of the headland.
            The cheefe headlands are onely Cape Tragabig
                  
                     •
                  anda
and Cape Cod.
            
            
               
The cheefe mountaines, them of Pennobſcot:
the twinkling mountaine of Aucociſco; the greate
mountaine of Saſanon; and the high mountaine of
Maſſachuſit: each of which you ſhall finde in the
Mappe; their places, formes, and altitude. The
waters are moſt pure, proceeding from the intrals
of rockie mountaines;Hearbs. the hearbes and fruits are
of many ſorts and kindes: as alkermes, currans, or
a fruit like currans, mulberries, vines, reſpices, goosberries,
plummes, walnuts, cheſnuts, ſmall nuts,
&c. pumpions, gourds, ſtrawberries, beans, pease,
and mayze; a kinde or two of flax, wherewith they
make nets, lines and ropes both ſmall and great,
verie ſtrong for their quantities.
            Oke,Woods. is the chiefe wood; of which there is great
difference in regard of the ſoyle where it groweth.
firre, pyne, walnut, cheſnut, birch, aſh, elme,
cypreſſe, ceder, mulberrie, plumtree, hazell, ſaxefrage,
and many other ſorts.
            Eagles,Birds. Gripes, diuerſe ſorts of Haukes, Cranes,
Geeſe, Brants, Cormorants, Ducks, Sheldrakes,
Teale, Meawes, Guls, Turkies, Diue-doppers, and
many other ſorts, whoſe names I knowe not.
            Whales,Fiſhes. Grampus, Porkpiſces, Turbut, Sturgion,
Cod, Hake, Haddock, Cole, Cuſk, or ſmall
Ling, Shark, Mackerell, Herring, Mullet, Baſe, Pinacks,
Cunners, Pearch, Eels, Crabs, Lobſters,
Muskles, Wilkes, Oyſters, and diuerſe others &c.
            Moos,Beaſts. a beaſt bigger then a Stagge; deere, red, and
Fallow; Beuers, Wolues, Foxes, both blacke and
other; Aroughconds, Wild-cats, Beares, Otters,

Martins, Fitches, Muſquaſlus, & diuerſe ſorts of
vermine, whoſe names I know not. All theſe and
diuerſe other good things do heeſe, for want of
vſe, ſtill increaſe, & decreaſe with little diminution,
whereby they growe to that abundance. You ſhall
ſcarce finde any Baye, ſhallow ſhore, or Coue of
ſand, where you may not take many Clampes, or
Lobſters, or both at your pleaſure, and in many
places lode your boat if you pleaſe; Nor Iles where
you finde not fruits, birds, crabs, and muskles, or
all of them, for taking, at a lowe water. And in the
harbors we frequented, a little boye might take of
Cunners, and Pinacks, and ſuch delicate fiſh, at
the ſhips ſterne, more then ſixe or tenne can eate in
a daie; but with a caſting-net, thouſands when wee
pleaſed: and ſcarce any place, but Cod, Cuſke,
Holybut, Mackerell, Scate, or ſuch like, a man may
take with a hooke or line what he will. And, in diuerſe
ſandy Baies, a man may draw with a net great
ſtore of Mullets, Baſes, and diuerſe other ſorts of
ſuch excellent fiſh, as many as his Net can drawe
on ſhore: no Riuer where there is not plentie of
Sturgion, or Salmon, or both; all which are to be
had in abundance obſeruing but their ſeaſons. But
if a man will goe at Chriſtmaſſe to gather Cherries
in Kent, he may be deceiued; though there be plentie
in Summer: ſo, heere theſe plenties haue each
their ſeaſons, as I haue expreſſed. We for the moſt
part had little but bread and vineger: and though
the moſt part of Iuly when the fiſhing decaied
they wrought all day, laie abroade in the Iles

all night, and liued on what they found, yet were
not ſicke: But I would wiſh none put himſelf long
to ſuch plunges; except neceſsitie conſtraine it: yet
worthy is that perſon to ſtarue that heere cannot
liue; if he haue ſenſe, ſtrength and health: for, there
is no ſuch penury of theſe bleſsings in any place,
but that a hundred men may, in one houre or two,
make their prouiſions for a day: and hee that hath
experience to mannage well theſe affaires, with fortie
or thirtie honeſt induſtrious men, might well
vndertake (if they dwell in theſe parts) to ſubject
the Saluages, and feed daily two or three hundred
men, with as good corne, fiſh, and fleſh, as the
earth hath of thoſe kindes, and yet make that labor
but their pleaſure: prouided that they haue engins,
that be proper for their purpoſes.
            Who can deſire more content,A note for men that haue great ſpirits, and ſmal meanes that hath ſmall
meanes; or but only his merit to aduance his fortune,
then to tread, and plant that ground hee
hath purchaſed by the hazard of his life? If he haue
but the taſte of virtue, and magnanimitie, what to
ſuch a minde can bee more pleaſant, then planting
and building a foundation for his Poſteritie, gotte
from the rude earth, by Gods bleſsing & his owne
induſtrie, without preiudice to any? If hee haue
any graine of faith or zeale in Religion, what can
hee doe leſſe hurtfull to any; or more agreeable to
God, then to ſeeke to conuert thoſe poore Saluages
to know Chriſt, and humanitie, whoſe labors
with diſcretion will triple requite thy charge and
paines? What ſo truely ſutes with honour and honeſtie,

as the diſcouering things vnknowne? erecting
Townes, peopling Countries, informing the
ignorant, reforming things vniuſt, teaching virtue;
& gaine to out Natiuemother-countrie a kingdom
to attend her; finde imployment for thoſe that are
idle, becauſe they know not what to doe: ſo farre
from wronging any, as to cauſe Poſteritie to remember
thee; and remembring thee, euer honour
that remembrance with praiſe? Conſider: What
were the beginnings and endings of the Monarkies
of the Chaldeans, the Syrians, the Grecians, and Romanes,
but this one rule; What was it they would
not doe, for the good of the commonwealth, or
their Mother-citie? For example: Rome, What
made her ſuch a Monarcheſſe, but onely the aduentures
of her youth, not in riots at home, but in dangers
abroade? and the iuſtice and iudgement out
of their experience, when they grewe aged. What
was their ruine and hurt, but this; The exceſſe of
idleneſſe, the fondneſſe of Parents, the want of experience
in Magiſtrates, the admiration of their
vndeſerued honours, the contempt of true merit,
their vniuſt iealoſies, their politicke incredulities,
their hypocriticall ſeeming goodneſſe, and their
deeds of ſecret lewdneſſe? finally, in fine, growing
onely formall temporiſts, all that their predeceſſors
got in many years, they loſt in few daies. Thoſe by
their pains & vertues became Lords of the world;
they by their eaſe and vices became ſlaues to their
ſeruants. This is the difference betwixt the vſe of
Armes in the field, & on the monuments of ſtones;

the golden age and the leaden age, proſperity and
miſerie, iuſtice and corruption, ſubſtance and ſhadowes,
words and deeds, experience and imagination,
making Commonwealths and marring
Commonwealths, the fruits of vertue and the
concluſions of vice.
            Then, who would liue at home idly (or thinke
in himſelfe any worth to liue) onely to eate, drink,
and ſleepe, and ſo die? Or by conſuming that careleſly,
his friends got worthily? Or by vſing that
miſerably, that maintained vertue honeſtly? Or,
for being deſcended nobly, pine with the vaine
vaunt of great kindred, in penurie? Or (to maintaine
a ſilly ſhewe of brauery) toyle out thy
heart, ſoule, and time, baſely, by ſhifts, tricks,
cards, & dice? Or by relating newes of others actions,
ſharke here or there for a dinner, or ſupper;
deceiue thy friends, by faire promiſes, and diſsimulation,
in borrowing where thou neuer intendeſt
to pay; offend the lawes, ſurfeit with exceſſe, burden
thy Country, abuſe thy ſelfe, deſpaire in want,
and then couzen thy kindred, yea euen thine owne
brother, and wiſh thy parents death (I will not
ſay damnation) to haue their eſtates? though thou
ſeeſt what honours, and rewards, the world yet
hath for them will ſeeke them and worthily deſerue
them.
            I would be ſory to offend, or that any ſhould
miſtake my honeſt meaning: for I wiſh good to
all, hurt to none. But rich men for the moſt part
are growne to that dotage, through their pride in

their wealth, as though there were no accident
could end it, or their life. And what hellish care do
ſuch take to make it their owne miſerie, and their
Countries ſpoile, eſpecially when there is moſt
neede of their imployment? drawing by all manner
of inuentions, from the Prince and his honeſt
ſubiects, euen the vitall ſpirits of their powers and
eſtates: as if their Bagges, or Bragges, were ſo
powerfull a defence, the malicious could not aſſault
them; when they are the onely baite, to cauſe
vs not to be onely aſſaulted; but betrayed and
murdered in our owne ſecurity, ere we well perceiue it.
            May not the miſerable ruine of Conſtantinople,
               An example of ſecure couetouſneſs.
their impregnable walles, riches, and pleaſures laſt
taken by the Turke (which are but a bit, in compariſon
of their now mightines) remember vs, of the
effects of priuate couetouſneſs? at which time the
good Emperour held himſelfe rich enough, to haue
ſuch rich ſubiects, ſo formall in all exceſſe of vanity,
all kinde of delicacie, and prodigalitie. His
pouertie when the Turke beſieged, the citizens
(whoſe marchandizing thoughts were onely to
get wealth, little conceiuing the deſperate reſolution
of a valiant expert enemy) left the Emp. ſo long
to his concluſions, hauing ſpent all he had to pay
his young, raw, diſcontented Souldiers; that ſodainly
he, they, and their citie were all a prey to the
deuouring Turke. And what they would not ſpare
for the maintenance of them who aduentured
their liues to defend them, did ſerue onely their

enemies to torment them, their friends, and countrey,
and all Chriſtendome to this preſent day.
Let this lamentable example remember you that
are rich (seeing there are ſuch great theeues in the
world to robbe you) not grudge to lend ſome proportion,
to breed them that haue little, yet willing
to learne how to defend you: for, it is too late
when the deede is a-doing. The Romanes eſtate
hath beene worſe then this: for, the meere couetouſneſſe
and extortion of a few of them, ſo mooued
the reſt, that not hauing any imployment, but
contemplation; their great iudgements grew to ſo
great malice, as themſelues were ſufficient to deſtroy
themſelues by faction: Let this mooue you
to embrace imployment, for thoſe whoſe educations,
ſpirits, and iudgements, want but your purſes;
not onely to preuent ſuch accuſtomed dangers,
but alſo to gaine more thereby then you
haue. And you fathers that are either ſo fooliſhly
fond, or ſo miſerably couetous, or ſo willfully ignorant,
or ſo negligently careleſſe, as that you will
rather maintaine your children in idle wantonneſs,
till they growe your maſters; or become ſo baſely
vnkinde, as they wiſh nothing but your deaths;
ſo that both ſorts growe diſſolute: and although
you would wiſh them any where to eſcape the
gallowes, and eaſe your cares; though they ſpend
you here one, two, or three hundred pound a yeer;
you would grudge to giue halfe ſo much in aduenture
with them, to obtaine an eſtate, which in
a ſmall time but with a little aſsiſtance of your

prouidence, might bee better then your owne.
But if an Angell ſhould tell you, that any place yet
vnknowne can afford ſuch fortunes; you would
not beleeue him, no more then Columbus was beleeued
there was any ſuch Land as is now the well
knowne abounding America; much leſſe ſuch
large Regions as are yet vnknowne, as well in America,
as in Affrica, and Aſia, and Terra incognita;
where were courſes for gentlemen (and them
that would be ſo reputed) more ſuiting their qualities,
then begging from their Princes generous
diſposition, the labours of his ſubiects, and the
very marrow of his maintenance.
            I haue not beene ſo ill bred, but I haue taſted
of Plenty and Pleaſure,
               The Authors conditions. as well as Want and Miſerie:
nor doth neceſsity yet, or occaſion of discontent,
force me to theſe endeauors: nor am I ignorant
what ſmall thanke I ſhall haue for my
paines; o
                  •
                that many would haue the Worlde
imagine them to be of great iudgement, that can
but blemiſh theſe my deſignes, by their witty obiections
and detractions: yet (I hope) my reaſons
with my deeds, will ſo preuaile with ſome, that I
ſhall not want imployment in theſe affaires, to
make the moſt blinde ſee his owne ſenſeleſneſſe, &
incredulity; Hoping that gaine will make them affect
that, which Religion, Charity, and the Common
good cannot. It were but a poore deuice in
me, To deceiue my ſelfe; much more the King, &
State, my Friends, and Countrey, with theſe inducements:
which, ſeeing his Maieſtie hath giuen

permiſsion, I wiſh all ſorts of worthie, honeſt, induſtrious
ſpirits, would vnderſtand: and if they
deſire any further ſatisfaction, I will doe my beſt
to giue it: Not to perſwade them to goe onely;
but goe with them: Not leaue them there; but
liue with them there. I will not ſay, but by ill prouiding
and vndue managing, ſuch courſes may be
taken, may make vs miſerable enough: But if I
may haue the execution of what I haue proiected;
if they want to eate, let them eate or neuer digeſt
Me. If I performe what I ſay, I deſire but that reward
out of the gaines may ſute my paines, quality,
and condition. And if I abuſe you with my
tongue, take my head for ſatiſfaction. If any dislike
at the yeares end, defraying their charge, by
my conſent they ſhould freely returne. I feare not
want of companie ſufficient, were it but knowne
what I know of thoſe Countries; & by the proofe
of that wealth I hope yearely to returne, if God
pleaſe to bleſſe me from ſuch accidents, as are beyond
my power in reaſon to preuent: For, I am
not ſo ſimple, to thinke, that euer any other motiue
then wealth, will euer erect there a Commonweale;
or draw companie from their eaſe and
humours at home, to ſtay in New England to effect
my purpoſes.The planters pleaſures, and profits. And leſt any ſhould thinke the toile
might be inſupportable, though theſe things may
be had by labour, and diligence: I aſſure my ſelfe
there are who delight extreamly in vaine pleaſure,
that take much more paines in England, to enioy
it, then I ſhould doe heere to gaine wealth ſufficient:

and yet I thinke they ſhould not haue halfe
ſuch ſweet content: for, our pleaſure here is ſtill
gaines; in England charges and loſſe. Heer nature
and liberty affords vs that freely, which in England
we want, or it coſteth vs dearely. What pleaſure
can be more, then (being tired with any occaſion
a-ſhore) in planting Vines, Fruits, or Hearbs, in
contriuing their owne Grounds, to the pleaſure
of their owne mindes, their Fields, Gardens, Orchards,
Buildings, Ships, and other works, &c. to
recreate themſelues before their owne doores, in
their owne boates vpon the Sea, where man woman
and childe, with a ſmall hooke and line, by
angling, may take diuerſe ſorts of excellent fiſh, at
their pleaſures? And is it not pretty ſport, to pull
vp two pence, ſix pence, and twelue pence, as faſt
as you can hale and veare a line? He is a very bad
fiſher, cannot kill in one day with his hooke and
line, one, two, or three hundred Cods: which dreſſed
and dryed, if they be ſould there for ten ſhillings
the hundred, though in England they will
giue more then twentie; may not both the ſeruant,
the maſter, and marchant, be well content
with this gaine? If a man worke but three dayes
in ſeauen, he may get more then hee can ſpend,
vnleſſe he will be exceſsiue. Now that Carpenter,
Maſon, Gardiner, Taylor, Smith, Sailer, Forgers,
or what other, may they not make this a pretty
recreation though they fiſh but an houre in a day,
to take more then they eate in a weeke: or? if they
will not eate it, becauſe there is ſo much better

choiſe; yet ſell it, or change it, with the fiſher men,
or marchants, for any thing they want. And what
ſport doth yeeld a more pleaſing content, and leſſe
hurt or charge then angling with a hooke, and
croſsing the ſweete ayre from Ile to Ile, ouer the
ſilent ſtreames of a calme Sea? wherein the moſt
curious may finde pleaſure, profit, and content.
Thus, though all men be not fiſhers: yet all men,
whatſoeuer, may in other matters doe as well.
For neceſsity doth in theſe caſes ſo rule a Common
wealth, and each in their ſeuerall functions,
as their labours in their qualities may be as profitable,
becauſe there is a neceſsary mutuall vſe of
all.
            For Gentlemen,Imployments for gentlemen. what exerciſe ſhould more delight
them, then ranging dayly thoſe vnknowne
parts, vſing fowling and fiſhing, for hunting and
hauking? and yet you ſhall ſee the wilde haukes
giue you ſome pleaſure, in ſeeing them ſtoope (six
or ſeauen after one another) an houre or two together,
at the ſkuls of fiſh in the faire harbours,
as thoſe a-shore at a foule; and neuer trouble nor
torment your ſelues, with watching, mewing, feeding,
and attending them: nor kill horſe and man
with running & crying, See you not a hauk? For hunting
alſo: the woods, lakes, and riuers, affoord not
onely chaſe ſufficient, for any that delights in that
kinde of toyle, or pleaſure; but ſuch beaſts to
hunt, that beſides the delicacy of their bodies for
food, their skins are ſo rich, as may well recompence
thy dayly labour, with a Captains pay.
            
               
For labourers,Imployments for labourers. if thoſe that ſowe hemp, rape,
turnups, parſnips, carrats, cabidge, and ſuch like;
giue 20, 30, 20, 50 ſhillings yearely for an acre
of ground, and meat drinke and wages to vſe it,
and yet grow rich: when better, or at leaſt as good
ground, may be had and coſt nothing but labour;
it ſeemes ſtrange to me, any ſuch ſhould there grow
poore.
            My purpoſe is not to perſwade children from
their parents; men from their wiues; nor ſeruants
from their maſters: onely, ſuch as with free conſent
may be ſpared: But that each pariſh, or village,
in Citie, or Countrey, that will but apparell their
fatherleſſe children, of thirteene or fourteen years
of age, or young maried people, that haue ſmall
wealth to liue on; heere by their labour may liue
exceeding well: prouided alwaies that firſt there
bee a ſufficient power to command them, houſes
to receiue them, meanes to defend them, and meet
prouiſions for them; for, any place may
bee ouerlain: and it is moſt neceſſarie to haue a
fortreſſe (ere this grow to practice) and ſufficient
maſters (as, Carpenters, Maſons, Fiſhers, Fowlers,
Gardiners, Huſbandmen, Sawyers, Smiths,
Spinſters, Taylors, Weauers, and ſuch like) to
take ten, twelue, or twentie, or as ther is occaſion,
for Apprentiſes. The Maſters by this may quicklie
growe rich; theſe may learne their trades themſelues,
to doe the like; to a generall and an incredible
benefit, for King, and Countrey, Maſter, and
Seruant.
            
               
It would bee an hiſtorie of a large volume,Examples of the Spanyard. to recite
the aduentures of the Spanyards, and Portugals,
their affronts, and defeats, their dangers and miſeries;
which with ſuch incomparable honour and
conſtant reſolution, ſo farre beyond beleefe, they
haue attempted and indured in their diſcoueries &
plantations, as may well condemne vs, of too much
imbecillitie, ſloth, and negligence: yet the Authors
of thoſe new inuentions, were held as ridiculous,
for a long time, as now are others, that doe but ſeek
to imitate their vnparalleled vertues. And though
we ſee daily their mountaines of wealth (sprong
from the plants of their generous indeuours) yet
is our ſenſualitie and vnto wardneſſe ſuch, and ſo
great, that wee either ignorantly beleeue nothing;
or ſo curiouſly conteſt, to preuent wee knowe not
what future euents; that wee either ſo neglect, or
oppreſſe and diſcourage the preſent, as wee ſpoile
all in the making, crop all in the bloominig; & building
vpon faire ſand, rather then rough rockes,
iudge that wee knowe not, gouerne that wee haue
not, feare that which is not; and for feare ſome
ſhould doe too well, force ſuch againſt their willes
to be idle or as ill. And who is he hath iudgement,
courage, and any induſtrie or qualitie with vnderſtanding,
will leaue his Countrie, his hopes at home,
his certaine eſtate, his friends, pleaſures, libertie, &
the preferment ſweete England doth afford to all
degrees, were it not to aduance his fortunes by inioying
his deſerts? whoſe proſperitie once appearing,
will incourage others: but it muſt be cheriſhed

as a childe, till it be able to goe, and vnderſtand
it ſelfe; and not corrected, nor oppreſſed aboue it
ſtrength, ere it knowe wherefore. A child can neither
performe the office, nor deedes of a man of
ſtrength, nor indure that affliction He is able▪ nor
can an Apprentice at the firſt performe the part of
a Maiſter. And if twentie yeeres bee required to
make a child a man, ſeuen yeares limited an apprentice
for his trade: if ſcarce an age be ſufficient
to make a wiſe man, or a States man, and commonly,
a man dies ere he hath learned to be diſcreet: If
perfection be ſo hard to be obtained, as of neceſſirie
there muſt bee practice, as well as theorick: Let
no man much condemne this paradox opinion, to
ſay, that halfe ſeauen yeeres is ſcarce ſufficient, for
a good capacitie, to learne in theſe affaires, how to
carrie himſelfe: and who euer ſhall trie in theſe remote
places the erecting of a Colony, ſhall finde
at the ende of ſeauen yeares occaſion enough to vſe
all his diſcretion: and, in the Interim all the content,
rewards, games, and hopes will be neceſſarily
required, to be giuen to the beginning, till it bee
able to creepe, to ſtand, and goe, yet time enough
to keepe it from running, for there is no feare it wil
grow too faſt, or euer to any thing; except libertie
profit, honor, and proſperitie there found, more
binde the planters of thoſe affaires, in deuotion to
effect it; then bondage, violence, tyranny, ingratitude,
and ſuch double dealing, as bindes free men
to become ſlaues, and honeſt men turne knaues:
which hath euer bin the ruine of the moſt popular

common-weales; and is verie vnlikelie euer well
to begin in a new.
            Who ſeeth not what is the greateſt good of the
Spanyard,
               The bliſſe of Spaine. but theſe new concluſions, in ſearching
thoſe vnknowne parts of this vnknowne world? By
which meanes hee diues euen into the verie ſecret
of all his Neighbours, and the moſt part of the
world: and when the Portugale and Spanyard had
found the Eaſt and Weſt Indies; how many did condemn
themſelues, that did not accept of that honeſt
offer of Noble Columbus? who, vpon our neglect,
brought them to it, perſwading our ſelues the
world had no ſuch places as they had found: and
yet euer ſince wee finde, they ſtill (from time to
time) haue found new Lands, new Nations, and
trades, and ſtill daily dooe finde both in Aſia,
Africa, Terra incognita, and America; ſo that there
is neither Soldier nor Mechanick, from the Lord
to the begger, but thoſe parts afforde them all imploiment;
and diſcharge their Natiue ſoile, of ſo
many thouſands of all ſorts, that elſe, by their ſloth,
pride, and imperfections, would long ere this haue
troubled their neighbours, or haue eaten the pride
of Spaine it ſelfe.
            Now he knowes little, that knowes not England
may well ſpare many more people then Spaine, and
is as well able to furniſh them with all manner of
neceſſaries. And ſeeing, for all they haue, they ceaſe
not ſtill to ſearch for that they haue not, and know
not; It is ſtrange we ſhould be ſo dull, as not maintaine
that which wee haue, and purſue that wee

knowe. Surely I am ſure many would taſte it ill,
to bee abridged of the titles and honours of their
predeceſſors: when if but truely they would iudge
themſelues; looke how inferior they are to their
noble vertues, ſo much they are vnworthy of their
honours and liuings: which neuer were ordained
for ſhowes and ſhadowes, to maintaine idleneſſe &
vice; but to make them more able to abound in
honor, by heroycall deeds of action, iudgement,
pietie, and vertue. What was it, They would not
doe both in purſe and perſon, for the good of the
Commonwealth? which might moue them preſently
to ſet out their ſpare kindred in theſe generous
deſignes. Religion, aboue all things, ſhould
moue vs (eſpecially the Clergie) if wee were religious,
to ſhewe our faith by our workes; in conuerting
thoſe poore ſaluages, to the knowledge of
God, ſeeing what paines the Spanyards take to
bring them to their adulterated faith. Honor might
moue the Gentrie, the valiant, and induſtrious▪ and
the hope and aſſurance of wealth, all; if wee were
that we would ſeeme, and be accounted. Or be we
ſo far inferior to other nations, or our ſpirits ſo far
deiected, from our auncient predeceſſors, or our
mindes ſo vpon ſpoile, piracie, and ſuch villany, as
to ſerue the Portugall, Spanyard, Dutch, French, or
Turke (as to the coſt of Europe, too many doo
                  •
               )
rather then our God, our King, our Country, & our
ſelues? excuſing our idleneſſe, and our baſe complaints,
by want of impioiment; when heere is ſuch
choiſe of all ſorts, and for all degrees, in the planting

and diſcouering theſe North parts of Amemerica.
            
            Now to make my words more apparent by my
deeds;My ſecond voyage to New England. I was, the laſt yeare, 1615. to haue ſtaied in
the Countrie, to make a more ample triall of thoſe
concluſions with ſixteene men; whoſe names were

                  Gent.
                  Thomas Dirmir.
                  




Edward Stalings.
                  


Daniel Cage.
                  


Francis Abbot.
                  


Iohn Goſling.

               
               
                  Souldiers.
                  William Ingram.
                  Robert Miter.
                  Dauid Cooper.
                  Iohn Partridge,
                  and two boies.
               
               
                  Sailers.
                  
Thomaſs Digbie.
                  


Daniel Baker.
                  

Adam Smith.
                  Thomas Watſon
                  Walter Chiſsick
                  Iohn Hall.

               


            
            I confeſſe, I could haue wiſhed them as many
thouſands, had all other prouiſions bin in like proportion:
nor would I haue had ſo fewe, could I
haue had meanes for more: yet (would God haue
pleaſed wee had ſafely arriued) I neuer had the like
authoritie, freedom, and prouiſion, to doe ſo well.
The maine aſſiſtance next God, I had to this ſmall
number, was my acquaintance among the Saluages;
eſpecially, with Dohannida, one of their greateſt
Lords; who had liued long in England. By the
meanes of this proud Saluage, I did not doubt but
quickly to haue gotte that credit with the reſt of
his friends, and alliants, to haue had as many of
them, as I deſired in any deſigne I intended, and
that trade alſo they had, by ſuch a kind of exchange

of their Countrie commodities; which both with
eaſe & ſecuritie in their ſeaſons may be vſed. With
him and diuerſe others, I had concluded to inhabit,
and defend them againſt the Terentynes; with a better
power then the French did them; whoſe tyranny
did inforce them to imbrace my offer, with no
ſmall deuotion. And though many may thinke me
more bolde then wiſe, in regard of their power,
dexteritie, treacherie, and inconſtancie, hauing ſo
deſperately aſſaulted & betraied many others: I ſay
but this (becauſe with ſo many, I haue many times
done much more in Virginia, then I intended
heere, when I wanted that experience Virginia
taught me) that to mee it ſeemes no daunger more
then ordinarie. And though I know my ſelfe the
meaneſt of many thouſands, whoſe apprehenſiue
inſpection can pearce beyond the boundes of my
habilities, into the hidden things of Nature, Art,
and Reaſon: yet I intreate ſuch giue me leaue to excuſe
my ſelfe of ſo much imbecillitie, as to lay, that
in theſe eight yeares which I haue been conuerſant
with theſe affairs, I haue not learned there is a great
difference, betwixt the directions and iudgement
of experimentall knowledge, and the ſuperficiall
coniecture of variable relation: wherein rumor, humor,
or miſprision haue ſuch power, that oft times
one is enough to beguile twentie, but twentie not
ſufficient to keep one from being deceiued. Therefore
I know no reaſon but to beleeue my own eies,
before any mans imagination, that is but wreſted
from the conceits of my owne proiects, and indeauours.

But I honor, with all affection, the counſell
and inſtructions of iudiciall directions, or any other
honeſt aduertiſement; ſo farre to obſerue, as they
tie mee not to the crueltie of vnknowne euents.
            Theſe are the inducements that thus drew me
to neglect all other imployments, and ſpend my
time and beſt abilities in theſe aduentures. Wherein,
though I haue had many diſcouragements by
the ingratitude of ſome, the malicious ſlanders of
others, the falſeneſſe of friendes, the trechery of
cowards, and ſlowneſſe of aduenturers; but chiefly
by one Hunt, who was Maſter of the ſhip, with
whom oft arguing theſe proiects, for a plantation,
howeuer hee ſeemed well in words to like it, yet
he practiced to haue robbed mee of my plots, and
obſeruations: and ſo left mee alone in a deſolate
Ile, to the fury of famine, and all other extreamities
(leſt I ſhould haue acquainted Sir Thomas
Smith, my Honourable good friend, & the Councell
of Virginia) to the end, he and his aſſociates,
might ſecretly ingroſſe it, ere it were knowne to
to the State: Yet that God that alway hath kept
me from the worſt of his diſſimulations. Notwithſtanding
after my departure, hee abuſed the Saluages
where hee came, and betrayed twenty ſeauen
of theſe poore innocent ſoules, which he ſould in
Spaine for ſlaues, to mooue, their hare againſt our
Nation, aſwell as to cauſe my proceedings to be ſo
much the more difficult.
            Now, returning in the Bark, in the fift of Auguſt

I arriued at Plimouth: where imparting thoſe
my purpoſes to my honourable friende Sir Ferdinando
Gorge, and ſome others; I was ſo incouraged,
and aſſured to haue the managing their
authoritie in thoſe parts, during my life, that I ingaged
my ſelfe to vndertake it for them. Arriuing
at London, I found alſo many promiſe me ſuch aſſiſtance,
that I entertained Michaell Cooper the
Maſter, who returned with mee, and others of
the company. How hee dealt with others, or others
with him I know not: But my publike proceeding
gaue ſuch incouragement, that it became ſo
well apprehended by ſome fewe of the Southren
Company, as theſe proiects were liked, & he furniſhed
from London with foure ſhips at Sea, before
they at Plimouth had made any prouiſion at all,
but onely a ſhip cheefely let out by ſir Ferdinando
Gorge; which vpon Hunts late trecherie among the
Saluages, returned as ſhee went, and did little or
nothing, but loſt her time. I muſt confeſſe I was
beholden to the ſetters forth of the foure ſhips that
went with Cooper; in that they offered mee that
imploiment if I would accept it: and I finde, my
refusall hath incurred ſome of their diſpleasures,
whoſe fauor and loue I exceedingly deſire, if I may
honeſtly inioy it. And though they doe cenſure me
as oppoſite to their proceedings; they ſhall yet ſtill
in all my words and deedes finde, it is their error,
not my fault, that occaſions their diſlike: for hauing
ingaged my ſelfe in this buſineſſe to the Weſt
Countrie; I had beene verie diſhonest to haue

broke my promiſe; nor will I ſpend more time in
diſcourie, or fiſhing, till I may goe with a companie
for plantation: for, I know my grounds.
Yet euery one that reades this booke can not put
it in practice; though it may helpe any that haue
ſeene thoſe parts. And though they endeauour to
worke me euen out of my owne deſignes, I will
not much enuy their fortunes: but, I would bee
ſory, their intruding ignorance ſhould, by their
defailements, bring thoſe certainties to doubtfulneſſe:
So that the buſineſſe proſper, I haue my deſire;
be it by Londoner, Scot, Welch, or Engliſh, that
are true ſubiects to our King and Countrey: the
good of my Countrey is that I ſeeke; and there is
more then enough for all, if they could bee content
but to proceed.
            At laſt it pleaſed Sir Ferdinando Gorge,
               The occaſion of my returne. and Maſter
Doctor Sutliffe Deane of Exceter, to conceiue
ſo well of theſe proiects, and my former imployments,
as induced them to make a new aduenture
with me in thoſe parts, whither they haue ſo often
ſent to their cōtinuall loſſe. By whoſe example, many
inhabitants of the weſt Coūtry, made promiſes
of much more then was looked for, but their priuate
emulations quickly qualified that heat in the
greater number; ſo that the burden lay principally
on them, and ſome few Gentlemen my friends,
in London. In the end I was furniſhed with a Ship
of 200. and another of 50. But ere I had ſayled
120 leagues, ſhee broke all her maſts; pumping
each watch 5 or 6000 ſtrokes: onely her ſpret ſaile

remayned to ſpoon before the wind, till we had reaccommodated
a Iury maſt, & the reſt, to returne
for Plimouth.
               My reimbarkment, incounters with py
                     •••
                  s and impriſonment by the French. My Vice-admirall beeing loſt, not
knowing of this, proceeded her voyage: Now with
the remainder of thoſe prouiſions, I got out again
in a ſmall Barke of 60 tuns with 30 men (for this
of 200 and prouiſion for 70) which were the 16
before named, and 14 other ſaylors for the ſhip.
With thoſe I ſet ſaile againe the 24 of Iune: where
what befell me (becauſe my actions and writings
are ſo publicke to the world, enuy ſtill ſeeking to
ſcandalize my indeauours, & ſeeing no power but
death, can ſtop the chat of ill tongues, nor imagination
of mens mindes) leſt my owne relations
of thoſe hard euents, might by ſome conſtructors,
be made doubtfull, I haue thought it beſt to inſert
the examinations of thoſe proceedings, taken
by Sir Lewis Stukley a worthie Knight, and
Vice admirall of Deuonſhire; which were as followeth.
            The examination of Daniel Baker, late Steward to
Captaine Iohn Smith in the returne of Plimouth;
taken before Sir Lewis Stukley Knight, the eight of
December 1615.
            Who ſaith,Captaine Fry 
                     〈…〉
                  
                being chaſed two dayes by one Fry,
an Engliſh Pirate, that could not board vs, by reaſon
of foule weather, Edmund Chambers, the Maſter
Iohn Miner, his mate, Thomas Digby the 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
and others importured his ſaide Captaine to
yeeld; houlding it vnpoſſible hee ſhould defend

himſelfe: and that the ſaide Captaine ſhould ſend
them his boate, in that they had none: which at
laſt he concluded vpon theſe conditions, That Fry
the Pyrate ſhould vow not to take any thing from
Captaine Smith, that might ouerthrowe his voyage,
nor ſend more Pirats into his ſhip then hee
liked off; otherwaies, he would make ſure of them
he had, and defend himſelfe againſt the reſt as hee
could.
            More: he confeſſeth that the quarter-maſters &
Chambers receiued golde of thoſe Pirats; but how
much, he knoweth not: Nor would his Captain
come out of his Caben to entertaine them; although
a great many of them had beene his ſaylers,
and for his loue would haue waſted vs to the
Iles of Flowers.
            
            At Fyall,
               The one of 200, the other 20. wee were chaſed by two French Pyrats,
who commanded vs Amaine. Chambers, Minter,
Digby, and others, importuned againe the
Captaine to yeeld; alledging they were Turks, and
would make them all ſlaues: or Frenchmen, and
would throw them all ouer board if they ſhot but
a peece; and that they were entertained to fiſh,
and not to fight: vntill the Captaine vowed to fire
the powder and ſplit the ſhip, if they would not
ſtand to their defence; whereby at laſt wee went
cleere of them, for all their ſhot.
            At Flowers,
               The Admirall 140 tuns, 12 peeces, 12 murderers, 90 men, with long piſtols, pocket piſtol, muſket, ſword and poniard, the Vice-admirall 100 tuns, the Rere-admiral 60, the other 80: all had 250 Men moſt armed as is said. wee were chaſed by foure French
men of warre; all with their cloſe fights afore and
after. And this examinants Captaine hauing provided
for our defence, Chambers, Minter, Digby,
               
and ſome others, againe importuned him to
yeeld to the fauour of thoſe, againſt whom there
was nothing but ruine by fighting: But if he would
goe aboard them, in that hee could ſpeake French,
by curteſie hee might goe cleere; ſeeing they offered
him ſuch faire quarter, & vowed they were
Proteſtants, and all of Rochell, and had the Kings
commiſſion onely to take Spaniards, Portugales,
and Pyrats; which at laſt hee did: but they kept
this examinates Captaine and ſome other of his
company with him. The next day the French men
of warre went aboard vs, and tooke what they
liſted, and diuided the company into their ſeuerall
ſhips, and manned this examinates ſhip with the
Frenchmen; and chaſed with her all the ſhippes
they ſaw: vntill about fiue or ſix dayes after vpon
better conſideration, they ſurrendered the ſhip,
and victualls, with the moſt part of our prouiſion,
but not our weapons.
            More: he confeſſeth that his Captain exhorted
them to performe their voyage, or goe for New
found Land to returne fraughted with fiſh, where
hee would finde meanes to proceed in his plantation:
but Chambers and Minter grew vpon tearms
they would not;The gentlemen and ſouldiers were euer willing to fight. vntill thoſe that were Souldiers
concluded with their Captaines reſolution, they
would; ſeeing they had clothes, victualls, ſalt, nets, &
& lines ſufficient, & expected their armes: and ſuch
other things as they wanted, the French men promiſed
to reſtore, which the Captaine the next day
went to ſeeke, and ſent them about loading of

commodities, as powder, match, hookes, inſtruments,
his ſword and dagger, bedding, aqua vitae,
his commiſſion, apparell, and many other things;
the particulars he remembreth not: But, as for the
cloath, canuas, and the Captaines cloathes, Chambers,
and his aſſociats diuided it amongſt themſelues,
and to whom they beſt liked; his Captaine
not hauing any thing, to his knowledge, but his
waſtecoat and breeches. And in this manner going
from ſhip to ſhip, to regaine our armes, and the
reſt; they ſeeing a ſayle, gaue chaſe vntill night.
The next day being very foule weather, this examinate
came ſo neete with the ſhip vnto the French
men of warre, that they ſplit the maine ſayle on
the others ſpret ſayle yard. Chambers willed the
Captaine come aboard, or hee would leaue him:
whereupon the Captaine commanded Chambers
to ſend his boate for him. Chambers replyed ſhee
was ſplit (which was falſe) telling him hee might
come if he would in the Admiralls boat. The Captaines
anſwer was, he could not command her, nor
come when hee would: ſo this examinate fell on
ſterne; and that night left his ſaid Captaine alone
amongſt the French men, in this manner, by the
command of Chambers, Minter, and others.
            
               Daniel Cage, Edward Stalings, Gentlemen; Walter
Chiſſell, Dauid Cooper, Robert Miller and Iohn Partridge,
beeing examined, doe acknowledge and
confeſſe, that Daniel Baker his examination aboue
writen is true.
            
               
Now the cauſe why the French detayned me againe,A double treachery.
was the ſuſpicion this Chambers and Minter
gaue them, that I would reuenge my ſelfe, vpon
the Bank, or in New found Land, of all the French I
could there incounter; & how I would haue fired
the ſhip, had they not ouerperſwaded mee: and
many other ſuch like tricks to catch but opportunie
in this maner of leaue me. And thus they returned
to Plimouth; and perforce with the French I
thus proceeded.
            Being a Fleet of eight or nine ſayle,A 
                     ••
                  eet of nine French men of war, and 
                     •
                  ights with the Spaniards. we watched
for the W'eſt Indies fleet, till ill weather ſeparated vs
from the other 8. Still we ſpent our time about the
Iles neere Fyall: where to keepe my perplexed
thoughts from too much meditation of my miſerable
eſtate, I writ this diſcourse; thinking to haue
ſent it you of his Maieſties Councell, by ſome ſhip
or other: for I ſaw their purpoſe was to take all
they could. At laſt we were chaſed by one Captain
Barra, and Engliſh Pyrat, in a ſmall ſhip, with ſome
twelue peeces of ordinance, about thirty men, and
neer all ſtarued. They ſought by curteſie releefe
of vs; who gaue them ſuch faire promiſes, as at
laſt wee betrayed Captaine Wolliſton (his Lieftenant)
and foure or fiue of their men aboard vs, and
then prouided to take the reſt perforce. Now my
part was to be priſoner in the gun-roum, & not to
ſpeake to any of them vpon my life: yet had Barra
knowledge what I was. Then Barra perceiuing wel
theſe French intents, made ready to fight, and Wolliſton
as reſolutely regarded not their threats,

which cauſed vs demurre vpon the matter longer,
ſom ſixteene houres; and then returned their priſoners,
and ſome victualls alſo, vpon a ſmall compoſition.
The next wee tooke was a ſmall Engliſh
man of Poole from New found Land. The great caben
at this preſent, was my priſon; from whence
I could ſee them pillage thoſe poore men of all
that they had, and halfe their fiſh when hee was
gone, they ſould his poore cloathes at the maine
maſt, by an outcry, which ſcarce gaue each man
ſeauen pence a peece. Not long after, wee tooke a
Scot fraught from Saint Michaels to Briſtow: hee
had better fortune then the other. For, hauing but
taken a boats loading of ſuger, marmelade, ſuckets,
and ſuch like, we diſcried foure ſayle, after whom
we ſtood; who forling their maine ſayles attended
vs to fight. But our French ſpirits were content
onely to perceiue they were Engliſh red croſles.
Within a very ſmall time after, wee chaſed foure
Spaniſh ſhippes came from the Indies: wee fought
with them foure or fiue houres, tore their ſayles
and ſides; yet not daring to board them, loſt them.
A poore C
                  •
               ruell of Braſile, was the next we chaſed:
and alter a ſmall fight, thirteene or fourteen
of her men being wounded,A prize worth 16000 crow
                     •
                  
                which was the better
halfe, we tooke her, with 370 cheſts of ſugar. The
next was a Weſt Ind
                     •
                  es man, of 160 tuns, with
1200 hides, 50 cheſts of cutchanell, 14 coffers of
wedges of ſiluer,A prize worth 200000 crownes. 8000 ryalls of 8, and fix offers
of the King of Spaines treaſure, beſides the pillage
and rich coffers of many rich paſſengers. Two

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
monethes they kept me in this manner to manage
their fights againſt the Spaniards, and be a priſoner
when they tooke any Engliſh. Now though
the Captaine had oft broke his promiſe, which
was to put me a-shore on the Iles, or the next ſhip
be tooke; yet at laſt, he was intreated I ſhould goe
for France in the Caruell of ſugar: himſelf reſolued
ſtill to keepe the Seas. Within two dayes after, we
were haled by two Weſt Indy men: but when they
ſaw vs waue them for the King of France, they
gaue vs their broad ſides, ſhot through our mayne
maſt and ſo left vs. Hauing liued thus, neer three
moneths among thoſe French men of warre; with
much adoe, we arriued at the Gulion, not far from
Rochel; where inſtead of the great promiſes they
alwaies fed me with, of double ſatiſfaction, and
full content, they kept me fiue or ſix daies priſoner
in the Caruell, accuſing me to bee him that burnt
their Colony in New France; to force mee giue
them a diſcharge before the Iudge of the Admiralty,
and ſo ſtand to their curteſie for ſatiſfaction,
or lie in priſon, or a worſe miſchiefe. To preuent
this choiſe, in the end of ſuch a ſtorme that beat
them all vnder Hatches,My eſcape from the French men. I watched my opportunity
to get a-shore in their boat; where-into, in the
darke night, I ſecretly got: and with a halfe pike
that lay by me, put a drift for Rat Ile: but the Current
was ſo ſtrong and the Sea ſo great, I went a
drift to Sea; till it pleaſed God the winde ſo turned
with the tide, that although I was all this fearefull
night of guſts and raine, in the Sea, the ſpace of 12

houres, when many ſhips were driuen a ſhore, and
diuerſe ſplit (and being with ſculling & bayling the
water tired, I expected each minute would ſinke
mee) at laſt I arriued in an oazie Ile by Charowne;
where certaine fowlers found mee neere drowned,
and halfe dead, with water, colde, and hunger. By
thoſe, I ſound meanes to gette to Rochell; where I
vnderſtood the man of warre which we left at Sea,
and the rich prize was ſplit, the Captaine drowned
and halfe his companie the ſame night, within
ſeauen leagues of that place, from whence I eſcaped
alone, in the little boate, by the mercy of
God; far beyond all mens reaſon, or my expectation.
Arriuing at Rochell, vpon my complaint to the
Iudge of the Admiralitie, I founde many good
words, and faire promiſes; and ere long many of
them that eſcaped drowning, tolde mee the newes
they heard of my owne death: theſe I arreſting,
their ſeuerall examinations did ſo confirme my
complaint, it was held proofe ſufficient. All which
being performed according to the order of iuſtice,
from vnder the iudges hand; I preſented it to the
Engliſh Ambaſſador then at Burdeaux,
               Sir Thomas Edmunds. where it was
my chance to ſee the arriuall of the Kings great mariage
brought from Spaine. Of the wrack of the rich
prize ſome 36000. crownes worth of goods came
a ſhore & was ſaued with the Caruell, which I did
my beſt to arreſt: the Iudge did promiſe me I ſhold
haue iuſtice; what will bee the concluſion as yet, I
know not.They betraied mee hauing the broad ſeale of England and neere twentie sayle of Engliſh more, beſiles them concealed in like manner were betrayed that year But vnder the colour to take Pirats and
Weſt-Indie men (becauſe the Spanyards will not

ſuffer the French trade in the Weſt-Indies) any
goods from thence, thogh they take them vpon the
Coaſt of Spaine, are law full prize; or from any of
his territories out of the limits of Europe.
            
            Leauing thus my buſineſſe in France, I returned
to Plimouth, to find them that had thus buried me
amongſt the French: and not onely buried mee,
but with ſo much infamy,My returne for England, 1615 as ſuch trecherous cowards
could ſuggeſt to excuſe their villanies: But my
clothes, bookes, inſtruments, Armes, and what I
had, they ſhared amongſt them, and what they
liked; ſaying, the French had all was wanting; and
had throwne them into the Sea, taken their ſhip,
and all, had they not runne away & left me as they
did. The cheeftaines of this mutinie that I could
finde, I laied by the heeles; the reſt, like themſelues,
confeſſed the truth as you haue heard. Now how
I haue or could preuent theſe accidents, I reſt at
your cenſures. But to the matter.
            
               Newfound-land at the firſt, I haue heard, was
held as deſperate a fiſhing, as this I proiect in New
England. Placentia, & the Banke, were alſo as doubtfull
to the French: But, for all the diſasters happened
mee, the buſineſſe is the ſame it was: and the
fiue ſhips (whereof one was reported more then
three hundred tunnes) went forward; & found fiſh
ſo much, that neither Izeland-man, nor New foundland-man,
I could heare of hath beene there, will
goe any more to either place, if they may goe thither.The ſucceſſe of my vice Admirall and the foure ſhips of London, from New England.
So, that vpon the returne of my Viceadmirall
that proceeded on her voyage when I ſpent my

maſts, from Plimouth this yeare are gone foure or
fiue ſaile: and from London as many; onely to
make voyages of profit: where the Engliſhmen
haue yet bneene, all their returnes together (except
Sir Fr. Popphames) would ſcarce make one a ſauer
of neere a douzen I could nominate; though there
be fiſh ſufficient, as I perſwade my ſelfe, to fraught
yearely foure or fiue hundred ſayle, or as many as
will goe. For, this fiſhing ſtretcheth along the Coaſt
from Cape Cod to Newfound-land, which is ſeauen
or eight hundred miles at the leaſt; and hath his
courſe in the deepes, and by the ſhore, all the yeare
long; keeping their hants and feedings as the beaſts
of the field, & the birds of the aire. But, all men are
not ſuch as they ſhould bee, that haue vndertaken
thoſe voiages: and a man that hath but heard of an
inſtrument, can hardly vſe it ſo well, as hee that by
vſe hath contriued to make it. All the Romanes were
not Scipioes: nor all the Geneweſes, Columbuſes: nor
all Spanyards, Corteſes: had they diued no deeper in
the ſecrets of their diſcoueries, then wee, or ſtopped
at ſuch doubts and poore accidentall chances;
they had neuer beene remembred as they are: yet
had they no ſuch certainties to begin as wee. But,
to conclude, Adam and Eue did firſt beginne this
innocent worke, To plant the earth to remaine to
poſteritie: but not without labour, trouble & induſtrie.
Noe, and his family, beganne againe the ſecond
plantation; and their ſeede as it ſtill increaſed,
hath ſtill planted new Countries, and one countrie
another: and ſo the world to that eſtate it is. But

not without much hazard, trauell, diſcontents, and
many diſasters. Had thoſe worthie Fathers & their
memorable off-spring not beene more diligent for
vs now in theſe Ages, then wee are to plant that
yet vnplanted, for the after liuers: Had the ſeede
of Abraham, our Sauiour Chriſt, and his Apoſtles,
expoſed themſelues to no more daungers to teach
the Goſpell, and the will of God then wee; Euen
wee our ſelues, had at this preſent been as Saluage,
and as miſerable as the moſt barbarous Saluage yet
vnciuilized. The Hebrewes, and Lacedaemonians, the
Goths, the Grecians, the Romanes, and the reſt, what
was it they would not vndertake to inlarge their
Territories, enrich their ſubiects, reſist their enemies?
Thoſe that were the founders of thoſe
great Monarchies & their vertues, were no ſiluered
idle golden Phariſes, but induſtrious iron-steeled
Publicans: They regarded more prouiſions, and
neceſſaries for their people, then iewels, riches,
eaſe, or delight for themſelues. Riches were their
ſeruants, not their Maiſters. They ruled (as Fathers,
not as Tyrantes) their people as children,
not as ſlaues: there was no diſaster, could
diſcourage them; and let none thinke they incountered
not with all manner of incumbrances. And
what haue euer beene the workes of the greateſt
Princes of the earth, but planting of countries,
and ciuilizing barbarous and inhumane Nations,
to ciuilitie and humanitie? whoſe eternall actions,
fill our hiſtories. Laſtly, the Portugales, and Spanyards:
whoſe euerliuing actions, before our eyes will

teſtifie with them our idleneſſe, and ingratitude to
all poſterities, and the neglect of our duties in our
pietie and religion we owe our God, our King, and
Countrie; and of want charity to thoſe poore ſaluages,
whoſe Countrie wee challenge, vſe and posſeſſe;
except wee bee but made to vſe, and marre
what our Fore-fathers made, or but onely tell what
they did, or eſteeme our ſelues too good to take the
like paines. Was it vertue in them, to prouide that
doth maintaine vs? and baſeneſſe for vs to doe the
like for others? Surely no. Then ſeeing we are not
borne for our ſelues, but each to helpe other, and
our abilities are much alike at the houre of our
birth, and the minute of our death: Seeing our
good deedes, or our badde, by faith in Chriſts merits,
is all we haue to carrie our ſoules to heauen, or
hell: Seeing honour is our liues ambition; and our
ambition after death, to haue an honourable
memorie of our life: and ſeeing by noe
meanes wee would bee abated of the
dignities & glories of our Predeceſſors;
let vs imitate their
vertues to bee worthily
their ſucceſſors.
            FINIS.
            
               At London printed the 18. of Iune, in
the yeere of our Lord 1616.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            To his worthy Captaine,
the Author.
            OFt thou haſt led, when I brought vp the Rere
            In bloodie wars, where thouſands haue bin ſlaine.
            Then giue mee leaue, in this ſome part to beare;
            And as thy ſeruant, heere to read my name.
            Tis true, long time thou haſt my Captaine beene
            In the fierce wars of Tranſiluania:
            
            Long ere that thou America hadſt ſeene,
            Or led waſt captiued in Virginia;
            
            Thou that to paſſe the worlds foure parts doſt deeme
            No more, then t'were to goe to bed, or drinke,
            And all thou yet haſt done, thou doſt eſteeme
            As nothing. This doth cauſe mee thinke
            That thou I'aue ſeene ſo oft approu'd in dangers
            (And thrice captiu'd, thy valor ſtill hath freed)
            Art yet preſerued, to conuert thoſe ſtrangers:
            By God thy guide, I truſt it is decreed.
            For mee: I not commend, but much admire
            The England yet vnknowne to paſſers by-her.
            For it will praiſe it ſelfe in ſpight of me;
            Thou it, it thou, to all poſteritie.
            
               Your true friend,
and ſouldier,
Ed. Robinſon.
            
         
         
            
            To my honeſt Captaine,
the Author.
            MAlignant Times! What can be ſaid or don,
            But ſhall be cenſur'd and traduc't by ſome!
            This worthy Work, which thou haſt bought ſo dear,
            Ne thou nor it, Detractors neede to fear.
            Thy words by deedes ſo long thou haſt approu'd,
            Of thouſands knowe thee not thou art belou'd.
            And this great Plot will make thee ten times more
            Knowne and beleu'd, than ere thou wert before.
            I neuer knew a Warryer yet, but thee,
            From wine, Tobacco, debts, dice, oaths, ſo free.
            I call thee Warrier: and I make the bolder;
            For, many a Captaine now, was neuer Souldier.
            Some ſuch may ſwell at this: but (to their praiſe)
            When they haue don like thee, my Muſe ſhall raiſe
            Their due deſerts to Worthies yet to come,
            To liue like thine (admir'd) till day of Doome.
            
               Your true friend,
ſomtimes your ſoldier,
THO. CARLTON.
            
         
      
   