
      
         
            
            
            THE
SERMONS OF
MAISTER HENRIE
SMITH, GATHERED
INTO ONE VOLVME.
            Printed according to his corrected Copies
in his life time.
            
               ANCHORA SPEI
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            AT LONDON
Printed by Richard Field for Thomas Man,
dwelling in Pater Noſter row, at the ſigne of
the Talbot. 1593.
         
         
            
            
            NOBILISSIMO VIRO,
GVILIELMO CECILIO, EQVITI
AVRATO, BARONI BVRGHLEIENSI,
SVMMO ANGLIAE THESAVRARIO,
ET CANTABRIGIENSIS ACADEMIAE
CANCELLARIO:
HENRICVS SMITHVS HAEC
PIGNORA IN GRATI ANIMI
TESTIMONIVM
CONSECRAVIT.
         
         
            
            
            THE SEVERAL TEXTS
and titles of the Sermons contained
in this Booke.
            A Preparatiue to Mariage.
            A treatiſe of the Lords ſupper, in
two Sermons.
            
               I. Corinthians 11. 23. 24. &c.
The Lord Ieſus in the night that he, &c.
            The Examination of Vſurie, in
two Sermons.
            
               Pſalme 15. 1. 5.
Lord who ſhall dwell in thy Tabernacle, &c.
            The benefite of Contentation.
            1. Timothie. 6. 6.
Godlineſſe is great gaine, if a man be, &c.
            The affinitie of the Faithfull.
            
               Luke 1. 19. 20. 21.
Then came to him his mother and his, &c.
            
               
The Chriſtians Sacrifice.
            
               Prouerb. 23. 26.
My Sonne, giue me thy heart.
            The true triall of the Spirits.
            1. Theſſalonians 19. 20. 21. 22.
Quench not the Spirit, &c.
            The Wedding garment.
            
               Romans 13. 14.
Put ye on the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, &c.
            The way to walke in.
            
               Romans 13, 13
Let vs walke honeſtly, as in the day, &c.
            The pride of Nabuchadnezzar.
            
               Daniel 4. 26, 27.
At the end of twelue moneths he, &c.
            The fall of Nabuchadnezzar.
            
               Daniel 4. 28. 29. 30.
While the word was in his mouth, &c.
            The Reſtitution of Nabuchadnezzar.
            
               Daniel 4. 31. 32. 33. 34.
And at the end of theſe daies, &c.
            The honour of Humilitie.
            1. Peter 5. 5.
God reſ
                  •
               ſteth the proud, and giueth, &c▪
            
            
               
The Young-mans Taske.
            
               Eccleſiaſtes 12. 1.
Remember thy Creator in the daies of, &c.
            The triall of the righteous.
            
               Pſalme 34. 19.
Many are the troubles of the righteous, &c.
            The Chriſtians practiſe.
            
               Romans 12. 2.
Be ye changed by the renuing of your, &c.
            The Pilgrims Wiſh.
            
               Philippians 1. 23.
I deſire to be diſſolued, and to be with, &c.
            The Godly mans requeſt.
            
               Pſalme 90. 12.
Teach vs, O Lord, to number our daies, &c.
            A Glaſſe for Drunkards in two Sermons.
            
               Geneſis 9. 20. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27.
And Noah began to be an husband, &c.
            The Art of Hearing, in two Sermons.
            
               Luke 8. 18.
Take heed how you heare.
            The Heauenly Thrift.
            
               Luke 8. 18.
Whoſoeuer hath, to him ſhall be giuen, &c.
            
               
The Magiſtrates Scripture.
            
               Pſalme 82. 76.
I haue ſayd, Ye are Gods, but ye ſhall die, &c.
            The Triall of Vanities.
            
               Eccle. 1. 2.
Vanitie of vanities, ſayth the Preacher.
            The Ladder of Peace.
            1. Theſſ. 15. 16. 17. 18.
Reioice euermore, &c.
            The betraying of Chriſt.
            
               Math. 27. 1. 2. 3. 4.
When the morning was come, and the, &c.
            The petition of Moſes.
            
               Deut. 3. 23. 24.
And I beſought the Lord the ſame, &c.
            The Dialogue betweene Paul and Agrippa.
            
               Act. 26. 27. 28. 29.
O King Agrippa, beleeueſt thou the, &c.
            The Humilitie of Paul.
            
               Rom. 12. 1. 2.
I beſeech you therefore brethren, &c.
            A looking Glaſſe for Chriſtians.
            
               Rom. 12. 3.
I ſay through the grace that is giuen, &c.
            
               
Foode for new borne babes.
            1. Pet. 2. 2.
As new borne babes deſire the ſincere, &c.
            The banquet of Iobs Children.
            
               Iob. 1. 4. 5.
And his Sonnes went and banqueted, &c.
            Satans compaſſing the Earth.
            
               Iob. 1. 7. 8.
Then the Lord ſayd vnto Satan, &c.
            A Caueat for Chriſtians.
            1. Cor. 10. 12.
Let him that thinketh he ſtandeth, take, &c.
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               BEcauſe ſickneſſe hath restrained
mee from preaching, I am content
to doe any good by writing.
Happie is that author which is
inſtead of other, that after his
booke is read, men need read no
moe of that matter. I go vpon a Theame which
many haue trauerſed before me prolixly,Reuerēdum Couerdalum excipio. or curſorily,
or barrenly: If I haue performed by ſtudie
any more then the reſt, let my Reader iudge,
and giue glorie to him which teacheth by whome
he wil, What I haue endeuoured, my ſelfe do feele
and others know. We are ignorant of many things
for a few that we vnderſtand: but I haue bin alway
aſhamed, that my writings ſhuld weigh lighter
for want of paines, which is the bane of printing,
and ſurfetteth the Reader. Now I ſend thee
like a Bee to gather hony out of flowers & weeds.
Euery gardē is furniſhed with others, & ſo is ours.
Read, pray, and meditate: thy profit ſhall be little
in any booke, vnleſſe thou read alone, and vnles
thou read all, and record after, as the Bereans
did the ſermons of Paul. It is one of the births
of my fainting, therfore take it with a right hand:
and if thou find any thing that doth make thee
better, I repent not that others importunitie hath
obtained it for thee. Farewell. As Iacob bleſſed
his ſonnes when he left them, ſo now I muſt leaue

my fruit to others; I pray God to bleſſe it, that it
may bring forth fruit in other, and be the ſauour
of life to all that reade it.
            
               Thine in Chriſt, H. S.
               
            
         
         
            THE EPISTLE TO THE
TREATISE OF THE LORDS
SVPPER.
            IN the firſt ſermon the aduerſary
is confuted. In the ſecond ſermon
the Communicants are prepared:
In both are manie obſeruations,
and the wordes of the Text
expounded. Now labour for thy
ſelfe as I haue laboured for thee: I
would haue thee profit ſomewhat
more by this book, becauſe it hath
weakened mee more then all the
reſt.
            Farewell.
         
         
            
            The principall contents of this Treatiſe.
            
               THe cauſe of contracts before mariage. 1
               Three honors giuen of God to mariage. 2
               Three cauſes of mariage. 9
               Whether Miniſters may marrie. 12
               Whether an olde man may marrie a young
woman, & contra. 13
               Whether Proteſtants may marrie Papiſts. 31
               Whether children may marrie without Parents
conſent. 31
               Whether husbands may ſtrike their wiues. 44
               Whether the vſe of mariage be ſinne. 18
               Whether mothers ſhould nurſe their Children.
63
               How children ſhould be brought vp. 64
               Fiue markes in the choice of a husband or
wife. 26
               The husbands duties. 40
               The wiues duties. 47
               Their duties to their ſeruants. 56
               Their duties to their children. 62
               Three examples of good parents. 66
               Of Stepmothers. 67
               Of Diuorcement. 69
            
            
               Other obſeruations that fall in handling
the parts.
               
                  MAriage, the firſt ordinance of God, and
calling of men. fol. 3
                  Chriſts firſt miracle at a mariage. 4
                  
                     
Three mariages of Chriſt. 4
                  By mariage the womans curſe turned to two
bleſſings. 5
                  A note of Adams ſleepe. 6
                  Another application of the rib, whereof was
made the woman. 7
                  The day of mariage counted the ioyfulleſt
day in mans life. 7
                  Fornicators like the diuell. 12
                  No baſtard proſpered but Iephtah. 12
                  A married Fornicator like a Gentleman
theefe. 13
                  A wife is the poore mans treaſure, wherein
onely he matcheth the rich. 16
                  Two ſpies for a wife, diſcretion & fancie. 17
                  The wife muſt not onely be godly but fit. 18
                  A memorable ſaying of one that light vpon
a fit wife. 20
                  The beginning of the ring in mariage. 20
                  Why mariage doth come of Nuptiae. 22
                  Maides muſt ſpeake like an Eccho. 24
                  A leſſon for the married, drawne from the
name of wedding garment. 33
                  The man and wife like Cock and Dam. 32
                  Mariage compounded of two loues. 36
                  The beſt policy in mariage is to begin wel. 37
                  They muſt learne one anothers nature. 38
                  A ſweet example, teaching how couples ſhall
neuer fall out. 39
                  
                     
Man and wife like two partners. 42
                  Abraham bid to leaue all but his wife. 44
                  Why wiues are called huſwiues. 50
                  When the Man is away, the wife muſt liue
like a widow. 52
                  Why a wife was called the contrary to a huſband.
52
                  The cauſe whie manie deſpiſe their Huſbands.
               
            
            
               Other obſeruations.
               
                  Many obſeruations vpon ſeruants. 56
                  The maſter muſt correct his men, & miſtreſſe
her maides. 62
                  Children like mediators betweene a man and
his wife. 63
                  Adulterie like the diſeaſe of Mariage, and diuorcement
like the remedie. 70
                  Why adulterie ſhould diſſolue mariage more
then any thing elſe. 69
                  A ſentence for the maried to thinke vpon. 71
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A
PREPARATIVE
TO MARIAGE.
            
               YOu are come hither to be cō
               tracted
in the Lord, that is, of
two to be made one: for as
god hath knit the bones & ſinews
togither for the ſtrengthening
of mens bodies, ſo he
hath knit mā & womā togither, for the ſtrēgthening
of their life, becauſe two are firmer
thē one, & therfore when God made the woman
for man,Eccle. 9 9. he ſaid;Gen. 2. 18. 
               I will make him a helpe:
ſhewing that man is ſtronger by his wife. Euery
mariage before it be knit, ſhould be cōtracted,Exo. 22. 16.
as it is ſhewed in Exo. 22. 16. & Deu. 22. 28.
which ſtay between the contract and the mariage,Deu. 22. 28.
was the time of longing for their affection
to ſettle in,Why contracts goe before mariage. becauſe the deferring of that
which we loue, doth kindle the deſire, which
if it came eaſilie and ſpeedily vnto vs, would

make vs ſet leſſe by it.Mat. 1. 18. Therfore we read how
Ioſeph & Marie were contracted before they
were married. In theThat is, betweene ye contract & the mariage. Luke 1. 27. & 42. & 49. &c.
                contract Chriſt was
conceiued, and in the marriage Chriſt was
borne, that he might honor both eſtates: virginity
with his conception, and mariage with
his birth. You are contracted but to be married,What mariage is.
therfore I paſſe from contracts to ſpeake
of marriage, which is nothing elſe but a communion
of life betweene man and woman,
ioyned together according to the ordinance
of God.
            Firſt, I will ſhew the excellencie of marriage;The parts of the treatiſe.
then the inſtitution of it; then the cauſes
of it; then the choiſe of it; then the duties of
it; and laſtly the diuorcement of it.
            Well might Paule ſay, Marriage is honourable:
               Heb. 13. 4.
for God hath honoured it himſelfe. It
is honorable for the author,The excellencie of mariage. honorable for the
time, and honorable for the place. Whereas
all other ordinances were appointed of God
by the hands of men, or the hands of Angels,
mariage was ordained by God himſelf,Act. 7. 53. which
cannot erre.Heb. 2. 2. No man, nor Angell, brought
the wife to the husband,Gen. 2. 22. but God him ſelfe:
ſo marriage hath more honor of God in this,
then all other ordinances of God beſide, becauſe
he ſolemnized it himſelfe.
            Then it is honourable for the time, for it

was the firſt ordinance that God inſtituted,Mariage the firſt ordinance of God.
euen the firſt thing which he did after man
and woman were created, and that in the
ſtate of innocencie, before either had ſinned,
like the fineſt flower, which will not thriue
but in a cleane ground. Before man had anie
other calling, he was called to be a husband,
therefore it hath the honour of antiquitie aboue
all other ordinances, becauſe it was ordained
firſt, and is the auncienteſt calling of
men.
            Then it is honourable for the place: For
whereas all other ordinances were inſtituted
out of Paradiſe, mariage was inſtituted in
Paradiſe, in the happieſt place, to ſignifie how
happie they are that marrie in the Lord, they
do not onely marrie one another, but Chriſt
is married vnto them: and ſo marriage hath
the honour of the place aboue all other ordinances,
becauſe it was ordained in Paradiſe.
            As God the Father honoured marriage, ſo
did God the Sonne,Gen. 3. 15. which is called the ſeed of
the woman: and therfore Marriage was ſo honored
amongſt women becauſe of this ſeed,
that when Elizabeth brought foorth a ſonne,Luke 1. 25.
ſhe ſayd, that God had taken away her rebuke:
counting it the honour of women to
beare children, and by conſequence, the honour

of women to be married; for the children
which are borne out of mariage, are the
diſhonor of women, and called by the ſhamefull
name of Baſtards.Deu 32. 2.
            
            As Chriſt honoured Mariage with his
birth, ſo he honoured it with his miracles:
for the firſt miracle which Chriſt did,Chriſtes firſt miracle at a Mariage. he
wrought at a mariage in Canaan, where he
turned their water into wine: ſo, if Chriſt be
at your mariage, that is, if you marie in Chriſt,Ioh. 2. 8.
your water ſhalbe turned into wine, that is,
your peace, and your reſt, and your ioy, and
your happineſſe ſhall begin with your Mariage:
but if you marie not in Chriſt, then your
wine ſhall be turned into water, that is, you
ſhall liue woorſe hereafter then you did before.
            As hee honoured it with miracles, ſo hee
honoured it with praiſes:Mat. 22. 2. for he compareth
the kingdome of God to a Wedding,Verſe 11. and he
compareth holineſſe to a wedding Garment.
And in the fifth of Cāticles,Cant. 5. 9. he is wedded him
ſelfe.
            We reade in Scripture of three Mariages
of Chriſt.Three mariages of Chriſt. The firſt was, when Chriſt and our
 nature met together. The ſecond is, when
 Chriſt and our ſoule ioyne together. The
 third is, the vnion of Chriſt and his Chruch.
Theſe are Chriſts three wiues. As Chriſt honoured

Mariage, ſo do Chriſts Diſciples: for
Iohn calleth the coniunction of Chriſt and
the faithfull,Reue. 19. 7. a Mariage. And in the one and
twentith of the Reuelation and ninth verſe,Reu. 21. 9.
the Church hath the name of a Bride,Reu. 17. 1. whereas
Hereſie is called an harlot.By mariage the womans curſe turned into two bleſſings. Further, for the
honour of Mariage, Paul ſheweth how by it,
the curſe of the woman was turned into a
bleſsing, for the womans curſe was the paines
which ſhe ſhould ſuffer in her trauaile. Now
by mariage this curſe is turned into a bleſſing:Gen. 3. 16.
for children are the firſt bleſſing in all
the Scripture.Gen. 1. 28. And therefore Chriſt ſaith, that
ſo ſoone as the mother ſeeth a manchilde
borne into the world,Ioh. 16. 11. ſhee forgetteth all her
ſorowes, as though her curſe were turned into
a bleſſing.
            And further Paul ſaith,1. Tim. 2. 15 that by bearing of
children, if ſhe continueFor thoſe paines wil trie her faith. in faith & patience,
ſhe ſhall be ſaued: as though one curſe were
turned into two bleſſings. For firſt, ſhe ſhall
haue children, and after, ſhe ſhall haue ſaluation.
What a mercifull God haue we, whoſe
curſes are bleſſings?Note. So he loued our Parents,
when he puniſhed them, that he could ſcarce
puniſh them for loue, and therfore a comfort
was folded in his iudgement.
            To honour mariage more, it is ſayd, that
God tooke a rib out of Adams ſide,Gen. 2. 22. & thereof

built the woman. He is not ſaid to make
man a wife, but to builde him a wife: ſignifiing,
that man and wife make (as it were) one
houſe together, & that the building was not
perfect, vntill the woman was made as well
as the man, therefore if the building bee not
perfect now, it muſt be deſtroyed againe.
            Before God made the woman: it is ſayd,
that he caſt the man into a ſleepe,A note of Adams ſleepe. and in his
ſleepe he tooke a rib out of his ſide, and as he
made man of earth, ſo hee made the woman
of bone,Gen. 2. 21. while Adam was a ſleepe.
            This doth teach vs two things: as the firſt
Adam was a figure of the ſecond Adam, ſo
the firſt Adams ſleepe, was a figure of the ſecond
Adams ſleepe,1. Cor. 15. 22. & 45. and the firſt Adams
ſpouſe, was a figure of the ſecond Adams
ſpouſe. That is, as in the ſleepe of Adam, Eue
was borne, ſo in the ſleep of Chriſt the church
was borne; as a bone came out of the firſt Adams
ſide, ſo blood came out of the ſecond
Adams ſide. As Adams ſpouſe receiued life in
his ſleepe, ſo Chriſts ſpouſe receiued life in
his ſleepe: that is, the death of Chriſt is the
life of the Chruch,Eph. 5. 14. for the Apoſtle calleth
death a ſleepe:Ioh. 14. 6. but Chriſt which died is called
life,A note of Adams ſleepe. ſhewing that in his death we liue. Secondly,
this ſleep which the man was caſt into,
while his wife was created, doth teach vs,

that our affections, our luſtes, and our concupiſcences,
ſhould ſleepe while we goe about
this action. As the man ſlept while his wife
was making, ſo our fleſh ſhould ſleepe while
our wife is chooſing,Gen. 27. 3. leaſt as the loue of veniſon
wanne Iſaack to bleſſe one for another,
ſo the loue of gentrie, or riches, or beautie,
make vs take one for another.
            To honour mariage more yet, or rather to
teach the married how to honour one another,A note of Adams rib
it is ſaid, that the wife was made of the
husbands rib, not of his head, for Paul calleth
the husband the wiues head:Gen. 2. 22. nor of the foote,Eph. 5. 23.
for hee muſt not ſet her at his foote: the ſeruant
is appointed to ſerue,The Fathers obſeruation. and the wife to
helpe. If ſhee muſt not matche with the
head, not ſtoupe at the foote, where ſhall he
ſet her then? Hee muſt ſet her at his hart, and
therefore ſhe which ſhould lie in his boſome,
was made in his boſome, and ſhould be as
cloſe to him as his rib, of which ſhe was faſhioned.
            Laſtlie, in all Nations the day of mariage
was reputed the ioyfulleſt day in all their life,
and is reputed ſtill of all, as though the ſunne
of happineſſe began that day to ſhine vppon
vs, when a good wife is brought vnto vs.
Therefore one ſaith: that mariage doth ſignifie
merrie-age, becauſe a play-fellow is come

to make our age merrie, as Iſaac and Rebecca
ſported together.
            Salomon conſidering all theſe excellencies,
as though we were more indebted vnto
God for this, then other temporall gifts, ſaith,
Houſe and riches are the inheritance of the fathers,
               Pro. 14. 14.
               but a prudent wife commeth of the
Lord.
            
            Houſe and riches are giuen of God, and
all things elſe, and yet hee ſaith, houſe and riches
are giuen of parents, but a good wife is
giuen of God: as though a good wife were
ſuch a gift, as we ſhould account from God
alone,Thus Adam doth. and accept it as if he ſhould ſend vs a
preſent from heauen, with this name written
on it,Gen. 2. 
               The gift of God.
            
            Beaſtes are ordeined for food, and cloathes
for warmth, and flowers for pleaſure, but the
wife is ordeined for man,Gen. 29. 20. like litle Zoar, a Citie
of refuge to flie to in all his troubles, and
there is no peace comparable vnto her, but
the peace of conſcience.
            Now it muſt needes bee, that Mariage,
which was ordeined of ſuch an excellent author,
and in ſuch a happie place, and of ſuch
an auncient time, and after ſuch a notable order,
muſt likewiſe haue ſpeciall cauſes for the
ordinance of it. Therefore the holy Ghoſt doth
ſhew vs three cauſes of this vnion.
            
               
One is,Three cauſes of mariage. the propagation of children, ſignified
in that when Moſes ſaith; He created
them male and female: not both male, nor
both female,Gen. 2. 7. but one male, and the other female,
as if he created them fit to propagate
other. And therefore when he had created
them ſo, to ſhewe that propagation of children
is one ende of mariage, he ſayd vnto
them;Gen. 1. 28. 
               Encreaſe and multiplie. That is, Bring
forth children, as other creatures bring forth
their kinde.
            For this cauſe Mariage is called Matrimonie,Why mariage is called Matrimony.
which ſignifieth mothers, becauſe it maketh
them mothers which were virgins before:
and in the ſeminarie of the world, without
which all things ſhould be in vaine, for
want of men to vſe them, for God reſerueth
the great Citie to himſelfe, and this Suburbes
he hath ſet out to vs, which are Regents by
ſea and by land.
            If children be ſuch a chiefe ende of mariage,
then it ſeemes, that where there can be
no hope of children, for age and other cauſes,
there mariage is not ſo lawfull,This is ſignified in becauſe it is
maimed of one of his endes, and ſeemes rather
to be ſought for wealth,Deu. 23. 1. or for luſt, then
for this bleſſing of children. It is not good
grafting of an olde head vpon young ſhoulders,
for they will neuer beare it willingly, but

grudgingly.
            Twiſe the wife is called The wife of thy
youth,
               Prou. 5. 18. as though when men are olde,Mal. 2. 15. the time
of marying were paſt. Therefore God makes
ſuch vnequall matches ſo ridiculous euerie
where, that they pleaſe none but the parties
themſelues.
            The ſecond cauſe is to auoyd fornication;The ſecond cauſe
this Paul signifieth when he ſaith;1. Cor. 7. 8. 
               For the auoyding
of fornication, let euerie man haue his
owne wife. He ſaith not for auoiding of adulterie,
but for auoiding of fornication: ſhewing
that fornication is vnlawfull too, which
the Papiſts make lawful,Papiſts ſtewes. in maintaining their
ſtewes, as a ſtage for fornicators to play vpon,
and a ſanctuarie to defend them, like to
Abſaloms tent,2. Sa. 16. 22 which was ſpread vpon the
top of the houſe, that all Iſrael might ſee how
he defiled his fathers concubines.
            For this cauſe Malachie ſaith,Mal. 2. 15. that God
did create but one woman for the man, hee
had power to create moe, but to ſhew that he
would haue him ſtick to one, therfore he created
of one ribbe, but one wife for one huſband:
And in the Arke there were no mo women
then men: but foure wiues for foure huſbands,
although it was in the beginning of
the world, when many wiues might ſeeme
neceſſarie to multiplie mankinde.
            
               
If any might haue a diſpenſation herein,
it ſeemes that Kinges might bee priuiledged
before any other, becauſe of their ſucceſſion
to the Crowne, if his wife ſhould happen to
be barren: and yet the King is forbidden to
take many wiues,Deu. 17. 17. in Deut. 17. 17. as well as
the miniſter in 1. Tim. 3. 2. ſhewing,1. Tim. 3. 2. that the
danger of the ſtate doth not counteruaile the
danger of fornication.
            For this cauſe wee reade of none but wicked
Lamech before the floud,Gen. 4. 23. that had more
wiues then one, whome Iouinian calleth a
monſter, becauſe he made two ribbes of one.
And another ſaith, that the name of his ſecond
wife doth ſignifie a ſhadowe, becauſe
ſhe was not a wife, but the ſhadow of a wife:
For this cauſe the Scripture neuer biddeth
man to loue his wiues, but to loue his wife,
and ſaith,Mat. 9. 5. 
               They ſhall be two in one fleſh, not
three, nor foure, but onely two. For this cauſe
king Salomon calleth the whoriſh woman a
ſtrange woman,Prou. 2. 16. to ſhew that ſhe ſhould be a
ſtranger vnto vs, and we ſhould be ſtrange to
her.
            For this cauſe children which are borne in
mariage are called Liberi, which ſignifieth
free borne: and they which are borne out of
mariage are called Baſtardes, that is, baſe
borne,Gen. 36. 25. like the Mule which is ingendred of

an Aſſe and a Mare.Fornicators like the diuell. Therefore adulterers are
likened to the diuell, which ſowed another
mans ground,Mat. 13. 22. other ſowe for a harueſt, but
they ſowe that which they dare not reape.
Therefore children borne in wedlocke are
counted Gods bleſſing, becauſe they come
by vertue of that bleſſing,Pſa. 128. 4. 
               Increaſe and multiplie.
               Gen. 1. 28.
But before Adam and Eue were maried,
God neuer ſayd, Increaſe, ſhewing that he
did curſe, and not bleſſe ſuch increaſe. Therefore
we reade not in all the Scripture of one
Baſtard that cam to any good,Baſtards. but only Iephtah,Iudg. 11. 1.
and to ſhewe that no inheritance did belong
to them in heauen,They might be ſaued, but they had the marke of the curſe. they had no inheritance
in earth, neither were counted of the
congregation as other were. Deut. Chap. 23.
verſe 2.
            Now becauſe Mariage was appointed for
a remedie againſt fornication, therefore the
law of God inflicted a ſorer puniſhment vpon
him which did commit vncleannes after
mariage,Leu. 20. 10. then vpon him which was not maried,Deu. 22. 22.
becauſe he ſinned,Maried fornicators. although he had the
remedie of ſinne, like a rich theefe which
ſtealeth, and hath no need.
            Now if mariage be a remedie againſt the
ſinne of fornication, then vnleſſe Miniſters
may committe the ſinne of fornication,Mariage of Ministers. it
ſeemes that they may vſe the remedie as well

as other: for as it is better for one man to marie
then to burne, ſo it is better for all men to
marie then to burne: and therfore Paul ſaith,
Mariage is honourable amongſt all men.
               1. Cor. 7. 9. And
againe,Heb. 13. 4. 
               For the auoiding of fornication let euerie
man haue his wife.
               1. Cor. 7. And as though he did
foreſee that ſome would except the Miniſter
in time to come; in the firſt Epiſtle of Timothie,
the third Chapter and ſecond verſe, he
ſpeaketh more preciſely of the Miniſters
wife then of any other,1. Tim. 3. 2. ſaying; Let him be the
husband of one wife. And leaſt ye ſhould ſay
that by one wife he meaneth one Benefice,
like the Papiſts; he expoūdeth himſelfe in the
fourth verſe, and ſaith, that hee muſt bee
one that can rule his houſe well, and his children.
            Sure God would not haue theſe children
to be baſtardes, and therefore it is like
that he alloweth the Miniſter a wife. Therefore
Paul ſaid well,1. Cor. 7. 6. that he had no commandement
for Virginitie: for Virginitie cannot
be commaunded, becauſe it is a ſpeciall gift,
but not a ſpeciall gift to Miniſters, and therefore
they are not to be bound more then other.
A peculiar gift may not be made a generall
rule, becauſe none can vſe it but they
which haue it. And therefore in 1. Cor. 7. 17.
he ſaith:1. Cor. 7. 17. 
               As God hath diſtributed to euery man,

ſo let him walke. That is, if he haue not the gift
of continencie he is bound to marrie, & therfore
Paule commandeth in the ſeuenth verſe,
whether he be miniſter or other, If they can
not abſtaine, let them marrie, as though they
tempted God if they married not.
            The Lawe was generall, It is not good for
man to be alone,
               Gen. 2. 18. exempting one order of men
no more then another.Mat. 19. 11. And againe, Chriſt
ſpeaking of chaſtitie, ſaith; All men cannot receiue
this thing. Therefore, vnleſſe we knowe
that this order of men can receiue this thing,
Chriſt forbids to bynde them more then other:
and therefore as the Prieſts were married
that taught the Law, ſo Chriſt choſe Apoſtles
that were married, to preach the Goſpel.
Therefore the doctrine of Papiſts is the doctrine
of deuils:1. Tim. 4. 3. for Paul calleth the forbidding
of marriage, the doctrine of deuils, a fit title
for all their bookes.
            Laſtly, if marriage be a remedie againſt
ſinne, then Marriage it ſelfe is no ſinne: for if
marriage it ſelfe were a ſinne,Rom. 3. 8. we might not
marrie for anie cauſe, becauſe we muſt not do
the leaſt euill, that the greateſt good may
come of it: and if marriage be not a ſin, then
theBe not thou vain, and theſe words will not be offenſiue. duties of marriage are not ſinne, that is,
the ſecret of marriage is not euill, and therefore
Paule ſaith,Heb. 13. 4. not onely Marriage is honourable:
               
but the bed is honourable, that is, euen
the action of marriage is as lawfull as marriage.
            Beſides,1. Cor. 7. 8. Paule ſaith, Let the huſband giue
vnto the wise due beneuolence. Here is a commaundement
to yeeld this dutie: that which
is commaunded, is lawfull; and not to do it,
is a breach of the commaundement. Therfore
marriage was inſtituted before any ſinne was,
to ſhew that there is no ſinne in it, if it be not
abuſed: but becauſe this is rare, therefore after
women were deliuered,Leuit. 12. 4. 5. &c. God appoynted
them to be purified, ſhewing that ſome ſtaine
or other doth creepe into this action, which
had need to be repented,1. Cor. 7. 5. and therefore when
they praied, Paul would not haue them come
together, leaſt their prayers ſhould be hindered.
            The third cauſe is to auoyd the inconuenience
of ſolitarineſſe ſignified in theſe words,The third cauſe.
               It is not good for man to be alone,
               Gen. 2. as though he
had ſaid; this life would be miſerable and irkſome,
and vnpleaſant to man, if the Lord had
not giuen him a wife to companie his troubles.
If it be not good for man to be alone,
then it is good for man to haue a fellow: therfore
as God created a paire of all other kinds,
ſo he created a paire of this kinde.
            We ſay that one is none, becauſe he cannot

be fewer then one, he cannot be leſſer
then one, he cannot be weaker then one: and
therfore the wiſe man ſaith;Eccl. 4. 10. 
               Woe to him which
is alone, that is, he which is alone ſhall haue
woe. Thoughts, and cares, and feares, will
come to him, becauſe he hath none to comfort
him, as theeues ſteale in when the houſe
is emptie; like a Turtle, which hath loſt his
mate, like one legge when the other is cutte
off, like one wing when the other is clipte,
ſo had the man bene if the woman had not
bene ioyned to him: therefore for mutuall ſocietie
God coupled two together, that the infinite
troubles which lie vppon vs in this
world, might be eaſed with the comfort and
help one of another, and that the poore in the
worlde might haue ſome comfort as well as
the rich,Pro. 19. 6. for The poore man (ſaith Salomon)
is forſaken of his owne brethren,
               Pro. 27. 10. yet God hath
prouided one comforter for him, like Ionathans
armour-bearer,1. Sam. 14. 7 that ſhall neuer forſake
him, that is another ſelfe, which is the onely
commoditie (as I may tearme it) wherein the
poore do match the rich:A wife is the poore mans riches. Without which
ſome perſons ſhould haue no helper, no comforter,
no friend at all.
            But as it is not good to be alone, ſo Salomon
ſheweth,Prou. 21. 9. 
               That it is better to be alone,
then to dwell with a froward wife, which is like

a quotidian ague, to keepe his patient in vre.
Such furies do haunt ſome men,1. Sa. 16. 14 like Saules
ſpirite, as though the diuell had put a ſworde
into their handes to kill themſelues, therefore
chooſe whom thou maiſt enioy, or liue alone
ſtill, and thou ſhalt not repent thee of thy bargaine.
            That thou mayſt take and keepe without
repentance,The choiſe. now we will ſpeake of the choiſe,
which ſome call the way to good wiues
dwelling, for theſe flowers growe not on euerie
ground: therefore they ſay, that in wiuing
and ſtriuing, a man ſhould take counſell
of all the world,Deut. 1. 23. 4. leaſt he light vpon a curſe,
while hee ſeekes for a bleſſing. As Moſes
conſidered what ſpies he ſent into Chanaan,
ſo thou muſt regarde whom thou ſendeſt to
ſpie out a wife for thee.Two ſpies for a wife. Diſcretion is a warie
ſpie, but fancie is a raſh ſpie, and liketh whom
ſhe will miſlike againe.
            In the Reuelation Antichriſt is deſcribed
by a woman, and in Zacharie ſinne is called
a woman, which ſheweth, that women haue
many faultes,Zach. 5. 7. therefore hee which chuſeth of
them, had need haue iudgement, and make
an Anatomie of their hearts and mindes, before
he ſay, This ſhalbe mine. For the wiſeſt
man ſaith; I haue found one man of a thouſand,
but a woman among them all haue I not found.
               
Although this may be vnderſtoode of his
Concubines, yet it implyeth that generally
there is a greater infirmitie in women, than
in men, becauſe hee compareth them together,
as though there were a dearth of good
women ouer the world.
            For helpe hereof, in 1. Cor. 7. 39. we are
taught to marrie in the Lord, then we muſt
chuſe in the Lord too: therefore we muſt beginne
our marriage where Salomon beganne
his wiſedome.1. Reg. 3. 9. 
               Giue vnto thy ſeruant an vnderſtanding
heart. So giue vnto thy ſeruant
an vnderſtanding wife.Gen. 24. 12. If Abrahams ſeruant
praied vnto the Lord to proſper his buſines,
when he went about to chuſe a wife for another,
how ſhouldſt thou pray when thou goeſt
about a wife for thy ſelfe, that thou mayſt
ſay after, My lot is fallen in a pleaſant ground?
To direct thee to a right choiſe herein, the holie
Ghoſt giues thee two rules in the choiſe
of a wife,Godly, & fitte. Godlineſſe and fitneſſe: Godlines,
becauſe our Spouſe muſt bee like Chriſtes
Spouſe, that is, graced with gifts, and imbrodered
with vertues, as if we married holineſſe
her ſelfe. For the marriage of man and woman
is reſembled of the Apoſtle to the marriage
of Chriſt and the Church.Ephe. 5. 29. Now the
Church is called holie, becauſe ſhee is holie.
In the ſixt of the Canticles ſhe is called vndefiled,Cant. 6. 8.
               
becauſe ſhe is vndefiled.Pſal. 45. 9. In the 45. Pſal.
ſhe is called faire within, becauſe her beautie
is inward;1. Sa. 16. 7. So our Spouſe ſhould be holie, vndefiled,
and faire within. As God reſpecteth
the heart, ſo we muſt reſpect the heart, becauſe
that muſt loue, and not the face. Couetouſneſſe
hath euer bene a ſuiter to the richeſt,
and pride to the higheſt, and lightneſſe
to the faireſt: and for reuenge hereof, his ioy
hath euer ended with his wiues youth, which
tooke her beautie with it. The goods of the
world are good, and the goods of the bodie
are good, but the goods of the minde are better.1. Cor. 13. 13.
As Paul commendeth Faith, Hope, and
Charitie, but ſaith the greateſt of theſe is charitie:
ſo may I commend beautie, and riches
and godlineſſe, but the beſt of theſe is godlineſſe,
becauſe it hath the things which it wāts,
and makes euery ſtate alike with her gift of
contentation.
            Secondly,A fit wife. the mate muſt be fitte: It is not
inough to be vertuous, but to be ſutable, for
diuers women haue many vertues, and yet do
not fitte with ſome men; & diuers men haue
many vertues, and yet doe not fit to ſome women:
and therefore we ſee many times, euen
the godly couples to iar when they are married,
becauſe there is ſome vnfitneſſe between
them, which makes oddes. What is oddes, but

the contrary to euen?The ceremonie is not approued, but the inuention declared. therefore make them
euen (ſaith one) and there will be no oddes.
From hence came the firſt vſe of the Ring in
weddings, to repreſent this euenneſſe: for if
it be ſtraiter then the finger, it will pinch, and
if it be wider then the finger it will fall off;
but if it be fitte, it neither pincheth nor ſlippeth:
So they which are like, ſtriue not, but
they which are vnlike, as fire and water. Therfore
one obſerueth, that concorde is nothing
but likeneſſe, & all that ſtrife is for vnfitneſſe:
as in thinges when they fitte not together,
and in perſons, when they ſuite not one another.
            How was God pleaſed when he had found
a King according to his owne hart?1. Sa. 2. 35. So ſhall
that man be pleaſed that findes a wife according
to his owne heart, whether he be rich
or poore, his peace ſhall affoord him a cheerfull
life,The ſaying of a godly man. and teach him to ſing, In loue is no
lack. Therfore a godly man in our time thanked
the Lord that he had not onely giuen
him a godly wife, but a fitte wife: for he ſayd
not that ſhe was the wiſeſt, nor the holieſt,
nor the humbleſt, nor the modeſteſt wife in
the world, but the fitteſt wife for him in the
world, which euery man ſhould thinke when
that knot is tied, or elſe ſo often as he ſeeth a
better, hee will wiſh that his choice were to

make againe. As he did thanke God for ſending
him a fit wife, ſo the vnmarried ſhould
pray God to ſend him a fit wife: for if they
be not like, they will not like.
            The fitneſſe is commended by the holy
Ghoſt in two words: one is in the ſecond of
Geneſis,Gen. 2. 18. and the other is in 2. Cor. 6. 14. that
in Geneſis is,2. Cor. 6. 14. 
               Meet, God ſaith, I will make man
a helpe Meet for him. Shewing that a wife can
not helpe wel, vnleſſe ſhe be meet. Further, it
ſheweth that man is ſuch an excellent creature,
that no creature was like vnto him, or
meet for him, till the woman was made.
            This meetneſſe God ſheweth againe, in
the 22. verſe,Gen. 2. 22. where Moſes ſayth, That of the
rib which was taken out of man, God built
the womā: ſignifying, that as one part of the
building dooth meet and fit with another: ſo
the wife ſhould meet and fit with the huſband;
that as they are called couples, ſo they
may be called paires, that is, as a paire of
gloues, or a paire of hoſe are like: ſo man and
wife ſhould be like, becauſe they are a paire
of friends.
            If thou bee learned, chuſe one that loueth
knowledge; if thou be martial, chuſe one that
loueth prowes; if thou muſt liue by thy labor,
chuſe one that loueth husbandrie: for vnleſſe
her mind ſtand with thy vocation, thou ſhalt

neither enioy thy wife nor thy calling.
            That other word in 2. Cor. 6. 14. is Yoke,
there Mariage is called a Yoke. Paul ſayth;
Be not vnequally yoked. If mariage be a yoke,
then they which draw in it muſt be fit, like
two oxen which draw the yoke together, or
elſe all the burthen will lie vpon one. Therefore
they are called yokefellows too, to ſhew
that they which draw this yoke muſt be fellowes.Phil. 4. 3.
As hee which ſoweth ſeed chuſeth a
fit ground, becauſe they ſay, it is good grafting
vpon a good ſtocke, ſo he which will
haue godly children, muſt chuſe a godly wife,
for like mother (ſaith Ezechiel) like daughter.Ezec. 16. 44
Now as the traueller hath markes in his
way, that he may proceed aright: ſo the ſuiter
hath markes in his way that he may chuſe
right.
            There be certaine ſignes of this fitnes,Fiue rules in the choiſe of a good wife. and
godlines, both in the mā and in the woman.
If thou wilt know a godlie man, or a godlie
woman, thou muſt marke fiue things: the report,
the lookes, the ſpeech, the apparell, and
the companions; which are like the pulſes,
 that ſhew whether we be well or ill. The report,Psal. 11. 26
becauſe as the market goes, ſo they ſaie
the market men wil talke.Pro. 10. 7. A good man commonlie
hath a good name,Mar. 14. 9. becauſe a good
name is one of the bleſſings which God promiſeth

to good men, but a good name is not
to bee prayſed from the wicked: and therefore
Chriſt ſayth;Luke 6. 26. 
               Curſed are you when al men
ſpeake well of you: that is, when euill men
ſpeake well of you, becauſe this is a ſigne
that you are of the world,Iohn 15. 19 
               for the world liketh
and prayſeth her owne: Yet as Chriſt ſayd,
Who can accuſe me of ſinne?
               Iohn 8. 46. So it ſhould bee
ſayd of vs, not who can accuſe me of ſinne?
but who can accuſe me of this ſinne? or who
can accuſe me of that ſinne? That is, who
can accuſe mee of ſwearing? who can accuſe
mee of diſſembling? who can accuſe mee of
fornication? No man can ſay this of his
thought, but euery man ſhould ſay it of the
act,Luke 16. like Zachariah and Elizabeth, which are
called vnblameable before men, becauſe none
could accuſe them of open ſinnes.
            The next ſigne is the looke, for Salomon 
ſaith in Eccleſ. 8. 7.Eccle 8. 7. 
               Wiſdome is in the face of
a man, ſo godlineſſe is in the face of a man,
and ſo follie is in the face of a man, and ſo
wickedneſſe is in the face of a man. And therfore
it is ſayd in Eſay, Chapter 3. verſe 9. The
triall of their countenaunce teſtifieth agaynst
them.
               Eſay 3. 9. As though their lookes could ſpeake,
and therefore we read of proud lookes, and
angrie lookes, and wanton lookes: becauſe
they bewray pride, and anger, & wantonnes.
            
               
I haue heard one ſay, that a modeſt man
dwels at the ſigne of a modeſt countenaunce,
and an honeſt woman dwelleth at the ſigne
of an honeſt face, which is like the gate of the
temple that was called Beautifull: ſhewing,
that if the entrie be ſo beautifull,Acts 3. 2. within is
great beautie.
            To ſhew how a modeſt countenance, and
womanly ſhamefaſtnes do commend a chaſt
wife, it is obſerued that the word Nuptiae,
which ſignifieth the mariage of the woman,
doth declare the manner of her mariage: for
it importeth a couering, becauſe the virgins
which ſhould be married, when they came to
their husbands, for modeſtie and ſhamefaſtneſſe
did couer their faces: as we read of Rebeccah,Gen. 24. 65.
which ſo ſoone as ſhe ſaw Iſaac, and
knew that he ſhould be her husband, ſhe caſt
a vaile before her face, ſhewing that modeſtie
ſhould be learned before mariage, which is
the dowrie that God addeth to her portion.
            
                The third ſigne is her ſpeech, or rather her
ſilence;To Adam firſt and to Moſes after. for the ornament of a woman is ſilence:
and therefore the law was giuen to
the man rather then to the woman, to ſhew
that he ſhould be the teacher, and ſhe the hearer▪
               Maids muſt ſpeake 
                     〈…〉
                  
               
As the Eccho anſwereth but one for manie
which are ſpoken to her, ſo a maides anſwere
ſhould be in a word, for ſhe which is

full to talke, is not likely to prooue a quiet
wife.
            The eye and the ſpeech are the mindes
glaſſes,Mat. 12. 34 for out of the aboundance of the heart
(ſaith Chriſt) the mouth ſpeaketh: as though
by the ſpeech wee might know what aboundeth
in the heart:Mat. 12. 36 and therefore he ſayth: By
thy words thou ſhalt bee iuſtified, and by thy
words thou ſhalt be condemned. That is, thou
ſhalt bee iuſtified to be wiſe, or thou ſhalt be
condemned to be fooliſh: thou ſhalt be iuſtified
to be ſober, or thou ſhalt be condemned
to be raſh: thou ſhalt be iuſtified to be humble,
or thou ſhalt be condemned to be proud:
thou ſhalt bee iuſtified to be louing, or thou
ſhalt be condemned to be enuious. Therefore
Salomon ſaith,Pro. 18. 7. 
               A fooles lippes are a ſnare to his
own ſoule. Snares are made for other, but this
ſnare catcheth a mans ſelfe, becauſe it bewraieth
his follie, and cauſeth his trouble, and
bringeth him into diſcredit.Pro. 17. 23. Contrariwiſe, the
heart of the wiſe (ſaith Salomon) guideth his
mouth wiſely,
               Eccl. 12. 10. 
               and the words of his mouth haue
grace. Now to ſhew that this ſhould be one
marke in the choiſe of thy wife, Salomon describing
a right wife,Pro 19. 15. ſaith; She openeth her
mouth with wiſdome,
               Nu. 19. 15. 
               and the law of grace is in
her tongue. A wife that can ſpeake this language,
is better then ſhee which hath all the

tongues. But as the open veſſels were counted
vncleane, ſo account that the open mouth
hath much vncleanneſſe.
            
                The fourth ſigne is the apparell, for as the
pride of the glutton is noted,Luk. 16. 19. in that he went
in purple euery day, ſo the humilitie of Iohn
is noted, in that he went in hair-cloth euery
day.Mar. 1. 6. A modeſt woman is knowne by her ſober
attire, as the prophet Eliah was knowne
by his rough garment.2. King. 1. 8. Looke not for better
within, thē thou ſeeſt without: for euery one
ſeemeth better then ſhe is, if the face be vanitie,
the heart is pride. He which biddeth thee
abſtaine from the ſhew of euill, would haue
thee to abſtain from thoſe wiues which haue
the ſhewes of euill:1 The. 5. 22 for it is hard to come in
the faſhion, and not to be in the abuſe: and
therefore Paul ſaith:Rom. 12. 2. 
               Faſhion not your ſelues like
vnto this world, as though the faſhions of men
did declare of what ſide they are.
            
                The fift ſigne is the companie, for birds of
a feather wil flie together, and fellowes in ſin,
will be fellowes in league,1. Reg. 12. 8. euen as young Rehoboam
choſe yong companions. The tame
beaſts will not keepe with the wilde, nor
the cleane dwell with the leprous. If a man
can be knowne by nothing elſe, then he may
be knowne by his companions: for like will
to like, as Salomon ſayth; Theeues call one

another. Therefore when Dauid left iniquitie,Pro. 1. 11.
he ſaid; Away from me all ye that worke iniquitie:
               Pſal. 6. 8.
ſhewing, that a man neuer abandoneth
euill, vntill he abandon euil companie: for no
good is concluded in this Parliament. Therfore
chuſe ſuch a companion of thy life, as
hath choſen companie like thee before. For
they which did chuſe ſuch as loued prophane
companions before, in a while were drawne
to bee prophane too, that their wiues might
loue them. All theſe properties are not ſpied
at three or foure commings, for hypocriſie is
ſpun with a fine threed, and none are ſo often
deceiued as louers. He which wil know al his
wiues qualities before he be married to them,
muſt ſee her eating, and walking, and working,
and playing, and talking, & laughing,
and chiding, or elſe he ſhall haue leſſe with
her then he looked for, or more then he wiſhed
for.
            When theſe rules are warilie obſerued, they
may ioine together, and ſay as Laban & Bethuel
ſaid;Gen. 24. 50. 
               This commeth of the Lord, therfore
we will not ſpeake againſt it. How happie are
thoſe, in whom Faith, and Loue, and Godlineſſe
are maried together before they marie
themſelues? For none of theſe martiall, and
cloudie, and whining mariages can ſay, that
Godlineſſe was inuited to their Bridal; and

therefore the bleſſings, which are promiſed
to godlineſſe, do flie from them.
            Now in this choice are two queſtions.Parents conſent in Mariage. Firſt,
whether children may marrie without their
parents conſent: Second, whether they may
marrie with Papiſts or Atheiſts, &c. Touching
the firſt,Exod. 20. God ſayth: Honour thy father
and thy mother. Now, wherein canſt thou honour
them more, then in this honorable action,
to which they haue preſerued thee, and
brought thee vp, which concerneth the ſtate
of thy whole life? Agayne, in the firſt inſtitution
of Mariage, when there was no father
to giue conſent, thē our heauenly father gaue
his conſent:Gen. 2. 22. God ſupplied the place of the
Father, and brought his daughter vnto her
husband, and euer ſince the father after the
ſame maner, hath offered his daughter vnto
the husband.
            Beſide, there is a law, that if a man defloure
a virgin,Exod. 22. he ſhall marrie her: but if the father
of the virgin do not like of the marriage, then
he ſhall pay vnto her the dowrie of virgins,
that is, ſo much as her virginitie is eſteemed,
ſo that the father might allow the mariage, or
forbid it.
            Againe,Num. 30. 6. there is a law, that if any free
man, or free woman make a vow, it muſt bee
kept. But if a virgin make a vow, it ſhould not

be kept, vnleſſe her father approue it, becauſe
ſhe is not free: therefore if ſhee did vow to
marrie, yet the father hath power by this law
to breake it. Againe, our Sauiour ſaith, that in
heauen there is no marrying, nor giuing to
marriage, ſhewing that in earth there ſhould
be a giuing to marriage, as well as marrying.
Therefore the law ſpeaketh vnto the father,
ſaying.Deut. 7. 3. 
               Thou ſhalt not take a wife for thy ſon of
ſtrangers. Therefore Paul ſpeaketh to the father,1. Cor. 7. 38.
               If thou giue thy daughter to mariage, thou
doeſt well.
               Iob. 1. 3. & 10. Therefore Iobs children are counted
part of Iobs ſubſtance, ſhewing, that as a
man hath the diſpoſition of his owne ſubſtance,
ſo he hath the diſpoſition of his owne
children. Therefore in Mat. 22. 30. the wife is
ſayd to be beſtowed in marriage, which ſignifieth,
that ſome did giue her beſide her ſelfe:
therefore it is ſayd,Gen. 29. 18. that Iacob ſerued Laban,

                  〈◊〉
                Laban might giue him his daughter to
wife.1 Sam. 18. 17. 
                     •
                  
                Therefore Saul ſaith to Dauid, I will
giue thee mine eldeſt daughter to wife:Gen 28. 6. therefore
it is ſayd that Iudah tooke a wife to Er
his ſonne.Gen. 34. 9. Therefore Sichem ſaith to his Father,Gen. 24. 51. 52. 53.
get me this maide to wife. Therefore in
the marriage of Iſaac, we ſee Abrahams ſeruant
in the place of Iſaac, and Rebecca the
mayd and her parents,Iudg. 14 2. ſitting in Parliament
together: therefore Sampſon, though he had

found a maide to his liking, yet he would not
take her to wife, before hee had tolde his parents,
and craued their aſſent. It is a ſweete
wedding, when the father and the mother
bring a bleſſing to the feaſt: and a heauie vnion
which is curſed the firſt day that it is knit.
            The parents commit their children to Tutors,
but themſelues are more then Tutors. If
children may not make other contracts without
their good will, ſhall they contract marriage,
which haue nothing to maintaine it after,
vnleſſe they return to beg of them whom
they ſcorned before.
            Wil you take your fathers money, and wil
you not take his inſtruction? Mariage hath
neede of many Counſellers, and doeſt thou
count thy father too many, which is like the
foreman of thy inſtructors? If you mark what
kinde of youthes they be, which haue ſuch
haſt, that they dare not ſtay for their parentes
aduiſe, they are ſuch as hunt for nothing but
beauty, and for puniſhment hereof they marrie
to beggerie, and loſe their father and mother
for their wife: Therefore honor thy parents
in this, as thou wouldeſt that thy children
ſhould honour thee.
            The ſecond queſtion is anſwered of Paul,
when hee ſaith: Be not vnequally yoaked with
Infidels. As we ſhould not be yoked with Infidels,

ſo we ſhould not be yoked with Papiſts,Mariage with Papiſts, &c.
and ſo we ſhould not be yoked with
Atheiſts, for that alſo is to be vnequallie yoked,Gen. 24. 3.
vnleſſe we be Atheiſts too. As the Iewes
might not marrie with the Chananites,Exo. 34. 16. ſo
we may not marry with them,Gen. 28. 1. which are like
Chananites,Mal. 2. 11. but as the ſonnes of Iacob ſayd
vnto Emor,Ezra. 9. 12. which would marrie their ſiſter;Gen. 34. 14.
               We may not giue our ſiſter to a man vncircumciſed,
               The ſimilitude holds in their ſaying, & not in their meaning, for they ſpake truely, but they ment falſlie.
               but if you will be circumciſed like vs, then
we will marrie with you.
            
            So parents ſhould ſay to ſuiters, I may not
giue my daughter to a man vnſanctified, but
if you will be ſanctified, then I will giue my
daughter vnto you. Though hereſie and irreligion
be not a cauſe of diuorce, as Paul teacheth,
yet it is a cauſe of reſtraint, for we may
not marry all, with whom we may liue being
married. If adultery may ſeparate marriage,
ſhall not idolatrie hinder marriage, which is
worſe than it?Mat. 29. 6. Chriſt ſaith; Let no man ſeparate
whom God hath ioyned,
               Mark. 10. 9 ſo I may ſay, Let no
man ioyne whom God doth ſeparate. For if
our father muſt be pleaſed with our mariage,
much more ſhould we pleaſe that Father
which ordeined marriage.
            Shall I ſay, Be my wife, to whome I may
not ſay,Eſay. 52. 11 
               Be my companion? Or, Come to my
bed, to whom I may not ſay, Come to my table?
               
How ſhould my mariage ſpeed well,2. Iohn. 10. when I
marrie one to whom I may not ſay, God ſpeed,
becauſe ſhe is none of Gods friends?
            If a man long for a bad wife, he were beſt
go to hell a wooing, that he may haue choice.
Is there no friend but the enemie? no tree but
the forbidden tree? He marrieth with the diuell,
which marrieth with the tempter: for
Tempter is his name,Matt. 4. 3. and to tempt is his nature.
When a man may chooſe, hee ſhould
chooſe the beſt, but this man chooſeth the
worſt, like them which call good euill, and
euill good.
            He praieth Not to be lead into temptation,
               Luke 11. 4.
and leadeth himſelfe into temptation. Surely
he doth not feare ſinne, which doth not ſhun
occaſions, and hee is worthie to be ſnared
which maketh a trap for himſelfe. When Salomon,1. Reg. 11. 1. &c.
the mirror of wiſedome, the wonder
of the world, the figure of our Lord, by Idolatrous
concubines is turned to an Idolater, let
no man ſay, I ſhall not be ſeduced: but ſay,
how ſhall I ſtand, where ſuch a Cedar fell?
The wife muſt be meet, as God ſayd, Gen. 2.
18. But how is ſhe meet, if thou be a chriſtian
& ſhe a Papiſt? We muſt marry in the Lord
as Paul ſaith,1. Cor. 7. 39. but how doe we marrie in the
Lord, when we marrie the Lordes enemies?
Our ſpouſe muſt be like Chriſts ſpouſe, but

Chriſts ſpouſe is neither harlotte, nor heretike,
nor atheiſt. If ſhe be poore, the Lord reproueth
not for that; if ſhe be weak, the Lord
reproueth not for that; if ſhe be hard fauoured,
the Lord reproueth not for that; all theſe
wants may be diſpenced with: but none giueth
anie diſpenſation for godlineſſe but the
diuell. Therefore they which take that priuiledge,
are like them which ſeeke to witches,
and are guilty of preferring euil before good.
This vnequall mariage,Gen. 3. 4. was the chiefe cauſe
that brought the floud, and the firſt beginning
of Giants, and monſtrous births, ſhewing
by their monſtrous children what a monſtrous
thing it is,Gen. 6. 2. for beleeuers and vnbeleeuers
to match together.
            In Matth. 22. Chriſt ſheweth, that before
parties married, they were woont to put on
faire and new garments,Mat. 22. 11 which were called
VVedding garmentes, a warning vnto all
which put on wedding garments,Wedding garment. to put on
truth and holineſſe too, which ſo preciſely is
reſembled by that garment more then other.
It is noted in the fourteenth of Luke, that of
all them which were inuited to the Lordes
banquet,Note. and came not onely hee which had
married a wife,Luk. 14. 21. did not deſire to be excuſed,
but ſaid ſtoutly, I cannot come. Shewing how
this ſtate dooth occupie a man moſt, and

draw him often from the ſeruice of God:
and therefore we had not neede to take the
worſt, for the beſt are comberſome enough.
In the ſecond of Iob,Iob. 2. 9. & 3. 1. it is obſerued of the patient
man, that he did not curſe the day of his
birth, vntill his wife brake foorth into blaſphemie,
ſhewing, that wicked women are able
to change the ſtedfaſteſt man, more then
all temptations beſide. Sampſon would take
a Philiſtian to wife,Iudg. 14. but he loſt his honor, his
ſtrength, and his life by her, leaſt any ſhould
do the like.
            But what a notable warning is that in the
2. Chro. 21. 6. where the holy Ghoſt ſayth:2. Chro. 21. 6
               Iehoram walked in the waies of Ahad, for he
had the daughter of Ahad to wife, as though
it were a miracle if hee had bene better then
he was, becauſe his wife was a temptation.
Miſerable is that man which is fettered with
a woman that liketh not his Religion, ſhee
will be nibling at his praier, and at his ſtudie,
and at his meditations, till ſhe haue tyred his
deuotions, and turned the edge of his ſoule,
as Dauid was tired of his malapert Michol,2. Sa. 6. 16.
ſhe mocked him for his zeale, and liked herſelfe
in her follie. Many haue fallen at this
ſtone:Luk. 16. 32. Therefore as Chriſt ſaith: Remember
Lots wife; ſo when thou marrieſt, remember
Iehorams wife, and bee not wedded to her

which hath not the Wedding garment: but
let vnitie goe firſt, and let vnion follow after,
and hope not to cōuert her, but feare that ſhe
will peruert thee, leaſt thou ſaie after like him
which ſhould come to the Lordes banquette,
I haue married a wife,
               Luk. 14. 20. 
               and cannot come. Luke
14. 20.
            Yet the chiefeſt point is behinde,The duties of mariage that is,
our duties. The dueties of marriage may be
reduced to the dueties of man and wife one
towarde another, and their dueties towarde
their children, and their duetie toward their
ſeruants. For themſelues, ſaith one, they muſt
thinke themſelues like two birdes,Pro. 31. 26. the one is
the cocke,The man and wife like Cock and dam▪
                and the other is the dam: the cocke
flieth abroad to bring in, and the dam ſitteth
vpon the neſt to keepe all at home. So God
hath made the man to trauell abroad, and the
woman to keepe home: and ſo their nature,
and their witte, and their ſtrength, are fitted
accordingly; for the mans pleaſure is moſt abroad,
and the womans within.
            In euerie State there is ſome one vertue
which belongeth to that calling more
than other: as Iuſtice vnto Magiſtrates,
and Knowledge vnto Preachers, and Fortitude
vnto Souldiers: ſo Loue is the Marriage
vertue, which ſignes Muſicke to their
whole life.
            
               
Wedlocke is made of two loues, which I
may call the firſt loue,Mariage compounded of two loues. and the after loue. As
euerie man is taught to loue God before hee
be bid to loue his neighbour; ſo they muſt
loue GOD before they can loue one another.
            To ſhewe the loue which ſhould be betweene
man and wife, Mariage is called Coniugium,
which ſignifieth a knitting or ioyning
together: ſhewing, that vnleſſe there be a ioyning
of hearts, and a knitting of affections together,
it is not Mariage in deede, but in
ſhew and name, and they ſhal dwel in a houſe
like two poyſons in a ſtomacke, and one ſhall
euer be ſicke of another.
            Therefore, firſt that they may loue, and
keepe loue one with another, it is neceſſarie
that they both loue God, and as their loue increaſeth
toward him, ſo it ſhall increaſe each
to other. But the man muſt take heede that
his loue toward his wife be not greater than
his loue toward God,Gen. 3. 6. as Adam & Sampſons
were,Iudg 16. 17 for all vnlawfull loue will turne to hatred,
as the loue of Amon did toward Thamar,2. Sa. 13. 15
and becauſe Chriſt hath forbidden it,
therefore hee will croſſe it. This made Vriah
ſo fearful,Mat. 10. 36 leaſt the pleaſure of his wife ſhould
withdraw his heart from God, that he would
not goe to his owne houſe, ſo long as he had

cauſe to mourne and pray, although he had a
wife which feared God like himſelfe: & that
you may ſee it is no cheape dalliance for the
husband to make the wife, or the wife to
make the husband leſſe zealous then they
were. In Deut. 13. the wife which did draw
her husband from God is condemned to die:
therefore good wiues, when their husbands
purpoſe any good, ſhould incourage them
like Iacobs wife,Gen. 30. 16. which bade him do according
to the word of God, and if they ſee them
minded to doe any euill, they ſhould ſtay
them,Mat. 17. 19 like the wife of Pylate, which counſayled
her husband not to cōdemne Chriſt. For
ſeeing holineſſe is called the Wedding garment,Mat. 22. 11
who ſhall weare this wedding garmēt,
if they weare it not which are wedded? When
one holy hath found another, then the holieſt
ſeemeth to make the Mariage, and his angels
come to the feaſt.
            To paſſe ouer ſleights which ſeldome
proſper, vnleſſe they haue ſome warrant.
The beſt pollicie in mariage is to begin well,Beſt pollicie in mariage to begin wel.
for as boords well ioined at the firſt, ſit cloſe
euer after, but if they ſquare at the firſt, they
warpe more and more: So they which are
well ioined, are well maried, but they which
offend their loue before it be ſetled, fade euerie
day like a Marigold, which cloſeth her

flower as the ſunne goeth down, til they hate
one another more then they loued at firſt.
            To begin this concord well,They muſt learn one anothers nature. it is neceſſarie
to learne one anothers nature, and one anothers
affections, and one anothers infirmities,
becauſe ye muſt be helpers, and ye cannot
helpe vnleſſe you know the diſeaſe. All the
iarres almoſt which doe trouble this band,
doe riſe of this, that one dooth not hit the
meaſure of the others heart, to applie themſelues
to eithers nature, whereby it commeth
to paſſe, that neyther can refrain when either
is offended; but one ſharpeneth another,
when they had neede to be calmed. Therefore
they muſt learn of Paul to faſhion themſelues
one to the other,1. Cor. 9. 20. if they would win
one another, and if any iarre doe ariſe, one
ſayth; in no wiſe deuide beds for it, for then
the ſunne goeth-down vpon their wrath,Ephe. 4. 25. and
the meanes of reconcilement is taken away.
Giue paſſions no times, for if ſome mans anger
ſtand but at night, it turneth to malice
which is vncurable.
            The Apoſtle ſayth,1. Cor. 11. 19 that there will bee offences
in the church: ſo ſure there wilbe many
offenſes in mariage: but as he ſaith, theſe
are trials who haue faith, ſo theſe are but tryals
who are good husbands, & who are good
wiues. His anger muſt be ſuch a mood, as if he

did chide with himſelfe, and their ſtrife as it
were a ſauce made of purpoſe to ſharpē their
loue when it waxeth vnpleaſaunt: like Ionathans
arrowes which were not ſhot to hurt,1. Sa. 20. 20
but to giue warning.A ſweet example teaching how couples ſhall neuer fall out. Knowing once a couple
which were both cholerick, and yet neuer fel
out, I asked the man how they did order the
matter, that their infirmitie did not make
them diſcord. He anſwered me, when her fit
is vpon her I yeeld to her, as Abraham did to
Sara;Gen. 16. 6. and when my fit is vpon me, ſhe yeelds
to me, and ſo we neuer ſtriue together, but aſunder.
Me thought it was a good example
to commend vnto all married folkes: for euery
one hath his frenzie and loueth them that
can beare his infirmitie. Whom will a woman
ſuffer, if ſhe will not ſuffer her husband?
and whoſe defects will a man beare, if he will
not beare hers which beareth his? Thus much
of their duties in generall, now to their ſeuerall
offices.
            The man may ſpell his dutie out of his
name,Ephe. 5. 23. for he is called the Head: to ſhew, that
as the eye, and the tongue, and the eare, are in
the head, to direct the whole body: ſo the
man ſhould be ſtored with wiſdome, and vnderſtanding,
& knowledge, and diſcretion, to
direct his whole family: for it is not right that
the worſe ſhould rule the better, but the better

ſhould rule the worſe, as the beſt rules all.
The husband ſaith, that his wife muſt obey
him becauſe he is her better, therefore if hee
let her bee better than himſelfe, he ſeemes to
free her from her obedience, and binde himſelfe
to obey her.
            His firſt duetie is called Harting,
               The husbands firſt dutie. that is,
hartie affection. As they are hand, faſted, ſo
they muſt be heart-faſted, for the eye, and the
tongue, and the hand, will be her enemies, if
the heart be not her friend. As Chriſt draweth
all the commaundements to loue, ſo I
may drawe all their dueties to loue, which is
the hearts gift to the bride at her marriage.
Firſt, he muſt chooſe his loue, & then he muſt
loue his choiſe: this is the oyle which maketh
all things eaſie. In Salomons ſong, which is
nothing elſe but a deſcription of Chriſt the
Bridegrome, and the Church his ſpouſe, one
calleth the other Loue, to ſhew, that though
both doe not honour alike, yet both ſhould
loue alike, which the man may doe without
ſubiection.
            The man is to his wife in the place of
Chriſt to his Church:Vnderſtand in his Mariage only. therefore the Apoſtle
requireth ſuch an affection of him towardes
his Spouſe, as Chriſt beareth towarde his
Spouſe:Ephe. 5. 25. for he ſaith; Husbandes loue your
wiues, as Chriſt loued his Congregation, that

is, with a holie loue, and with a heartie loue,
and with a cōſtant loue, as the Church would
be loued of Chriſt. Will not a man loue his
glorie?1. Cor. 11. 7. Why Paul calleth the woman the glorie
of the man, for her reuerence makes him to
be reuerenced, and her praiſe makes him to
be praiſed. Therefore hee which loueth not
his wife, loueth his ſhame, becauſe ſhe is his
glorie.Ephe. 5. 28. Eph. 5. 28. Paul ſaith, Hee which loueth
his wife, loueth himſelfe, for thereby he enioyeth
peace and comfort, and helpe to himſelfe
in all his affaires: therefore in the ſame verſe
Paul counſelleth husbands to loue their wiues
as their bodies. And after in the 33. verſe, as
though it were too litle to loue them as their
bodies,Leui. 19. 18 he ſaith: Let euerie one loue his wife
as himſelfe, that is, as his bodie and ſoule too.
For if God commaunded men to loue their
neighbours as themſelues, much more are
they bound to loue their wiues as themſelues
which are their next neighbors. As Elkanah
did not loue his wife leſſe for her barrenneſſe,
but ſaid,1. Sam. 1. 8. 
               Am not I better vnto thee then tenne
ſonnes? as though hee fauoured her more, for
that which ſhe thought her ſelfe deſpiſed. So
a good husband will not take occaſion to
loue his wife leſſe for her infirmities, but
comfort her more for them, as this man did,
that ſhe may beare with his infirmities too.
            
               
When Chriſt ſaith,Mar. 10. 7. that a man ſhould leaue
father and mother, and cleaue to his wife, hee
ſignifieth how Chriſt left his father for his
ſpouſe, and that man doth not loue his wife
ſo much as he ſhould, vntil he affect her more
then euer he did his father or mother. Therfore
when God bad Abraham forſake all his
kinred,Gen. 21. 1. yet he bad him not forſake his wife:
as though the other ſometime might be forſaken
for God, but the wife muſt be kept for
God, like a charge which bindeth for tearme
of life.
            His next dutie to loue,The huſbands ſecōd dutie. is a fruit of his loue:
that is, to let all things be common betweene
them, which were priuat before. The man &
wife are partners,Man and wife are two partners. like two oares in a boate,
therefore he muſt diuide offices and affaires,
and goods with her, cauſing her to be feared
and reuerenced, and obeyed of her children
and ſeruants like himſelfe, for ſhe is an vnder
officer in his Commonweale, and therefore
ſhee muſt bee aſſiſted and borne out like his
deputie, as the Prince ſtandeth with his magiſtrates
for his owne quiet, becauſe they are
the legs which beare him vp. To ſhew this
communitie betweene husband and wife,
he is to maintaine her as he dooth himſelfe,
becauſe Chriſt ſayth,Mar. 10. 8. 
               They are no more two
but one.
            
            
               
Therefore when hee mayntaineth her, hee
muſt thinke it but one charge, becauſe hee
mayntaineth no more but himſelfe, for they
two are one. He may not ſay as husbands are
woont to ſay, That which is thine is mine,
and that which is mine is mine owne; but
that which is mine is thine and my ſelfe too.
For as it is ſayde,Rom. 8 32. 
               Hee which hath giuen vs
his ſonne, can hee denie vs any thing? So
ſhee may ſay, hee which hath giuen mee
himſelfe, can hee denie mee any thing? The
bodie is better then the goods, therefore
if the bodie bee mine, the goods are mine
too.
            Laſtly,The huſbands laſt dutie. hee muſt tender her as much as all
her friends, becauſe he hath taken her from
her friends, and couenaunted to tender her
for them all. To ſhew how he ſhould tender
her,1. Pet. 3. 7. Peter ſayth, Honour the woman as the
weaker veſſell. As wee doe not handle glaſſes
like pots, becauſe they are weaker veſſels,
but touch them nicely and ſoftly, for feare
of crackes, ſo a man muſt intreat his wife
with gentleneſſe and ſoftneſſe, not expecting
that wiſedome, nor that fayth, nor that
patience, nor that ſtrength in the weaker veſſel,
which ſhould be in the ſtronger; but think
when he takes a wife, he takes a vineyard, not
grapes, but a vineyard to beare him grapes:

therefore he muſt ſowe it, and dreſſe it, and
water it, and fence it, and thinke it a good
vineyard, if at laſt it bring foorth grapes.
So hee muſt not looke to find a wife without
a fault, but thinke that ſhe is committed
to him to reclaime her from her faults;
for all are defectiues: and if he find the prouerbe
true, That in ſpace commeth grace, hee
muſt reioice as much at his wife when ſhee
amendeth, as the Husbandman reioiceth
when his Vineyarde beginneth to fructifie.
            This is farre from ciuile warres betweene
man and wife;Husbands muſt hold their hāds and wiues their tongues. in all his offices is found no
office to fight. If hee cannot reforme his
wife without beating he is woorthie to bee
beaten for chuſing no better: when he hath
vſed all meanes that hee may, and yet ſhee is
like her ſelfe, hee muſt take her for his croſſe,
and ſay with Ieremie, This is my croſſe, and I
will beare it. But if he ſtrike her, he takes away
his hand from her, which was the firſt part he
gaue her to ioine them together: and ſhee
may put vp her complaint againſt him, that
hee hath taken away part of her goods. Her
cheekes are made for thy lippes, and not for
thy fiſts.
            The verie name of a wife is like the Angel
which ſtaied Abrahams hand,Gen. 21. 11. whē the ſtroke

was comming. If Dauid, becauſe he could not
expreſſe the good and comfort of vnitie, was
faine to ſay,Pſal. 133. 1 
               Oh how good and ioyfull a thing it
is, for brethren to dwell together in vnitie!
Then weigh and iudge how harſh and bitter
a thing it is, for man and wife to dwell together
in enmitie. For the firſt yeare after mariage,Deut. 24 9.
God would not haue the husband goe
to warre with his enemies but no yeare would
he haue him warre with his wife, and therefore
God gaue him that yeare to ſtay at home
and ſettle his loue, that he might not warre,
nor iarre after: for the God of peace dwelleth
not in the houſe of warre.Mat. 12. 29 As a kingdom
cannot ſtand if it be deuided, ſo a houſe cannot
ſtand if it be deuided: for ſtrife is like fire
which leaues nothing but duſt, and ſmoake,
and aſhes behinde it. We reade in the Scriptures,
of maſters that ſtroke their ſeruants, but
neuer of any that ſtroke his wife, but rebuked
her.Gen. 19. 33. Lot was drunke when hee laie with
his daughter in ſtead of his wife, and ſo is he
which ſtriketh his wife in ſtead of his ſeruāt.
The law ſheweth how a bond man ſhould be
corrected, but the wife is like a iudge, which
is ioyned in commiſſion with her husband to
correct other.Deut. 23. 2. Wilt thou ſtrike one in his own
houſe? no more ſhouldeſt thou ſtrike thy
wife in her houſe. She is come to thee as to a

ſanctuary to defend her from hurt, and canſt
thou hurt her thy ſelfe? Therefore Abraham
was called Saras vayle,
               Gen. 20. 16. becauſe hee ſhould
ſhield her; for a vayle is made to ſaue. Abraham
ſayd to Lot,Gen. 13. 8. 
               Are we not brethren? that is,
may brethren iarre? But they may ſay, Are
we not one? can one chide with another?
can one fight with another? Hee is a badde
hoaſt, that welcomes his gueſt with ſtripes.
Dooth a King trample his Crowne?Pro. 12. 4. Salomon
calleth the wife, The crowne of her huſband:
therefore hee which woundeth her,
woundeth his owne honour. Shee is a
free Citizen in thine owne houſe, and hath
taken the peace of thee the firſt day of her
marriage to holde thy handes, till ſhee releaſe
thee againe.Gen. 2. 23. Adam ſaith of his ſpouſe, This
is fleſh of my fleſh,
               Ephe. 5. 19. But no man (ſaith Paule)
euer hated his owne fleſh. So then, if a man
aske whether he may ſtrike his wife, GOD
ſaith nay; thou maiſt not hate thy wife, for
no man hateth his owne fleſh: ſhewing, that
he ſhould not come neare blowes, but thinke
his wrath too much:Col. 3. 16. for Paule ſaith, Be not
bitter to your wiues, noting that anger in a
husband is a vice.
            Doth the cocke ſpurre the henne? Euerie
man is aſhamed to laie his handes on a woman,
becauſe ſhe cannot match him, therefore

he is a ſhameles man which laieth hands
on his wife. The hand dooth not buffet his
own cheeke, but ſtroake it. If a man be ſeene
raging with himſelfe, he is caried to Bedlem:
ſo theſe madde men which beat themſelues,
ſhould be ſent to Bedlem till their madneſſe
be gone.Pro. 5. 16. Salomon ſayth, Delight continuallie
in her loue: that is, begin, proceed, and end in
loue. In reuenge whereof, he ſheweth that delight
is gone, becauſe he calleth loue their delight.1. Tim. 3. 3
                     •
                  
               
Therfore as Paul ſaith of Biſhops; A
Biſhop muſt be no ſtriker:
               Of his wife ſo a husband muſt
be no ſtriker:Leu. 19. 28. for he which ſtriketh his own
fleſh,Deut. 14. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . breaketh that law which ſayth,1. King. 18. 28. 
               Thou
ſhalt not make a skarre in thy flesh: and is like
the Baalites,It is properlyment in mourning for the dead, but it doth imply an vnlawfulneſſe to hurt our ſelues. which wounded their owne bodies.
Thus we haue ſent a letter vnto husbāds
to read before they fight. Now let vs go
home to loue againe. Wouldeſt thou learne
how to make thy match delightfull? Salomon
ſayd, Reioice in her loue continually. As
though thou couldeſt not delight without
loue, and with loue thou maiſt delight continually.
Therefore loue is called the thankfull
vertue,Prou. 5. 19. becauſe it rendereth peace and
eaſe, and comfort to them that makes of her.
So much to husbands.
            Likewiſe the woman may learne her dutie
of her names.The womans duties. They are called goodwiues,

as good wife A. and goodwife B. Euerie wife
is called a good wife, therefore if they be not
good wiues, their names doe belie them, and
they are not worth their titles, but anſwere to
a wrong name, as plaiers doe vppon a ſtage.
This name pleaſeth them well:Phil. 4. 3. but beſide
this, a wife is called a Yoake-fellow, to ſhewe
that ſhe ſhould helpe her husband to beare
his yoak, that is, his griefe muſt be her griefe;
and whether it be the yoake of pouertie, or
the yoake of enuie, or the yoake of ſicknes, or
the yoake of impriſonment, ſhe muſt ſubmit
her neck to beare it patiently with him, or els
ſhe is not his yoak-fellow, but his yoake, as
though ſhe were inflicted vpon him for a penaltie,Iob. 2. 9.
like to Iobs wife, whom the diuell left
to torment him, when hee tooke away all he
had beſide.Rom. 12. 19 The Apoſtle biddeth to Reioyce
with them that reioyce, and mourne with them
that mourne. With whom ſhould the wife reioyce,
rather then with her husband? or with
whom ſhould ſhe mourne, rather then with
her owne fleſh?2. King. 2. 6. 
               I will not leaue thee, ſaith Eliſha
to Eliah: ſo ſhe ſhould neuer leaue him till
death.Gal. 6. 2. 
               Beare one anothers burthen, ſaith Paul,
who ſhall beare one anothers burthen, if the
wife doe not beare the husbandes burthen?1. King. 21. 5.
Wicked Iezabell comforted her husband in
his ſickneſſe,1. Kin. 14 4. and Ieroboams wife ſought for

his health, though ſhe was as bad as he. God
did not bid Sarah leaue her father, and her
country, as he bad her husband; yet becauſe
he bad Abraham leaue his,Gen. 12. 1. ſhe left hers too:
ſhewing that ſhe was content, not onely to
be his play-fellow, but his yoake-fellow too.
            Beſide a yoke-fellow,Gen. 2. 18. ſhe is called a helper,
to help him in his buſines, to helpe him in his
labours, to helpe him in his troubles, to helpe
him in his ſickneſſe: like a woman Phiſition,
ſometime with her ſtrength, and ſometime
with her counſell:1. Cor. 1. 27. for ſometime as God confoundeth
the wiſe by the fooliſh, and the
ſtrong by the weake: ſo he teacheth the wiſe
by the fooliſh, and helpeth the ſtrong by the
weake.
            Therefore Peter ſaith,1. Pet. 3. 1. 
               Husbands are wonne
by the conuerſation of their wiues. As if hee
ſhould ſay, ſometime the weaker veſſell is the
ſtronger veſſell,Gen. 25. 2. and Abraham may take coū
               ſell
of Sara,2. King. 5. 8. as Naaman was aduiſed by his
ſeruant.2. Kin. 6. 10. The Shunamites counſell made her
husband receiue a Prophet into his houſe,
and Heſters counſell made her husband ſpare
the Church:Hest. 7. 3. ſo ſome haue beene better helpers
to their husbandes, then their husbandes
haue beene to them, for it pleaſeth God to
prouoke the wiſe with the fooliſh, as he did
the Iewes with the Gentiles.
            
               
Beſide a helper,Pro. 5. 18. ſhee is called a Comforter
too, and therfore the man is bid reioyce in his
wife: which is as much to ſay, that wiues muſt
be the reioycing of their husbandes, euen like
Dauids harpe to comfort Saule.1. Sa. 16. 23 Therefore it
is ſaide of Rebeccah, that ſhe prepared meate
for her husband,Gen. 27. 9. ſuch as he loued; ſo a good
wife is knowne when her wordes, and deedes,
and countenances are ſuch as her husband
loueth ſhe muſt not examine whether hee be
wiſe or ſimple, but that ſhee is his wife: and
therefore they which are bound muſt obey,
as Abigail loued her husband though hee
were a foole:1. Sa. 25. 3. for the wife is as much deſpiſed
for taking rule ouer her husband, as he
for yeelding it vnto her. Therefore one ſaith,
that a mankinde woman is a monſter, that is,
halfe a woman, and halfe a man. It becomes
not the miſtreſſe to be maiſter, no more than
it beſeemeth the maiſter to be miſtreſſe, but
both to ſaile with their owne winde.
            Lastly, we call the wife Huſwife: that is,
house-wife,Gen. 38. 14. not a ſtreete wife, like Thamar,
nor a field-wife,Gen. 34. 2. like Dinah:Whye wiues are called huſwies. but a houſe-wife,
to ſhewe that a good wife keepes her houſe,
and therefore Paul biddeth Titus to exhort
women that they be chaſte, and keeping at
home:Tit. 2. 5. preſently after Chaſte, he ſaith keeping
at home, as thogh home were chaſtities keeper.

And therefore Salomon depainting the
whore,Pro. 7. 12. ſetteth her at the doore, now ſitting
vpon her ſtalles, now walking in the ſtreetes,
now looking out at the windowes, like curſed
Iezabel; as if ſhee held foorth the glaſſe of
temptation,2. Reg. 9. 30 for Vanitie to gaze vpon. But
chaſtitie careth to pleaſe but one, & therefore
ſhee keepes her cloſet, as if ſhee were ſtill at
praier.Gen. 18. 9. The Angell asked Abraham, Where is
thy wife? Abraham anſwered, Shee is in the
Tent. The Angell knew where ſhe was, but
yet he asked, that we might ſee how women
in old time did keep their tents and houſes. It
is recorded of the Shunamite that ſhe did aſke
her husband leaue to goe vnto the Prophet,2. Reg. 9. 30
though ſhe went to a Prophet, and went of a
good errand, and for his cause as much as her
owne, yet ſhe thought it not meete to go far
abroad without her husbands leaue.
            Phidias when he ſhould paynt a woman,
painted her ſitting vnder a Snailes ſhell, ſignifying,
that ſhe ſhould go like a ſnaile, which
carrieth his houſe vpon his backe. Salomon
bad Shimei,1. Reg. 2. 36. 37. 
               Go not beyond the riuer: ſo a wife
ſhould teach her feete, goe not beyonde the
doore:Husbands ſhould not keep their wiues ſo ſtrait, but 
                     •
                  iues ſhould not think their houſe their priſon, but as their paradiſe where they wold be. ſhe muſt count the walles of her houſe
like the bandes of the riuer which Shimei
might not paſſe if he would pleaſe the king.
            For when Adam was away. Eue was made

a praie: if her husband be from her, vntill he
returne againe ſhe muſt thinke her ſelfe a widowe,
that is, ſeparate from man; for Vidua
doth ſignifie, A viro diuiſa: that is, widowe
doth ſignifie diuided from man: therefore
now ſhe muſt haue no fellowſhip, nor companie
with men, becauſe ſhe is deuided from
man.
            As it becommeth her to keepe home, ſo it
becommeth her to keepe ſilence, and alway
ſpeake the beſt of her head. Other ſeeke their
honour in triumph, but ſhe muſt ſeek her honour
in reuerence, for it becommeth not anie
woman to ſet light by her husband, nor to
publiſh his infirmities. For they ſay that is an
euill:A wife may not vtter her husbands faultes. bird that defileth her owne neſt, and if a
wife vſe her husband ſo, how may the huſband
vſe the wife? Becauſe this is the qualitie
of that ſexe, to ouerthwart, and vpbraide, and
ſue the preheminence of their husbandes,
therfore the Philoſophers could not tell how
to define a wife,A wife the contrarie to a huſband. but called her, The contrarie
to a husband, as though nothing were ſo croſſe
and contrarie to a man, as a wife. This is not
ſcripture, but no ſlaunder to many.
            As Dauid exalted the loue of women aboue
all other loues,2. Sa. 1. 26. ſo Salomon mounteth
the enuie of women aboue all other enuies:Pro. 21. 19.
ſtubborn, ſullen, taunting, gainſaying, outfacing,

with ſuch a bitter humor, that one
would think they were molten out of the ſalt
pillar,Gen. 19. 26 into which Lots wife was transformed.
We ſay not al are alike, but this ſect hath many
Diſciples.Gen. 2. 20. Dooth the ribbe that is in mans
ſide fret or gaule him? no more then ſhoulde
ſhe which is made of the rib.
            Though a woman be wiſe, and painefull,
and haue many good parts, yet if ſhe bee a
ſhrow, her troublſome iarring in the end will
make her honeſt behauiour vnpleaſant, as her
ouer-pinching at laſt cauſeth her good huſwiferie
to bee euill ſpoken of. Therefore although
ſhe be a wife, yet ſomtimes ſhe muſt
obſerue the ſeruants leſſon,Tit. 2. 9. 
               Not anſwering againe,
and hold her peace, to keepe the peace.
Therefore they which keepe ſilence, are well
ſaid to hold their peace, becauſe ſilence oftentimes
dooth keepe the peace, when wordes
would breake it.
            To her ſilence and patience, ſhe muſt adde
The acceptable obedience, which makes a woman
rule while ſhe is ruled. This is the wiues
tribute to her husband: for ſhee is not called
his head, but he is called her head. Great
cauſe hath man to make much of his wife, for
great and many are her duties to him, for
Paul ſaith;Epheſ. 5. 23 
               Wiues ſubmit your ſelues vnto your
husbands, as to the Lord. Shewing that ſhee

ſhould regard his will as the Lords will,How farre the wife ſhould obey. but
withall, as the Lord commandeth onely that
which is good and right, ſo ſhe ſhould obey
her husband in good & right, or elſe ſhe doth
not obey him as the Lord, but as the tempter.
The firſt ſubiection of woman began at
ſinne: for when God curſed her for ſeducing
her husband,Gen. 3. 16. when the Serpent had ſeduced
her, he ſaid, He ſhall haue authoritie ouer thee.
And therefore as the man named all other
creatures,Gen. 2. 20. in ſigne that they ſhould be ſubiect
to him, as a ſeruant which commeth when
his maſter calleth him by his name: ſo did he
name the woman alſo,Verſe 23. in token that ſhee
ſhould be ſubiect to him likewiſe. And therfore
Aſſuerus made a law,Heſt. 1. 20. 22. that euery man
ſhould beare rule in his owne houſe, and not
the woman,Num. 30. 7. becauſe ſhe ſinned firſt, therefore
ſhe is humbled moſt:Iudg. 19. 26 & euer ſince, the daughters
of Sara are bound to call their husbandes
Lords,Gen. 18. 12 as Sara called her husband: that is, to
take them for their Lords,1. Pet. 3. 6. for heads and gouernors.
If ye diſdaine to follow Abrahams
ſpouſe, the apoſtle biddeth you folow Chriſts
ſpouſe:Epheſ. 5. 24. for he ſaith; Let a wife, be ſubiect to her
husband, as the church is to Chriſt. A greater
loue then this (ſaith Chriſt) no man can haue So
a better example then this,Iohn 15. 13 no woman can
haue. That the wife may yeeld this reuerence

to her husband,The cauſe why many deſpiſe their huſbands. Paul would haue her attire
to be modeſt and orderly, for gariſh apparell
hath taught many goſſips to diſdaine their
husbands. This is the follie of ſome men, to
lay all their pride vpon their wiues,1. Tim. 2. 9. they care
not how they ſlouen themſelues, ſo their
wiues iette like Peacockes.1. Pet. 3. 5. But Peter doth
commend Sara for her attire, and not Abraham,
ſhewing that women ſhould braue it
no more then men,Gen. 3. 21. and God made Eues coat
of the ſame cloath that he made Adams.Ger. 3. 7. They
couered themſelues with leaues, and God derided
them, but now they couer themſelues
with pride, like Sathan which is fallen down
before them like lightning,Luk. 10. 18. ruffe vpon ruffe,
lace vpon lace, cut vpon cut, four & twentie
orders, vntil the woman be not ſo precious as
her apparell: that if any man would picture
Vanitie, he muſt take a pattern of women, or
elſe he cannot draw her likenes.Mat. 14. 6. As Herodias
was worſe for her fine dauncing: ſo a woman
may haue too many ornaments, friſled locks,
naked breſts, painting, perfume, & eſpecially
a rolling eye are the forerunners of adulterie,
and hee which hath ſuch a wife, hath a fine
plague. Once women were maried without
dowries, becauſe they were well nurtured, but
now if they weighed not more in golde then
in godlineſſe, many ſhould ſitte like Nunnes

without husbands. Thus we haue ſhadowed
the mans dueties to his wife, and the womans
to her husband.
            After their duties one to another,Their duties to their ſeruants. they
muſt learne their duties to their familie. One
compareth the maiſter of the houſe to the Seraphin,Eſay. 6. 6.
which came & kindled the prophets
zeale: ſo he ſhould go from wife to ſeruants,
and from ſeruants to children, and kindle thē
in the zeale of God, longing to teach his
knowledge, as a Nurſe to emptie her breſts.
Another ſayth,Reuel. 5. 10. that a maiſter in his familie
hath all the offices of Chriſt, for he muſt rule,
and teach, and pray; rule like a king, and
teach like a prophet, and pray like a Prieſt.
To ſhew how a godly man ſhould behaue
himſelf in his houſhold: whē the holy Ghoſt
ſpeaketh of the conuerſion of any houſekeeper,Acts 16. 13 & 18. 8.
lightly he ſaith, That the man beleeued,
with all his houſhold.
            As Peter being conuerted,Luk. 22. 23. muſt conuert
his brethren; ſo the maiſter being conuerted,
muſt conuert his ſeruants. For therfore God
ſaid, that he would not hide his counſel from
Abraham, because he would teach his familie,
and ſurely all dutie which is not done of
conſcience, is but ey-ſeruice, and fayleth
at moſt need. as Ziba betrayed his mayſter,
when he ſhould haue defended him. Therefore

before Oneſimus was conuerted, Paul
ſaid he was an vnprofitable ſeruant,Phil. 18. but whē
hee was conuerted, he calleth him more then
ſeruant, becauſe ſuch a ſeruant is better then
many ſeruants.
            Therfore though Laban was wicked himſelfe,Gen. 29. 27.
yet hee reioyced that Iacob his ſeruaunt
was godlie, becauſe God bleſſed him
better for him.Ioſh. 14. 55 Ioſhua ſayth: I and my houſhold
will ſerue the Lord. Shewing, that maiſters
ſhould receiue none into their houſes,
but whome they can gouerne, as Ioſhua did:
and if any haue crept into their doores, then
they muſt put him foorth againe, for Dauid
ſayth: I will not ſuffer a lyar to ſtay in my houſe,
Pſal. 101. 7. Hee ſayth not, a ſwearer, nor a
theefe, but a lyer, as if he ſhould ſay, I will rid
him out of my doores before he be a ſwearer,
and a theefe, for a lyer will grow to a ſwearer
and a theefe in a daye, as a Dicer groweth
to a begger in a night. Therefore it is noted
of Cornelius,Acts 10. 2. that all his houſhold ſerued
God himſelfe. This is reported alſo of Ioſeph
and Marie for an example, that they went vp
euery yeare with all their families,Luke 2. 41. to worſhip
at Ieruſalem, that their children, & their
ſeruants might learne to know God as well
as they. Theſe examples be written for houſholders,
as others are for magiſtrates & miniſters

and ſoldiors, that no calling might ſeek
further then the Scripture for inſtruction.
Wherefore as you are maiſters now, and they
your ſeruants inſtruct them, and train them,
as if you would ſhew what maiſters they
ſhould be hereafter.
            After the care of their ſoules, they muſt
care for their bodies:Luke 10. 7. for if the laborer is worthie
of his hire which laboureth but a day;
what is the ſeruant worth, which laboureth
euery day?Philem. 17. Therefore Paul is ſo earneſt with
Philemon to make much of Oneſimus his
ſeruant, that he deſireth Philemon to receiue
him as he would himſelfe. Therfore becauſe
cruell & greedie maſters ſhould not vſe them
too hardly,Gen. 2. 2. God remembred them in his creation,
and made euery weeke one day of reſt,
wherein they ſhould be as free as their maiſters:
ſo God pittieth the labourer from heauen,
and euery Sabboth lookes downe vpon
him from heauen, as if he ſhould ſay, one day
thy labors ſhall haue an end, and thou ſhalt
reſt for euer,2. Sam. 18. 5 as thou reſtedſt this day.
            By this we ſee, as Dauid did limit Ioab that
he ſhould not kil Abſalon; ſo God hath boūd
maiſters, that they ſhould not oppreſſe their
ſeruants? Shall God reſpect thine more then
thou? Art thou made freſher to thy labor by
a little reſt, & is not thy ſeruant made ſtronger

by reſt to labour for thee?Gen. 31. 9. How many
beaſts and ſheepe did Laban loſe, onely for
hardly intreating of a good ſeruaunt? therefore
that is the way to loſe, but not to thriue.
Hee which counteth his ſeruant a ſlaue, is in
an error: for there is difference betweene beleeuing
ſeruants, and infidell ſeruants: the infidels
were made ſlaues to the Iewes, becauſe
God hated them, and would humble them;
but their brethren did ſerue them like helpers,
which ſhould be trained by them.
            It is not a baſe nor vile thing to bee called
a ſeruaunt,Eſay. 42. 1. for our Lord is called a ſeruaunt:Mat. 12. 18
which teacheth Chriſtians, to vſe their ſeruaunts
well for Chriſtes ſake, ſeeing they are
ſeruants too, and haue one maiſter Chriſt. As
Dauid ſpeaketh of man, ſaying:Pſa. 8. 6. 
               Thou haſt
made him a little lower then the Angels; ſo I
may ſay of ſeruaunts, that God hath made
them a little lower then children, not children,
but the next to children, as one would
ſay inferior children, or ſonnes in law.
            And therefore the houſholder is called Pater
familias: which ſignifieth, a Father of his
familie, becauſe he ſhould haue a fatherly care
ouer his ſeruants, as if they were his children:
and not vſe them onely for their labour, like
beaſts.
            Beſides, the name of a ſeruaunt, dooth

not ſignifie ſuffering, but doing; therfore maſters
muſt not exerciſe their hands vpō them
but ſet their hands to worke,1. Cor. 12. 13 and yet as God
layeth no more vpon his ſeruaunts then hee
makes them able to beare, ſo men ſhould
laie no more vpon their ſeruaunts then they
are able to beare.Pro. 12. 10. For a good man (ſaith Salomon)
will be mercifull to his beaſt, and therefore
hee will bee more mercifull to his brother.
            That mā is not worthie to be ſerued which
cannot affoord that his ſeruants ſhould ſerue
God as well as himſelfe. Giue vnto God that
which is Gods, and then thou maiſt take that
which is thine. He that careth not for his familie
(ſaith Paul) is worſe then an infidell:
               1. Tim. 5. 8. becauſe
infidels care for their familie. But as Agur
praieth,Pro. 30. 8. 
               Giue me not too much nor too litle,
but feed me with food conuenient: ſo their care
ſhould not be too much nor too little, but cō
               ueniēt,
or elſe they are worſe then infidels to,
becauſe couetouſnes is called Idolatry,Epheſ. 5. 5. which
is worſe then infidelitie, for it is leſſe rebellion
not to honor the king then to ſet vp another
king againſt him, as the Idolatrous do
againſt the king of heauen.
            Next vnto ſeruants inſtruction and labors,
muſt bee conſidered their corrections. As
Paul ſaith,Epheſ. 6. 4. 
               Fathers prouoke not your childrē to

wrath: So may I ſay, Maiſters prouoke not
your ſeruants to wrath: that is, vſe ſuch reproofes,
and ſuch corrections, that you do not
prouoke them, but moue them, that you do
not exaſperate them, but winne them, for reuiling
wordes and vnreaſonable fierceneſſe,
doth more hurt then good. And therefore the
law of God did charge the maiſter, that he
ſhould not inflict aboue fortie ſtripes vpon
his ſeruant,Deut. 25. 2. leaſt he ſhould ſeeme deſpiſed in
his eyes For while a childe, or ſcholler, or ſeruant
doth thinke that he is reproued for loue,
or beaten with reaſon, it makes him thinke of
his fault and is aſhamed: but when hee ſeeth
that he is rebuked with curſes, & beaten with
ſtaues, as though they were hated like a dog,
his heart is hardned againſt the man which
correcteth him, and the fault for the which he
is corrected, and after he becommeth deſperate,
like a horſe which turneth vpon the ſtriker:
and therfore thinke that God euen then
chides you whenſoeuer you chide in ſuch
rage. For though there be a fault, yet ſome
thinges muſt be winkt at, and ſome thinges
muſt be forgiuen, and ſome puniſhed with
a looke, for hee which takes the forfeite
of euerie offence, ſhall neuer bee in anie
reſt, but vexe himſelfe more then his ſeruant.
            
               
Further I haue heard experience ſay,The maiſter muſt correct his men, and the miſtreſſe her maides. that
in theſe puniſhments it is moſt meet and acceptable
to the offender, that the man ſhould
correct his men, and the woman her maides:
for a mans nature ſcorneth to be beaten of a
woman, and a maides nature is corrupted
with the ſtripes of a man. Therefore wee
reade, that Abraham would not meddle with
his mayd, but committed her to his wife, and
ſaid,Gen. 16. 6. 
               Doe with her as it pleaſeth thee: as if hee
ſhould ſay, It belongeth not to mee but to
thee.
            Laſtly we put the dutie toward children,Their duties toward their children.
becauſe they come laſt to their handes. In
Latin children are called pignora, that is, pledges,
as if I ſhould ſay, a pledge of the husbands
loue to the wife, and a pledge of the wiues
loue toward the husband: for there is nothing
which doth ſo knit loue between the man and
the wife, as the frute of the wombe. Therefore
when Leah began to conceiue, ſhe ſayd,
now my husband will loue me;Gen. 28. 31. as though the
husband did loue for children. If a woman
haue many defects (as Leah had) yet this is
the mendes which ſhe makes her husband, to
bring him children, which is the right wedding
Ring, that ſealeth and maketh vp the
marriage. When their father and mother fall
out, they perke vp betweene thē like litle mediators,

and with many pretie ſportes make
truce when other dare not ſpeake to them.
Therefore now let vs conſider what theſe little
ones may challenge of their parents, that
ſtand them in ſtead of Lawyers. Before we
teach parents to loue their children, they had
need be taught not to loue them too much,
for Dauids darling, was Dauids traitor: and
this is the manner of God, when a man begins
to ſet any thing in Gods roome, and loue
it aboue him which gaue it, either to take away
it, or to take away him, before hee prouoke
him too much; therefore if parentes
wold haue their children liue, they muſt take
heed to loue them too much: for the giuer is
offended, when the gift is more eſteemed
than he.
            The firſt duetie is the mothers,Mothers ſhould nurſe their children. that is,
to nurſe her childe at her own breſtes, as Sara
did Iſaac, and therefore Eſay ioyneth the nurſes
name and the mothers name both in one:
& calleth them nurſing mothers,
               Gen. 21. 7. ſhewing, that
mothers ſhould be the nurſes. So when God
thoſe a nurſe for Moſes,Exod. 2. 8. he led the hand maid

                  •
                Pharaos daughter to his mother, as though
God would haue none nurſe him but his mother.
After, whē the ſon of God was born, his
father thoght none fit to be his nurſe,Mat. 2. 14. but the
virgin his mother. The earths fountaines are

made to giue water, and the breſtes of women
are made to giue ſuck. Euery beaſt, and
euery foule is bred of the ſame that did beare
it, onely women loue to be mothers, but not
nurſes.
            Therefore if their Children proue vnnaturall,
they may ſay, thou followeſt thy mother,
for ſhe was vnnaturall firſt, in locking vp her
breſts from thee, and committing thee forth
like a Cuckow to be hatched in a Sparrowes
neſt. Hereof it comes that we ſay, He ſuckt euill
from the dug, that is, as the Nurſe is affected
in her bodie, or in her minde, commonly
the childe draweth the like infirmitie from
her, as the egges of a Henne are altered vnder
the Hauke; yet they which haue no milke,
can giue no milke. But whoſe breaſtes haue
this perpetuall drought? Forſooth it is lyke
the goute, no beggers may haue it, but Citizens
or Gentlewomen. In the ninth chapter
of Hoſea, thy breſtes are named for a curſe:
what lamentable happe haue Gentlewomen,
to light vpon this curſe more then other? ſure
if their breaſts be drie as they ſay, they ſhould
faſt and pray together, that this curſe migro
be remoued from them.
            The next dutie is,Prou. 22. 6. 
               Catechize a childe in his
youth,
               How children ſhuld be broght vp. 
               and he will remember it when he is olde:
This is the right bleſſing which fathers and

mothers giue to their children, when they
cauſe God to bleſſe them too.1. Re. 3. 26. The wrong
mother cared not though the childe were deuided,
but the right mother would not haue
it deuided: ſo wicked Parents care not though
their children be deſtroied, but godly parents
would not haue them deſtroyed but ſaued,
that when they haue dwelt together in earth,
they may dwell together in heauen. As the
Midwife frameth the bodie when it is young
and tender, ſo the parents muſt frame the
minde while it is greene and flexible, for
youth is the ſeed time of vertue.Luke 11. 2. They which
are called fathers, are called by the name of
God, to warne them that they are in ſtead of
God to their children, which teacheth all his
ſons. What example haue children but their
parents? and ſure the prouidence of God
doth eaſe their charge more than they are aware;
for a childe will learne better of his father
than of anie other.Except of kings ſons. And therefore wee
read of no Schoolemaiſters in the ſcripture
but the Parents: for when Chriſt ſaith to the
Iewes,Ioh. 8. 38. 
               If yee be the ſonnes of Abraham, yee
will doe the workes of your Father Abraham:
he ſheweth, that ſonnes vſe to walke in their
Fathers ſteppes, whether they bee good or
bad.
            It is a maruellous delight to the father

and mother, when people ſay that their children
are like them: but if they be like them
in godlineſſe, it is as great delight to other as
to the parents: or elſe we ſay that they are ſo
like, that they are the worſe for it. Well doth
Dauid call children arrowes,
               Pſal. 127. 4 for if they be wel
bred, they ſhoote at their parents enemies, and
if they be euill bred they ſhoote at their parents.
Therefore many fathers want a ſtaffe
to ſtay them in their age, becauſe they prepared
none before, like olde Eli, which was
corrected himſelfe,1. Sa. 2. 29. for not correcting his
ſonnes. Are not children called the fruite of
their parents?Pſ. 132. 11. Therefore as a good tree is
knowne by bringing foorth good fruite,Mat. 12. 33 ſo
parents ſhould ſhewe their godlineſſe in the
education of their children, which are their
fruite.1. Sa. 1. 20. For this cauſe the Iewes were wont to
name their children ſo whē they were borne,1. Sa. 13. 24.
that euer after, if they did but thinke vppon
their names, they would put them in mind of
that religion which they ſhould profeſſe: for
they did ſignifie ſome thing that they ſhould
learne.
            An admonition to ſuch as call their children
at all aduentures,Three examples of good parents. ſomtime by the names
of dogs, euen as they proue after. In 1. Kings
2. 2. we haue Dauid inſtructing his ſonnes. In
Gen. 39. Iacob correcting his ſonnes: and in

Iob. 1. Iob praying for his ſonnes. Theſe three
put together, inſtructing, correcting & praying,
make good children, and happie parents.
            Once Chriſt tooke a childe, and ſet him in
the midſt of his diſciples,Luke 18. 17 and ſayd, He which
will receiue the kingdome of heauen, muſt receiue
it as a little childe: ſhewing, that our children
ſhould be ſo innocent, ſo humble, and voide
of euill, that they may be taken for examples
of the children of God. Therefore in Pſalme
127. 4. children are called the heritage of the
Lord, to ſhew that they ſhould be trained, as
though they were not mens children, but
Gods, that they may haue Gods heritage
after.Col. 4. 15. Thus if you doo, your ſeruants ſhall be
Gods ſeruants,Phil. 1. 8. and your children ſhall be
Gods children, and your houſe ſhall be Gods
houſe, like a little Church, when others are
like a denne of theeues.
            Now I ſpeake to one which is a mother ſo
ſoone as ſhe is married:The name of ſtepmother expounded, and their dutie. therefore peraduenture
you looke that I ſhould ſhewe the dutie
of ſtepmothers. Their name dooth ſhewe
them their duetie too, for a ſtepmother doth
ſignifie a ſtedmother, that is, one mother dieth,
and another commeth in her ſtead: therefore
that your loue may ſettle to thoſe little
ones as it ought, you muſt remember that
ye are their ſtedmother, that is in ſted of their

mother, and therefore to loue them, and tender
them, and cheriſh them as their mother did.
She muſt not looke vpon them like Rehoboam,
who tolde his people that hee would be
worſe vnto them then his predeceſſour; for
then they will turne from her, as his ſubiects
did from him: but ſhe muſt come to them as
Dauid came to the people after Saules death,
and ſayd,1. Sam. 2. 7. 
               Though your maſter Saul be dead, yet
I will raigne ouer you: ſo ſhe muſt ſay to them,
though your mother be dead, yet will I be a
mother: ſo the children will loue her aſmuch
as their father. Further, theſe children are orphanes,
and therefore you muſt not onely regarde
them as children, but as orphane children.Iere. 22. 2.
Now God requireth a greater care ouer
widowes and Orphanes,Deu. 14. 17. & 24. 17. & 26. 12. than ouer anie
other women or children.
            Laſtly, you muſt remember that ſaying,
As you meaſure vnto other,
               Mat. 7. 2. 
               ſo it ſhall be meaſured
vnto you againe: that is, as you intreate
theſe children ſo another may come after and
intreat your children; for he which hath taken
away the firſt mother and ſent you, can
take away the ſeconde mother and ſende a
third, which ſhall not be like a ſtepmother to
yours, vnleſſe you be like a ſtepmother to
theſe.
            If theſe duties bee performed in marriage,

then I neede not ſpeake of Diuorcement,Diuorcement, the phiſick of mariage.
which is the rod of mariage, and diuideth
them which were one fleſh, as if the bodie
and ſoule were parted aſunder. But becauſe
all performe not their wedlocke vowes, therfore
hee which appointed mariage, hath appointed
diuorcement, as it were taking our
priuilege from vs,Mat. 18. 19 when we abuſe it. As God
hath ordained remedies for euery diſeaſe, ſo
he hath ordained a remedie for the diſeaſe of
mariage.Mat. 19. 8. The diſeaſe of marriage is adulterie,Why Chriſt would haue no diuorcement but for fornication.
and the medicine hereof is diuorcement.
Moſes licenſed them to depart for hardneſſe
of heart, but Chriſt licenſeth them to depart
for no cauſe but adulterie. If they might be
ſeparated for diſcord, ſome would make a
commoditie of ſtrife: but now they are not
beſt to be contentious, for this law will hold
their noſes together, till wearines make them
leaue ſtrugling: like two ſpaniels which are
coupled in a chaine, at laſt they learne to goe
together, becauſe they may not go aſunder.
As nothing might part friends,Mat. 5. 32. but If thine
eye offend thee, pull it out, that is, if thy friend
be a tempter: ſo nothing may diſſolue mariage
but fornication,Mat. 19. 9. which is the breach of
marriage, for marriage is ordained to auoide
fornication,1. Cor. 7. 10 and therefore if the condition be
broken, the obligation is void.
            
               
And beſide, ſo long as all her children, are
his children, ſhe muſt needs be his wife, becauſe
the father and mother are man & wife:
but when her children are not his children,
ſhe ſeemes no more to be his wife, but the others
whoſe children ſhe beares, and therefore
to be diuorced from him. In all the old
Teſtament,Note. we read of no diuorce betweene
any, which ſheweth that they liued chaſter
then wee: yet no doubt this law was better
executed amongſt them, then amongeſt vs.
Such a care God hath had in all ages and callings,
to prouide for them which liue honeſtly:
for diuorcement is not inſtituted for the
carnall, but for the chaſt, leaſt they ſhould be
tied to a plague while they liue. As for the adulterer
& adultreſſe,Leu. 20. 10. he hath aſſigned death
to cut them off, leaſt their breath ſhould infect
others. Thus hee which made mariage,
did not make it vnſeparable, for then mariage
were a ſeruitude. But as Chriſt ſayth of
the Sabboth,Mar. 2. 27. 
               The Sabboth was made for man,
that is, for the benefit of man, and not for
the hindrance of man: ſo mariage was made
for man, that is, for the honour of man, & not
for the diſhonor of mā:Leu. 20. 10. but if mariage ſhould
turne to fornication, and when it is turned to
fornication, there might be no ſeparatiō, then
mariage were not for the honor of man, but

for the trouble, & greefe, & diſhonor of man.
Therfore now ye haue heard how diuorcemēt
is appointed for a remedie of fornicatiō, if any
be aſhamed of this phiſick, let thē be more
aſhamed of the diſeaſe.Concluſion. Becauſe I haue ſpoken
more then you can remember, if you aske me
what is moſt needful to bear away, In my opiniō,A ſentence for the maried to thinke vpon.
there is one ſaying of Paul, which is the
profitableſt ſentēce in al the ſcripture for mā
& wife to meditate often, & examin whether
they find it in themſelues as they do in other,
leaſt their mariage turn to ſin, which ſhould
further them in godlines.1. Cor. 7. 32. 
               The vnmaried man
careth for the things of the Lord, how he may
pleaſe the Lord, but he that is maried careth for
the things of the world, how hee may pleaſe his
wife. Alſo, The vnmarried woman careth for the
things of the Lord, how ſhe may be holy, but ſhee
that is maried, cares for the things of the world,
how ſhe may pleaſe her husbād. As though their
pleaſing of god, wer turned al to pleaſing one
another, & their carnall loue had eaten their
ſpiritual loue,Gen. 41. 4. as the lean kine deuourd the fat.
Therfore it follows in the next words,Ver. 3. 4. 
               This I
ſpeake for your cōmoditie, As thogh there were
great cōmoditie in remembring this watchword.
All men haue not the feeling of Gods
word, or els ſuch a ſentēce might be an anker
for the maried to ſtay thē, when any tentatiō
               
goeth about this chaunge, which Paul feared
euen in them which feared GOD before.
            If thou haſt read all this booke, and art
neuer the better, yet catch this flower before
thou go out of the garden, and peraduenture
the ſent thereof will bring thee back to ſmell
the reſt.1. Sam. 1. 23 As the corps of Azael made the paſſengers
to ſtand, ſo I placed this ſentence in
the dore of thy paſſage, to make thee ſtand &
conſider what thou dooſt before thou marrieſt.
For this is the ſcope and operation of it,
to cal the mind to a ſolemne meditation, and
warne him to liue in mariage as in a temptation,
which is like to make him woorſe then
he was,2. Chr. 21. 6 as the mariage of Iehoram did, if he
vſe not Iobs preſeruatiue,Iob. 9. 28. to be iealous ouer
all his life.
            The allurements of beautie, the trouble about
riches, the charges of children, the loſſes
by ſeruants, the vnquietneſſe of neighbours
crie vnto him that hee is entered into
the hardeſt vocation of all other: and therefore
they which haue but nine yeares Prentiſhip
to make them good Mercers or Drapers,
haue nineteene yeares before marriage,
to learne to be good husbands and wiues, as
though it were a trade of nothing but myſteries,
and need of double time ouer all the reſt.
            
               
Therfore ſo often as you thinke vpon this
ſaying, thinke whether you be examples of
it,Gen. 24. 40 and it will waken you, and chide you, and
lead you a ſtraight path, like the Angell
which led the ſeruant of Abraham.
            Thus haue I chalked the way, to prepare
you vnto mariage, as the Leuites prepared
their brethren to the Paſſe-ouer:2. Chr. 35. 6 
               remember
that this day ye are made one, and therefore
muſt haue but one will. And now the Lord
Ieſus, in whom ye are contracted, knit your
hearts together, that yee may loue one another
like Dauid and Ionathan,1. Sam. 18. 1 and go before
you in this life,Mat. 2. 9. like the Star which went before
the Gentiles, that ye may beginne,
and proceed, and end in his glorie.
To whome be all glorie
for euer, Amen.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            A TREATISE OF THE
LORDS SVPPER, IN
two Sermons.
            
               THE FIRST SERMON.
               
                  1. Cor. 11. 23. 24.
                  
                     The Lord Ieſus in the night that he was betraytooke
bread:
                     And when he had giuen thanks, he brake it, and
ſaid, Take, eat: this is my bodie which is broken
for you, this doe ye in remembrance of me.
                  
               
               
                  THe word,The two breaſts of the Church. and the Sacraments
are the two breſts wherewith
our Mother dooth nurſe vs.
Seeing euery one receiueth,
and few vnderſtād what they
receiue; I thought it the neceſſarieſt
doctrine to preach of the Sacrament;
which is a witnes of Gods promiſes, a
remembrance of Chriſts death, and a ſeale

of our adoption: therfore Chriſt hath not inſtituted
this Sacrament for a faſhion in his
Church, to touch, and feele, and ſee, as wee
gaze vpon pictures in the windowes, but as
the woman which had the bloodie iſſue,Mat. 9. 20. touching
the hemme of Chriſts garment, drew
vertue from Chriſt himſelfe, becauſe ſhee beleeued:
ſo Chriſt would that wee touching
theſe ſignes ſhould draw vertue from himſelfe,
that is, all the graces which theſe ſignes
repreſent. Therefore as the Leuites vnder the
Law,2. Chr. 35. 6 were bound to prepare their brethren
before they came to the Paſſe-ouer: So preachers
of the Goſpel ſhould prepare their brethren
before they come to the ſupper of the
Lord. For which purpoſe I haue choſen this
place to the Corinthians, which is the cleareſt
and fulleſt declaration of this Sacrament
in all the Scripture.
               
                  The Lord Ieſus in the night, &c.
               
               The ſumme of all theſe words is,The diuiſion. the Inſtitution,
and vſe of the Lords ſupper. Firſt,
Paul ſheweth the author of it, the Lord Ieſus:
then the time when it was inſtituted, in the
night that he was betraied: then the manner
how he did inſtitute it, he tooke bread, & when
he had giuen thanks, he brake it, and gaue vnto
his diſciples, &c. then the end why hee did inſtitute
it, for a remembrance of his death.
               
               
                  
Touching the Author,The Author. he which is ſignified
by it, was the author of it. The Lord Ieſus
hath bid vs to ſupper,Iohn 1. 27. 
                  I am not woorthie
(ſaith Iohn) to looſe his ſhoo: ſo wee are not
worthie to wait at his trencher, and yet hee
will haue vs ſit at his table.None but Chriſt may ordaine Sacraments. To him belongeth
the power to ordaine Sacraments in his
Church, becauſe he fulfilled the Sacraments
of the Law. When Chriſt came, the Paſſeouer
creaſed,Iohn 1. 29. becauſe he is our Paſſeouer; that is,
the Lambe by whoſe blood wee are ſaued.
When Chriſt came, Circumciſion ceaſed, becauſe
he is our circumciſion, that is, the purifier
and cleanſer of our ſinnes.Reuel. 7. 14.
               
               Now theſe two Sacraments are fulfilled,
he hath appointed two other Sacraments for
them; in ſtead of the paſcall Lambe, which
the Iewes did eat, hee hath giuen vs another
Lambe to eate,Iohn. 1. 29. which Iohn calleth the Lambe
of God, that is himſelfe, vpon whome all doe
feede, whoſoeuer doe receiue this Sacrament
with an aſſured faith that Chriſt died to poſſeſſe
them of life. The breaking of the bread
dooth ſignifie the wounding of the bodie:
the pouring out of the wine doth ſignifie the
ſhedding of his blood. The eating of the
bread and drinking of the wine doth ſignifie
that his fleſh and blood doe nouriſh in vs life
eternall, as the bread and wine doe nouriſh

the life preſent.
               In ſtead of Circumciſion,Gen. 17. 10. which began at
Abraham,Who was therefore called Iohn the Baptiſt. he hath ordeined Baptiſme, which
began at Iohn, a more liuely repreſentation
of the true circumciſion of the heart, becauſe
it repreſenteth vnto vs the blood of Chriſt,
which waſheth our ſoules as the water in
baptiſme waſheth our bodies.Mat. 3. 1.
               
               Touching the time,Reu. 1. 5. 
                  In the night (ſaith
Paul,Re. 22▪ 14.) therefore this Sacrament is called the
Lordes Supper,
                  Time. becauſe it was inſtituted at
night when they vſed to ſup. But what night?
Euen that night (ſaith Paule) when he was betraied:
                  Verſe 23.
that night which he ſhould haue curſed,Iob. 3. 3.
as Iob did the day of his birth, if hee had
ſuffered againſt his will: that night when he
ſhould haue thought to deſtroy men, as men
conſpired to deſtroy him. That night (ſaith
Paul) this Sacrament of grace, and peace, and
life began: Euen that night when we betraied
him. Many nights did he ſpend in watching,
and praying for vs; and is there a night now
for vs to kill and betraie him? That was a
darke night, when men went about to put
out the Sunne which brought them light.
Who can but wonder, to ſee how Chriſt and
they for whom Chriſt came, were occupied
at one time? when they deuiſed miſchiefe againſt
him, and ſought all meanes to deſtroy

him, then hee conſulted how to ſaue them,
and inſtituted the ſame night this bleſſed ſacrament,
to conuey all his graces & bleſſings
vnto them, Euen that night when they betraied
him.
               
               The reaſon why this action was deferred
vntill night,Why this ſacrament was inſtituted at night. is, becauſe that was the time appointed
by the Law to eate the Paſſe-ouer,
which was like a predeceſſor of this Sacrament.Why it was deferred till his laſt night.
The reaſon why he deferred it vntil his
laſt night, was, becauſe the Paſſe-ouer could
not be ended before the fulneſſe of time, and
the true Paſchall Lambe were come to be
ſlaine in ſtead of the other. Therefore how
fitlie did Chriſt end the Paſſe-ouer, which
was a ſigne of his ſuffering, ſo preſently before
his ſuffering? And beſide, how ſweetly
did he confirme his Diſciples faith, when as
they ſhould ſee that the next day performed
before their eyes, which ouer night both in
the Paſſe-ouer and in the Sacrament, was ſo
liuely reſembled vnto them? If anie man
from this doe gather,Why we receiue not the Lordes Supper at night. that we ought to eate
the Lordes Supper at night, as Chriſt did, he
muſt vnderſtand that we haue not the ſame
cauſe to doe ſo which Chriſt had, becauſe of
the Paſſe-ouer. And therefore the Church
which hath diſcretion of times and places,
hath altered both the time and the place, vſing

the Temples in ſted of the chamber, and
the morning in ſted of the euening: for indifferent
things are ruled by order and decency.
               Touching the manner,Ver. 23. 24. 
                  He tooke bread,
and when hee had giuen thankes, hee brake it,
and gaue it vnto them. Hee would not eate it,
nor breake it, before he had giuen thankes to
God. What neede he which was God, giue
thankes to God, but to ſhewe vs what wee
ſhould doe when we eate our ſelues?1. Theſ. 5. 18 
                  In all
things giue thanks, (ſaith Paul:) whereby we
declare that all things come from God: but
the wicked beleeue eaſier that God doeth
take,Note. then that hee doth giue, and therefore
they neuer praie hartily vnto him for anie
thing, nor feelingly thanke him for it. For
which the Lord complaineth,Mal. 1. 2. ſaying: I haue
loued you, yet ye ſay, wherein haſt thou loued
vs?
                  Eſay 1. 5. Shewing that we are worſe then the oxe,
which knoweth his feeder. And if wee acknowledge
all things from God,Gen. 19. 20. yet wee doe
like Lot, Is it not a little one (ſaith he) when
he craued to go vnto Zoar, as though it were
not much which he asked: ſo we mince & extenuate
the giftes of God, before we receiue
them and after: like them which haue a grace
for dinner, and none for breakfaſt, as though
they had their dinners from God, and breakfaſts
of their owne.
               
                  
Our example did not ſo, although it was but
bread which hee receiued, yet hee was more
thankfull for bread, then many which burie
the foules, and fiſhes, and beaſtes in their bellie:
for if a count of all were kept, for one that
praieth;Luk. 11 3. 
                  Giue vs this day our daily bread, a hundred
take their bread, and meat, and ſleep too
which neuer pray for it.
               
                  After hee had giuen thankes, hee brake it,
and gaue vnto them, and ſaide, Take eate, for
when he had giuen thankes to God, then it
was ſanctified, and bleſſed, and lawfull to eate.
So when thou ſerueſt God,Note. then it is lawfull
for thee to vſe Gods bleſſinges, then thou
maieſt eate and drinke as Chriſt did, but not
before, for theſe thinges were created to ſerue
them which ſerue God: if thou doeſt not
ſerue him for them, thou encrocheſt vpon
Gods bleſſinges, and ſtealeſt his creatures,
which are no more thine, then thou art his,
for the good God created all things for good
men, as the diuels poſſeſſions are reſerued for
euill men.
               Therefore, as Chriſt would not breake the
bread before hee had giuen thankes to the
founder, ſo know, that there is ſome thing to
be done before thou receiue anie benefite of
GOD, and preſume not to vſe his creatures
with more libertie than his ſonne did, which

did not eate without giuing thankes, nor riſe
againe without ſinging a Pſalme.
               It followeth,Mat 26. 30 
                  This is my bodie. Here is the
fruite of his thankes before; hee prayed that
the bread and wine might be bleſſed, & they
were bleſſed.Gen. 27. As Iſaacks bleſſing ſhewed it
ſelfe vpon Iacob whom he bleſſed, ſo Chriſt
his bleſſing appeared ſtraight vpon theſe myſteries:
for it could not be ſaid before, This is
my bodie, becauſe it was meere bread: but now
it may be called his bodie, becauſe his bleſſing
hath infuſed that vertue into it, that it dooth
not onely repreſent his bodie, but conuey his
bodie and himſelfe vnto vs. The efficacie of
this bleſſing is in this Sacrament euer ſince,
ſanctifying it vnto vs as well as it did to the
Apoſtles,Luk. 22. 32. euen as Chriſts praier ſtaied Peters
faith after Chriſt was dead.
               Now ye haue heard the meaning of theſe
words, He tooke bread, and bleſſed it, and brake
it, and gaue it: you ſhall ſee with what a myſticall
reſemblance they vnite Chriſt and vs
Firſt, as Chriſt in the Supper tooke bread to
feede vs:Heb. 2. 16. ſo in his birth he tooke our fleſh to
ſaue vs. Secondly, as Chriſt when he had taken
the bread, bleſſed the bread to make it a
ſpirituall food: ſo Chriſt, when he had taken
our fleſh, powred foorth moſt rich and precious
graces into it, to make it food of life vnto

vs.Ioh. 17. 19. Thirdly, as Chriſt when hee had bleſſed
the bread, brake the bread: ſo Chriſt when
hee had filled his bodie with moſt precious
graces,1. Pe. 2. 24. brake it vp like a rich treaſure houſe,
his handes by the nayles, his backe by the
ſtripes, his head by the thornes, his ſide by
the ſpeare; that out of euerie hole a riuer of
grace and goodneſſe might iſſue & flow forth
vnto vs.Ephe. 3. 17. Laſtly, as Chriſt gaue the bread when
he had broken it: ſo Chriſt (by a liuely faith)
communicateth his bodie after he hath crucified
it. Hereby wee are taught, that when
we ſee the Miniſter take the bread to feed vs,
we muſt conceiue, that Chriſt (being God
from euerlaſting) tooke our fleſh to ſaue
vs. When we ſee the Miniſter bleſſe the bread
to a holie vſe, we muſt conceiue, that Chriſt
(by vniting the Godhead vnto it) ſanctified
his fleſh for our redemption. When wee ſee
the Miniſter breake the bread to ſuſtaine our
bodies, we muſt conceiue, that Chriſt in his
death, brake his bodie to refreſh our ſoules.
When wee ſee the Miniſter giue the bread
to our handes, we muſt conceiue, that Chriſt
as truly offereth himſelf to our faith to be receiued
of vs.
               Becauſe vpon theſe wordes the Papiſts
ground their Tranſubſtantiation, that is that
the bread is changed into Chriſts fleſh, & the

wine is turned into Chriſtes blood, whereby
we eate the ſame bodie which dyed vpon the
Croſſe, & drinke the ſame blood which iſſued
out of his ſide. That you may ſee the blindnes
of this Popiſh dreame. I would haue you
but marke euerie word of this ſcripture, how
they make againſt tranſubſtantiation, that ye
may ſee them ſlaine like Goliah with their
owne ſworde.1. Sa. 17. 15 Euen as God made Caiphas
ſpeak againſt himſelf;Ioh. 18. 14. ſo the ſcriptures which
heretikes alledge,1. K. 18. 28. do make againſt thēſelues,
like the Baalites which wounded their owne
fleſh.Heretikes alleadge ſcripture like the diuell. I may liken their allegations to Satans
when he tempted Chriſt in the wilderneſſe, he
alleadged but one ſentence of ſcripture for
himſelfe,Mat. 4. 4. and that Pſalme out of which hee
borrowed it made ſo plaine againſt him,Pſa. 91. 11. that
he was faine to picke here a word and there a
word, and leaue out that which went before,
and skip in the middeſt, and omit that which
came after, or elſe hee had marred his cauſe.
the ſcripture is ſo holie, and pure, and true,
that no word nor ſillable thereof can make
for the diuell, or for ſinners, or for heretikes:
yet as the diuell alledged ſcripture, though
it made not for him, but agaynſt him; ſo
doe the Libertines, and Epicures, and heretickes,
as though they had learned at his
ſchoole,
               
                  
Now there is no ſentence of the ſcripture,
which the wiſer Papiſts alleadge boldly for
their Tranſubſtantiation,Mat. 26. 26 but this, that Chriſt
ſayd, This is my bodie: by which they may
proue as well,Ioh. 10. 7. 9 that Chriſt is a doore, becauſe
he ſaith,Ioh. 15. 1. 
                  I am the doore: or a vine, becauſe he
ſaith, I am a vine: for his ſayings are like. Figuratiue
ſpeeches muſt not be conſtrued literally,
but this is heretikes faſhion. If you mark
you ſhall ſee throughout, that all the teſtimonies
which the Papiſts alledge for their hereſies,Note.
are either tropes, or figures, or allegories,
or parables, or alluſions, or darke ſpeeches;
which when they preſume to expound allegoricallie,
or literallie, without conference
of other ſcriptures, then they wander and
ſtraie from the marke, or elſe it is impoſſible
that the truth ſhould maintaine error, that is,
that the ſcripture ſhould ſpeake for hereſie,
if it were not peruerted: therefore wee ſee
that.Gen. 3. 3. Eue neuer erred, vntill ſhe corrupted the
text.
               Now we will enter the lyſtes with our aduerſaries,Arguments againſt Popiſh tranſubſtantiation.
and ſee whether theſe wordes doe
proue that the bread and wine are turned into
Chriſts bodie, Paul ſaith, Ieſus tooke bread:
well then, yet it is bread: when he had taken
it, then he bleſſed it; what did he bleſſe? the
bread which hee tooke; well then, yet it is

bread: when he had bleſſed it, then he brake
it; what did he breake? the bread which hee
bleſſed; well then, yet it is bread: when hee
had broken it, then hee gaue it; what did hee
giue? the bread which he brake: well then,
yet it is bread: when he had giuen it, they did
eate it; what did they eate? the bread which
hee gaue them; well then, yet it is bread:
when they did eat it, then he ſayd, This is my
bodie; what did hee call his bodie? the bread
which they did eat; well then, yet it is bread.
If it be bread all this while, when hee did take
it, and bleſſe it, and brake it, and gaue it, and
they did eate it, when is it turned into his bodie?
here they ſtand like the Sadduces,Mat. 22. 34 as mute
as fiſhes.
               Now that ye may ſee, that not we only ſay
it is bread and wine after the conſecration; in
the 27. verſe, Chriſt himſelfe doth cal it bread
and wine after he had giuen it, as hee did before.Mar. 14. 25
And in Marke he ſaith, I will drinke no
more of the fruit of the vine. Here Chriſt ſaith,
that it was the fruit of the vine which hee
drank; but his blood is not the fruit of vines,
but wine, therefore wine was his drinke, and
not blood.
               Beſide, if you would heare Paul expound
Chriſt, hee ſheweth that all our Fathers had
the ſame ſubſtance of Chriſt in their Sacraments,

that we haue in ours; for hee ſayth,
They all did eate the ſame ſpirituall meate,
                  1. Cor. 10. 4. 
                  and
al drinke the ſame ſpiritual drinke. Straight hee
ſaith, that this meat and this drinke was Chriſt.
Marke that he ſayth not onely,Verſ. 3. 4. 
                  They did eat
the ſame meat that we eate; but he ſaith, that
this meat was Chriſt:
                  Verſe. 4. and not onely ſo, but
to ſhew that Chriſt is not a corporall meate,
as the Papiſts ſay; he ſayth, hee is a ſpirituall
meate as we ſay: therefore you ſee that wee
doe not eate him corporally, no more then
our Fathers, but that as they did eate him ſpiritually,
ſo do wee; for ſpirituall meate muſt
be eaten ſpiritually, as corporall meate is eaten
corporally.
               Agayne, for the ſignes to bee turned into
the thing ſignified by them, is vtterly againſt
the nature of a Sacrament, and makes it no
Sacrament, becauſe there is no ſigne: for euerie
Sacrament doth conſiſt of a ſigne, and a
thing ſignified: the ſigne is euer an earthlie
thing, and that which it ſignifieth is a heauenly
thing. This ſhall appeare in al examples:
As, in Paradiſe there was a very Tree
for the ſigne, and Chriſt the thing ſignified
by it:Gen. 17. 11. in Circumciſion there was a cutting off
of the skinne, and the cutting off of ſinne: in
the Paſſe-ouer there was a Lambe,Exod. 12. 3. & Chriſt:
in the Sabboth there was a day of reſt,Exo. 23. 11. and

eternall reſt:Heb. 9
                        •
                     . in the ſacrifices there was an
offering of ſome beaſt, and the offering of
Chriſt:Exod. 30. in the Sanctuarie there was the holie
place,Exo. 25. 24. and heauen: in the Propitiatorie there
was the golden couering, and Chriſt our couer:Exod. 17. 16
in the Wilderneſſe there was a Rocke
yeelding water, and Chriſt yeelding his
blood:Mat. 3. 16. in the Apparition there was a Doue,
and the holy Ghoſt:Iohn 6. 49. in the Manna there was
bread,Iohn 1. 33. and Chriſt: in Baptiſme there is verie
water which waſheth vs, and Chriſts blood
waſhing vs:1. Cor. 11. 19 ſo in the Supper of Chriſt there
is verie bread and Wine for the ſigne, and the
bodie and blood of Chriſt for the thing ſignified,
or elſe this Sacrament is againſt the
nature of all other ſacraments.
               Againe, there muſt bee a proportion betweene
the Paſſe-ouer and the Lords Supper,Exod. 12.
becauſe this was figured by the other.
Nowe, the Iewes had in their Paſſe-ouer,
Breade, and Wine, and a Lambe: So our
ſauiour Chriſt inſtituting his laſt Supper,Mat. 26. 26
left Bread, and Wine, and a Lambe: the
which name is giuen to himſelfe,Iohn. 29. becauſe
hee came like a Lambe, and died like a
Lambe.
               Againe, if Chriſts verie bodie were offered
in the ſacramēt, then it were not a ſacrament,
but a ſacrifice, which two differ as much as

giuing, and taking: for in a ſacrifice we giue,
and in a ſacrament wee receiue, and therefore
wee ſay our ſacrifice, and Chriſts ſacrament.
               
                   Againe, euery ſacrifice was offered vpon
the Altar.Exod. 27. Now marke the wiſedome of the
holy-Ghoſt, leaſt we ſhould take this for a
Sacrifice, hee neuer names Altar when hee
ſpeakes of it, but, The Table of the Lord.
Therefore it is no doubt but the diuell hath
kept the name of Altar, that we might think
it a ſacrifice.
               
                   Againe, if the bread were Chriſtes fleſh,
and the wine his blood, as theſe two are ſeparate
one from the other; ſo Chriſts fleſh
ſhould be ſeparate from his blood, but his
bodie is not deuided, for then it were a dead
bodie.
               
                   Againe, that which remaineth doth nouriſh
the bodie, & reliſh in the mouth as it did
before, which could not be, but that it is the
ſame food which it was before.
               
                   Againe, I would aske, whoſe are this
whiteneſſe, and hardneſſe, and roundnes, and
coldneſſe? None of them ſay that it is the
whiteneſſe, and hardneſſe, and roundneſſe,
and coldneſſe of Chriſts body: therefore it
muſt needes bee the whiteneſſe, and hardneſſe,
and roundneſſe, and coldneſſe of the

bread, or elſe qualities ſhould ſtand without
ſubſtances, which is, as if one ſhould tell you
of a houſe without a foundation.
               Againe, as Chriſt dwelleth in vs, ſo hee is 
eaten of vs, but hee dwelleth in vs onely by
faith, Ephe. 3. 17. Therfore he is eaten only by
faith.
               Agayne, none can bee ſaued without the 
communion of the body of Chriſt: but if all
ſhould communicate with it corporally, then
neither infants, nor any of our fathers, the patriarkes,
or the prophets, ſhould be ſaued, becauſe
they receiued it not ſo.
               Againe, Chriſt ſayth not, This wine, but 
                  This cup, and therefore by their concluſion,
not onely the wine ſhould bee turned into
blood, but the cup too.
               Againe, Paul ſaith; They which receiue
                  
                  vnwoorthilie, receiue their owne damnation,
But if it were the fleſh of Chriſt, they ſhould
rather receiue ſaluation then damnation, becauſe
Chriſt ſaith; Hee that eateth my fleſh,
and drinketh my blood, hath life euerlaſting,
Iohn 6. 54.
               Againe, if they would heare an Angell 
from heauen: when Chriſts bodie was glorified,
an Angell ſayd to the woman, Hee is
riſen, and is not here, Mat. 28. as if he ſhould
ſay; his body is but in one place at once, or

elſe he might haue bene there though he was
riſen.
               
                   Againe, why doe they ſay in receiuing
this Sacrament euer ſince the primitiue
Church, Lift vp your hearts, if they haue al in
their mouthes? To end this cōtrouerſie, here
wee may ſay as the Diſciples ſaid to Chriſt,
Whither ſhall we go from thee?
                  Iohn 6. 68. I meane wee
neede not to go to any other expoſitor of
Chriſt, then Chriſt himſelfe, therefore marke
what he ſaith:Iohn 6. 60. at firſt, when Chriſt ſaid that
he was the bread of life, & that al which wold
liue, muſt eate him, they murmured vntill he
expoūded his words, & how did he expound
his words?Iohn. 6. 35. Thus, Hee that commeth vnto mee
hath eaten, and he that beleeueth in mee, hath
drunke. After when hee inſtituted this Sacramēt,
in like words they murmured not, which
they would as before, if hee had not reſolued
thē before, that to eat his body, and to drinke
his blood, was nothing but to come to him,
and beleeue in him.
               After hee had ſaid ſo, they murmured not,
becauſe they did ſee ſome reaſon in it, as it is
plainlie ſaid, This is my bodie, ſo it is plainlie
ſaide,Iohn 6. 63. 
                  Theſe words are ſpirite: that is, they
muſt be vnderſtood ſpirituallie, and not literallie.
               But if it be fleſh indeed, why doe they not

ſatisfie the ſimple people how they may eate
this fleſh in Lent, when they forbid them to
eate any fleſh, they muſt needs eate it doubtfully,
and he which doubteth, ſaith Iames, receiueth
nothing: therefore hee which eateth
the maſſe, receiueth nothing.
               I did not alleage the Fathers in my Sermon,
but if any ſuſpend his aſſent, till they
bring in their verdit, let him heare thē make
confeſſion of their beleefe.
               Auguſtine ſaith,Aug. vpon the 3. pſal. the Lord doubted not to
ſay, This is my bodie, when hee gaue onely a
ſigne, or Sacrament of his bodie.
               Tertullian ſaith,Tert. againſt marcion the 4. booke. 
                  This is my bodie, that is, a
ſigne of my bodie.
               Ambroſe ſaith, the bread and wine remain
ſtill the ſame thing that they were.4. booke 4. can. of ſacraments. In his firſt dialogue.
               
               Theodoret ſayth, after the conſecration,
the myſticall ſigns doe not caſt off their own
nature, but abide ſtill in their firſt ſubſtance
and forme.
               Origene ſayth,Vpon the 15. of Mat. the bread that is ſanctified
with the word of God, as touching the materiall
ſubſtance thereof, goeth into the bellie
and foorth againe like other meats.Iren. 4. book. cap. 34. againſt Valētinus.
               
               Irenaeus ſaith, that it hath two things in it,
one earthly, and the other heauenly.
               Cyril ſaith,Ad ob. Theod. Anathe
                     
                        •
                     atis. our Sacraments auouch not the
eating of a man.
               
                  
Cyprian ſaith,1. Booke of Epi. the Lord calleth bread made
of many graines, his bodie; and called wine
made of many grapes, his blood.
               Athanaſius ſayth,In that goſpell whoſoeuer ſpeaketh a word, &c. Hom. 60. to the people of Antioch. Chriſt made mention of
his aſcenſion into heauē, that he might withdraw
his Diſciples from corporall and fleſhly
eating.
               Chryſoſtome ſayth, God giueth vs things
ſpirituall, vnder things viſible and naturall.
And againe, being ſanctified, it is deliuered
from the name of bread, and is exalted to the
name of the Lords body,To Caeſarius the Monke. although the nature
of the bread ſtill remaine.
               And becauſe they beleeue that the Pope
cannot erre,Againſt Eutiches the Heretike. Pope Gelaſius ſetteth too his
hand, and ſayth with the reſt: Neyther the
ſubſtaunce of the bread, nor nature of the
wine, ceaſe to be more then they were before.
               Tell vs Papiſt, do not theſe Fathers ſpeake
as plaine as we? Canſt thou auouch Tranſubſtantiation
more flatlie then they denie it?
How had this hereſie bene chaſed, if the diuel
had hatched it in their time?
               Thus the Scriptures on the one ſide, and
the Fathers on the other ſide, did ſo trouble
three Archpapiſts,Vpon the Canon lect. 40. Biel, Tonſtal, and Fiſher,
that Gabriel Biel ſayth, how the bodie of
Chriſt is in the Sacrament, is not found in the

Canon of the Bible.
               Tonſtall ſaith,1. Booke of the Sacra. pa. 4
                        •
                     . It had bene better to leaue
euerie man to his owne coniecture, as they
were before the Councell of Laterane, than
to bring in ſuch a queſtion.
               Fiſher ſaith,Againſt the captiuity of Babilō, made by M. Luther. No man can proue by the
words of the Goſpell, that any Prieſt in theſe
dayes dooth conſecrate the verie bodie and
blood of Chriſt.
               Here is fulfilled, Out of thine owne mouth I
will condemne thee.
                  Luk. 19. 22. But we will not carrie the
matter ſo, becauſe a Iudge muſt haue two
eares, therefore now let them ſpeake.
               Becauſe they cannot tell how the bread &
wine ſhould bee turned into fleſh and blood,The Papiſts allegations for the reall preſence.
and yet appeare bread and wine ſtill, they ſay
it is a myracle: but how doe they prooue it?
If they contende it is a myracle, they muſt
ſhewe vs a ſigne: for euerie myracle may be
ſeene,Exo. 4. 8. & 21. like all the myracles of Moſes, and
Chriſt, and the Apoſtles: and therefore a myracle
is called a ſigne, becauſe it may be ſeene
like a ſigne, and the word ſignifieth a wonder.
And the Iewes crauing a myracle, ſayd;
Shew vs a myracle:
                  Exod. 9. as though they were taught
to iudge of myracles by ſight. All which doth
ſhew that a myracle may be ſeene, but here no
myracle is ſeene.
               
                  
Againe, a myracle (eſpecially in the time
of the Goſpell) is an extraordinarie thing, but
they make this an ordinarie thing: for if the
bread and wine be turned into fleſh & blood,
then myracles are as common as Sacraments,
and ſo becauſe they haue Maſſe euerie day,
they ſhould worke myracles euerie day.
               Laſtly, this ſeemeth ſtrange, that Auguſtin
(whom they ſo much honour) gathered all the
myracles which are written in the ſcripture,
and yet amongſt all, ſpeaks not of this: therefore
then it was counted no myracle: but
Paule ſpeakes of lying myracles,2. Theſ. 2. 9. and this is
one of them.
               If they ſay that Chriſt can turne bread and
wine into his bodie,Obiection and therefore hee doth.
Firſt,Anſwere. they muſt proue that he wil, for they can
doe many things themſelues which they doe
not, becauſe they will not: therefore it is an
old anſwere, that from Can to Will no Argument
followeth. The Leper did not ſay vnto
Chriſt,Mar. 1. 40. If thou cāſt, thou wilt: but, If thou wilt
thou canſt.
               
               But the queſtion which they think cannot
be anſwered, like their inuincible Nauies, is
this.Obiection If the bread be not his bodie, why doth
he call it his bodie? Reſolue this knot, and all
is cleare.Anſwere. Marke then, and we will looſe it as
well as we can: He ſaith, This is my bodie, as

he ſaith after; which is broken for you, Why? his
bodie was not broken before he ſuffered, how
did he ſay then, which is broken, before it was
broken? There is no ſenſe of it but this, the
bread was broken, and ſignified that his body
ſhould be broken.
               Now, as the breaking of the bread did ſignifie
the breaking of his bodie, ſo the bread
muſt needes ſignifie his bodie: but as his bodie
was not broken indeede when the bread
was broken, ſo the bread could not be his bodie
indeed, for then his body ſhould haue bin
broken when the bread was broken: Yet let
them obiect what they can.
               If (ſay they) the bread and wine bee not
changed into his bodie and blood, why doth
hee ſpeake ſo darkly?Obiection hee might haue ſpoken
plainer.
               I anſwere,Anſwere. though this ſeeme darke to Papiſts,
yet it was not darke to the Apoſtles,
they vnderſtood his meaning well inough,
and all the reſt for 1215. yeares after Chriſt
before Tranſubſtantiation was ſpoken of. If
the Apoſtles had not vnderſtood his meaning,
they would not ſticke to aske him, as
their manner was, vntill they were acquainted
with Chriſts phraſe, whenſoeuer they doubted
vpon any of his ſpeeches, they were wont
to come vnto him and ſay;Luke 8. 9. 
                  Maſter, what is

the meaning? but they were vſed to ſuch phraſes:
for it was Chriſtes manner to teach by ſimilitudes,
ſhewing one thing by another,
which is the plaineſt manner of teaching, and
moſt vſed in holie ſcripture, eſpecially in the
types and ſhadowes of this Sacrament.Mat. 26. 17. For
example, Chriſt calleth the Lambe the Paſſeouer,
in place whereof this Sacrament ſucceeded,
and therefore preſentlie after they
had eaten the Paſſe-ouer, Chriſt inſtituted
this Sacrament to be vſed for it. Chriſt (I ſay)
called the Lambe the Paſſe-ouer, and yet the
Paſſe-ouer was this, an angel paſſed ouer the
houſes of the Iſraelites,Exo. 12. 27. and ſtroke the Egyptians:
this was not a Lambe; and yet becauſe
the Lambe was a ſigne of this Paſſe-ouer, as
the bread and wine is of Chriſtes bodie, therefore
Chriſt called the Lambe the Paſſeouer,
as hee calleth the bread and wine his
bodie.
               Againe,Gen. 17. 13. Circumciſion is called the Couenant,
and yet Circumciſion was nothing but
the cutting away of a skinne: but the Couenant
is,Gen. 12. 3. 
                  In Abrahams ſeede all Nations ſhall be
bleſſed, I will be their God, and they ſhall be my
people, I will defend and ſaue them, & they ſhall
ſerue and worſhip me. This is not Circumciſion,
and yet as though circumciſion were the
couenant it ſelfe, it is called the couenant

becauſe it ſignifieth the Couenant: ſo bread
and wine are called Chriſtes bodie, becauſe
they ſignifie Chriſts bodie.
               Againe,Tit. 3. 5. Baptiſme is called Regeneration,
and yet Baptiſme is a dipping of our bodies
in water;1. Cor. 6. 11. but regeneration is the renuing of
the minde to the image wherein it was created.
This is not Baptiſme, and yet as though
Baptiſme were Regeneration it ſelfe, it is called
Regeneration, becauſe it ſignifieth Regeneration:
ſo the bread and wine are called
Chriſts bodie, becauſe they ſignifie Chriſts
bodie.
               Againe,Luk. 22. 20. the Cup is called the new Teſtament;
and yet the Cup is but a peece of mettall
filled with wine: but the new Teſtament
is,Ioh. 3. 36. 
                  He which beleeueth in the Sonne, ſhall be ſaued.
This is not a Cup, and yet as though the
Cup were the new Teſtament it ſelfe, it is called
the new Teſtament, becauſe it ſignifieth
the new Teſtament: ſo the bread and wine
are called Chriſtes body, becauſe they ſignifie
Chriſts bodie.
               They which knewe that the Lambe is not
the Paſſe-ouer, though Chriſt called it the
Paſſe ouer; that Circumciſion is not the Couenant,
though God calleth it the Couenant;
that Baptiſme is not Regeneration,
though it be called Regeneration; that the

Cuppe is not the newe Teſtament, though
Chriſt called it the newe Teſtament; could
they not as well vnderſtand, that the bread &
wine were not Chriſts bodie, though Chriſt
called them his bodie? As they vnderſtood
theſe ſpeeches, ſo they vnderſtood this
ſpeech: therefore they which ſay, that the
bread and wine are Chriſtes bodie, becauſe
Chriſt ſaith,Mat. 26. 26 
                  This is my bodie; may as well ſay,
that the Lambe is the Paſſe-ouer, becauſe
Chriſt calleth it the Paſſe-ouer; that Baptiſme
is Regeneration, becauſe Paule calleth
it Regeneration; that the Cup is the new Teſtament,
becauſe Chriſt calleth it the newe
Teſtament.
               If euerie Sacrament was called by the
thing which it ſignified, and yet neuer anie
Sacrament was taken for the thing it ſelfe;
what reaſon haue they to take this Sacrament
for the thing it ſelfe, more than all the
reſt? It is the conſent of all Writers, that a
Sacrament is a ſigne, therefore not the thing
ſignified: no more than the buſh at the doore
is the wine in the ſeller. If I call the Prince a
Phoenix, the Vniuerſitie a Fountaine, the
Court a Peacocke, the Cittie a Sea, the
Countrey an Hermite: why, can the Papiſtes
vnderſtand mee, and not vnderſtand
Chriſt?
               
                  
What a darke, and ſtraunge, and intricate,
and incredible ſpeech had this bene for them
to vnderſtand groſlie, and literallie? Would
they thinke, that they did eate Chriſts bodie,
when his bodie ſtood before them, and he had
told them before that his bodie was like their
bodie? Nay, this would haue required moe
wordes, and made them come againe; with
Maſter,
                  Luk. 9. 8. 
                  what is the meaning? for they were
not ſo inſtructed yet before the reſurrection,
to beleeue euerie thing without queſtioning,
if it were contrarie to ſenſe and reaſon: but as
they asked, who had giuen him anie meate,
when he ſaid that he had meate,Ioh. 4. 33. & they could
ſee none: ſo they would haue asked, what
meate is this which we ſee not? How can euery
one of vs eat his body, & yet he hath but
one bodie, & that body is whole when we eat
it? Loe, he ſtandeth before vs & ſaith, that his
body is like vnto ours, & yet he takes bread &
breaks it, & giues it vnto vs to eat, & when we
eate it,Luk. 24. 39. 
                  This is my body, & yet his body
ſtandeth before vs ſtil. If his body be like ours
(as he ſaith) how can it be eaten, & be there,
for ours cannot? Thus they wold haue queſtioned,
if they had not bene vſed to ſuch phraſes:
but as they could vnderſtand him, when
he called himſelf a ſtone, a rock, a doore, a window,
& a vine: ſo they pickt out his meaning

when hee ſayd that bread was his bodie: for
hee had told them before, that hee was the
bread of eternall life.
               
               Now the bread of eternall life is not eaten
with teeth, for the bodie cannot eate ſpiritually,
no more then the ſoule can eate corporally,
and therefore hee is ſuch a bread as is
eaten with faith, and ſo himſelfe ſaith in the
Goſpell of Iohn.Ioh. 6. 35. Marke this eating by faith,
and all the ſtrife is ended. Fleſh and blood indeede
neede not faith to chew them, for the
teeth can chew them well inough. Therefore
if the bread and wine were the bodie of
Chriſt, then we neede not faith to eate it, but
all which haue teeth might eate Chriſts bodie,
yea the Myce might eate it as well as
men, for they eate the ſame bread that
wee doe, as well after it is conſecrated as before.
               If this be not inough to batter the ruines
of this vpſtart Hereſie, I will come to Interrogatories,
and ſee whether they haue learned
it by roate, or by reaſon.
               If they grounde their Tranſubſtantiation
vpon theſe wordes of Chriſt,Mat. 26. 26▪
                   
                  This is my bodie,
which hee ſpake to his Diſciples: I aske
them, whether they receiue that bodie which
was mortall, or that bodie which is glorified?
becauſe one of theſe bodies they muſt

needes receiue, either his mortall bodie, or
his glorified bodie.Neither Chriſts mortall body, nor his immortall bodie can be in the Sacrament. If they ſay that it is his
mortall bodie, the mortall bodie will not
profite them: for you ſee that mortall foode
is but for this mortal life, neither hath Chriſt
a mortall bodie now to communicate vnto
them, becauſe it is changed to an immortall
bodie; therefore they cannot receiue the
mortall bodie, becauſe Chriſt hath not
a mortall bodie to giue vnto them. If they
ſaye, that they receiue his glorified bodie;
then they muſt flie from this Text: for
at that time Chriſt had not any glorified
bodie.
               When this Sacrament was inſtituted, and
Chriſt ſayde, This is my bodie, his bodie was
not glorified, becauſe the Sacrament was
inſtituted before his death, and his body was
glorified after his reſurrection. Therefore if
they receiue the ſame body which the Apoſtles
receiued, as they ſay they doe, they cannot
receiue a glorified bodie, becauſe then
Chriſt had not a glorified bodie to communicate
vnto them.
               Thus the rockes and ſandes are of both
ſides them, they receiue a bodie neither mortall
nor immortall: if Chriſt hath any ſuch
body, iudge you. Here they ſtande like a
foole, which cannot tell on his tale: Nabuchadnezzar

dreamed a dreame and knew not
what it meant.Dan. 4. 15.
               
               Beſide, I aske them to whom Chriſt ſpake
when he ſaid,Mar. 14. 24. 
                  This is my bodie? Marke ſayth,
hee ſpake to them, that is, to his Diſciples:
well then, if theſe wordes, This is my bodie,
were not ſpoken to the ſignes, but to the
perſons: not to the bread and wine but to the
Receiuers, as the words which follow, Doe
this in remembrance of mee:
                  Chriſt ſpake not to the bread and wine, but to his diſciples. if theſe wordes
were not ſpoken to the bread and wine, then
it is plaine that they doe not change the nature
of the Bread and Wine. If the nature of
them be not altered, then the ſubſtance remaineth,
and then wee receiue no other ſubſtance
with them, becauſe two ſubſtances can
not be in one place.
               What then, is there nothing in the ſacrament
but bread and wine,More in the Lords Supper, then bred and wine. like a hungry nunſcion?
Nay, wee ſay not that the ſacrament
is nothing but a bare ſigne, or that you receiue
no more then you ſee: for Chriſt ſaith,
that it is his body: and Paul ſaith, that it is
the communion of Chriſts body and blood:
Therefore there is more in ſacramentall
Bread,1. Cor. 10. 16 then in common bread; though the
nature be not changed, yet the vſe is chaunged:
it dooth not onely nouriſh the body as
it did before, but alſo it bringeth a Breade

with it which nouriſheth the ſoule: for as
ſure as wee receiue breade, ſo ſure wee receiue
Chriſte; not onelie the benefites of
Chriſt, but Chriſt: although not in a popiſh
manner, yet we are ſo ioined vnto him,
as though wee were but one bodie with
him.
               As the ſpouſe dooth not marrie with the
landes and goods,A ſimilitude. but with the man himſelfe,
and being partaker of him, is made
partaker of them: ſo the faithfull doe not
onelie marrie with Chriſtes benefites, but
with Chriſt himſelfe, and being partakers
of him, they are made partakers of his benefites:
for Chriſt may not be deuided from
his benefites, no more then the Sunne from
his light.
               It is ſaid,Rom. 8. 32. 
                  The Father gaue vs his Sonne,
and ſo the ſonne giueth vs himſelfe. For as
the Breade is a ſigne of his bodie, ſo the giuing
of the Bread, is a ſigne of the giuing of
his bodie. Thus he lieth before vs like a Pellicane,
which letteth her yoong ones ſucke
her blood: ſo that wee may ſay, the Lord inuited
vs to ſupper, and hee himſelfe was our
meate.
               But if you aske howe this is? I muſt
aunſwere. It is a myſterie: but if I coulde
tell it, it were no myſterie. Yet, as it is

ſayd, when three men walked in the midſt of
the furnace,Dan. 3. 25. 
                  One like the ſonne of God walked amongſt
them: So, when the faithful receiue the
Bread and Wine, one like the ſonne of God
ſeemeth to come vnto them, which fils them
with peace, and ioy, and grace, that they maruell
what it was which they receiued beſides
bread and wine.
               For example,A ſimilitude. thou makeſt a bargaine with
thy neighbour for houſe or land, and receyueſt
in earneſt a peece of golde: that which
thou receiueſt is but a peece of golde, but
now it is a ſigne of thy bargaine, and if thou
keepe not touch with him, happily it will
claſpe thee for all that thou art woorth: ſo,
that which thou receiueſt is bread, but this
bread is a ſigne of another matter which paſſeth
bread.
               Againe,Another ſimilitude. thou haſt an obligation in thy
hand, and I aske thee what haſt thou there?
and thou ſayeſt, I haue here an hundred
pounds: why (ſay I) there is nothing but paper,
inke, and waxe: Oh, but by this (ſayeſt
thou) I wil recouer an hundreth pounds, and
that is as good. So beloued, this is as good,
that vnder theſe ſignes, you receiue the vertue
of Chriſts body and blood by faith, as if
you did eate his bodie, and drinke his blood
indeede, which is horrible to thinke that any

ſhould deuour their God, thinking thereby
to worſhip him: neuer any heretike, nor Idolater,
conceiued ſo groſly of their god before
the Papiſt. We reade of a people which
did eate men, but neuer of any people which
did eat their God.
               All the Apoſtles ſay, that it was needfull
that Chriſt ſhould take our fleſh: but no Apoſtle
ſayth, that it is needfull that we ſhould
take Chriſtes fleſh; for all the bleſſinges of
Chriſt are apprehended by faith, & nothing
is fit to apprehend him whome wee ſee not,
but fayth: and therefore one of their owne
pillars ſayd,Auguſtine. 
                  Beleeue, and thou haſt eaten. Faith
dooth more in religion then the mouth,Luk. 11. 27. or
elſe we might ſay with the woman, Bleſſed
are the breaſts which gaue thee ſucke, and ſo
none ſhould be bleſſed but Marie: but Marie
was not bleſſed becauſe Chriſt was in her
bodie, but becauſe Chriſt was in her heart:
and leaſt this ſhould ſeeme incredible vnto
you, becauſe Marie is called bleſſed among
women: when Chriſt heard the women ſay,
Bleſſed are the breaſts which gaue thee ſucke, he
replied vnto her,Luk. 8. 21. 
                  Bleſſed are they which heare
the word of God and keepe it: theſe are my brethren,
and ſiſters, and mother (ſayth Chriſt) as
though the reſt were no kin to him in heauen,
though they were kin in earth.
               
                  
Thus if Chriſt were in thy body, and thou
ſhouldeſt ſay as this woman: Bleſſed is the bodie
that hath thee in it, nay would Chriſt ſay,
Bleſſed is the heart that hath me in it. If Marie
were no whit better for hauing Chriſt in her
armes, nor for hauing her in her bodie, howe
much better art thou for hauing him in thy
bellie,Note. where thou canſt not ſee him? Muſt
the ſunne needs come to vs, or elſe cannot his
heate and light profite vs? nay it dooth vs
more good, becauſe it is ſo farre off: ſo this
Sunne is gone from vs, that hee might giue
more light vnto vs, which made him ſaie, It
is good for you that I go from you:
                  Iohn 16. 7. therefore away
with this carnall eating of ſpirituall
things.Pro. 31. 29. 
                  Manie daughters haue done vertuouſly,
but thou (ſaith Salomon) ſurpaſſeſt them all. So,
manie heretikes haue ſpoken abſurdlie, but
this ſurpaſſeth them all, that Chriſt muſt be
applied like phiſicke, as though his blood
could not profite vs, vnleſſe we did drinke it,
and ſwallow it as a potion.
               Is this the Papiſts vnion with Chriſt? Is
this the manner whereby wee are made one
fleſh with Chriſt, to eate his fleſh? nay, when
hee tooke our fleſh vnto him, and was made
man, then we were vnited to him in the fleſh,
and not now. Chriſt tooke our fleſh, we take
not his fleſh, but beleeue that he tooke ours,

therefore if you would know whether Chriſts
bodie be in the ſacrament,A way to knowe whether Chriſts body be in the ſacrament. I ſay vnto you as
Chriſt ſaid vnto Thomas, touch, feele, and ſee.
In viſible things God hath appointed our
eyes to be iudges, for as the ſpirite diſcerneth
ſpirituall obiects, ſo ſenſe diſcerneth of ſenſible
obiects. As Chriſt taught Thomas to
iudge of his bodie, ſo may we, and ſo ſhould
they: therefore if you cannot ſee his body, nor
feele his body, you may gather by Chriſtes
ſaying to Thomas, that hee would not haue
you beleeue that it is his body,Ioh. 20. 27. for my bodie
(ſaith Chriſt) may be ſeene and felt. And thus
Tranſubſtantiation is found a liar.
               Nowe,why chriſt calleth the bread his body. if you aske mee why Chriſt calleth
the ſigne by the name of the thing it ſelfe, I
aske thee againe; Mayſt thou ſay when thou
ſeeſt the picture of the Queene, this is the
Queene; and when thou ſeeſt the picture of a
Lyon, this is a Lyon: and may not Chriſt ſay
when he ſeeth a thing like his bodie, This is
my bodie?
               
               I ſhewed you before, that euery Sacrament
is called by the name of the thing
which it dooth ſignifie, and therefore why
ſhould we ſtumble at this more then the reſt?
The reaſon why the ſignes haue the name of
the things, is to ſtrike a deeper reuerēce in vs
to receiue this ſacrament of Chriſt reuerētly,

ſincerely, and holily, as if Chriſt were there
preſet in body and blood himſelfe.
               And ſurely, as hee which defaceth the
Queenes ſeale is conuicted of contempt and
treaſon to her owne perſon: ſo he which prophaneth
theſe ſeales of Chriſt, doth not worſhip
Chriſt, but deſpiſe him, and that contempt
ſhall be required of him, as if hee had
contemned Chriſt himſelfe. This is the reaſon
why Chriſt calleth the ſignes of his bodie
his bodie, to make vs take this Sacrament reuerently,
becauſe we are apt to contemne it,
as the Iewes did their Manna.
               It followeth:Verſe 24. 
                  Doe this in remembrance of
me: that is, theſe ſignes ſhall bee a remembrance
of my death: when you breake the
bread, you ſhall remember the wounding of
my body: and when you drinke the wine, you
ſhall remember the ſheading of my blood.
If wee doe this is remembraunce of Chriſts
bodie, which was broken like the bread, it
is▪ an argument that his bodie is not there,
becauſe remembrance is not of thinges preſent,
but of things abſent: we remember not.
but wee ſee that which is before vs. This
might put the Papiſts in remembrance that
Chriſt is not ſacrificed now, when we do but
remember his ſacrifice: this is not Chriſtes
ſacrifice, but a remembrance of his ſacrifice:

he was ſacrificed before, and now it is applied,
leſt his ſacrifice ſhould be in vaine. This
was done once reallie, when he offered himſelfe
vpon the croſſe, therefore that offering
was called a ſacrifice, becauſe he was ſacrificed
indeed; but this offering is called a Sacrament,
becauſe it is but a ſigne of his ſacrifice.
               If Chriſt in this Sacrament were offered
indeede,If Chriſts body were in the Sacrament, it were not a Sacrament, but a ſacrifice. then it ſhould bee called a ſacrifice
as his once offering was: but becauſe it is but
a remembrance of his ſacrifice, therefore it is
called a Sacrament. This is not a ſacrifice of
Chriſt, but a ſacrifice of our ſelues. Leſt we
ſhoulde take it to bee a ſacrifice of Chriſt,
Chriſt himſelfe calleth it a remembrance of
his ſacrifice, Do this in my remembrance.
               
               Here is our worke, as Chriſt hath done, ſo
muſt we doe, ſo we miniſter, and ſo you receiue:
wee can giue you nothing but that
which we haue receiued from him, as Paul
ſaith. Therefore, if Chriſt did not giue his
mortall bodie which ſtood before them, and
could not profite them; nor his glorified bodie,
which was not glorified then, and when
it was glorified, aſcended vp vnto heauen,
and there abideth: how can theſe iugling
Prieſts make their God againe, which made
them? They can no more turne wine into

blood, & bread into fleſh, than they can commaund
a gnat to become a camell: for it is a
greater worke to make God, than to make
the world.Mat. 24. 23. Therefore as Chriſt ſaith; When
they tell you here is Chriſt, and there is Chriſt,
beleeue them not: So when they tell you that
Chriſt is in heauen, and that Chriſt is in
earth,2. Rin. 2. 17. in this place and that place, beleeue
them not: for Elias aſcenſion was a figure of
Chriſtes aſcenſion: when Elias was aſcended,
yet ſome ſought for his bodie vpon earth: ſo
though Chriſt be aſcended, yet manie ſeeke
his bodie vpon earth: but as they could not
finde Elias bodie, ſo theſe cannot finde
Chriſtes bodie, although they haue ſought
three hundred yeares.
               But if his bodie were vpon earth, as they
ſay, ſhould we handle it, and touch it, now it
is glorified? After his reſurrection he ſayd
vnto Marie,Ioh. 20. 17. 
                  Touch me not, becauſe his bodie
was glorified: that is, not to bee touched
with fingers any more, but with faith. Therefore
we reade of none which touched his bodie
(after it was riſen) but onely Thomas, to
ſettle his faith.
               Thus you ſee wee neede to ſuborne no
witneſſes, for euerie word in this Text which
they alleadge for Tranſubſtantiation, doth
make agaynſt Tranſubſtantiation, whereby

if Antichriſt doth ſignifie thoſe which are againſt
Chriſt, you ſee who may be called Antichriſt.
There is no queſtion in Poperie (except
Purgatorie the Popes publican and taſker)
about which the Papiſtes are at ſuch ciuill
warres among themſelues, as about this
Tranſubſtantiation. They cannot tell when
the chaunge beginneth, nor what manner of
change it is, nor how long the change continueth:
ſome hang one way, and ſome another,Iudg. 7. 22
like the Midianites, which fought one againſt
another. And no maruell though their
conſciences ſtagger about it: for to ſhew you
the right father of it, it was one of the dreames
of Innocentius the third,A monſter of his age. in the yeare of our
Lorde 1215. ſo manie yeares paſſed before
Tranſubſtantiation was named, and then a
Pope ſet it firſt on foote: ſo it came out of
Rome, the grandame of all hereſies, and for
want of ſcriptures, hath bene defended with
fire and ſword, and ſwallowed mo Martyrs
than all the gulfs of the Papall ſea beſide.
               Now,Eight abſurdities which follow Tranſubſtantiation. when the doctrines of men goe for
ſcriptures, you ſhal ſee how many errors ruſh
into the Church: for graunt but this to Pope
Innocentius as the Papiſts do, that the bread
and wine are chaunged into Chriſtes bodie.
Firſt it wil follow, that Chriſts body is not 
aſcended vp to heauen, becauſe it remaineth

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
vpon earth, and ſo one of the articles of our
faith ſhalbe falſified,Act. 19. 11. which ſaith, He is aſcended
into heauen: or if he be aſcended, and deſcended
againe, another article will be falſified,Rom. 8. 34.
which ſaith, That hee ſitteth at the right
hand of his father:
                  Act. 3. 21. that is (as Peter ſaith) he abideth
 in heauen. Secondly, it will follow,
that Chriſt hath not a true bodie, but a fantaſticall
bodie, becauſe it may bee in manie
places at one time: for if his bodie be in the
Sacrament, he muſt needes haue ſo many bodies
as there bee Sacraments; nay hee muſt
haue ſo many bodies as there be bittes in euerie
 Sacrament. Thirdly, it will follow, that
his bodie is diuided from his ſoule, and conſequentlie
is a dead bodie, becauſe the bread
is onely changed into his bodie, and not into
 his ſoule. Fourthly, it will follow, that the
wicked, and prophane, & reprobate, may receiue
Chriſt as well as the godlie, becauſe
they haue a mouth to eate as well as the beſt.
 Fiftly, it will followe, that Chriſtes Sacrifice
once for all,Heb 9. 28. & 10. 12. was not ſufficient, becauſe we
muſt ſacrifice him againe, and breake his bodie,
and ſhed his blood, as the Iewes crucified
 him vpon the Croſſe. Sixtly, it will follow,
that the bread being turned into the bodie of
our Redeemer, hath a part of our redemption
 as well as Chriſt Seuenthly, it wil follow, that

Chriſt did eate his owne bodie: for all the fathers
ſaie, that hee did eate the ſame Bread
which he gaue to his Diſciples. Laſtly, it will 
follow, that a Maſſing Prieſt ſhalbe the creator
of his Creator, becauſe hee makes him
which made him. All theſe abſurdities are
hatched of Tranſubſtantiation.
               Thus when men deuiſe Articles of their
owne, while they ſtrike vppon the anuill, the
ſparkes flie in their face; and they are like the
man which began to build, and could not finiſh
it. When I ſee the Papiſt in ſo many abſurdities
for entertaing one errour, me thinks
hee ſeemeth like a Collier, which is grymed
with his owne coales. Therefore, as in maners
we ſhould thinke of of Peters ſaying,Act. 5. 29. 
                  Whether
is it meete to obey God or men: So in doctrines
we ſhould thinke, whether it be meete to beleeue
God or men.
               Thus haue you heard the Author of this
Sacrament,Cōcluſion. 
                  The Lord Ieſus; the time when it
was inſtituted, in the night that he was betraied;
the manner how it was inſtituted, after
thankeſgiuing: the end why it was inſtituted,
for a remembrance of his death; and the diſcouerie
of Tranſubſtantiation, one of the laſt
hereſies which Babylon hatched. Now, they
which haue bene Patrons of it before, ſhould
doe like the father and mother of an idolater,

that is,Deut. 13. 6. and 9. laie the firſt hand vpon him to
ſhorten his life. Thus I end. Thinke what account
ye ſhall giue of that ye haue heard.
               The end of the firſt Sermon.
            
            
               A TREATISE OF THE
Lords Supper.
               THE SECOND SERMON.
               
                  1. Cor. 11. 25. 26. 27. 28.
                  
                     25 After the ſame manner alſo hee tooke
the Cuppe when he had ſupped: ſaying, This
Cup is the New Teſtament in my blood, this
doe as oft as yee drinke it in remembrance of
me.
                     26 For as often as yee ſhall eate this bread, and

drinke this Cuppe, yee ſhewe the Lords death
till he come.
                     27 Wherefore, whoſoeuer ſhall eate this bread,
and drinke the Cuppe of the Lord vnworthily,
ſhall be guiltie of the bodie and blood of the
Lord.
                     28 Let a man therefore examine himſelfe, and
ſo let him eate of this bread, and drinke of
this Cuppe.
                  
               
               
                  HEere I am to ſpeake of the
ſecond ſeruice, as it were,
at the Lordes table, and of
that preparation, which
is lyke the Wedding garment,
that euerie man muſt
bring to this Bāquet. Theſe words are diuerſly
repeated of the Euangeliſts. Here it is ſayd,
This Cup is the New Teſtament in my blood.
                  Mat. 26. 28 In
Mathew & in Mark it is ſaid,Mar. 14. 24 
                  This Cup is my
blood of the new Teſtament. This is the firſt mē
                  tion
which Chriſt makes of a Teſtament, as
though now his promiſes deſerued the name
of a Teſtament, becauſe the ſeale is ſet vnto
them, which before this Sacrament was not
ſealed, but like a bare writing without a ſinget.

This word Teſtament, dooth implie a promiſe,
and therefore teacheth vs, that the Sacrament
dooth confirme, and ſtrengthen, and
nouriſh our faith, becauſe it ſealeth the promiſe
which we ſhould beleeue.
               Here is to be noted, that Chriſt doth not
onely ſpeake of a Teſtament, but hee calleth
it a New Teſtament; which words neuer met
together before, as though the Law were for
the olde man to mortifie him, and the Goſpel
for the new man to comfort him againe: or,
as if the olde Teſtament had ſo waſht her
face, and chaunged her apparell at Chriſtes
comming, that one would not thinke it the
ſame, but a newe Teſtament, becauſe euen
now ſhe was ſhadowed with a thouſand Ceremonies,
and now they are gone from her,
like a miſt at the Sunne riſing. As Chriſt calleth
Loue,Ioh. 13. 34. 
                  A new Commandement, becauſe
hee renewed it like a Law worne out of memorie;
ſo he calleth the promiſe of ſaluation,
a New Teſtament, becauſe as it was renewed
to Sem, and after renewed to Abraham, and
after renewed to Dauid, ſo now hee renewed
it againe, which ſhould bee alway new and
freſh vnto vs. Euery Teſtament is confirmed
with blood, the olde Teſtament was confirmed
by the blood of Goates and Bullockes,
and Rammes;Heb. 9. 18. but the new Teſtament is confirmed

by the blood of Chriſt:Mat. 
                        •
                     
                   
                  My blood
(ſaith Chriſt) is the blood of the new Teſtament.
nay This Cup (ſaith Chriſt) is the new
Teſtament.
                  Luk. 26. 20. You may ſee then that they may
gather as well out of Chriſts words, that the
Cup is the new Teſtament, as that the Wine
is his blood: for Chriſt ſayth, This Cup is the
new Teſtament, as well as he ſaith, this Wine
is my blood, or this bread is my bodie. Beſide.
when Chriſt ſpeakes of a new Teſtament, he
implieth that the old Teſtament is fulfilled;
the ſacrifices,Heb. 8. 13. and Ceremonies of the Lawe
did ſignifie Chriſt before hee came, therefore
they are fulfilled in his comming: no moe
Sacrifices, no moFor types & figures. Ceremonies, for the truth
is come. Sacrifices and Ceremonies are honorablie
buried with the Prieſthood of Aaron,
let them reſt: it is not lawfull to violate
the ſepulchers of the dead, and take their bodies
out of the earth, as the witch would raiſe
Samuel out of his graue.1. Sa. 28. 14 Therefore they
which retaine ceremonies, which ſhould be
abrogated, reliques of Iudaiſme, or reliques
of Papiſme, may be ſaid to violate the ſepulchers
of the dead, and diſturbe the dece
                     •
                  ſed,
like the Witch, which preſumed to raiſe Samuel
out of his graue.
               This Teſtament is called a Teſtament in
blood, becauſe the Teſtament and Will of a

man is confirmed, when the man is dead, ſo
Chriſt confirmed his teſtament by his death.
Moſes ſaith,Leu. 17. 11. that life is in the blood; ſo the
blood of Chriſt is the life of this Teſtament.
If Chriſtes blood had not bene ſhed, this teſtament
made vnto vs, had bene vnprofitable,
as the Teſtament of a Father is vnto his
ſonne, if the father ſhould not die but liue:
therfore the Apoſtle ſaith,Heb. 9. 22. without ſhedding
of blood, there is no remiſſion of ſinnes.
Therefore the Teſtament or Couenaunt of
the remiſſion of our ſinnes, is called the Teſtament
in blood: the blood of Chriſt is the
ſeale of the Teſtament, which wee haue to
ſhew vnto God for the remiſſion of our ſins,
and the two Sacraments are a ſeale of that
blood, to witneſſe that it was ſhed.
               Againe, this is a matter regarded in teſtaments
and Willes; to the Teſtament of him
that is dead, no man addeth or detracteth, but
as the teſtator made it, ſo it ſtandeth without
alteration: ſo ſhould this teſtament of
Chriſt, and this ſacrament of Chriſt, no man
ſhould alter it now hee is dead, for hee which
addeth or detracteth,Deut. 4. 2. hath a curſe in Gods
booke.Reu. 22. 18.
               
               Therefore Chriſt when he inſtituted this
Sacrament, commaunded, Doo this; that is,
doo as I doo: leaſt they ſhould ſwarue one

whit from his owne manner: yet how many
gaudes haue the Papiſts added to it, that he
which had heard Chriſt ſay, Doe this in remembraunce
of me, and ſhould ſee how they
handle the matter in their Maſſe,The Popiſh receiuing vnder one kind confuted. coulde
ſee nothing to remember Chriſt by, but
a vayle to hide Chriſt from him. Therefore
this Commaundement was repeated
againe, when hee gaue the Wine, Doe this,
&c.
               
               As hee commaunded them to eate the
Bread in remembraunce of him, ſo hee commaundeth
them to drinke the wine in remembraunce
of him: nay, hee ſpeakes more
preciſely of the wine then of the bread; for
hee ſaith of the wine,Mat. 26. 27 
                  Drinke you all of this,
which hee ſaith not of the breade. Surely,
Chriſt did foreſee that ſome proud heretikes
would doe otherwiſe after him, euen as it is
come to paſſe: for the Papiſt doth break this
Commandement of Chriſt, as flatly as Saul
brake the commaundement of Samuell. Samuell
commanded him to kill the fat and the
leane,1. Sam. 15. 9 Saul killed the leane but not the fat; ſo
Chriſt commaundeth to receiue bread and
wine: they teach to receiue breade, but not
wine: Chriſt ſayth, Drinke you all of this: they
ſay, drink not al of this: Chriſt gaue the bread
and wine to all; they giue the bread to all, and

the wine to ſome: their Prieſts receiue all
but the people muſt content themſelues with
halfe: the Prieſt eates and drinkes, but the
people muſt not drinke for ſpilling on their
cloathes. Is this the Church which cannot
erre? Doe they thinke to hemme Chriſt in
their Maſſe,Mat. 27. 35 and ſhut his ordinaunce out of
their Maſſe? The ſoldiors diuided Chriſtes
coate, but theſe diuide his bodie, and ſeparate
the bread & wine which Chriſt hath ioyned.
Pauls ſpeaketh of Heretikes which taught,
Touch not,
                  Col. 2. 21. 
                  taſt not, handle not: ſo theſe ſaie,
Touch not,How the popiſh Prieſts do iniure the people. taſt not, handle not; when they
ſhould ſaie, Touch, and taſte, and handle. Of
all hereſies either olde or new, there is none
ſo iniurious to the common people, as the
 paſture of ſhauelings Poperie: for, they may
 not read the ſcriptures, they may not come
 to Councels, they may not examine that
 which is taught them, they may not be buried
 without a mortuarie, they may not drinke
at the Communion: as though their Prieſts
were their Lords.
               Therefore wee may ſay as a Heathen did,
There is no charitie in the Papiſtes Sacrament:
                  Act. 5. 2.
becauſe like Ananias, the Prieſts keepe backe
that which they ſhould diſtribute, and: mangle
the ſacrifice, as though Ely his ſonnes had
left their hooke to the Maſſing Friers.1. Sam. 2. 13
               
               
                  
Thus that ye may know who ſucceed the
Phariſies, they haue fulfilled that which the
Phariſies did,Mar. 7. 13. that is, By their owne commaundements,
they haue made the commandement of
God of no effect. For whereas the purpoſe of
Chriſt was to tie our faith wholy to himſelf,
that we ſhould not ſeeke for any thing without
him, knowing that the maintenance of
this life hath need both of meate and drinke,
to teach vs that all ſufficiencie is in himſelfe;
by bread and wine he ſheweth, that hee is in
ſtead both of meat and drink, that is, in ſtead
of all: which ſignification is taken awaye
where the wine is not giuen as well as the
bread. Therefore as it is ſaid of a horrible and
odious crime,Iud. 19. 30. 
                  Conſider the matter and giue
ſentence: ſo I wiſh all to conſider this innouation,
and giue ſentence of it. Can there be
any clearer contradiction to the worde, or
bolder checke to Chriſt, then when hee ſaith;
Drinke you all of this: to ſaie, drinke not all of
this? It is euen as when God ſaid, Ye ſhall die,
the diuell ſaid,Gen. 2. 17. 
                  ye ſhall not die. Shall we goe
now to a Councell, or a Father, or a Doctor,
to enquire whether this doctrine bee like
Chriſtes doctrine, I doe verelie thinke that
none is here ſo ſimple, but that hee ſeeth,
that if any thing can be contrarie to Chriſts
ſpeech, this is contrarie to it: but this is only

their detraction from the ſacrament.
               Now you ſhall heare their additions to the
Sacrament▪ looke vpon their veſtures, and
their geſtures, and their altars, and their pix,
and their incenſe, and their beckes, and their
nods, and their turnings, all this is more then
Chriſt did, and therefore the Prophet may
ſay againe,Eſay. 1. 12. 
                  who hath required this of you? Did
Chriſt commaund you to doe more then hee
did, and not doe as he did? Therfore let them
which haue eyes to ſee, be thankfull for their
light, when they heare how blind they were
whom God gaue ouer to be ſeduced.
               The fruite of this Sacrament is noted in
theſe words,Verſe 24. 
                  which is broken for you, which is
ſhed for you, that is (as Mathew interpreteth)
ſhed for the remiſſion of ſins.
                  Mat. 26. 28 As all was made
for vs,Gen. 1. ſo all which Chriſt ſpake, he ſpake for
vs,2. Cor. 4. 15. and all which Chriſt did, he did for vs, and
all which Chriſt ſuffered, hee ſuffered for vs,
that the ſinnes of men might bee forgiuen,
and yet ſo few apprehende this benefite, that
the way to heauen is called A narrowe way,
                  Mat. 7. 13.
as though all theſe paines did ranſome but a
ſmall number, and certaine order of men. All
are not ſaued by Chriſts death, But all which
are ſaued, are ſaued by Chriſtes death: his
death is ſufficient to ſaue all, as the ſunne is
ſufficient to lighten all: but if any man wink,

                  
                     〈…〉
                   will not giue him light: ſo if any

                     〈…〉
                  , and will not receiue, Chriſt
will not thruſt him into heauen, but euerie
man ſhall haue that which hee chuſeth, (as
Dauid ſaith) Bleſſing to him that loueth bleſſing,
                  Pſa. 119. 17
                  and curſing to him which loueth curſing.
               
               There wants not a hand to giue, but a hand
to take.Matth. 23. 
                  I would, (ſaith Chriſt) but you would
not. Strech foorth thy hande, and here is
Chriſtes hand, which takes Gods hand, and
mans hand, and ioines them together, and
then the remiſſion of ſinnes is ſealed. This is
the Will and Teſtament of Chriſt.
               He had no goods, nor lands, nor monie to
giue by his teſtament. A rich man when he
dieth, beſtoweth the monie which hee hath
gathered, and forgiueth many debtes which
are owing him, but Chriſt hath nothing to
giue, nor any thing to forgiue. The Lord of
all had leaſt of all, & he might ſay like his ſeruant
Peter,Act. 3. 6. 
                  gold and ſiluer haue I none, no not a
graue to burie his bodie in,Mar. 15. 46 but the graue that
Ioſeph made for himſelfe, ſerued to burie
Chriſt.Mat. 13. 55 His father was a Carpenter, but neuer
made any houſe for himſelf:Luk. 2. 16. his mother lay in
a ſtable for want of a chāber: his diſciple was
fain to borow xx. pēſe for him of a fiſh:Mat. 17. 27 therfore
when one offered,Luk. 9. 57. 
                  maſter I wil follow thee,
thinking to gain by his ſeruice, like retainers

to noble men; hee replyed vnto him 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  Foxes haue holes, and the fowles haue 
                        〈…〉
                     
the ſon of man hath not a houſe to hide his head:
ſhewing that the beaſts and fowles were richer
then he, therfore when he had nothing to
giue, he gaue himſelfe, and when he had no
debters to forgiue,Luk. 23. 34. he forgaue his enemies:
what then this is a poore & weake Teſtamēt,
which gaue nothing? oh the goodlieſt teſtamēt
that euer was made, for it bringeth to vs
the remiſſion of ſinnes, is it ſuch a matter to
forgiue ſinnes? Yea, the greateſt benefite in all
the world,A ſimilitude of mās eſtate nay, a greater benefit then all the
world: for thus it ſtood, thou hadſt committed
high treaſon againſt the Queens perſon,
thou art detected, apprehended, accuſed, conuicted,
and condemned vpon it to be hanged,
and drawne, and quartered, and thy quarters
to bee ſet vp for a ſpectacle, like a carkaſſe
which thou haſt ſeen hanging vpon a gibber,
and the crowes pecking vpon it. What a horror,
and ſhaking to thy minde, to thinke of
that day, when all theſe torments, and ſhame
and feare ſhall ſurpriſe thee at once, which
would make thee quake and tremble, if thou
ſhouldeſt ſee but another ſo diſmembred
before thy face? Thou haſt no comforte
now but this, when I haue ſuffered I ſhall be
free, before to morrow at this time, all my

paine will be paſt, though my ſhame continue,
and my children bee beggars. What
grace, what fauour, what mercy, now to pardon
thee all this, and ſaue thy life, and ſet thee
at libertie, as though thou hadſt neuer offended?
So I and thou, and euerie one here had
committed treaſon againſt the king of kings,
and ſtoode condemned for it, not to ſuffer,
and then to be free, like them which breake
the lawes of men: but to ſuffer and ſuffer, and
euer to ſuffer all that the diuels would heape
vpon vs.
               Then came the mercie of God for Chriſt,
which ſhedde his bloud, like an vmpire betweene
God and vs, and ſaide as Eſay ſaide to
Hezechia,His words are not ſo, but the effect of his words. 
                  Thou ſhalt not dye but liue, looſe
him, let him goe, for hee is mine. So we were
ſtaied like the widdowes ſonne, when he was
carried to his graue. This is the benefite of
Chriſtes death,2. Kin. 20. 5. and this Sacrament is the remembrance
of it,Luke 7. 15. and therefore whenſoeuer
we receiue it, this addition commeth with it,
which is ſhed for the remiſsion of ſinnes:
                  Mat. 26. 28 our
fault was ſo hainous and greeuous, that no
ranſome could counteruaile it, vnleſſe God
himſelfe had ſuffered for vs.
               Being in this extremitie, neither man,
nor angel offered his life for vs, but the prince
himſelfe, which ſhould haue crucified vs,

came to be crucified of vs for vs, yt we might
ſay with ſtedfaſt faith, I beleeue the remiſsion
of ſinnes, not the ſatisfaction of ſinnes, but the
remiſſion of ſinnes. Marke this diſtinction againſt
Popiſh merites of workes, or penance;
Chriſt hath ſatisfied, and not we, we are remitted,
and not Chriſt: therefore we ſay in our
confeſſion,The mercifull article. 
                  I beleeue the remiſsion of ſinnes,
which I may call the mercifull Article, becauſe
it is the quinteſſence, and ſweetneſſe of
all the twelue. Therefore who but Antichriſt
durſt depraue it? If there be a ſatisfaction for
our ſinnes by our works, or by our pilgrimages,
or by our maſſes, or by our penance, let
Chriſt neuer be called a forgiuer, but an exchanger,
like the Pope, which ſelleth his pardons
               Wretched creatures which will not receiue
the Lord, when he comes to their doore.
Chriſt ſaith;Reuel. 21. 6. 
                  Take for nothing, and they ſay
no, we will not take, but buy. Vile, baſe▪ miſerable
men, diſdaine to take grace of God
without ſatisfaction, but they will cope with
the Lord, and giue him ſo many pilgrimages,
faſt ſo many daies, heare ſo many maſſes, and
paie ſo manie workes for it, vntill they haue
done as much good as they haue done euill.
Our ſinnes are infinite, and God is infinit: but
our works are finite, in number and meaſure;

how can they anſwere then to that which exceedeth
number and meaſure? Therefore be
content with Ioſephs brethren, to take your
money againe,Gen. 42. 25. and ſay that you haue corne
for nothing, that is, you are ſaued for nothing,
or elſe when you ſay, I beleeue the remiſsion of
ſinnes, you lie vnto God, becauſe you doo not
beleeue the remiſſion of ſinnes, but ſatisfaction
for ſinnes, like the Papiſts.
               It followeth,Verſe 26. 
                  As often as yee ſhall eate this
bread,
                  Three arguments againſt tranſubſtantiation in one verſe. 
                  and drinke this cuppe, yee ſhall ſhewe the
Lords death till he come. Here are three inuincible
arguments againſt Popiſh tranſubſtantiation,
like the three witneſſes, vnder which
euerie word doth ſtand.
               Firſt we are ſayd to eate bread,Deut. 17. 6. then it is
not fleſh, but bread. Secondly, we are ſaide to
ſhew the Lordes death, then it is but a ſhewe
or repreſentation of his death, Thirdly, it is
ſaid, vntill hee come, if hee be to come, then he
is not come: if he be come, how can we ſay,
vntill hee come? The effect of this verſe was
ſhewed in theſe wordes, Doe this in remembrance
of me. For to ſay, Doe this in remembrance
of me, and to ſay, So oft as you doe this,
you ſhew my death, is much at one: ſo that if
you call this Sacrament a ſhewe of Chriſtes
death, as it is called here, then it is not Chriſt;
or if you call it a remembraunce of Chriſt,

as it is called there, yet it is not Chriſt, but a
ſhewe or remembrance of Chriſt: but this is
ſuch a ſhew and remembrance, that the next
verſe ſaith,Verſe 27. 
                  Whoſoeuer receiueth it vnworthily, is
guiltie of the bodie and bloud of Chriſt.
               
               Will yee know who receiueth vnworthely:What it is to receiue vnworthily.
In the nine and twentith verſe Paul
ſaith; he diſcerneth not the Lords bodie: that
is, which putteth no difference betweene this
bread and other, but eateth like a childe, the
meate which hee knoweth not: and after the
bread ſeemeth ſtones to him, and the wine
poyſon, becauſe his conſcience telleth him, I
haue receiued vnwoorthelie, before I could
ſay like Dauid, My hart is prepared. My ſheepe
(ſaith Chriſt) know my voyce:
                  Ioh. 10. 27. as they diſcerne
Chriſts wordes, ſo they diſcerne Chriſtes bodie,
and therefore ſo often as they come to
the Lordes table, they ſeeme to come into the
Lords preſence: there they greete, and kiſſe,
and embrace one another with affections,
which none can know but they that feele, like
Iohn,Luke 1. 41. which leaped in the wombe, ſo ſoone as
Chriſt came neare him.How receiuers may be guiltie of Chriſts death.
               
               Will yee know beſide, what it is to bee
guiltie of the bodie and blood of Chriſt? euen
as Iudas was guiltie for betraying him, and
Pilate for deliuering him,Mar. 14. 44. mar. 25. 1
                        •
                     . and the Iewes for
crucifying him:Mar. 15. 25 ſo they are guiltie which receiue

this Sacrament vnworthily, as Pilate
and Caiphas and Iudas were. If they be guiltie
of Chriſts death, they are guiltie of theyr
owne death too; as if they had committed
two murthers: and therefore Paul ſaith after,
that many of the Corinthians dyed,Verſe 30. onely for
the vnwoorthie receiuing of this Sacrament.
As the Worde is the ſauour of death to them
which receiue it vnworthelie, ſo the Sacrament
is the ſauour of death to them which
receiue it vnworthelie:1. Cor. 216. it neuer goeth into
their mouth, but they are traitors ipſo facto, &
may ſay to Hell, this day haue I taken poſſeſſion
of thee,How we ſhould be prepared before we come to the Lords table. because I am guiltie of Chriſtes
blood. Therefore it followeth immediatlie,
Let a man examine himſelfe before hee eate of
this bread, or drinke of this wine: as if he ſhould
ſay, If he which receiueth this Sacrament vnworthely,
bee guiltie of Chriſtes death, like
Iudas which hanged himſelfe; if theſe ſignes
be receiued to ſaluation or damnation, like
the Word; the next leſſon is, to examine your
ſelues before you receiue, leſt you receiue
like the ſonne of perdition,Ioh. 13. 27. which ſwallowed
the bread and the Diuell together. Therefore,
Let a man examine himſelfe, and ſo let
him eate: that is, let him examine firſt, and
receiue after: for if wee ſhould receiue the
bread of the earth reuerentlie,1. Sa. 9. 13. how ſhould

we receiue the bread of heauen? When Iehonadab
came to Iehu his chariot, hee ſayd,
Is thy heart vpright as my heart is toward thee?
                  1. K. 10. 15.
So when wee come to the Lordes table, hee
would haue our hearts vpright to him, as his
heart is to vs: for who feaſteth his enemies
and mockers?Iam. 2. 2. The golden Ring ſitteth higheſt
at our table, but the Wedding garment
ſitteth higheſt at this table. It is ſafer eating
with vnwaſhen handes, than with an vnwaſhen
heart. The Iewes were taught to chooſe
the Lambe of the Paſſe-ouer on the tenth
daye of the firſt moneth, in which moneth
they came out of Egypt,Exod. 12. 3. and 6. and on the fourteenth
daye after they were taught to eate
him: ſo they had foure daies reſpite betweene
the chooſing and the killing, to prepare and
ſanctifie themſelues for the Paſſe-ouer, which
was a ſigne of the Lords Supper. This admoniſhed
them, that the matter (now to be performed)
was verie waightie, and therefore
they were deeply to conſider it: for now was
the action and ſumme of al ſaluation in handling.
If they did prepare themſelues ſo, before
they did receiue the figure of this Sacrament,
how ſhould wee bee prepared before
we receiue the Sacrament it ſelfe?2. Chro. 35. 6 Therefore
as Ioſiah commaundeth the Leuites to prepare
the people: ſo Paul aduiſeth the people

to prepare themſelues, that is, to examine
whether they haue faith, and loue, and repentance,All are bound to know the ſcriptures.
before they come to this feaſt. By
this all may ſee: firſt, that Paule would haue
euerie laie man skilfull in the ſcripture, that
hee be able to examine himſelfe by it; for this
admonition is not to them which miniſter
the Sacrament, but to all which receiue the
Sacrament. And the rule by which we muſt
examine our ſelues, is the lawe which wee
ſhould obey: therefore if the rule be vnknowen,
the examination muſt be vndone. Our
doctrine muſt bee examined by the doctrine
of the Prophets and Apoſtles;Act. 17. 11. our prayers
muſt bee examined by the ſixe petitions of
Chriſtes prayer;Note. our beleefe muſt bee examined
by the twelue Articles of faith; our life
muſt be examined by the ten Commaundements
of the Law.Exod. 20. 1. &c. Now, hee which hath his
Touch-ſtone maye trie golde from copper;
but hee which hath it not, takes one for the other:
therefore,2. Cor. 13. 5. before Paules Examine, you
had neede to learne Chriſtes Search,
                  Ioh. 5. 39. 
                  Search
the Scriptures, and they will lighten you to
ſearch your ſelues. This is the doctrine with
which I will ende, and the neceſſarie poynt
for which I chuſe this Text, to teach you (if I
could) that Chriſtian Arte how to examine
your ſelues.
               
                  
                  Let a man examine himſelfe before hee eate.
                  Verſe 28.
Here is firſt an examination:The Diuiſion. ſecondly an examination
of our ſelues: thirdly, an examination
before we come to the Sacrament. Touching
the firſt, here Paul ſaith, Examine your
ſelues, but in 2. Corinth. 13. hee doubleth his
charge, Proue your ſelues; and againe at next
word, Examine your ſelues: as if hee ſhould
ſay, this worke muſt be done when it is done,
becauſe it is neuer throughly done; & therefore
we muſt double our examinatiō, as Paul
doubleth his counſell. If a man ſuſpect his
enemie, hee will trye him with a queſtion; if
that wil not ſearch him, he wil put forth another;
if that bee ſpyed, hee will moue another,
like one which putteth diuers keyes into
a locke vntill it open: So he which examineth,
muſt trie and trie, prooue, and prooue,
ſearch and ſearch:2. Cor. 11. 14. for the angell of darkneſſe
is like an angell of light,1. Ioh. 4. 1. and we haue no way
to diſcouer him, but that of Iohn, Trie the
ſpirites. God examineth with trials, the diuell
examineth with temptations, the world
examineth with perſecutions: we which are
thus examined, had neede to examine too.
If anie man skill not what Examining meaneth,
the very word Examine is ſo pregnant,
that it prompteth vs how we ſhuld examine:
for it ſignifieth to put our ſelues vnto the

Touch-ſtone, as if we would trie gold from
copper. Therefore one ſayth, that Examination
is the eye of the ſoule,A deſcription of true examination. whereby ſhe ſeeeth
her ſelfe, and her ſafetie, and her daunger,
and her way which ſhe walketh, and her pace
which ſhe holdeth, and the end to which ſhe
tendeth: ſhe lookes into her glaſſe and ſpieth
euerie ſpot in her face, how all her graces are
ſtayned; then ſhe takes the water of life, and
waſheth her blots away. After ſhee lookes againe,
and beholdeth all her gifts, her fayth,
feare, loue, patience, meekeneſſe, and marketh
how euerie one doth flouriſh or wither.
If they fade and decay, that ſhe feeleth a conſumption;
then ſhe takes preſeruatiues and
reſtoratiues of praier, and counſaile, and repentance,
before the ſickneſſe growe. Thus
euery day ſhee letteth downe a bucket into
her heart, to ſee what water it bringeth vp,
leſt ſhe ſhould corrupt within, and periſh ſodainlie.
               To heare, and read, and pray, and faſt, and
communicate, is a worke of manie: but to
examine thoſe workes is the faſhion of few:
and therefore Ieremie complaineth,Ier. 8. 6. 
                  No man
ſaith, what haue I done? as if hee ſhould ſaie,
No man examineth himſelfe. And therefore
in all the Scripture it is ſayd but of one,Iob. 9. 28. 
                  That
hee feared all his workes: as though hee durſt

not thinke, nor ſpeake, nor doe any thing
before he had examined what it was, from
whence it came, and whither it went: ſo the
more precious treaſure is deeper hid in the
ground.Mat. 13. 44
               
               The ſecond point is, to Examine our ſelues;
Paul ſaith,1. Theſ. 5. 21 
                  Trie all things, much more ſhould
we trie our ſelues.Mat. 13. 25 The good ſower doth ſow
his owne ground, but the bad ſower dooth
ſo we another mans ground▪ as the diuell did.
The Diſciples of Chriſt ſaid, Maiſter, is it I?
not,Mat. 26. 22 Maſter is it he? The Diſciples of Iohn
asked,Luk. 3. 10. 
                  Maſter, what ſhall wee doe? not Maſter,
what ſhall they doe? Wee muſt obey
ſome, and heare others, & admoniſh others,
and loue all; but examine our ſelues. That
which we applie vnto others, the Apoſtle applieth
vnto our ſelues: for when we ſpeak of
an examiner, we intend one which examineth
other; when wee ſpeake of an accuſer,
we intend one which accuſeth other; when
we ſpeake of a Iudge, wee meane one which
iudgeth others:1. Cor. 11. 13 but the ſcripture crieth, Examine
thy ſelfe, accuſe thy ſelfe, iudge thy
ſelfe;
                  Mat. 7. 3. that is, be not curious to ſearch a moat
in thy brothers eye, but pull out the beame
which is in thine owne eye. This doth ſhew
that they which ſit in Gods chaire to iudge
others, commonly haue greater faults themſelues,

then they whome they vſe to iudge:
and therefore Chriſt calleth their fault a
beame, and the others a moate. This made
Dauid ſaie,Pſa. 4. 4. 
                  Examine thy heart: thy heart is
thy owne heart, therefore thou muſt examine
whether thou praie, whether thou watche,
whether thou faſt; and not whether he praie,
whether hee watch, whether he faſt, as the
Phariſie examined the Publicane,Luk. 18. 11. leaſt thou
haue Peters checke, when he examined what
Iohn ſhould doe,Ioh. 21. 22 Chriſt ſaid, What is that to
thee? follow thou me. Thou art a priuat man
and haſt a priuate examination, therefore let
thy queſtion be, What haue I done? and make
thy Anatomie of thy ſelfe.
               See beloued, wee may not beleeue our
ſelues, before we haue examined our ſelues:
for we are falſe hearted, and the notableſt
couſiner that deceiueth moſt, for one time
that he deceiueth others, tenne times deceiueth
himſelfe. Becauſe the fleſh is a wilie
ſeruaunt, and will lye like Gehezi to his maſter,2. Kin. 5. 25.
and face him that it hath not ſinned,
when it commeth from ſinne: therefore as Eliſha
examined his ſeruant,2. Kin. 5. 26. ſo the ſoule must
examine her ſeruaunt, that is, man muſt bee
iealous of himſelfe, and take himſelfe for a
liar, for a flatterer, for a diſſembler, vntill
he be throughlie acquainted with himſelfe:

for no man is ſo often beguiled as by himſelf,
by truſting his double heart, and taking his
own word without further trial. If Paul had
bid vs examine others,Luk. 22. 31. we would haue ſifted
them like Sathan. Sathan hath deſired to ſift
thee (ſayth Chriſt to Peter) ſo we haue a deſire
to ſift others. Euen Peter which was
ſifted of ſathan, longed to ſift Iohn, & knowe
what he ſhould do, before hee hearkened to
his owne charge. Therefore the helpe of examination
is a needfull preſeruatiue, although
we were as ſound as Peter. They which are
ſuſpected of a crime, doe not examine themſelues,
but are examined of others, leaſt they
ſhould be partiall: but a Chriſtian muſt examine
himſelfe of his crime,1. Cor. 2. 11. and be his owne
iudge, his owne accuſer, and his owne condemner:
for no man knoweth the ſpirite of
man, but the ſpirit which is in man, which
will condemne him if he be guiltie, and tell
him all that hee hath done, and with what
minde he did it, and what he deſerueth for it.
This is the priuate araignment, or cloſe ſeſſions,
when Conſcience ſits in her chaire to
examine, and accuſe, and iudge, and condemne
her ſelfe, becauſe ſhe will not bee condemned
of God.
               Thus holie men haue kept their ſeſſions at
home, and made their hearts the fore-man

of the iurie, and examined themſelues as wee
examined others, the feare of the Lord ſtood
at the doore of their ſoules, to examine euerie
thought before it went in, and at the dore
of their lips, to examine euery word before
it went out, wherby they eſcaped a thouſand
ſinnes which we commit, as though wee had
no other worke. So thou ſhouldeſt ſitte in
iudgement of thy ſelfe, and call thy thoughts,
and ſpeeches, and actions, to giue in euidence
againſt thee, whether thou be a Chriſtian, or
an infidell, a ſonne, or a baſtard, a ſeruaunt, or
a rebell, a Proteſtant, or an hypocrite: if thou
find not faith, nor feare, nor loue, nor zeale,
when thou examineſt thy ſelfe, let no man
make thee beleeue that thou art holie, that
thou art ſanctified, that thou art a Chriſtian,
that thou art a beleeuer, that thou art a Goſpeller,
becauſe thou art worſe then thou ſeemeſt
thy ſelfe, for euery man is partiall to
himſelfe when he is moſt humbled.
               Therefore if my heart tell mee that I doe
loue God, whome ſhall I beleeue before my
ſelfe?Pro. 25. 3. As Salomon ſayth: No man can ſearch
the heart of the king: ſo Paul ſayth, No man
knoweth the ſpirite of any man,
                  1. Cor. 2. 11 
                  but the ſpirite
which is in man: that is, no man feeleth the
heart of man ſo wel as himſelf. And yet himſelfe,
although hee haue liued with it euer

ſince he was borne, doth not know his owne
heart, vnleſſe hee examine it narrowlie, no
more than hee knoweth his owne bones, or
his veines, or his ſinewes, or his arteries, or his
muskles, how many are in his bodie, or where
they lie, or what they doe.
               This ſeemes ſtrange that a man ſhould
not know his owne heart: yet it is true that
the beſt of all dooth not knowe his owne
heart, though he hath dwelt with it from his
mothers wombe. For Chriſt ſaith to his Diſciples,Luk. 9. 55.
euen to his Diſciples, you know not of
what ſpirit you are, that is, you thinke better
of your ſelues then you are, and know not
what the clocke ſtriketh within. There is a
zeale without knowledge, & there is a knowledge
without zeale; there is a fayth without
obedience, and there is an obedience without
faith; there is a loue without feare, and there
is a feare without loue, and both are hypocrites.
Therefore as Dalilah ſearched where
Sampſons ſtrength lay,Iudg. 16. 6. ſo let euery man
ſearch where his weakeneſſe lieth, and alwaie
be filling the emptie gap.
               Now this examination muſt goe before
vs to the Sacrament. Euerie meate worketh
according as it is digeſted, & this meate worketh
according as it is receiued. Therefore
when Chriſt had taught what we ſhould doe

in receiuing the Sacrament, now Paul ſheweth
what we ſhould doe before wee receiue
the Sacrament. Let a man examine himſelfe.
But ſome will come before they examine
themſelues: and therefore, as the Prieſtes of
the lawe had authoritie to put by lame and
blinde ſacrifices, ſo the miniſters of the Goſpell
haue power to put by lame and blind receiuers,
and he which doth not ſo, giueth a
ſworde into their handes to kill themſelues. If
the Paſtor would vſe this examination duly,
it were the onely way to make euery one examine
himſelfe, leaſt he be put by like Non
proficients. As Iiphtah diſcerned the Ephramites,
becauſe when they ſhould pronounce
Shibboleth, they pronounced Sibboleth: ſo
all which cannot pronounce Chriſt, that is,
giue a reaſon of their faith, are to bee thruſt
from this table.
               There is a hearing,Luk. 8. 18. & a preparatiue before
hearing. There is a praying, and a preparatiue
before praying.Eccle. 4. 17. There is a receiuing, and
a preparatiue before receiuing; which if it be
wanting, the receiuer receiueth vncomfortablie,
the prayer praieth idlely, the hearer
heareth vnfruitfullie, like thoſe which
doe eate before hunger, and drinke before
thirſt.
               This preparatiue before hearing, and praying,

and receiuing dooth ſignifie that there is
a kind of phiſicke in theſe three, for preparatiues
are miniſtred alwaies before Phiſicke,
and as the preparatiue which goeth before,
maketh way to the phiſick, or els it would do
no good but hurt: ſo vnleſſe examination go
before the ſacrament, we ſeale vp the threatnings
which are written againſt vs, in ſteade
of the promiſes which are made vnto vs: for
the ſacrament is a ſeale, and therefore ſealeth
good or euill, as euerie other ſeale doth.
               The preparatiue before wee receiue,Luk. 1. 76. is to
Examine.
                  The ſecond examinatiō. As Iohn was the fore-runner of
Chriſt, ſo examination is the fore-runner of
the ſacrament, like the Harbinger which rideth
before to prepare the roome.Iob 1. 5. For, if Iob
commaunded his ſonnes to ſanctifie themſelues
before they did come to his ſacrifice,
how ſhould we ſanctifie our ſelues before we
come to Chriſtes ſacrament, wherein we are
commaunded to doe as the Lorde himſelfe
did which inſtituted it?Luk. 22. 12. It is ſayd that the
chamber wherein Chriſt did inſtitute this ſacrament,
was trimmed; the chamber wherein
the Apoſtles receiued this ſacrament, was
trimmed. If Iudas chamber, his inner chamber
had bene trimmed ſo too, he had receiued
this Sacrament with as much comfort as the
other diſciples did: but becauſe his heart

was not trimmed: therefore he was the firſt
which was condemned for the vnworthie receiuing
of this Sacrament.
               Adam did not thinke that death had bene
in an apple,Gen. 3. 6. ſo you would not thinke that
death ſhould bee in bread: but as a coale
hath fire in it, beſide the coale it ſelfe, which
fire dooth either warme, or burne; ſo this
meate hath another meate in it, beſide that
which is ſeene, which dooth either ſaue, or
deſtroy: therefore he which commeth to this
ſpiritual meat, muſt examine whether he haue
a ſpirituall mouth, as well as a carnall mouth,
or elſe he ſhall receiue no more than he ſeeth,
& that which he ſeeth not ſhall deſtroy him.
               
                  No man (ſaith Chriſt) putteth new wine
into olde veſſels,
                  Mar. 2. 22. 
                  leſt the veſſels breake, and the
wine leake. This wine is new wine, therefore
put it into new veſſels, holie veſſels, ſanctified
veſſels, or elſe it will leake foorth, and breake
the veſſell, and thou ſhalt haue no more taſte
of it, than while the reliſh of bread is in thy
mouth. When Chriſt commeth to our houſe,
ſhall we not looke whether our chamber be
trimmed, as the chamber was trimmed againſt
his comming to the Paſſe-ouer? But
how ſhall we trimme it?
               When a man takes an office, hee examineth
his ſubſtance; when he takes a trade, he

examineth his skill: when he goeth to fight,
he examineth his ſtrength: but theſe wants
are no wants when hee goeth to the Sacrament.
Wilt thou know now vpon what articles
thou muſt inquire at that time, that is,
how thou ſhouldeſt examine thy ſelfe?
               As ſome praier may be at all times,1. Theſ. 5. 16▪
                   & ſome
reioycing may be at all times; ſo ſome examination
is at all times.Iob. 9. 28. Thus Iob examined
himſelfe euerie day, nay, euerie houre, because
he ſcanned all that he did.
               But there is a ſpeciall examination before
the Sacrament, becauſe it is the bread which
is receiued to ſaluation,1. Cor. 11. 29. or damnation; becauſe
it is the feaſt,Mat. 22. 11 to which whoſoeuer commeth
without his wedding garment, ſhall be
caſt into vtter darkneſſe; becauſe it is a ſeale
which ſealeth a curſe or a bleſſing.
               Therefore hauing obſerued that examination
is the neceſſarieſt leſſon in Chriſtianitie,
and leſſe knowne than other, I haue ſtudied
ſince my Sermon to lay downe three examinations
which you ſhould vſe at all times, and
a ſpeciall examination, for the Communicants
Catechiſme, which leadeth immediatly
to the Sacrament as a gueſt is handed to the
Table. In the firſt examination I will ſhew
thee a rule how thou ſhalt trie others ſpirits,
and how thou ſhalt trie thine owne.
               
                  
Thou ſhalt trie ſtraunge ſpirites by their 
manner of ſpeaking,The firſt examination vpon the marks of true ſpirits, & the falſe, in our ſelues or other. plainlie, or doubtfullie,
boldlie, or fearefullie, therefore we reade that
the oracles of the heathen had a double meaning,
and that the falſe Prophets neuer ſpake
boldly, but where their patrons were ready to
fleſh them.
               By the proportion of faith: for euerie hereſie
is contrarie to ſome article of our beleef,1. K. 22. 11.
as euery ſinne is againſt ſome of the ten Commandements.
               
               By the euent of their ſpeeches: for they 
take not effect,Deu. 18. 22. as it is ſayd in the 18. chapter
of Deuteronomie,Mat. 7. 15. and therefore they are called
falſe Prophets.
               By their fruites: for none of the falſe Prophets 
were good men.Mat. 7. 16.
               
               By their ſucceſſe: for if they be not of God 
they will come to nought as the Arrians, and
Manichees, and Pelagians are vaniſhed, as if
they had neuer bene: ſo time ſhall weare out
euerie doctrine that is not trueth. This is thy
rule to trie others ſpirits.
               Thou ſhalt trie thine owne ſpirite by the 
motions that it hath to good or euill. For as
a good ſtomacke turneth all that it eates into
good nutriment: and a bad ſtomack turneth
all that it eates into raw humors: ſo likewiſe
a good minde conuerteth all that it heareth,

and all that it ſeeth, and all that it feeleth, vnto
ſome profite: but a bad minde maketh a
temptation of euerie thing: therefore it is
ſayd,Rom. 14. 14. 
                  To the cleane all things are cleane, and ſo,
to the vncleane nothing is cleane:Tit. 1. 15. that is, they
defile themſelues with euerie thing.
               
                   Secondly, by the firſt cauſe, or preparation
which thou hadſt vnto it: for whatſoeuer
it be, thy thoughts will be where thou loueſt:Mat. 6. 21.
to verifie that ſaying; Where a mans treaſure
is, there will be his heart: for lightlie, the
beginning is a picture of the end, and the act
is like the thought which ſet it a worke.
               
                   Thirdlie, by the manner of the conſolation
in it, whether it be of knowledge, or ignorance,
whether it be conſtant, or mutable,
calme, or boyſterous, ſimple, or mixt: for as a
cleare fountaine yeeldeth cleare ſtreames, ſo
a pure heart hath pure ioyes.
               
                   Fourthlie, whether it bring to Chriſt, or
take any thing from him to thy ſelfe, like all
the parts of Poperie, which mangle his honor
either to angels, or to ſaints, or to pope, or to
images. If it abide all theſe queſtions, and
drawe thee not from anie good, then thou
mayſt ſay it is from God, water the ſeede, O
Lord, which thou haſt ſowen. This is the
fruite of thy firſt examination. In the ſecond,
by making thee diſcerne whether another be

a Chriſtian, I will teach thee to knowe whether
thy ſelfe be a Chriſtian; which that thou
maiſt reach too, obſerue this direction, and
thou ſhalt ſee of what ſide thou art.
               It muſt needes be,The ſecōd examination vpon the differences between the wicked & the godly. that they which walke
to contrarie endes, ſhould goe diuers wayes:
therefore there be moe differences betweene
the children of God and the children of the
worlde, than there bee betweene men and
beaſts.
               Firſt, they are diſtinguiſhed in will: for the 
wicked ſtriue to bring Gods will to theyr
will, like Balaam, which when he had an anſwere,
ſtayed for another; but the faithfull
labour to bring their will to Gods will, like
Chriſt,Mat. 26. 36 which ſayd; Not as I will, but as thou
wilt.
               
               They are diſtinguiſhed in Faith: All men
                  
                  haue not faith (ſaith Paul) but the iuſt liue by
faith;
                  2. Theſ. 3. 2. as if he ſhould ſay,Rom. 1. 17. the iuſt beleeue, and
the vniuſt beleeue not. The iuſt beleeue, and
applie that they beleeue to themſelues: the
wicked may beleeue like the diuels,Iam. 2. 19. but their
faith is like a gadding henne, which carrieth
her egges to other, and neuer laieth at home;
ſo they beleeue that other ſhall be ſaued, but
not themſelues.
               They are diſtinguiſhed in Hope: for becauſe 
the wicked hope not for any mends of

God, therefore they neuer defer their reward;
but if they doe any good, they are trumpets
of it themſelues, for feare it ſhould not bee
blazed enough:Mat. 6. 2. and therefore Chriſt ſayd,
that the Phariſies had their rewarde alreadie,
becauſe they were boaſters of their workes:2. Tim. 3. 2.
and if they doe not good but euill, yet they
would bee magnified as much for euill, as other
are for good. But the faithfull are likened
to handmaides,Pſa. 123. 2. which waite their reward;Mat. 6. 3.
                  Their left handſeeth not when their right hand
doth well, and they are afraide to take honor of
men, for looſing their honour with God, like
Iohn Baptiſt,Ioh. 1. 21. which made his vertues meaner
then they were, & debaſed himſelfe, when hee
might gaue got a name aboue his Lord.
               
                   They are diſtinguiſhed in obedience: therefore
Chriſt teacheth vs to iudge men by their
fruite,Mat. 7. 17. as an vnfallible rule: for the euill tree
will bring forth euill fruite, and the good tree
good fruite, and neither can change his propertie,
although the euill fruite is ſometimes
beautifull, and the good fruite ſometime blaſted.
All ſlip, but in the wicked, one ſinne teacheth
another, and in the faithfull one ſin preuenteth
another.
               
                   They are diſtinguiſhed in Repentance: for
the wicked doe but weepe for their ſins paſt,
but the godlie purpoſe to ſinne no more: ſo

Pharaoh,Exo. 10. 16. Saul, and Iudas ſayd, I haue ſinned;
but Shadrach,1. Sa. 15. 30 Meſhach,Mat. 27. 4. and Abednego ſayd,
We will not ſinne:
                  Dan. 3. 18. therefore the heart of the
godly is called a contrite heart,
                  Pſal. 51. 17 but the heart
the wicked is called a heart that cannot repent.
                  Rom. 2. 5.
Beſide,Luke 8. 30. as Chriſt caſt out a legion of diuels
at once, ſo the godly would be purged of
all their ſinnes together: but the wicked neuer
conſent to leaue all, but as Naaman ſayd,
Let the Lord ſpare me in this,
                  2. Kin. 5. 18. ſo euer hee excepteth
one ſinne, which is his beloued ſin;
like Herod,Mat. 14. 3. which reformed many things, &
yet would not leaue his brothers wife.
               They are diſtinguiſhed in Charitie: for ye 
ſhall neuer ſee the wicked loue their enemies;
and therefore when the Phariſies could not
loue their enemies,Mat. 5. 43. they taught that men
might hate their enemies: and Chriſt ſpeaking
of Publicans and ſinners,Luk. 6. 32. exhorteth his
Diſciples not to loue like them, becauſe they
loued none but their friends.
               They are diſtinguiſhed in Prayer: for the 
wicked cannot praie, therefore Dauid ſaith,
They call not vpon the Lord;
                  Pſal. 14. 4. as if they had not
the ſpirite of prayer:
                  Zach. 12. 10. and therefore Chriſt calleth
their prayers,Rom. 8. 16. 
                  babling, for they thinke not
of God when they ſpeake vnto him.Mat. 6. 7.
               
               They are diſtinguiſhed in Patience: no hypocrite
can beare the Croſſe, but ſaith lyke

Cain,Gen. 4. 13. 
                  It is heauier than I can ſuffer: but Paul
and Silas ſing in priſon:Act. 16. 25. for a faithfull man
would haue ſomething to humble him, & reioyceth
to beare his maiſters markes,Gal. 6. 17. becauſe
the wounds of a louer are ſweete.
               
                   They are diſtinguiſhed in the vſe of aduerſitie:
for this is a proper and peculiar mark of
Gods children, to profite by affliction: and
therefore we reade not in all the puniſhments
of the wicked, that one of them ſaid like Dauid,Pſ. 119. 71.
                  It is good for mee that I haue bene afflicted.
               
               
                   They are diſtinguiſhed in Humilitie: for
the wicked are not hūbled before the croſſe,
like Pharaoh that neuer ſorrowed,Exo. 8. 8. 15. but when
hee ſuffered: but the Apoſtles learned humilitie
of their Maiſter,Mat. 11. 29 before their perſecution
came.
               
                   They are diſtinguiſhed in their iudgement
of the word: for to the wicked it ſeemeth the
hardeſt, and ſimpleſt, & vnpleaſanteſt booke
that is:1. Cor. 1. 18. and therefore Paul ſaith, that it is fooliſhnes
vnto them. But to the godly, it ſeemeth
the wiſeſt, and eloquenteſt, and ſweeteſt, and
eaſieſt booke of all other, as though God did
ſodainely bring the vnderſtanding of it to
them,Gen. 27. 20. as Iacob ſayde of his veniſon: according
to that,Ioh. 7. 17. 
                  Hee that will doe his will, ſhall
know his doctrime.
               
               
                  
They are diſtinguiſhed in their Iudgement
                  
                  of God: the wicked are perſuaded now and
then of Gods mercie for the preſent time
while they feele it, as the Iewes praiſed him
alwaies,Exo. 15. 20. when hee did as they woulde haue
him; but they cannot perſuade themſelues,
that God will be mercifull to them ſtill, like
Iob,Iob. 13. 15. which ſaid, Though the Lord kill mee,
yet will I truſt in him: therefore the hope of
the righteous is called hope in death.
                  Pro. 14. 32. Beſide,
if the wicked loue God, it is but for his benefites,Pro. 23. 18.
as Saul loued him for his kingdome.
And this is alwaies to be noted,1. Sam. 10. 6 that in the
wicked, the feare of hell is greater then is
their hope of Heauen: but in the faithfull,
the hope of heauen is greater then their feare
of hell.
               They are diſtinguiſhed in their Delights:
                  
for the ſport of the vngodly is follie,Dan. 5. 4. like Belſhazzers;
and therefore when they are ſicke
or troubled, they neuer runne to the Word
for comfort, as though Gods promiſes pertained
not to them; but to feaſts or tables, or
tales,1. Sa. 16. 23 or muſicke, as Saul did to the harpe. But
all the delights of the godlie are like Dauids
daunce about the Arke;2. Sa. 6. 14. they are neuer merrie,
but when they are dooing well; nor at
peace, but when their praiers haue ouercome
God,Gen. 32. 28. like Iacob.
               
                  
                   They are diſtinguiſhed in their opinions
of death:Phil. 1. 23. for the faithfull long to bee diſſolued,Luk. 2. 29.
& although they might liue euer in continuall
proſperitie, yet they would not ſtaie
ſo long out of heauen: but the wicked would
neuer be diſſolued, becauſe death comes alwaies
vnto them like a iailor to hale vnto priſon,1. Kin. 22. 8.
as Ahab ſayd to Michaiah, That he neuer
propheſied good to him. Hereby a man ſhall
know whether hee haue faith: for if hee doe
beleeue the promiſes, hee will be glad to receiue
them.
               
                   They are diſtinguiſhed in their ſenſe of
ſinne, Wicked men feele the lothſomneſſe of
their vices, but none but the faithfull feele the
defects of their righteouſneſſe. The naturall
man neuer complaineth of his good workes,
but vaunteth of them: but a godly man findeth
fault with his praiers,Eſa. 64. 6. and his almes,
and his watches,Pſa. 16. 2. like Iſaiah, that ſayde, his
righteouſnes was like a menſtruous cloth. As
Chriſt met the tempter in the wilderneſſe,Mat. 4. 1, 2. a
place of prayer, and faſting, and meditation:
ſo a godly man meeteth the tempter in his
praiers, and in his faſts, and in his meditations,
that is, he finds ſome lette, or ſpotte, or
want in all his deuotions. Therefore, vnleſſe
thy righteouſneſſe miſlike thee as well as thy
prophanenes, know that yet thou art no further

than the wicked.
               They are diſtinguiſhed in their Endes, for 
the children of God propoſe the glorie of
God, and leuell all their thoughts and ſpeeches,
and actions, as if they were meſſengers
ſent to carrie him preſents of honor.
               Thus did Dauid when hee ſayd,Pſa. 103. 1. 
                  All that
is within me, praiſe the Lord. As though himſelfe
had rather bee without praiſe, then his
maſter, but the children of the world, ſet vp
their owne glorie for their marke, like Nabuchadnezzar,Dan. 4. 27.
which ſayd, For the honour of
my Maieſtie. Dan. 4. 27. Therfore they ſpeake,
and looke, and walke, as if they did ſay to
their tongue, and eyes, and feet, and apparell,
as Saul ſaid to Samuel,1. Sa. 15. 30. 
                  Honour me before this
people.
               
               Laſtly, they are diſtinguiſhed in Perſeuerance,
                  
for the zeale of the wicked laſteth not,
and therefore God ſayth,Exod. 32. 8. 
                  They are ſoone turned
out of the way: but the zeale of the faithful
was repreſented by the fire of the Temple,Leuit. 6. 12.
which neuer went out. By theſe differences
thou maiſt ſee how much thou dooſt differ
from the wicked, or whether thou be of their
band.
               Then come to the third examination:The 3 examination. as
the diuell tempteth thee,Mat. 
                        •
                     
                   to ſee what thou
wilt do for him, ſo thou muſt tempt thy ſelf,

and get of thy ſoule what it would doe for
God, and what it would ſuffer for him, which
hath ſuffered death for it. Therefore here we
will ſet downe certain interrogatories, wherof
thou ſhalt examine it.
               Firſt, whether thou haſt the heart of Ioſhua
to worſhip God as boldlie as thou doeſt,Ioſh. 24. 15
though all the world did renounce him, and
euerie one did mocke thee as they did Noah,
while he built the Arke?
               Whether thou wouldſt not denie Chriſt as
Peter did,Mat. 26. 70 if thou were in Peters ſtraights, and
nothing to ſuccour thee but thy policie?
               Whether thou wouldſt not ſteale,Ioſh. 7. 81. if thou
didſt ſee a bootie as fit as Achan, which thou
mighteſt catch vp, and no man ſpie thee?
               Whether thou wouldſt refuſe a bribe like
Eliſha,2. Kin. 5. 16 if thou didſt meet with one which
were as willing and able to giue it as Naaman?
               Whether thou wouldſt not deceiue,Luk. 16. 6. if thou
were in ſuch an office as the falſe Steward,Although this is a parable, yet it carrieth the ſignification of a hiſtorie.
whoſe maſter referred all vnto him, & knew
not when he kept any thing backe?
               Whether thou wouldſt not fulfill thy luſt
as Dauid did, if thou haddeſt his oportunitie
and allurement, and mighteſt doe it
without danger of law like a king,2. Sam. 11. 4 as Dauid
might?
               
                  
Whether thou wouldſt not tell a lie, as Abraham
did,Gen. 12. 13. if it ſtood vpon thy life, which
made him twice diſſemble that his wife was
his ſiſter,Gen. 20. 2. leaſt he ſhould die for her beautie?
               Finally, if it ſhould be ſaid vnto thee, as the
diuell ſaid to Chriſt,Mat. 4. 9. 
                  All theſe will I giue thee,
if thou will fall downe and worſhip me: that is no
more, but if thou wilt ſinne, whether thou
wouldeſt yeeld or no?
               If thou haſt ſinned thus and thus before,
I will not ſay, therefore the Lord wil not
heare thee,Pſal. 66. 18 but Dauid ſayth, If I regard wickedneſſe
in my heart, the Lord will not heare me,
that is, if for any cauſe a man purpoſe and carie
a minde to ſinne when he is tempted, the
Lord is ſo farre from helping him,1. Kin. 18. 26 that he wil
ſtand like Baal, as though hee did not heare
him; for he hath a traytors mind as deepe as
any, which thinkes, for a Dukedome I would
betray my prince, though he neuer playe the
traitor in his life. Thus you haue heard how
to trie ſpirits, and how to diſcerne a Chriſtian
from an hypocrite, & how to appoſe your
hearts, that ye may be ſure to iudge rightlie
what ye are.
               Now wee come to that examination,The 4. examinatiō.
which is the Epitome or abridgement of all
theſe, for memorie is ſhort, and all are not of
one ſtrength: but ſome runne, and ſome goe,

and ſome creepe, and all do well, ſo long as
they ſtriue to perfection. The matters wherof
principallie the mind ſhould be examined
before the ſacrament,Heb. 6. 1. are these.The receiuers articles.
               
               Firſt, whether thou haue faith, not only to
 beleeue that Chriſt died, but that he died for
thee:Eſai. 59. 20 for as the ſcripture called him a redeemer,Iob. 19. 25.
ſo Iob calleth him his Redeemer.
               
                   The ſecond article is, whether thou bee
in charitie, not whether thou loue thē which
loue thee, but whether thou loue them which
hate thee: for Chriſt commandeth vs, To loue
our enemies.
                  Mat. 5. 44.
               
               
                   The third article is, whether thou repent,
not for thy open & groſſe ſinnes, but for thy
ſecret ſinnes, and pettie ſinnes, becauſe Chriſt
ſaith,Mat. 12. 36 
                  That we muſt giue account for euerie idle
word.
               
               
                   The fourth article is, whether thou reſolue
not to ſinne againe for anie cauſe, but to amend
thy euill life, not when age commeth,
or for a ſpurt, but to begin now, and laſt till
death,Reue. 22. 13 for Chriſt is Alpha and Omega, both
the beginning, and the end, as well in our liuing,
as in our being, which hath made no
promiſe to them which begin, but to them
which perſeuere.Reuel. 2. 11.
               
               
                   The laſt article is, whether thou canſt
finde in thy heart to die for Chriſt, as Chriſt

died for thee: for we are bid not only to followe
him, but to beare his Croſſe: and therefore
we are called ſeruaunts,Luk. 12. 38. to ſhew how we
ſhould obey;2. Tim. 3. 4. and we are called ſouldiers, to
ſhew how we ſhould ſuffer.
               Theſe are the receiuers articles, whereof
his conſcience muſt be examined before hee
receiue this Sacrament: happie is hee which
can ſay,Mat. 19. 20 
                  All theſe haue I kept: for the Doue
was not ſo welcome to Noah,Gen. 8. 11. as this man is
to Chriſt. But if thou find not theſe affections
within,Mat. 5. 24. but a neaſt of vices, leaue thine
offering at the Altar, and returne to thine examination
againe: for thou art not a fit gueſt
to ſup with the Lord, vntill thou haue on this
Wedding garment.
                  Mat. 22. 11
               
               How is it then, that ſome regard their other
garments more then this? Paul ſayth, Examine
your ſelues, and they examine their apparell,
if they haue new cloathes in the countrie,The preparation of coūtrie folke before they receiue.
then they are readie to receiue. I haue
knowne manie kept from the Sacrament a
whole yeare together by their maiſters, for
nothing, but for want of a new ſute to ſet thē
foorth with their fellowes.
               Others reſpect whether it be a faire daye,
that they may walke after ſeruice, making
that day, vpō which they receiue, like a ſcholers
Thurſdaie, which hee loues better then

all the daies in the weeke, onely becauſe it is
his play-day. Thus like the Iewes, They
ſitte downe to eate, and riſe vp to plaie, that as
Chriſt calleth the Phariſies praier Babling,
Matth. 6. 7. ſo their receiuing may bee called
dallying.
               When they haue the Sacrament in their
bellie, they thinke that all is well, as Micah,
when hee had a Leuite in his houſe, thought
that God loued him, but as the Leuit did not
profit him,Iudg. 17. becauſe he receiued nothing but
the Leuit, ſo the bread and wine dooth them
no good, becauſe they receiue nothing but
bread and wine for want of faith. Maruell
not then if you haue not felt that comfort after
the Sacrament, which you looked for, for
it is comfortable to none, but to them which
prepare their hearts and examine themſelues
before, becauſe it is not the mouth, but the
heart which receiueth comfort.
               Now it may be that the moſt which are
here haue brought a mouth, and not a heart,
theſe go away from the Sacrament to despight
Chriſt,Ioh. 13. 30. as Iudas went from the ſacrament
to betraie him.
               The other goe awaie like one which hath
receiued a chearefull countenaunce of the
Prince, all his thoughts are ioy, and the countenance
of the Prince is ſtill in his eye. As he

which hath eaten ſweete meate, hath a ſweete
breath: ſo they which haue eaten Chriſt, all
their ſayings, and doings, are ſweete, like a
perfume to men, and incenſe to God: their
peace of conſcience, and ioy of heart, and deſire
to doe good, will tell them whether they
haue receiued the bare ſignes, or the thing
ſignified.
               Euerie one which receiueth this Sacrament,How a mā ſhall know whether he haue receiued well.
ſhall feele himſelfe better after it, lyke
the Apoſtles: or elſe hee ſhall finde himſelfe
worſe after it, like Iudas. Heereby ye ſhall
knowe whether ye haue receiued like the Apoſtles,
or like Iudas. Thus we haue ended
the doctrine of the Lordes Supper. Now if
you cannot remember all that I haue ſayd,
yet remember the Text: that is, Examine
your ſelues before you
receiue this Sacrament
hereafter.
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            THE EXAMINATION
OF VSVRIE, IN TWO
SERMONS.
            
               To the Reader.
               
                  HEre thou haſt the Sermōs which
haue bene often deſired, becauſe
of the matter fit for this Citie.
One ſaith, that he would neuer
ſpeake to Vſurers, and Bribemongers,
but when they be vpon
their death-beds: for hee which liueth by ſin, reſolueth
to ſinne, that he may liue. But when he goeth
to hanging, Iudas himſelfe will ſay, I haue
ſinned.
                  Mat. 27. 4. If I ſpeake not to Vſurers vpon their
death-bed, yet I ſpeake to Vſurers which ſhall he
on their death-bed. Three things do giue me hope.
One is, that all hearts are in the hands of God, to
call them at what houre he liſt,Act. 9. 15. and therfore Saul
may become an Apoſtle.
               
                  
The next is, that the third crow doth waken
moe than the former, and therefore after the
crowing of other, this Crow may happily bee
heard.
               The laſt is, that there is no ſinne, but ſome
men haue bene reclaimed from it, and ſo may Vſurers
from their ſinne.
               Therefore goe my booke like Dauid againſt
Goliah,1. Sa. 17. 51 and fight the Lordes battels againſt Vſurers.
The Lord giue that ſucceſſe to his doctrine
in theſe leaues, that it may conſume Vſurers,Ioſh. 5. 1.
as Ioſhuah droue out the Chananites before
him. If I could take but this one weede out of
the Londoners garden, I were anſwered for
my health, and my ſtrength ſpent amongſt
them. Reade with thy
beſt mind, & thou ſhalt
profit more.
               
                  Thine H. S.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            THE
EXAMINATION
OF VSVRIE.
            
               THE FIRST SERMON.
               
                  Pſal. 15. verſe 1. & 5.
                  
                     1 Lord, who ſhall dwell in thy Tabernacle?
Who ſhall reſt in thine holy mountaine?
                     5 He that giueth not his mony to vſurie.
                  
               
               
                  THeſe two verſes muſt be conſidered
together,Verſe 1. becauſe one
is the queſtion, and the other
is the anſwere: Dauid demaundes
who ſhall come to
heauen? and God tels him
that Vſurers ſhall not come thither: as if he
ſhould ſay, they goe to hell. Therefore as Paul
taught Timothie to warne them which are
rich,1. Tim. 6. 17 as though they had more neede to bee
warned than other: ſo this ſentence ſeemeth
to be penned for a warning to the rich, becauſe
it ſtrikes vpon the rich mans vice.
               I haue ſpoken of Briberie, and Symonie,
and now I muſt ſpeake of their ſiſter Vſurie.
Many times haue I thought to ſpeake of this
Theame, but the arguments which are alleadged

for it, haue made me doubtfull what
to ſay in it, becauſe it hath gone as it were vnder
protection. At laſt you ſee it falleth into
my text, and therefore now I cannot bauke it
any longer. Therefore if anie heere haue fauoured
this occupation before, let him now
ſubmit his thoughts to Gods thoughts, for I
will alleadge nothing againſt it, but that
which is built vpon the rocke.
               Vſurie is the ſin which God will trie now
whether you loue better than his word: that
is, whether you will leaue it if hee forbid it.
For if he flatly forbid it, and yet you wilfullie
retaine it, then you loue Vſurie better than
Gods word. Therefore one ſaith well, that
our Vſurers are Heretikes,Vſurers heretikes. becauſe after manie
admonitions, yet they maintaine their errour,
and perſiſt in it obſtinately as Papiſts do
in Poperie. For this cauſe I am glad, that I
haue anie occaſion to gripple with this ſinne
where it hath made ſo manie ſpoiles, & where
it hath ſo manie patrones: for it is ſayd, that
there be moe of this profeſſion in this Citie,
then there be in all the Land beſide. There be
certaine ſinnes, which are like an vnreaſonable
enemie, which will not bee reconciled to
death; and this is one of theſe euerlaſting
ſinnes, which liue and dye with a man. For
when he hath reſigned his pride, and his enuie,

and his luſt, yet Vſurie remaineth with
him, and hee ſaith as Naaman ſaide; Let the
Lord be mercifull vnto me in this,
                  2. Kin. 5. 18. let mee haue
a diſpenſation for this; as though this were a
neceſſarie ſinne, and he could not liue without
it.Three ſins counted no ſinnes, There be three ſinnes which are counted
no ſinnes, and yet they doe more hurt
then all their fellowes; and thoſe are, Briberie,
Nonreſidencie, and Vſurie: theſe three
(becauſe they are gainfull) are turned from
ſinnes to occupations.
               How manie of this Citie for all that they
are vſurers, yet wold be counted honeſt men,
and would faine haue Vſurie eſteemed as a
trade: whereas, if it were not ſo gainefull, it
would be counted as great a ſinne as anie othe,
and ſo it is counted of all but them which
liue by it. This is the nature of pleaſure and
profite, to make ſinnes ſeeme no ſinnes if we
gaine anie thing by them: but the more gainfull
a ſinne is, the more dangerous it is; and
the more gainefull vſurie is, the more dangerous
it is. I will ſpeake the more of it, becauſe
happely you ſhall not heare of this matter againe.
               Firſt I will define what Vſurie is:The contents of this Treatiſe. Secondly,
I will ſhew you what Vſurie doth ſignifie:
Thirdly, I will ſhew the vnlawfulneſſe of it:
Fourthly, I will ſhew the kindnes of it: Fiftly,

I will ſhewe the arguments which are alleadged
for it: Sixtly, I wil ſhew the puniſhment
of it: Seuenthly, I will ſhew you what opinion
we ſhould holde of them, which doo not
lend vpon Vſurie, but borrow vpon Vſurie:
Laſtly, I will ſhew you what they ſhould do
which haue got their riches by Vſurie.
               Touching the firſt,The definition of Vſurie. Vſurie is that gayne
which is gotten by lending, for the vſe of the
thing which a man lendeth, couenaunting
before with the borrower, to receiue more
then was borrowed: and therfore one cals the
Vſurer a legall theefe, becauſe before he ſteale
he tels the partie how much he will ſteale, as
though he ſtoale by lawe.Vſurers ſteale by law. This word more,
comes in like a ſixt finger, which makes a
monſter, becauſe it is more then ſhould bee.
Another defining vſurie, calleth it the contrarie
to Charitie: for Paul ſaith, Loue ſeeketh
not her owne, but vſurie ſeeketh anothers that
is not her owne; therefore Vſurie is farre from
loue:1. Iob. 4. 8. but God is loue ſaith Iohn, therfore Vſurie
is farre from God too.
               Now, all the Commaundements of God
are fulfilled by loue; which Chriſt noteth,
when hee draweth all the commaundements
to one commaundement,Mat. 22. 37 which is, Loue God
aboue all things, and thy neighbour as thy ſelfe:
as if hee ſhould ſay, hee which loueth God,

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
will keepe all the Commandements which
reſpect God, and he which loueth his neighbour,
will keepe all the Commandements
which reſpect his neighbour: therefore, to
maintaine loue, God forbiddeth all things
which hinder this loue, and amongſt the reſt
here he forbiddeth Vſurie, as one of her deadlieſt
enemies. For a man cannot loue and be
a Vſurer, becauſe Vſurie is a kind of crueltie,
and a kinde of extortion, and a kinde of perſecution,
and therefore the want of loue doth
make vſurers: for if there were Loue, there
would be no vſurie, no deceipt, no extortion,
no ſlaundering, no reuenging, no oppreſſion:
but we ſhould liue in peace, and ioy, and
contentment like the Angels; whereby you
ſee that all our ſinnes are againſt our ſelues:
for if there were no deceipt, then we ſhould
not be deceiued: if there were no ſlaunder,
then wee ſhould not be ſlaundered; if there
were no enuie, then wee ſhould not be enuied;
if there were no extortion, then wee
ſhould not be iniured; if there were no vſurie,
then we ſhould not be oppreſſed. Therefore
Gods law had bene better for vs than
our owne law: for if his law did ſtand, then
we ſhould not be deceiued, nor ſlaundered,
nor enuied, nor iniured, nor oppreſſed. God
hath commaunded euerie man to lende freely,Luke 6. 35.
                  
and who would not borrow freely? Therfore
they which brought in vſurie, brought in
a law againſt themſelues.
               The firſt Vſurers which we reade of, were
the Iewes, which were forbidden to be Vſurers:Eze. 18. 12.
yet for want of faith and loue, Ezechiel
and Nehemiah doe ſhew,Nehe. 2. 5. how the Iewes,
euen the Iewes which receiued this law from
God himſelfe, did ſwarue from it, as they did
from the reſt. Firſt, they did lend vpon vſurie
to ſtrangers, after they began to lende vpon
vſurie to their brethren: and now there be no
ſuch vſurers vpon earth, as the Iewes which
were forbidden to be vſurers: whereby you
may ſee, how the malice of man hath turned
mercie into crueltie.Deu. 15. 10. For whereas lending
was commaunded for the benefite of men,
vſurie hath turned it to the vndoing of men:
for they take when they ſeeme to giue, they
hurt when they ſeeme to helpe, they damage
when they ſeeme to vantage: therefore it is
well noted, that vſurie hath her name of byting:
and ſhe may well ſignifie biting, for
many haue not onely bene bitten by it, but
deuoured by it, that is, conſumed al that they
haue.Gal. 5. 15. Therefore, as the Apoſtle ſaith, If you
bite one another, take heed you bee not deuoured
one of another: ſo I may ſay, If you be Vſurers
one to another, take heed you bee not

deuoured one of another, for Vſurers are
byters.
               As the name of the deuill dooth declare
what an enemie hee is;Becauſe it ſignifieth an aduerſarie Neſchec. ſo the name of vſurie
dooth declare what an enemie ſhee is. That
you may know vſurie for a byter, her name
dooth ſignifie byting. If there were one byting
vſurie, and another healing vſurie, then
vſurie ſhould haue two names, one of byting,
and another of healing: but all vſurie ſignifieth
byting, to ſhew that all vſurie is vnlawfull.
               Now you haue heard what vſurie is, and
of what it is deriued, you ſhall heare the vnlawfulneſſe
of it.
               
                   Firſt, it is againſt the lawe of charitie, becauſe
charitie biddeth vs to giue euery man
his owne,The vnlawfulnes of Vſurie. and to require no more then our
owne: but vſurie requireth more then her
owne, & giues not to other their owne. Charitie
reioyceth to communicate her goods to
other, and Vſurie reioiceth to gather other
mens goods to her ſelfe.
               
                   Secondly, it is againſt the Law of Nations:
for euerie Nation hath ſome lawe againſt
vſurie, and ſome reſtraint againſt vſurers, as
you ſhall heare when we ſpeake of the puniſhment.
               
                   Thirdly, as it is againſt the law of Nations,

ſo it is againſt the lawe of Nature, that is, the
naturall compaſſion which ſhould be among
men.A ſimilitude. You ſee a riuer when it goeth by an
emptie place, it will not paſſe vntill it hath
filled that emptie place, & then it goeth forward
to another emptie place and filleth it,
and ſo to another emptie place and filleth it,
alwaies filling the places which are emptie:
ſo ſhould wee, the rich ſhould fill the poore,
the full ſhould fill the hungrie, they which abound
ſhould fill them which want, for the
rich are but Gods Amners, & their riches are
committed to them of God to diſtribute and
doe goods as God dooth himſelfe. As the water
is charitable after a ſort, ſo is the aire: for
it goeth to emptie places too, and filleth them
as the water doth. Nature cannot abide that
anie place ſhould bee emptie, and therefore
the aire though it be a light bodie, and ſo naturally
aſcendeth vpward, yet rather then any
place in the earth ſhould be emptie, the aire
will diſcend as it were from his throne, & go
into caues, into dens, & into dungeous, to fill
them. If the rich were ſo good to their emptie
brethren, as the aire and water are to other
emptie things: as there is no emptie place in
the world, ſo there ſhold be no emptie perſon
in the world: that is, the rich in Iſrael would
fill the poore in Iſrael. But the rich make the

poore to fill them: for Vſurers feed vpon the
poore, euen as great fiſhes deuour the ſmall.
Therefore he which ſaid, Let there not bee
a begger in Iſrael,
                  Deut. 15. 4. ſaid too, Let there not bee a
Vſurer in Iſrael; for if there be Vſurers in Iſrael,
there will be beggars in Iſraell, for Vſurers
make beggers, euen as Lawyers make
quarrellers.
               
                   Fourthly, it is againſt the lawe of God.
Firſt, it is forbidden in Exodus 22. where it is
ſaid, If thou lend monie vnto my people, that is,
to the poore with thee, thou ſhalt not oppreſſe
them with Vſurie: here is Vſurie called oppreſſion;
therefore if oppreſſion be a ſin, Vſurie
is a ſin too. Secondly, it is forbidden in
Leuiticus 25. 26. where it is ſaid. Thou ſhalt not
giue thy monie to Vſurie, nor lend thy vittailes
for increaſe: here you may ſee, that men may
be Vſurers of vittailes and other things, as
well as of monie. Thirdly, it is forbidden in
the 23. chapter of Deuteronomium, where it
is ſaid, Thou ſhalt not lend vnto thy brother vpon
Vſurie. And leaſt you ſhould ſay, that hee
meaneth but one kind of vſurie, hee ſheweth
that hee meaneth all kinds of vſurie: for after
in verſe 19. hee ſayth; As vſurie of monie
vſurie of vittailes, vſurie of corne, or vſurie of
any thing that is giuen to vſurie: becauſe ſome
are not vſurers of monie, but ſome are vſurers

of vittailes, ſome are vſurers of cloth, ſome
are vſurers of corne, ſome are vſurers of wine,
ſome are vſurers of oyle, and ſome of one
thing, and ſome of another, and none woulde
be counted vſurers but they which lend monie
vpon vſurie; therefore God forbiddeth ſo
preciſely vſurie of anie thing, ſhewing that al
vſurie is vnlawfull.
               It is a miſerable occupation to liue by
ſinne, and a great comfort to a man when he
looketh vpon his gold and ſiluer, & his heart
telleth him; all this is well gotten, and when
he lieth vpon his death-bed, and muſt leaue
all to his children, hee can ſay vnto them, I
leaue you mine own: but the Vſurer cannot
ſay, I leaue you mine owne, but I leaue you other
mens; therefore the Vſurer can neuer die
in peace, becauſe if he die before hee make reſtitution,
he dieth in his ſinne.
               When Chriſt raiſed Lazarus from death,
after he had laine foure daies in the graue, hee
wept ſo ouer his Sepulchre, that the ſtanders
about ſaid one to another:Ioh. 11. 34. 
                  See how he loued
him: As it may be ſaid of Chriſt, ſee how hee
loueth vs, ſo it ſhould bee ſaid of vs, ſee how
they loue one another. For Chriſt ſaid to his
Diſciples:Ioh. 13. 34. 
                  Loue one another as I haue loued
you: but it may be ſaid of the Vſurer, ſee how
he hateth other, & loueth himſelfe. For when

he ſayth that he lendeth for compaſſion, hee
meaneth for compaſſion of himſelfe, that he
may gaine by his pittie. The Vſurer loueth
the borrower, as the Iuie loueth the Oke: the
Iuie loueth the Oke to grow vp by it, ſo the
vſurer loueth the borrower to growe rich by
him. The Iuie claſpeth the Oke like a louer,
but it claſpeth out all the iuice and ſap, that
the Oke cannot thriue after: ſo the vſurer
lendeth like a friend, but he couenanteth like
an enemie, for he claſpeth the borrower with
ſuch bands, that euer after he diminiſheth, as
faſt as the vſurer encreaſeth.
               Chriſt expounding the commaundement
which forbiddeth to ſteale,I Vnderſtand that his ſermō vpon the mount, is an expoſition of the commandements, or elſe the Text will not ſeeme to implie this. ſaith; Lend freely,
ſhewing that vſurie becauſe ſhe lendeth not
freelie, is a kind of theft, and the Vſurers a
kind of theeues, for elſe this expoſition were
not right. Therefore Zacheus, as though hee
had ſtolne other mens goods, when hee began
to repent, he reſtored them againe foure
folde, euen as theeues are enioined to reſtore
foure fold for that which they haue ſtolne, ſo
Zacheus reſtored foure folde, as though, hee
had ſtolne.Luk. 19. 8. It ſeemeth that Zacheus was no
great theefe,In ſome kind of theft. becauſe he reſtored foure folde
for all that he had gotten wrongfullie,Exod. 22. for he
got but the fourth port of his goods wrongfullie
at the moſt, or elſe he could not haue reſtored

foure folde againe. But now, if ſome
ſhould reſtore four fold for al that they haue
gotten wrongfully, they ſhould reſtore more
then they haue, becauſe all which vſurers get,
they get wrongfully: for their occupation is a
ſinne, and therefore one ſaith: Becauſe they
cannot reſtore foure fold here, they ſhall ſuffer
an hundred fold hereafter.
               Amaziah is forbidden to ſtrengthen himſelfe
with the armies of Iſraell,2. Chro. 25. onely becauſe
Iſrael had offended God; If Amaziah might
not ioine the armies of Iſrael with his armies
to ſtrengthen him, dareſt thou ioine the
goods of the poore with thy goods to inrich
thee? When God ſet Adam his worke, hee
ſaid;Gen. 3. 19. 
                  In the ſweat of thy browes thou ſhalt liue:
not in the ſweat of his browes, but in the
ſweate of thy browes: but the Vſurer liueth
in the ſweat of his browes, and her browes;
that is, by the paines, and cares, and labours
of another, for he taketh no paines himſelfe,
but onely expecteth the time when his interreſt
will come in, like the bellie which dooth
no worke, and yet eateth all the meat.
               When God had finiſhed his Creation,
hee ſaide vnto man, and vnto beaſts, and vnto
fiſhes,Gen. 1. 28. 
                  Encreaſe and multiplie, but hee neuer
ſayde vnto money, encreaſe and multiplie,
becauſe it is a dead thing, which hath no

ſeed, & therfore is not fit to ingender. Therefore
he which ſaith to his money, Increaſe
and multiplie, begetteth a monſtrous birth,
like Anah,Gen. 36. 24 which deuiſed a creature which
God had not created before. Chriſt ſaith to
his Diſciples,Mat. 5. 46. 
                  If you loue but them which loue
you, what are you better then the Publicanes?
for they loue their brethren: ſo I may ſay, if
you will lend to none but to them which wil
paie you vſurie for it, what are you better
then the Iewes? for the Iewes woulde lende
for vſurie; and if you be no better then the
Iewes, then you ſhall ſpeed no better then
they.Mat. 5. 29. For as Chriſt ſaid, Except your righteouſneſſe
do exceed the righteouſneſſe of the Phariſies,
your reward ſhall not exceed the rewarde
of the Phariſies: ſo except your charitie doe
exceed the charitie of the Iewes, your reward
ſhall not exceede the reward of the Iewes.
All this dooth ſhewe, that the Vſurer is
like Eſau,Mal. 1. 3. of whome God ſaide, Eſaw haue I
hated. Now in the 112 Pſalme, you ſhall ſee
who is like Iacob,Verſ. 5. of whome God ſaith, Iacob
haue I loued: for there Dauid ſayth, A good
man is mercifull and lendeth, and ſtraight vpon
it hee ſetteth this crowne, He ſhall neuer
bee mooued, but bee had in perpetuall remembrance:
as if hee ſhould ſay, this is the good
mans vſurie, this is his increaſe, euen a good

name, and euerlaſting ioy. Againe, in the 23.
of Exodus it is ſaid, Lend vnto him which wanteth
without Vſurie, that the Lord may bleſſe
thee:
                  Mal. 3. 10. as if he ſhould ſay, let the Lord paie the
increaſe, feare not to be looſers by dooing
good, for God hath giuen his word to requite
it himſelfe. As he ſaith to them which were afraide
to paie tithes and offer ſacrifice,Deu. 25. 10. 
                  Try me
if I will not powre downe a bleſsing vpon you:
ſo hee ſeemeth to ſaie vnto them which are afraid
to lend, Try me if I wil not powre down
a bleſſing vpon you. Whom will you truſt, if
you doo not truſt your Creator, your Father,
your Redeemer, your Preſeruer, and your Sauiour?
               Now you haue heard the vnlawfulneſſe of
Vſurie,The kinds of Vſurers you ſhall heare how manie kindes
there be of it. As other Crafts are called Myſteries,
ſo I maie fitlie call it, The Myſterie of
Vſurie; for they haue deuiſed moe ſorts of Vſurie,
than there be trickes at cardes: I cannot
reckon halfe, and I am afraid to ſhew you all,
leaſt I ſhould teach you to be Vſurers, while
I diſſwade you from Vſurie. Yet I will bring
foorth ſome; and the ſame reaſons which are
alleadged againſt theſe, ſhall condemne all the
reſt.
               Some will not take Vſurie, but they will
haue the vſe of your paſture, or your land, or

your orchard, or your teame, or your kine, vntill
you pay the money againe, which in that
time wil grow to a greater gaine to the Vſurer,
and a greater loſſe to the borrower, than
if he had paide more money than other Vſurers
are wont to take.
               
                   Some will not take vſurie, but they will
take plate, and veſſell, and tapiſtrie, and bedding
& other houſhold ſtuffe, to vſe & weare
vntil their money come home, which wil loſe
more in the wearing, than the intereſt of the
money would come to. This vſurie is forbidden
in the 2. of Amos, where God complaineth,
ſaying; They lye downe vpon the cloathes
which are laide to pledge: ſhewing, that wee
ſhould not lye downe vpon ſuch clothes, that
is, we ſhould not vſe or wear the thing which
is laide to pledge.
               
                   Some will take no Vſurie, but they will
take a pawne which is better then the money
which they lend, and then they wil couenant,
that if he bring not the money again by ſuch
a day, hee forfetteth his pawne: Which day
the Vſurer knoweth that the poore man is
not able to keepe, and ſo keepeth the pawne
for his money, which is worth twiſe his money.
This Vſurie is forbidden in Leuit. 25.
where it is ſaide; Thou ſhalt not take Vſurie, or
vauntage, As if hee ſhould ſay, thou ſhalt

not take the forfeyture, for then thou takeſt
vantage, when thou takeſt more then thou
lendeſt.
               Some will not take Vſurie, but they will 
buy ſome thing at a ſmall price, and then couenant
with the Borrower, that hee buy the
ſame againe of the ſame price at ſuch a daie:
which day the Vſurer knoweth that the borrower
is not able to keepe, and ſo hee getteth
for a little, that which the other might haue
ſolde for much more. This vſurie is condemned
in the firſt Chapter to the Theſſalonians,
the fourth verſe, where it is ſaide, Let no
man defraude, or circumuent his brethren in
any thing.
               
               Some will not take Vſurie, but they will 
lende out their money to occupiers, vpon
condition to be partakers in their gaines, but
not in their loſſes: So one takes all the paines,
and abideth all the venture, and the other that
takes no paines, reapeth halfe the profit. This
Vſurie is forbidde in 2. Theſſ. chap. 3. verſ. 10.
where it is ſaid; Hee which will not worke, let
him not eate.
               
               Some will not take Vſurie, but if he be a 
Labourer, or a Maſon, or a Carpenter, which
borroweth of him, he will couenant with him
for ſo manie daies worke, he ſhall labour with
him ſo many daies, or ſo many weekes for nomoney,

but the loane of money. This vſurie
is condemned in Luke 10. 7. where it is ſayd,
The labourer is worthie of his hire.
               
               
                   Some will not take vſurie, but if you haue
not preſent money to pay for their wares, they
will ſet a high price of them, for the forbearing
of the time, and ſo they doe not only ſell
their wares, but they ſell time too: that is, they
doe not onely ſell their owne, but they ſell
Gods owne. Therefore one ſaith of theſe,
when he ſelleth the day, he ſelleth the light,
and when he ſelleth the night, he ſelleth reſt:
therefore when hee would haue the light of
heauen, and the reſt of Paradice, it ſhalbe ſaid
vnto him, that he hath ſold both alreadie. For
he ſolde light when hee ſolde the day, and he
ſolde reſt when he ſolde the night; and therfore
now he can haue neither light, nor reſt.
Hereafter let not the Londoners ſay, that they
giue time, but that they ſell time.
               
                   There be other Vſurers which wil not lend
themſelues, but giue leaue to their wiues, and
they play like huckſters, that is euerie moneth
a peny for a ſhilling, which is one hundreth
for another in the yeare.
               
                   But that I was informed of them ſince this
Sermon was preached, I had left out our capitall
Vſurers, which will not lend anie money,
becauſe they dare not require ſo much

gaine as they would haue; but if you would
borrow an hundred pound, they wil giue you
wares worth threeſcore pound, and you ſhall
anſwere them an hundred pounde for it.
Theſe are the Vſurers generall, which lurke
about the Citie like Rattes, and Weſels, and
Fulmers, of whome may bee ſaide the ſame
which is ſaide of the diuels,1. Pet. 5. 8. 
                  They ſeeke whom
they may deuoure.
               
               There be other couſins to Vſurers, which 
are not counted Vſurers;Vſurers couſins. ſuch as take money
for that which they ſhould giue freely; ſuch
as take as much for a counterfeite as for the
beſt; ſuch as take a fee of a Client, and do
him no pleaſure: ſuch as take money for Maſſes,
and Dirges, and Trentals, and Pardons,
and ſuch like drugges, which doo no more
good than fire out of the chimney. This is a
kinde of vſurie and deceipt beſide, which one
daie they will caſt away, as Iudas did his thirtie
pence.
               Now haue you heard the kindes of Vſurie,Obiections made by Vſurers
you ſhall heare the Arguments which are deuiſed
for Vſurie.
               Sinne is neuer compleat vntill it be excuſed:
this is the vantage which the diuell getteth
by euery ſinne, whenſoeuer hee can faſten
any temptation vppon vs, we giue him a
ſinne for it, & an excuſe to boot, as Adam our

father did.Gen. 3. Firſt he ſinned, and then hee excuſed:
ſo firſt we ſinne, and then we excuſe,
firſt a Vſurer, and then an excuſer: Therfore
euerie Vſurer will defende vſurie with his
tongue though he condemne it with his conſcience.
If the Image-makers of Epheſus had
not liued by Images,Act. 19. 25. they would haue ſpoken
for Images no more than the reſt: for none
ſtood for Images, but the Image-makers: ſo
if the Vſurers did not liue by vſurie, they
woulde ſpeake for vſurie no more than the
reſt: for none ſtandes for vſurie, but Vſurers.
               It is an eaſie matter (if a man be diſpoſed)
to ſpeake ſomething for euerie vice, as ſome
defend the ſtewes, ſome defend Nonreſidencie,
ſome defend ſwearing by my faith, ſome
defend bowling vpon the Sabaoth,Iudg. 6. 31. and ſome
defend Vſurie: but, will you pleade for Baal?
(ſaith Ioaſh) that is, Will you plead for ſinne
which will pleade againſt you? A ſinne is a
ſinne when it is defended: nay, a ſinne is two
ſinnes when it is defended:Mat. 5. 19. for, Hee which
breaketh one of the leaſt Commaundements,
(ſaith Chriſt) and teacheth others to doo ſo,
is the leaſt in the Kingdome of Heauen. A
Squire of lowe degree, is a Squire of no degree:
ſo the leaſt in the Kingdome of Heauen,
is none of the Kingdome of Heauen.
               
                  
Who then is the leaſt in the Kingdome of
Heauen? not hee which breaketh the leaſt of
the Commaundements, but hee which teacheth
others to do ſo: that is, he which by defending,
and excuſing, and mincing, and extenuating
his ſinne, incourageth others to
ſinne too.
               To defend Vſurie, they diſtinguiſh vpon
it, as they diſtinguiſh of lying. As they ſay,
there is a pernicious lye, and an officious lye,
and a merrie lye, and a godlie lye: ſo they ſaie,
there is the Merchants vſurie, and the Strangers
vſurie, and the Widowes vſurie, and the
Orphans vſurie, and the poore mans vſurie,
and the byting vſurie, and the charitable vſurie,
and the neceſſarie vſurie. As God ſaid,
Ye ſhall dye;
                  Gen. 2. and the Woman ſaide, peraduenture
yee ſhall dye; and the Serpent ſaide,
ye ſhall not dye:
                  Three opinions of vſurie. ſo there be three opinions of
vſurie. Some ſay like God, thou ſhalt dye; they
thinke that Vſurie is vtterlie vnlawfull, becauſe
God hath vtterlye forbid it: ſome
ſaye like to the Woman, peraduenture thou
ſhalt dye; they doubt whether Vſurie bee
vtterlye vnlawfull or no, becauſe it is ſo
much tollerated; ſome ſaie like the Serpent,Gen. 3.
                  thou ſhalt not dye; they thinke that
Vſurie is lawfull, becauſe it is gainfull, as Saul
thought, that the Idolaters beaſtes ſhould

not be killed,1. Sa. 15. 9. becauſe they were fatte. But, as
hee was commanded to kill the fatte beaſtes,
as well as the leane: ſo wee are commaunded
to kill fat ſinnes as well as leane ſinnes, gainful
ſinnes as well as prodigall ſinnes.
               They which plead for Vſurie, obiect theſe
 Arguments. Firſt they ſay, God doth allow
ſome kinde of Vſurie;Obiectiōs for Vſurie. for in Deut. 23. it is ſaid,
Of a ſtraunger thou maiſt take Vſurie. I perceiue
no ſcripture ſpeaketh for Vſurers. Of a
ſtranger (ſaith God) thou maieſt take Vſurie:
but thou takeſt vſurie of thy brother; therefore
this condemneth thee, becauſe thou vſeſt
thy brother like a ſtranger. Here ſtranger
doth ſignifie the Iewes enemies, whome
they were commaunded to deſtroy: therefore
marke how much this maketh againſt vſurie,
which they obiect for vſurie. God doth
not licenſe the Iewes to take vſurie of any but
their enemies, whom they might kill. They
might not be Vſurers vnto anie, but to them
of whome they might be deſtroyers; whome
they might ſlaie, of them onely they might
take vſurie: ſhewing that Vſurie is a kind of
puniſhment, and ſuch a kinde of puniſhment,
as if we are to kill a man, it were a verie fitte
puniſhment for him: and therefore the Iewes
might take vſurie of none, but them whom
they might kill. I hope vſurers will alleadge

this Scripture no more.
               Secondly, they ſay they lend for compaſſion,
and ſo make Vſurie a worke of Charitie.
This were charitie not to be partakers in our
gaines, but to be partakers in our loſſes: but
vſurers will bee partakers in our gaines, but
not in our loſſes: nay, though we looſe, yet
they will gaine. Is this charitie? It is vſurers
charitie.
               Thirdly they ſay, if he gaine and I gaine 
too, is not this well? may hee not conſider
my friendſhip, and bee thankfull? Yes, hee
may be thankfull: but no man is bound to be
thankfull, but when he hath receiued a good
turne, then hee is tried whether hee will bee
thankeful or no, and if he requite thy courteſie,
then he is thankfull; but if thou bind him
to requite it, then thou art couetous.
               Fourthly they ſay, Vſurie is neceſſarie for 
Orphanes, and Widowes, and Straungers,
which haue no other way to get their liuing,
and therefore ſome vſurie muſt be tolerated.
If Vſurie be neceſſarie for vs, how did the
Iewes without it? Did God thinke it good
for the ſtate of their Common-weale to bee
without Vſurers: and is it good for the ſtate
of our Common-weale to haue vſurers: this
is wiſdome againſt God.
               Fiftlie they ſaie, if I may not gaine by the 
                  
money which I lend, I will lend no more, but
keepe my money to my ſelfe: nay, that is as
bad to keepe thy money from them which
neede, as to lend thy money for vſurie; For
Chriſt ſaith,Mat. 5. 42. 
                  From him which borroweth, turne
not away thy face: therefore thou art bounde
to lend. As he hath a curſe in Pro. 11. which
keepeth his corne when hee ſhould ſell it to
them which hunger; ſo he hath a curſe in Ezec.
18. which keepeth his money when hee
ſhould lend it to them which want.
               
                   Sixtly they ſay, becauſe Vſurie comes of
biting, the biting vſurie is onely forbidden,
and none but the biting vſurie: why then all
vſurie is forbidden, for all vſurie commeth of
biting, ſo the wiſe God hath giuen it a name
to condemne it.
               
                   Laſtly, they alleage the lawe of the lande
for it, and ſay, the Queenes ſtatute dooth allowe
vs to take vpon Vſurie ten in the hundred.
Theſe are like the Iewes, which ſaid,
We haue a law,
                  Iohn 19. 7. 
                  & by our law he ſhall die: when
they could not ſaie by Gods law he ſhall die,
then they ſaide, by our law hee ſhall die: ſo
when they cannot ſaie by Gods law we maie
take Vſurie, they ſaie by mans lawe wee
may take vſurie, this is the pooreſt defence of
all the reſt: for if Gods law forbid thee, can
any law of man excuſe thee? As it would not

ſerue Adam to ſaie,Gen. 3. 
                  The woman bad me, ſo it
will not ſerue the vſurer to ſay, the law doth
licenſe me: for though peraduenture our law
doe tollerate more then ſhould be tollerated,
yet I would haue you know, that our law doth
not allow ten in the hundred, nor fiue in the
hundred, nor one in the hundred, nor any vſurie
at all: but there is a reſtraint in our law,
that no vſurer take aboue ten in the hundred;
it doth not allow ten in the hundred, but puniſheth
that tirant which exacteth aboue ten
in the hundred. It is much like that tolleration
which we reade of diuorces: for the hardnes
of mens heartes,Mat. 19. 7. Chriſt ſaith that Moſes
did ſuffer the man & wife to part aſunder: ſo
for the hardnes of mēs hearts, our Moſes, our
Prince is faine to ſuffer as it were a kind of vſurie,
becauſe otherwiſe no men would lend.
               Theſe are the beſt excuſes which our vſurers
haue to pleade for themſelues, againſt
they come before the tribunall of God, and
if their reaſons wil not ſtand before men, nor
their own conſcience, how wil they ſtand before
the Lord? and yet hee which ſpeaketh
to theſe, maketh himſelfe a mocke. Chriſt
preached manie Sermons, and was neuer
ſcorned at any, but when he preached againſt
couetouſneſſe,Luk. 16. 14. then it is ſaide, that hee was
mocked: ſhewing, that theſe kinde of men

are moſt incorrigible, and wedded to their
ſinne til death make them part. Yet (for their
greater condemnation) we are commaunded
to ſpeake to them which will not heare:Ezek. 2. 5. of
which number, is euerie reader of this Sermon,What the Vſurer is like.
if he be a Vſurer after.
               Now you long to heare what the vſurer is
like. To what ſhall I liken this generation?
They are like a Butlers boxe; for as all the
counters at laſt come to the Butler, ſo all the
money at laſt commeth to the vſurer: ten after
ten, and ten after ten, and ten to ten, till
at laſt he receiue not only ten for an hundred,
but an hundred for ten: this is the onely difference,
that the Butler can receiue no more
then he deliuered, but the Vſurer receiueth
more then hee deliuereth. They are like a
Moath; euen as a Moath eateth a hole in
cloath, ſo vſurie eateth a hole in ſiluer. If
you haue a peece of ſiluer which is as much as
an hundred pounds, in one yeare vſurie will
eate a hole in it as big as ten pounds: in two
yeares ſhe will eat a hole as bigge as twentie
pounds, in three yeares ſhe will eate a hole as
bigge as thirtie pounds. Nay, now they ſay,
hee is but a bad husband, which cannot eate
a hole as bigge as fiftie poundes in a yeare:
that is, which cannot gaine half in halfe: how
many holes haue theſe moths eaten in poore

mens garments? they are like Nonreſidents,
that is, ſuch bad members, that no man ſpeaketh
for but themſelues: as no man ſtandeth
for nonreſidencie, but he which is a Nonreſident,
or he which would be a Nonreſident, ſo
no man ſtandeth for vſurie, but he which is an
vſurer, or he which would be an vſurer. They
are like Ieſabell,1. Kin. 21. 7 which ſaid, Let mee alone, I
haue a way. If there bee no waie to liue (ſayth
the falſe Steward) I know what to doe,Luke 16. 4. I will
deceiue: ſo if there be no way to liue (ſaith the
vſurer) I know what to doe, I will oppreſſe. If
I cānot liue by buying, nor by ſelling, nor by
flattering, nor by laboring, I will liue by oppreſſion.
But as one in his Comment ſpeakes
to the falſe Steward; Thou ſaiſt, I know what
to doe, but doeſt thou know what thou ſhalt
ſuffer? So I ſay to vſurers, you ſay you knowe
what to doe, but do you know what you ſhal
ſuffer? Indeed he knoweth not what to doe,
which knoweth not to doe well: and therfore
Chriſt ſaid of his perſecutors,Luk. 23. 34. 
                  That they knew
not what they did. Here I wil end the firſt daies
examination. Now I may conclude with
Paul,1. Cor. 7. 10. 
                  I haue not ſpoken, but the Lord: and therfore
as the Lord ſaid vnto Saul that he perſecuted
him;Act. 9. 22. ſo they which reſiſt this doctrine,
do contemne him, and not me.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               The end of the firſt Sermon.
            
            
               
               THE EXAMINATION
OF VSVRIE.
               THE SECOND SERMON.
               
                  IT remaineth that we ſpeake
of the Vſurers puniſhment:
Then, what may be thought
of them which do not take
vſurie, but giue vſurie. Laſtly
what they ſhould doe, which
haue got their riches by vſurie.
               To begin with the puniſhment,The puniſhments of vſurers. not onely
Gods law, but euen the Cannon law, doth
 ſo condemne vſurie, that firſt it doth excommunicate
him from the Church, as though he
had no communion with Saints.
               
                   Secondlie, it dooth detaine him from the
ſacraments, as though he had no communion
with Chriſt.
               
                   Thirdlie, it dooth depriue him of his Sepulchre,

and wil not ſuffer him to be buried,
as though hee were not worthie to lie in the
earth, but to lie in hell.
               Laſtlie, it maketh his will to be no will, as 
though his goods were not his owne: For nothing
is ours, but that which wee haue
rightlie got: and therefore we ſay, It is mine
by right, as though it were not ours, vnleſſe
it be ours by right. This is the iudgement of
mans law.
               Now you ſhall heare the iudgement of
Gods law. A Vſurer dooth receiue two incomes,
one of the borrower, and another of
the reuenger: of the borrower he lookes for
gaine, but of the reuenger he lookes for puniſhment.
Therfore all the Scripture prophecieth
euill vnto him, as Michaiah did to Achab.Pro. 28. 8.
Salomon ſaith: He which encreaſeth his
riches by Vſurie, gathereth for them which will
be mercifull to the poore. As if hee ſhould ſaie,
when he hath loden himſelfe like a Cart, hee
ſhall be vnloden like a Cart againe, and they
ſhall inherit his monie, for whom he did neuer
gather it. For he which is vnmercifull to
the poore, meaneth not to gather for them
which will bee mercifull to the poore. But
Salomon ſaith: That they ſhall be his heires,
which will be mercifull, as hee was vnmercifull.
               
                  
Now marke whether this propheſie of
Salomon be true, I know not how many in
this Cittie doe encreaſe by vſurie, but this
propheſie ſeemeth to be verified of many: for
it is noted, that the riches & lands of Aldermen
and Merchants, and other in London,
do not laſt ſo long, nor indure ſo well, as the
riches and lands of other in the countrie, and
that their children doe not prooue ſo well as
others, nor come to that place in the Common
weele, which for their wealth their parents
looked that they ſhould come to. I can
giue no reaſon for it, but the reaſon of Salomon,
Hee which increaſeth by Vſurie, gathereth
for them which will bee mercifull to the poore.
That is, their riches ſhall go from their heires
to Gods heires,Pro. 13. 22. according to that, The riches
of the ſinner is layd vp for the righteous: that is,
the righteous ſhall enioie that which the wicked
gathereth.
               All riches are vncertaine, but the riches
which are euill gotten, are moſt vncertaine:
They may be called moueable goods, for
they are verie moueable, like the clowdes
which neuer reſt till they fall as they climed.
God ſayth,Eze. 22. 13. that he will ſmite the Vſurer with
his fiſt, not with the palme of his hand, but
with his fiſt, which giueth a greater blow. As
his handes were ſhut againſt the poore, ſo

Gods handes ſhall be ſhutte againſt him, that
his puniſhment may be like his ſinne. But if
you will heare their finall ſentence. Dauid
ſaith heere; That they ſhall not dwell in Gods
Temple, nor reſt in his holie mountaine. Then
we will ſeeke no more puniſhments, for this
puniſhment is all puniſhments. If they ſhall
not come to heauen, whoſe then ſhall thoſe
riches be? Nay, whoſe then ſhall the honour
be when that day commeth? If hee ſhall not
reſt in heauen, then he ſhall reſt in hell, where
no reſt is. Then, ſaith one, the Vſurer ſhall crie
vnto his children,Note. Curſed bee you my Children,
becauſe you were the cauſe of theſe
torments: for leaſt you ſhould be poore I was
an Vſurer, and robbed other, to leaue riches
vnto you. To whom the children ſhall replie
againe, nay, curſed be you father, for you
were the cauſe of our torments, for if you had
not left vs other mens goods, we had not kept
other mens goods.
               Thus when they are curſed of God, they
ſhall curſe one another: curſe the Lord for
condemning them, curſe their ſinnes for accuſing
them, curſe their Parents for begetting
them, and curſe themſelues becauſe they
cannot helpe themſelues. As they which are
bleſſed doe nothing but bleſſe, ſo they which
are accurſed, do nothing but curſe.
               
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
This is the ſecond vſurie which the Vſurer
ſhall receiue of God, after hee hath receiued
vſurie of men: then the name of Vſurie
ſhalbe fulfilled, as it ſignifieth biting; ſo when
it hath bitten other, it ſhall bite the Vſurer
too, and neuer reſt biting; then they ſhall
wiſh that they could reſtore againe as Zacheus
did, and ſhall not reſtore, becauſe their money
is gone. Therefore if Chriſt be come to
your hearts, as he came to Zacheus houſe, reſtore
now as Zacheus did,Luke 19. and eſcape this
iudgement. This is the end of the Vſurer and
his money, if they ſtay together till death, yet
at laſt there ſhalbe a diuiſion. The diuell ſhall
take his ſoule;Note. the earth ſhall take his bodie,
the ſtrangers ſhal take his goods, & the mourners
ſhall reioyce vnder their blacks, and ſay,
Wickedneſſe is come to the graue.
               Therefore, if thou wouldeſt not be counted
an vſurer then, refrain to be a vſurer now,
for they which are vſurers now, ſhalbe counted
Vſurers then. Thus you haue heard the
Vſurers payment.
               Now if you will know whether it be vnlawful
to giue vſurie,Whether it be vnlawfull to giue Vſurie. as it is vnlawfull to take
vſurie, I wiſh that you could reſolue your
ſelues that I might not ſpeake of it: for I haue
heard ſome Preachers ſay, that there be ſome
truths which they would be loath to preach:

and ſo there be ſome truthes which I would
be loath to preach, becauſe manie heare by
halues, and ſome, for malice or ignorance, will
take thinges otherwiſe then they are ſpoken,
yet becauſe I haue promiſed, I wil ſpeak ſomthing
of it.
               Well then, may we neither take vſurie, nor
giue vſurie?Ier. 15. 10. I know that Ieremie ſaith, I haue
not lent vpon vſurie to others, neither haue others
lent vpon vſurie to mee:
                  1. Obiect. as though both
were vnlawfull, not onely to take vſurie, but
to giue vſurie.Anſwere. But thereby Ieremie doth ſignifie
that hee was no medler in the worlde,
whereby they ſhould enuie him like other
men, and therefore hee cleareth himſelfe
chieflie from Vſurie, becauſe Vſurers were
moſt enuied. And to ſhewe that hee was not
an Vſurer, he ſaith that he was not a borrower,
which is more lawfull than to be a Vſurer:
like a man which ſaith, I doe neither hate him
nor know him. Why it was lawfull to know
him, but to proue that he did not hate him,
hee ſaith, hee doeth not know him. So Ieremie,
to proue that hee had not lent vpon vſurie,
doeth ſaie, that hee neuer borrowed vpon
Vſurie, which manie will doe that will not
lende. The beſt Expoſitors giue this ſence
of it. I knowe beſide, that Chriſt did caſt
foorth the buyers out of the Temple,2. Obiect. as wel as

the ſellers:Anſwere. But that was not for buying, but
for buying in the Temple, where they ſhould
not buy, but praie: or elſe it was as lawfull to
buy anie thing, as it is lawfull to vſe it.
               I know beſide,3. Obiection. that it is a common ſaying,
if there were no buyers, there would be no
ſellers, if there were no bribe-giuers, there
would be no bribe-takers.Anſwere. But in this caſe it
may be rather ſaide, if there were no takers,
there would be no giuers: for the giuer doth
not make the receiuer to take, but the receiuer
dooth make the giuer to giue, becauſe
hee will not lende, vnleſſe the other wil giue
him for the loane: therefore as we ſay the receiuer
makes the theefe: ſo I may ſay, the receiuer
of Vſurie, makes the giuer of Vſurie.
Therefore I would be loth to compare them
which are conſtrained to borrow vpon vſurie,
vnto them which did buy in the Temple,
and were not conſtrained more then they
which ſolde in the Temple. Much leſſe may I
compare them which giue vſurie, vnto them
which take vſurie: for there is as great oddes
betweene them, as there is betweene giuing
and taking, or betweene couetouſneſſe and
neceſſitie, for one is couetouſneſſe, and the other
is neceſſitie. He which lendeth for vſurie,
lendeth for couetouſneſſe, but he which borroweth
vpon vſury, borroweth for neceſſitie.
               
                  
Now, for neceſſitie God hath allowed
manie things; as, for neceſſitie it was lawfull
for Adams ſonnes to marrie with Adams
daughters, becauſe there were no other women;1. Sa. 21. 6.
for neceſſitie it was lawfull for Dauid
to eate the ſhew-bread, becauſe hee had no
other foode; for neceſſitie it was lawfull to
worke,Luk. 13. 10. and heale, and fight vpon the Sabaoth,
which was not lawfull but for neceſſitie:
therefore for neceſſitie why may not a man
paie more then hee borrowed? ſeeing no
ſcripture doth forbid vs to paie more then we
borrowed, but to require more then we lend.
Some doo thinke, that as God did vſe the ambition
of Abſalon, and the malice of Pharao,
and the trecherie of Iudas vnto good; ſo
men may vſe the couetouſnes of Vſurers vnto
good, that is, to helpe at a need when a man is
like to be vndone, and his children caſt away,
and his leaſe forfeited, & many inconueniences
beſide like to enſue, which you know better
then I, vnleſſe hee haue preſent money at
ſome time to preuent a miſchiefe. For example
hereof, I may alleadge how Iacob did vſe
the ſinne of Laban. Laban did euill in ſwearing
by idols,Gen. 31. 53. but Iacob did not euill in receiuing
ſuch an oath of him, though it was an
vnlawfull oath: ſo though the Vſurer do euill
in taking vſurie, yet a man doth not euill

in giuing Vſurie.Gen. 21. 31. Beſide, I may alleadge the
example of Abraham and Abimelech: Abraham
made a couenant with Abimelech; to
confirme this couenant, Abraham ſware, and
Abimelech ſware: Abraham ſware by the
true God, but Abimelech ſware by his falſe
Gods; and yet Abraham did receiue this oath
and ſinned not. So, if her Maieſtie and the
Turke ſhould make a couenant, the Turke
woulde not ſweare as the Queene woulde
ſweare; for the Queene would ſweare by the
Lord: but the Turke would ſweare by Mahomet.
If it be lawfull then to receiue ſuch an
oath, though it be an vnlawfull oath, why
may it not be lawful for me to giue more than
I borrowed, though it be vnlawful for the vſurer
to take more then hee lended? Beſide, a
Prince may not pardon a wilfull murtherer,
yet I thinke that no man will ſay in haſt, that
hee which hath committed murther may not
take a pardon. As this vnlawfull giuing doth
not make the taking vnlawfull; ſo the other
vnlawfull taking doth not make the giuing
vnlawfull. Beſides, it is lawfull to ſuffer iniurie,
though it be vnlawfull to offer iniurie: it
is lawfull to ſuffer iniurie, as Chriſt paide
tribute, which was iniurie; but it is not lawfull
to offer iniurie;Mat. 17. 17 becauſe there are ſix commandements
againſt it.
               
                  
Now, to take vſurie, is (as it were) to offer
iniurie; but to giue Vſurie, is (as it were) to
ſuffer iniurie; therfore, though I may not take
more than I lended, yet I may giue more than
I borrowed.
               Moreouer, I may compare giuing of vſurie,
to ſwearing: if a man ſweare without a
cauſe, hee ſinneth; but if hee ſweare as the
Word teacheth him to ſweare, hee ſinneth
not: ſo, if a man borrowe vpon vſurie, and
borrow without cauſe, he ſinneth, becauſe he
feedeth the Vſurer; but elſe, as a man may
ſweare in ſome caſe, ſo in ſome caſe a man may
borrow vpon vſurie that is, in caſe of neceſſitie,
when a man muſt needes borrow, and can
borrow of none but Vſurers.
               Laſtly, I may alledge, that vſurie & vſurer,
are neuer read in the ſcripture, but they ſignifie
him that takes vſurie, not him which giues
vſurie: and therfore the ſcripture ſeemeth to
forbid taking, but not giuing.
               Many reaſons more are alleadged, which
I cannot refute, and therefore I will not contradict
them: yet I meane not to decide the
queſtion, becauſe I will not be miſtaken. But
if ſome ſhould come vnto mee in that neceſſitie
and extremitie which I can imagine,
and aske; May I borrowe money of theſe Vſurers
to ſaue my life, or my credite, or my

liuing, ſeeing no man will lende me freely? I
woulde anſwere him as the Prophet anſwered
Naaman: neither doo, nor doo not, but
goe in peace. I will not forbid thee, nor I will
not condemne thee, but if thy conſcience
condemne thee not, I thinke thy ſinne one of
the leaſt ſinnes: and as Naaman praied, Lord
be mercifull vnto mee in this,
                  1. Reg. 5. 18. ſo I thinke the
Lorde will be mercifull vnto thee in this. But
if thy conſcience goe againſt it, then doo it
not; for it is ſinne to thee, though it be free
for another, becauſe whatſoeuer is not done
of faith,Rom. 14. 23 is ſinne. I charge you in the feare of
God, that you doo not miſtake that which is
ſaid, for I know no learned Preacher, nor learned
writer of other mind. Yet leaſt you ſhuld
miſtake the matter, as I diſtinguiſhed of lenders,
ſo I will diſtinguiſh of borrowers.
               If ſome may borrow vpon Vſurie,Diuers kindes of borrowers it doth
not follow that all may borrow vpon Vſurie,
becauſe all haue not the like cauſe: therefore
doo not ſay that I teach you to borrow vpon
Vſurie, for I thinke that the moſt in this Cittie
which borrow vpon vſurie, ſhould not
borrowe as they doo, becauſe they rather
maintaine vſurie, then ſupplie their neceſſitie.
Some I know borrow for meere neceſſitie;
if anie may be allowed, thoſe are they:
but there is a kinde of borrowers in this Cittie,

which feede vſurers as the bellowes kindle
the fire, ſo they haue no need to borrow
but becauſe they would be rich, and richer, &
richeſt of all: therefore they will imploy all
the money which they can borrow, thinking
to get more by the vſe of it, then the vſurie of
it doth come to. This maketh them ſell their
wares ſo deare, becauſe they muſt not onelie
gaine the price, but the intereſt beſide, and
more then the intereſt too, or elſe they gaine
nothing. Theſe borrowers are in another predicament
then thoſe which borrow for neceſſitie:
and therefore if they bee not old enough
to anſwer for themſelues, I am too
yong to anſwer for them. There are other borowers
(as I haue heard) which for ſome ſecret
cauſe would ſeeme barer & needier then
they are, either becauſe they would not bee
charged deepely with ſubſidies, or els becauſe
they would compound with their Creditors
for a little: therefore they will haue alwaies
ſomething for Vſurie, that their Creditors
may thinke them bare of monie, or that other
may pittie them in their charges. Theſe are
like thoſe Foxes which haue wealth ynough
to pay their debts, and yet lie in priſon becauſe
they would defraud their Creditors. I
doubt not but there bee more ſorts then I
know, I cannot hunt euerie corner, becauſe I

want experience.Note. But this is my concluſion,
I would haue no man paie intereſt vnto Vſurers
but for neceſſitie, euen as a trauailer giueth
his purſe vnto a theefe, becauſe he cannot
chuſe. Thus you haue heard what I can
ſay of them which take vſurie, and thē which
giue vſurie.
               Now you would vnderſtand the laſt queſtion;What Vſurers ſhould do with their gaines.
if you haue bene vſurers alredie, what
you ſhould doe with that money which you
haue gained by Vſurie? Surely, euen as Zacheus
did, reſtore it againe. If you cannot ſay
as Samuell ſayd,1. Sam. 12. 3 
                  Whoſe goods haue I taken?
then you muſt ſay as Zacheus ſayde, Whoſe
goods haue I kept?
                  Luk. 19. 8. The beſt thing is to do no
man wrong; but the next to that is, to make
him amends. This God ſignifieth when hee
ſaith,Ioſh. 6. 18. 
                  Put awaie the execrable thing from you:
that is, Let no vnlawfull thing ſtaie in your
hands, like the wedge of Achan, which hee
had got by ſinne, the ſame law ſerueth for
all which is got wrongfullie, which was inſtituted
againſt theeues,Exod. 22. 
                  Reſtore it againe: the
reaſon of this lawe is, becauſe the ſinne is not
remitted, vntill the debt be reſtored. For as
humilitie is the repentance of pride, and abſtinence
is the repentance of ſurfet, and alms
is the repentance of couetouſneſſe, and forgiueneſſe
is the repentance of malice; ſo reſtitution

is the repentance of vſurie. As hee
which is not humble, dooth not repent his
pride; he which doth not abſtaine, dooth not
repent his gluttonie; he which doth not forgiue,
doth not repent his malice; ſo he which
doth not reſtore, doth not repent his vſurie:
for how can he be ſaid to repent for his Vſurie,
which liueth by vſurie ſtill? therefore Daniel
ſaith to Nabuchadnezzar,Dan. 4. 24. 
                  Breake off thy
ſinnes by righteouſneſſe, ſhewing, that nothing
but righteouſneſſe can breake vnrighteouſneſſe.
As diſeaſes are healed by the contrarie,
ſo pride is healed by humilitie, gluttonie by
abſtinence, malice by forgiueneſſe, couetouſneſſe
by almes, and vſurie by reſtoring. This
Paul calleth,2. Cor. 7. 1 
                  The reuenge of a Christian, when
he takes reuenge vpon his ſinnes, and puniſheth
his luſts, ſo that hee maketh them doe
contrary to that which they would do. Therfore
you muſt reſtore that which you haue
got by vſurie, or elſe you doe not repent of
your vſurie.
               As a Cammell when hee comes home caſteth
off his burden at the doore, that hee
may enter into his ſtable, ſo they which are
laden with other mens goods, when they goe
to Heauen, muſt leaue their burthen where
they had it, leaſt they be too groſſe to get in
at the narrow gate. But as the Diſciples of

Chriſt ſaid,Iohn 6. 60. 
                  This is a hard ſpeech: ſo to them
which haue got moſt that they haue by vnlawfull
meanes, this is a hard ſpeech, to bid
them reſtore it againe: there bee two great
rubs in the way.
               Firſt,Two obiections. the loſſe which they ſhall ſuſtaine, if
they reſtore againe all which they haue got
vniuſtlie; Then the difficultie to reſtore it againe
to the right parties. If you aske me as
Amaziah asked the prophet, How ſhall wee
doe for thoſe hundred talents?
                  2. Chr. 25. 9 How ſhall I liue
when all is gone that I haue got wrong fullie?
I can ſay no more then the Prophet ſaid to
him, The Lord is able to giue thee more then
this.
                  Luk. 19. Zacheus did not feare how hee ſhould
liue, but Zacheus did feare to offend: ſo thou
ſhouldeſt not feare to reſtore other mens
goods, but thou ſhouldeſt feare to keep other
mens goods: and as Zacheus liued when he
had reſtored, ſo thou ſhalt liue whē thou haſt
reſtored.Mal. 3. 10. He which ſayth, Trie mee if I will
not powre downe a bleſſing, trye him whether
hee will not poure downe a bleſſing;
for hee hath promiſed to bleſſe the Lender
as well as the Sacrificer.Deut. 15. 10 Hee which is
the Lorde of all, can giue thee more wealth
then thou needeſt, but if you cannot reſtore
to the owner, nor to his heires, then giue it to
the poore, for they are the next heires, and

repent that thou haſt kept it ſo long: but in
no wiſe thou maiſt keep it to thy ſelfe, becauſe
it is none of thine.
               When Hezechia was like to die, Eſay ſaid
vnto him,Eſay 38. 6. 
                  Set thy things in order before thou
die. That which hee aduiſed him, he aduiſeth
all, ſet your things in order before you die.
What is this to ſet things in order, but to reſtore
vnto euerie one his owne? When thou
bequeatheſt thy bodie to the earth, then thy
bodie is ſet in order: when thou bequeatheſt
thy ſoule to God, then thy ſoule is ſet in order:
when thou bequeatheſt thy goods to the
owners: then thy goods are ſet in order:
therefore if thou die with other mens goods
in thy hand, then thou dieſt before thou haſt
ſet things in order, and then thou dieſt in thy
ſinnes, and then no promiſe in all the ſcripture
appertaineth vnto thee, becauſe nothing
is promiſed vnto ſinners, but vnto penitent
ſinners.
               Therefore that you may not die in your
ſinnes, it is neceſſarie to make reſtitution before
you die, or elſe you die in your ſinne, and
are croſſed out of all the ioyes of Heauen.
Wherefore as Abner ſayd to Ioab;2. Sa. 2. 2
                        •
                     . 
                  Knoweſt
thou not that it will be bitterneſse in the latter
end? So remember whether this courſe will
be ſweet or bitter in the end. If they be condemned

which giue not their owne goods
to them which neede, like the rich glutton,
how can they bee ſaued which drawe other
mens goods from them, that haue more need
of theirs?
               Thus you haue heard the definition of Vſurie,
and the deriuation of it, and the vnlawfulnes
of it, and the kinds of it, and the puniſhment
of it, and the arguments which are
alleaged for it, and what may bee thought of
them which doe not take vſurie, but giue vſurie,
and what they ſhould doe which haue
got their liuing by vſurie.
               Now ſeeing you may not bee Vſurers to
men, let euerie man hereafter be an vſurer to
God,Mat. 19. 26 which promiſeth; If thou leaue father
or mother, or wife, or children, or houſe, or
land for him; not ten in the hundred, but
an hundred for ten, nay an hundred for one,
and in the world to come life euerlaſting: that
is, a thouſand for one. That wee may receiue
this vſurie, let vs pray that the words which
we haue heard out of this Pſalme, may
dwell with vs till we dwell
in heauen.
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            THE BENEFITE OF
Contentation.
            
               To the Reader.
               
                  HEaring how faſt this Sermon hath
vttered, and yet how miſerably
it hath bene abuſed in printing,
as it were with whole limmes
cut off at once, and cleane left
out, I haue taken a little paines
(as my ſickneſſe gaue me leaue) both to perfect
the matter, and to correct the print. Now as the
Angell ſaid to Iohn,Reu. 10. 10. 
                  Take this booke and eate
it, ſo I wiſh that thou hadſt ſo digeſted this doctrine,
that all the parts of thy bodie and ſoule
were ſtrengthened by it. But if all this will not
make thee content with that thou haſt, ſorrowe
that thy couetouſneſſe is greater then others: and
neuer loue thy ſelfe vntill thou canſt find in thy
hart to be bleſſed. Farewell.
               
                  Thine H. Smith.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE BENEFITE OF
Contentation.
            
               1. Tim. 6. 6.
               Godlineſſe is great gaine, if a man be content
with that he hath.
            
            
               BEcauſe when wee preach, wee
know not whether we ſhall
preach againe, my care is to
chuſe fit and proper texts to
ſpeake that which I would
ſpeak, and that which is neceſſarie
for you to heare. Therefore, thinking
with my ſelfe what doctrine were fitteſt for
you, I ſought for a text which ſpeaks againſt
couetouſnes, which I may cal the Londoners
ſinne. Although God hath giuen you more
then other, which ſhould turne couetouſnes
into thankefulneſſe, yet as the Iuie groweth
with the Oke, ſo couetouſneſſe hath growne
with riches, euerie man wiſheth the Philoſophers
ſtone, and who is within theſe walles,
that thinkes he hath enough, though there be
ſo manie that haue too much? As the Iſraelits
murmured as much whē they had Manna,Exod. 16. 2.
as when they were without it,Num. 11. 4 ſo they
which haue riches, couet as much as they

which are without them: that conferring
your minds and your wealth together, I may
truely ſay, this Cittie is rich if it were not couetous.
This is the diuell which bewitcheth
you, to thinke that you haue not inough, whē
you haue more then you neede. If you cannot
chooſe but couet riches, I will ſhewe you riches
which you may couet, Godlineſſe is great
riches.
            
            In which wordes,Gen. 35. 4. as Iacob craued of his
wiues, and his ſeruants, to giue him their Idols,
that he might burie them: ſo Paule craueth
your couetouſnes, that he might bury it.
And that ye might be no loſers, hee offereth
you the vantage: in ſtead of gaine, hee propoſeth
great gaine. Godlineſſe is great gaine, as
if he ſhould ſay, Wil you couet litle gaine before
great? You haue found little ioy in money,
you ſhall find great ioy in the holy ghoſt:
you haue found little peace in the world, you
ſhall finde great peace in conſcience. Thus
ſeeing the worlde ſtriue for the worlde, like
beggers thruſting at a dole, Lawyer againſt
Lawyer, brother againſt brother, neighbour
againſt neighbour, for the golden Apple, that
poore Naboth cannot hold his owne, becauſe
ſo manie Achabs are ſicke for this vineyard:
when he had found the diſeaſe, like a skilfull
Phyſition, hee goeth about to picke out the

greedie worme which maketh men ſo hungrie,
and ſetteth ſuch a glaſſe before them,
that will make a ſhilling ſeeme as great as a
pound, a cottage ſeeme as faire as a pallace, &
a plough ſeeme as goodly as a diadem, that
he which hath but twentie poundes ſhal be as
merrie as hee which hath an hundred: and he
which hath an hundred, ſhal be as iocund as
he which hath a thouſand: and he which hath
a thouſand,Dan. 1. 12. ſhal be well contented as hee
which hath a million: euen as Daniel did
thriue with water and pulſe, as well as the reſt
did with their wine and iunkets.
            This is the vertue and operation of theſe
words; If you heare them with the ſame ſpirite
that Paul wrote them, they will ſo worke
vpon your hearts, that you ſhall goe away euerie
man contented with that which hee
hath,Luk. 19. 8. like Zacheus, which before he had ſeene
Chriſt, knew nothing but to ſcrape; but as
ſoone as he had heard Chriſt, all his mind was
ſet vpon giuing. This was not the firſt day
that Zacheus ſeemed rich to others, but this
was the firſt daie that Zacheus ſeemed rich
vnto himſelfe, when riches ſeemed dung, and
godlines ſeemed riches.Ma
                     •
                  . 19. 21 Chriſt doth not will
other to giue all their goods away to the poor
as he bad the yong man, to ſee what he would
do, but hee which forbad him to keepe his riches,

forbids vs to loue riches, which makes
our riches ſeem pouertie. When ye contemne
riches ye ſhal ſeem rich, becauſe no man hath
inough but hee which is contented:1. Tim. 6. 6. but if ye
couet, & groue, & thriſt, as Iacob gaue Ruben
a bleſſing,Gen. 49▪ 4. but ſaid, Thou ſhalt not be excellent,
ſo God may giue you riches, but he ſaith, You
ſhall not be ſatisfied: for ye wil be couetous vntil
ye be religious. He that will haue contentation,
muſt leaue his couetouſnes in pawne for
it. This is the ſpirit which we would caſt out,
if ye will leaue but this one ſinne behind, you
ſhall depart out of the Church, like Naaman
out of Iordan,2. Kin. 5. 14. as if you had bene waſhed, and
all your ſins ſwept away like the ſcales from
Paules eyes.Act. 9. 18. For what hath brought Vſury, ſimonie,
briberie, crueltie, ſubtiltie, enuy, ſtrife,
and deceit, into this Citie: and made euerie
houſe an inne, & euery ſhop a market of lyes
and fraud, but the ſuperfluous loue of money?
Name couetouſnes, and thou haſt named the
mother of all theſe miſchiefes: other ſinnes
are but hirelings vnto this ſinne. Vſurie, and
briberie, and ſimony, and extortion, & deceit,
and lyes, and oathes, are factors to couetouſneſſe:
and ſerue for Potters to fetch and
bring her liuing in. As the Receiuer maketh
a theefe, ſo Couetouſneſſe maketh an
Vſurer, and Extortioner, and Deceiuer,

becauſe ſhed receiueth the bootie which they
ſteale. Euen as Rachel cryed to her husband,
Giue me children or elſe I dye;
               Gen. 30. 1. ſo Couetouſneſſe
crieth vnto Vſurie, and Briberie, and Simonie,
and Crueltie, and Deceit, and Lies, Giue
mee riches or elſe I dye: how they may ſaue a
little, and how they may get much, and how
they may prolong life, is euerie mans dreame,
from ſunne to ſunne, ſo long as they haue a
knee to bow vnto Baal: ſo many vices budde
out of this one,Rom. 11. that it is called The roote of all
euill,
               1. Tim. 6. 10 as if hee would ſaie, the Spawne of all
ſines.
            Take away couetouſneſſe, and he will ſell
his wares as cheape as he; he will bring vp his
children as vertuouſlie as hee; hee will refuſe
bribes as earneſtly as hee; he will ſuccour the
poore as hartely as hee; hee will come to the
Church as lightlie as hee. If ye could feele the
pulſe of euerie heart, what makes Gehezi
to take the bribe which Eliſha refuſed?1. Kin. 5. 17. What
makes Demetrius to ſpeake for images,Act. 19. 24. which
Paul condemned?1. Sa. 5. 10. What makes Naball deny
Dauid that which Abigail gaue him? What
makes Iudas grudge the oyle which Marie
tendered?Mat. 16. 9. Nothing but Couetouſneſſe. When
thou ſhouldeſt giue, ſhe ſaith it is too much;
when thou ſhouldeſt receiue, ſhe ſaith it is too
little; when thou ſhouldeſt remitte, ſhe ſaith

it is too great▪ when thou ſhouldeſt repent,
ſhe ſaith it is too ſoone; when thou ſhouldeſt
heare,Exod. 5. 6. ſhee ſaith it is too farre: like Pharaoh,
which founde one buſineſſe or other to occupie
the Iewes, when they ſhould ſerue God.
            Thus euerie labour hath an end, but couetouſneſſe
hath none; like a ſuter in law, which
thinkes to haue an end this Tearme and that
Tearme, and the Lawyer which ſhould procure
his peace, prolongeth his ſtrife; becauſe
he hath an action to his purſe, as his aduerſarie
hath to his land: ſo hee which is ſet on coueting,
doth drinke brine, which makes him
thriſt more, and ſeeth no hauen till he arriue
at death: when hee hath lyed, hee is readie to
lye againe; when hee hath ſworne, hee is readie
to ſweare againe; when he hath deceiued,
hee is readie to deceiue againe; when the day
is paſt, he would it were to begin again; when
the Tearme is ended, hee wiſheth it were to
come againe; and though his houſe bee full,
and his ſhop full, and his coffers full, and his
purſe full; yet his heart is not full, but lanke &
emptie, like the diſeaſe which we call the
Wolfe, that is alwaies eating, and yet keepes
the bodie leane. The Ant doth eate the food
which ſhe findeth, the Lion doth refreſh him
ſelfe with the praie that hee taketh: but the
couetous man lyeth by his money, as a ſicke

man ſits by his meate, and hath no power to
take it,2. King. 7. 2. but to looke vpon it, like the Prince to
whom Eliſha ſayde, that hee ſhould ſee the
corne with his eyes, but none ſhould come
within his mouth. Thus the couetous man
makes a foole, of himſelfe, hee coueteth to couet,
hee gathereth to gather, hee laboureth to
labour, he careth to care; as though his office
were to fill a coffer full of Angels, and then to
dye; like an Aſſe which carrieth treaſures on
his backe all day, and at night they are taken
from him, which did him no good but loade
him. How happie were ſome, if they knewe
not gold from leade?Pro. 9. 12. 
               If thou be wiſe (ſaith Salomon)
thou ſhalt be wiſe for thy ſelfe: but he
which is couetous, is couetous againſt himſelfe.
For what a plague is this (vnleſſe one
would kill himſelfe) for a man to ſpende all
his life in carking, and pining, and ſcraping,
(as though hee ſhould do nothing but gather
in this world, to ſpend in the next) vnleſſe he
be ſure that he ſhall come againe when hee is
dead, to eate thoſe ſcraps which hee hath gotten
with all this ſtirre? Therefore couetouſneſſe
may well bee called miſerie, and the couetous
miſerable: for they are miſerable indeede.
            Of them which ſeeme to bee wiſe, there
be no ſuch fooles in the world, as they which

loue money better than themſelues: but this
is the iudgement of God, that they which
deceiue others deceiue themſelues, and liue
like Cain which was a vagabond vpon his
owne lande;Gen. 4. 14. ſo they are beggers in the middeſt
of their wealth: for though they haue
vnderſtanding to know riches, and a mind to
ſeeke them, and wit to finde them, and policie
to keepe them, and life to poſſeſſe them;
yet they haue ſuch a falſe ſight and bleare
eye, that when their riches lye before them,
they ſeeme pouertie, and hee which hath
not halfe ſo much, ſeemeth farre richer than
they.
            Will you knowe how this commeth to
paſſe? To ſhewe that the couetous men belong
to Hell, they are like Hell while they
liue. Hell is neuer filled, and they are neuer
ſatisfied:Pro. 20. 15. but as the Horſ-leach crieth, Giue,
giue; ſo their hearts crye, Bring, bring: and
though the Tempter ſhould ſaye to them as
hee ſaid to Chriſt,Mat. 4. 9. 
               All theſe I will giue thee, yet
all will not content them,Iude 6. no more than heauen
contentented him.
            But as the Glutton in Hell deſired a
droppe of Water,Luk. 16. 14. and yet a whole Riuer
woulde not ſatisfie him: for if a drop had
bene graunted him, hee would haue deſired
a drop more, and a drop more, and a drop to

that; ſo they will lye, and ſweare, and deceiue,
for a drop of riches. The Diuell neede not offer
them all, as hee did to Chriſt, for they will
ſerue him for leſſe: but if he could giue them
all, all would not content them, no more than
the world contented Alexander: for it is againſt
the name and nature of couetouſneſſe,
to be content, as it is againſt the name and nature
of Contentation, to be couetous. Therefore
one ſaith, that no mans heart is like the
couetous mans heart, for his heart is without
a bottome.
            A Prentiſe is bound but for nine yeares, and
then he is free: but if the couetous might liue
longer than Methuſhelah,Gen. 5. 15. yet they would neuer
be free-men, but bounde prentiſes to the
worlde, while they haue a foote out of the
graue.
            It is a wonder to ſee: as the Diuell compaſſeth
about,1. Pe. 5. 18. ſeeking whom hee maye deuore:
ſo men compaſſe about, ſeeking what
they may deuoure. Such loue is betweene
men and money,Pro. 1. 13. that they which profeſſe
good will vnto it with their hearts, will not
take ſo much paines for their life, as they take
for gaine: therefore no maruell if they haue
no leaſure to ſanctifie themſelues, which
haue no leaſure at anie time to refreſh themſelues.
            
               
Chriſt knew what he ſpake when he ſayd,Mat. 16. 24 
               No
man can ſerue two maiſters: meaning, God
and the world; becauſe each would haue all.
As the Angel and the diuel ſtroue for Moſes
body,Iude. 9. not who ſhould haue a part, but who
ſhould haue the whole; ſo they ſtriue ſtil for
our ſoules, who ſhall haue all. Therefore the
Apoſtle ſaith,1. Ioh. 2. 15. 
               The loue of this world is enmity
to God: ſignifying ſuch emulation betweene
theſe two, that God cannot abide the world
ſhould haue a part, and the world on the other
ſide cannot abide that God ſhould haue
a part. Therefore the loue of the world muſt
needes be enmitie to God, and therefore the
louers of the world muſt needs bee enemies
to God: and ſo no couetous man is Gods ſeruant,
but Gods enemie.
            For this cauſe Paul in the fifth chapter of
his Epiſtle to the Epheſians and fifth verſe,
calleth couetouſneſſe Idolatrie, which is the
moſt contrarie ſinne to God; becauſe as treaſon
ſetteth vp another King in the Kings
place, ſo Idolatrie ſetteth vp another God in
Gods place. This word doth ſignifie that the
couetous make ſo much of money, that they
euen worſhip it in their hearts, and would do
as much for it as the Idolaters doe for their
Idols.
            Paul ſeeing ſuch ſinnes committed, and

ſuch paines taken for gaine, thought with
himſelfe; If they could bee perſwaded that
Godlineſſe is gaine, it is like they would take
as much pains for godlineſſe, as they take for
gaine: therefore hee taketh vpon him to
prooue this ſtrange Paradox, that Godlines is
gaine, againſt all them in the verſe before,
which hold that Gaine is Godlineſſe. Theſe
two opinions are verie contrarie, and here
are many againſt one.
            A man would thinke that Paul ſhould
be verie eloquent and ſharpe witted, and that
he had neede to vſe ſome Logicke, for hee
hath choſen a hard Text. What Paul? will
you prooue that Godlineſſe is gaine? You ſhal
haue moe opponents againſt you then Micaiah
had when he forbad Achab to fight.1. King. 22. 17. If
you had taken the former verſe, which ſayth
that Gaine is Godlines, then you ſhould haue
had matters and examples inough: the Merchant,
and Mercer, and Lawyer, and Landlord,
and Patron, and all, would come in
and ſpeake for gaine,Act. 19. 28 as the Epheſians cried
for Diana: but if you will be croſſe to al, and
preach, Godlineſſe is gaine, to them which account
Gaine godlineſſe, men will thinke of
you as Feſtus did, that you ſpeake you know
not what.Act. 26. 24 Theſe leſſons are for Paul himſelfe.
            
               
As Chriſt ſayth,Mat. 19. 11 
               All doe not receiue this
Word, ſo all do not count this gaine but loſſe.
We count him rich which hath his barns full
like the Churle, his coffers full like the Glutton,
his table full like Belſhazzar, his ſtable
full like Salomon, his groūds full like Iob, his
purſe full like Craeſus. You ſpeake againſt
your maſter, for Chriſt ſent word vnto Iohn,
that the poore receiue the goſpell, as though
the godly were of the poorer ſort, and Dauid
calleth the wicked rich,Pſal. 73. 12. 
               They proſper and flouriſh,
ſayth he, their ſeede blaſteth not, their
Cow caſteth not: as if he ſhould ſay, It is not
as you take it Paul, that Godlines doth make
men rich; for this I haue obſerued in my
time, that the wicked be the wealthieſt, and
good Lazarus is the poore man, and wicked
Diues is the rich man.
            Againe, we reade, that the Officers were
asked, which of the Phariſies or of the Rulers
did follow Chriſt, yet theſe were counted
rich men though they had no godlineſſe:
and if we ſhould examine your owne ſelfe,
it ſeemes you were no great rich man for
all your Godlineſſe, when you did worke
with your hands for your liuing: therefore if
Godlineſſe be ſuch gaine, how happeneth it
that your ſhare is no better? So they which
are like Nicodemus, when Chriſt ſayth, that

they muſt be borne againe;Iohn. 3. 4. thinke that hee
can haue no other meaning, but that they
muſt returne againe into their Mothers
wombe:Iohn 6. and when he calles himſelfe Bread,
that he muſt needs meane ſuch bread as they
dine with.
            As the Iewes hearing the Prophet ſpeake
ſo often of Chriſtes kingdome,Mat. 20. 20 and call him
a King, looked for a temporall King, that
ſhould bring them peace, and ioy, and glorie,
and make them like Kings themſelues: ſo the
carnall eares, when they heare of a kingdome,
& treaſures, and riches, ſtraight their mindes
run vpon earthly, and worldly, and tranſitorie
things, ſuch as they loue, to whome Paul
anſwereth as Chriſt anſwered his Diſciples, I
haue another meate which you know not of:
               Iohn 4. 3. ſo
there are other riches which you knowe not
of. I ſayd no
                  •
               , that Godlineſſe is earthly, or
worldlie, or tranſitorie gaine, but great gaine.
He will not onely prooue Godlineſſe to bee
gaine, but great gaine: as if hee ſhould ſaie,
more gainfull then your wares and rents, and
fines, and intereſt; as though he would make
the Lawyer, and Merchant, and Mercer, and
Draper, and Patron, and Landlord, and all
the men of riches beleeue, that Godlineſſe
will make them rich farre ſooner then Couetouſneſſe.
            
               
I feare this ſaying may be renewed, If a
man tel you,
               Aba
                     •
                  . 1. 5. 
               ye wil not beleeue it: nay if God tell
you, yet you will not beleeue it. As the Lorde
looked downe vpon earth, to ſee if any did
regard him,Pſal. 14. 2
                     •
                   & 43. 2. and ſayth, There is not one, ſo
this ſentence may go from Court to Cittie,
from cittie to countrie, and ſay there is ſacrce
one in a town that wil ſubſcribe vnto it.Pſal. 4. 6. 
               Manie
(ſaith Dauid) aske who will ſhewe vs any
good? meaning riches, and honor, & pleaſure,
which are not good. But when he came to
goodnes it ſelfe, he leaues out Many, & prayeth
in his owne perſon, Lord lift vp the light
of thy countenaunce vpon vs, as though none
would ioyne with him.Mat. 11. 19 Yet wiſdome is iuſtified
of her owne children, and the godly count
godlineſſe gaine.
            To make vs loue godlineſſe, he calleth it
by the name of that wee loue moſt, that is,
Gaine;
               Luk. 1. 51▪
                as the father calleth his ſonne which
he would loue more then the reſt, by his own
name, to put him in mind of ſuch a loue as
he beareth to himſelfe. Here we may ſee, that
God doth not commaund men to bee godlye
onely becauſe it makes for his glorie, but becauſe
godlines is profitable to vs. For godlines
is not called gaine,Pro. 3. 8. in reſpect of God, but
in reſpect of vs: it is gaine to vs, but it is dutie
to him. So it is not called a health in reſpect

of vs, becauſe it is the health of our ſoules: ſo
it is not called a kingdome in reſpect of God,
but in reſpect of vs,Mat. 6. 33. becauſe wee are intituled
to the kingdome by this difference from the
reprobates.
            Put all the good things in the world together,
& the goodnes of all is found in godlines:
and therefore godlines is called by the
names of thoſe things that men count beſt,
to ſhew that the godly are as well, as merrie,
as content with their loue toward God, and
Gods loue toward them, as other are with
health, and wealth, and pleaſures. Therefore
it is ſayd of the godlie;Eſa. 35. 36. 
               The feare of the Lord
is his treaſure. Therefore ſaith Ieremie, The
Lord is my portion,
               Lam. 3. 24. as though he deſired nothing
elſe. And therefore it is ſaid of Moſes;
That he eſteemed the rebuke of Chriſt greater
riches then all the treaſures of Egypt.
               Heb. 11. 26. If croſſes
be riches, as Moſes thought, what riches are
in godlines? But is this all the harueſt? ſhall
godlineſſe be all the godlie mans riches? Nay
(ſaith Paul) Godlines hath the promiſes of this
life,
               1. Tim. 4. 8. 
               and of the life to come: that is, the godlie
ſhall doe well in heauen and here too. And
therefore Chriſt ſaith, Firſt ſeeke the kingdome
of God,
               Mat. 6. 33. 
               & all the reſt ſhall be caſt vpon you, euen
as the ſheaues fell before Ruth:Ruth. 2. 16. ſo riches ſhal
fall in your way, as they did to Abraham, and

Lot, and Iacob, and Iob, and Ioſeph, riches
were caſt to them, they knew not how, but as
if God had ſayd, bee rich, and they were rich
ſtraight. For al good things were created for
the good, and therefore they are called good
becauſe the good God created them for good
men, to good purpoſes: and therfore as Iacob
got the bleſſing,Gen. 27. 8. ſo he got the inheritance alſo:
to ſhew, that as the faithfull haue the inward
bleſſing, ſo they haue the outward bleſſing
too, when they are good for them. For
(ſaith Dauid) They which ſeeke the Lord ſhall
want nothing that is good.
               Pſal. 34. 10 Now God knowes
better then wee what is good for vs: as the
Nurſe knoweth better then the child, when
the milke is readie for it. Therefore Chriſt
ſaith in Mathew 6. 32,Mat. 6. 32. 
               Your heauenly Father
knoweth what you haue need of. He ſayth not,
that we know what we haue neede of, but
that our Father knoweth: as if hee ſhould
ſay, When you haue neede of health, your
Father will ſend you health: when you haue
neede of riches, your Father will ſend you
riches: when you haue neede of libertie,
your Father will ſend you libertie: for hee
ſayth not onely that his Father knoweth
what wee haue neede of,Mat. 7. 11. but that Hee will
giue vs the things which wee neede. Matth. 7.
Verſe 11.
            
               
Therfore as children take no care for their
apparell, what cloathes they ſhall weare, nor
for their victuals, what meat they ſhall eate,
but leaue this care for their father, ſo ſayth
Chriſt,Mat. 6. 31. 
               Take you no care, for my father careth
for you.
               Pſal. 55. 22
            
            He was not content to cal Godlineſſe gaine,
but he calleth it Great gaine, as if hee woulde
ſay, gaine, and more then gaine: riches, and
better then riches, a kingdome, and greater
then a kingdome. As when the Prophets
would diſtinguiſh betweene the idoll Gods,
and the liuing God, they call him the Great
God: ſo the gaine of godlines, is called Great
gaine.
               Deu. 12. 17. The riches of the world are called
earthlie,Mar. 4. 7. tranſitorie,1. Tim. 6. 9. ſnares, thornes, dung, as
though they were not worthie to be counted
riches:Phil. 3. 1. and therfore to draw the earneſt loue
of men from them, the holy-Ghoſt brings
them in with ſuch names of diſdaine, to diſgrace
them with their louers: but when hee
comes to Godlines,Pro. 3. 15. which is the riches of the
ſoule,Pro. 4. 9. & 13. hee calleth it great riches, heauenly riches,Pro. 8. 11. & 18.
vnſearchable riches, euerlaſting riches,
with al the names of honor, and al the names
of pleaſure, and all the names of happineſſe.
As a woman trimmes and deckes her ſelfe
with an hundred ornaments, onely to make
her amiable, ſo the holy-Ghoſt ſetteth

out godlineſſe with names of honor, & names
of pleaſure,Cant. 4. 1. and names of happines, as it were
in her Iewels, with letters of commendation,
to make her to bee beloued. Leſt anie riches
ſhould compare with godlineſſe, he giues it a
name aboue other, and calleth it great riches,
as if hee would make a diſtinction betweene
riches and riches: betweene the gaine of couetouſnes,
& the gaine of godlines: the peace
of the world, and the peace of conſcience: the
ioy of riches, and the ioy of the holy Ghoſt.
The worldly men haue a kinde of peace, and
ioy, and riches, but I cannot call it great, becauſe
they haue not inough, they are not contented
as the godlie are, therefore onely godlineſſe
hath this honour, to be called great riches.
The gaine of couetouſneſſe is nothing
but wealth: but the gaine of godlineſſe is
wealth, and peace, and ioy, and loue of God,
and the remiſſion of ſinnes, and euerlaſting
life: Therefore onely godlines hath this honour
to be called Great gaine. Riches make
bate,Gen. 13. 6. but godlines makes peace: riches breede
couetouſneſſe, but godlines brings contentation:
riches make men vnwilling to dye, but
godlines makes men readie to dye: riches often
hurt the owner, but godlines profiteth the
owner and other: Therefore onely godlines
hath this honour, to be called great riches.

ſuch gayne, ſuch ioy, ſuch peace is in godlineſſe,
and yet no man couets it: for this is the
qualitie of vertue, it ſeemeth nothing vnto a
man vntill he hath it, as Salomon ſaith of the
buyer, while hee is in buying hee diſpraiſeth
the thing which hee buyeth,Pro. 20. 14. and ſayth; It is
naught, it is not worth the price which ye
aske: but when he hath bought it, ſo ſoone as
he is gone he boaſteth of his peni worths, and
ſaith it is better than his money. So godlines,
before a man haue it, hee ſaith it is not worth
his labour, and thinks euerie houre too much
that hee ſpendeth about it: but when he hath
found it, he would not loſe it againe for al the
worlde, becauſe hee is nowe come to that
which followeth; To be contented with that he
hath.
            
            Heere Paule ſheweth with what a man
ſhould bee contented, not with a thouſande
poundes, nor a hundred pounds, nor twentie
poundes, but with that hee hath: and there is
great reaſon why hee ſhould ſo; becauſe no
man knoweth what is fit for him, ſo well as
his Caruer. And therefore euerie one ſhould
eſteeme ſo reuerently of God, that hee thinke
nothing better for him (for that preſent
time) than that which God meaſureth forth
vnto him.
            For when Chriſt had no money, hee was

contented, and when hee wanted money to
paie tribute,Mat. 17. 87 hee ſent for no more than hee
needed: hee might haue commanded twentie
poundes, as well as twentie pence. But
to ſhewe that we ſhould deſire no more than
will ſerue our turne, hee would haue no more
than ſerued his turne. Now, becauſe Contentation
is of ſuch a nature, that it can pleaſe it
ſelfe with pouertie, as well as riches. Therefore
it is called the great gaine, as though it
had all, which it wanted.
            And this Contentment (ſaith the Apoſtle
Paul) we owe to Godlines, becauſe it is
not poſſible for a wicked man to be contented:
for as he is not ſatisfied with ſinne, ſo he
is ſatisfied with nothing. Riches come, and
yet the man is not pleaſed: honor comes, and
yet the man is not pleaſed: libertie comes,
& yet the man is not pleaſed: pleaſure comes,
and yet the man is not pleaſed, vntill God
come,Pſal. 23. 6. and then he ſaith, My cup is full.
            
            
               Shewe vs thy Father (ſayth Phillip) and
it ſufficeth, Iohn 14. 7. Nay ſhewe vs thy
trueth, and it ſufficeth. Now my ſoule (ſayth
the Churle) take thy reſt: Nay, now my ſoule
take thy reſt, for thou haſt laide vp for many
yeares.
            The godly man hath foūd that which al the
world doth ſeeke, that is, inough. Euery word

may bee defined, and euerie thing may bee
meaſured, but inough cannot bee meaſured,
nor defined, it changeth euerie yeare: when
we had nothing, we thought it inough if we
might obtaine leſſe than wee haue: when we
came to more, we thought of another inough:
now we haue more, we dreame of another inough:
ſo inough is alwaies to come, though
too much be there alreadie. For as oyle kindleth
the fire which it ſeemes to quench, ſo riches
come as though they would make a man
contented, and make a man more couetous.
Therefore ſeeing Contentation was neuer
found in riches, the Apoſtle reacheth to ſeeke
it in godlineſſe, ſaying; Godlineſſe is riches: as
though it did not onely make a man contented,
but make a man contented with it ſelfe.
Hee ſpeakes as though hee had found a newe
kinde of riches, which the world neuer thoght
of, that are of ſuch a nature, that they will ſatisfie
a man like the water that Chriſt ſpake
of,Ioh. 4. 13. 
               Hee that drinkes of this water ſhall thirſt no
more: ſo they that taſt of theſe riches ſhal couet
no more:Act. 2. 2. but as the holie Ghoſt filled all
the houſe, ſo the grace, and peace, and ioy of
the holie Ghoſt filleth all the heart, that as Ioſeph
had no neede of Aſtronomie,Gen. 44. 15. becauſe
he had the Spirite of prophecie; ſo he which
hath Contentation, hath litle neede of riches,

hee thinkes not of the Philoſophers Stone,
nor the golde of Ophyr,1. King. 28. nor the mynes of India;
but he hath his quietus eſt, without ſuite
of law, for hee retaineth a peace-maker within,
which would make all lawyers preachers,
if men were ſo wiſe to take counſell of it.
When the lawe is ended, if the man be not
content, hee is in trouble ſtill; when his diſeaſe
is cured, if hee be not content, hee is ſicke
ſtill; when his want is ſupplied, if he be not
content, he is in want ſtill; when bondage is
turned into libertie, if hee be not content, hee
is in bondage ſtill; but though hee be in law,
and ſickneſſe, and pouertie, and bondage, yet
if he be content, he is free, and rich, and merrie,Gen. 2. 25.
and quiet: euen as Adam was warme,
though he had no cloathes. Such a commander
is Contentation, that whereſoeuer ſhe ſetteth
foote, an hundred bleſſings waite vpon
her: in euerie diſeaſe ſhe is a Phiſition, in euerie
ſtrife ſhee is a Lawyer, in euerie doubt ſhe
is a Preacher, in euerie griefe ſhe is a comforter:
like a ſweete perfume, which taketh away
the euill ſent, and leaueth a pleaſant ſent
for it. As the Vnicorne dippeth his horne in
the fountaine, and maketh the waters which
were corrupt and noiſome, cleare and wholeſome
vpon the ſodaine: ſo, whatſoeuer eſtate
Godlines comes vnto, it ſaith like the Apoſtles,

               Peace be to this houſe, peace bee to this
heart, peace be to this man.
            I may liken it to the fiue loaues and two
fiſhes wherewith Chriſt fed fiue thouſande
perſons,Luke 5. 9. and yet there were twelue baskets
full of that which was left, which could not
fill one basket when it was whole. Thus their
little Feaſt was made a great Feaſt: ſo the
godly, though they haue but little for themſelues,
yet they haue ſomething for other, like
the Widowes Myte,Mar. 12. 42 that they may ſay as the
Diſciples ſaid to Chriſt,Luk. 22. 35. they want nothing,
though they haue nothing.
            Contentation wanteth nothing, and a
good heart is woorth all. For if ſhee want
bread,Ioh. 4. 32. ſhee can ſay as Chriſt ſayd, I haue another
bread: if ſhe want riches, ſhe can ſay, I
haue other riches: if ſhe want ſtrength, ſhe
can ſay, I haue other ſtrength: if ſhee want
friends, ſhe can ſay, I haue other friends. Thus
the godlie finde all within, that the godleſſe
ſeeke without.
            Therefore, if you ſee a man contented
with that which he hath, it is a great ſign that
godlines is entered into him: for the heart of
man was made a Temple of God,2. Cor. 3. 16. & nothing
can fill it but God alone.Phil. 4. 12. Therefore Paul ſaith
after his conuerſion, that which hee could neuer
ſaie before his conuerſion, I haue learned

to be content. Firſt he learned godlineſſe, then
godlines taught him cōtentation. Now (ſayth
Paul) I haue learned to be content, as though
this were a leſſon for euery Chriſtian to learn,
to be content. For thus hee muſt thinke, that as
God ſayd to Moſes, when hee could not obtaine
leaue to goe to Canaan.Deu. 3. 26. 
               Let this ſuffice
thee to ſee Canaan: ſo, whatſoeuer hee giueth,
hee giueth this charge with it, Let this
ſuffice thee.
               Ier. 10. 19. As Ieremie ſaith, This is my ſorrow,
and I will beare it; ſo thou muſt ſay, This
is my portion, and I will take it. This is the
ſigne whether godlines be in a man, if he haue
ioy of that which hee hath; for the things that
God giueth to the righteous,1. Tim. 6. 17 Paul ſaith he giueth
thē to enioy, that is, if he haue much, he
can ſay with Paul,Phil. 4. 12. 
               I haue learned to abound: if
he haue litle, he can ſay with Paul, I haue learned
to want: that is, if he haue much, as Abraham,
& Lot, & Iacob, & Iob, & Ioſeph, yet it
cannot corrupt his minde; but as the net was
full of fiſhes,Ioh. 21. 11. & yet did not rent, becauſe they
caſt it at Chriſts commandement: ſo though
the godly be full of riches, his hart is not rent,
his minde not troubled, his countenance not
changed, becauſe he remembreth, theſe things
were giuen him to do good,Heſt. 4. 14. as Heſter thoght
of her honor: if he haue litle, it is like the oyle
which ſerued the widow as litle as it was:2. Kin. 4. 7. 
               for

a little to the righteous (ſaith Dauid) is better
than great riches to the vngodlie:
               Pſa. 37. 16. for when a
man hath founde the heauenly riches, hee careth
not for earthly riches, no more than hee
that walketh in the Sunne, thinkes whether
the Moone ſhine, or no, becauſe hee hath no
neede of her light.Mat. 5. 6. Therefore wee conclude
with Chriſt, Bleſſed are they which thirſt after
righteouſneſſe, for they ſhall be ſatisfied: not
they which thirſt after riches, nor they which
thirſt after honor, nor they which thirſt after
pleaſure; they ſhall not be ſatisfied but thirſt
more, as the ambitious, voluptuous and couetous
do, but they that thirſt after righteouſnes,
ſhall be ſatisfied, though they haue no riches,
nor honour, nor pleaſure. If ye aske like
the Virgin,Gen. 2. 25. 
               How can this be? I anſwere, euen
as Adam was warme without cloathes; ſo
God doth ſatisfie manie men without riches.
Though he was naked, yet hee did not ſee his
nakedneſſe, ſo long as he was innocent: but,
when hee began to rebell, than hee began to
want cloathes; ſo though a man bee poore,
yet hee doth not ſee his pouertie, ſo long as he
is contented: but when hee begins to couet,
then he begins to want riches, and from that
daye the curſe (in the firſt of Agge. 6.) takes
holde vpon him, Ye eate, but you haue not inough;
yee drinke, but you are not ſatisfied; yee

cloath your ſelues, but you are not warme. Indeed
the couetous man ſeemeth to drawe the
world to him with cords, his coffers are of
load-ſtones, his hands like nets, his fingers
like lime-twigs, here it comes, and there it
comes; one would think that this man ſhold
be happie one day. When the churles barnes
were full, hee bad his ſoule reſt, thinking to
gaine reſt by couetouſnes, that he might ſay,
Riches gaine reſt as well as Godlines: but ſee
what happened; that night when hee began
to take his reſt, riches, and reſt, and ſoule, and
all, were taken from him. Did hee not gaine
faire? would he haue taken ſuch paines if hee
had thought of ſuch reſt? Couetouſnes may
gaine riches, but it cannot gaine reſt: ye may
thinke like this Churle to reſt, when your
barnes, and ſhops, and coffers are full: but ye
ſhall finde it true which Eſay ſaith,Eſa. 48. 22. 
               There is
no reſt to the vngodlie. Therefore the Wiſe
man to preuent any hope of reſt, or honour,
or profit, by ſinne, ſpeakes as though hee had
tried,Pro. 12. 3. 
               A man cannot bee eſtabliſhed by iniquitie:
therefore he cannot bee quieted nor ſatisfied
by the gaine of deceipt, or bribes, or lies, or
vſurie, which is iniquitie; therefore bleſſed is
the man whom godlines doth make rich, For
When the bleſſing of the Lorde maketh rich
(ſaith Salomon) hee dooth adde no ſorrow to it,
               Pro. 10. 22.
               
               but (ſaith hee) the reuenewes of the wicked is
trouble; as though his mony were care. Wherfore
let Patron, and Landlord, and Lawyer,
and all ſay nowe, that Paule hath choſen the
better riches, which thiefe, nor moath, nor
canker can corrupt: theſe are the riches at laſt
which we muſt dwell with, when all the reſt
which we haue lyed for, and ſworne for, and
fretted for, and couzened for, and broken our
ſleepe for, & loſt many Sermons for, forſake
vs, like ſeruants which change their maſters:
then Godlineſſe ſhall ſeeme as great gaine to
vs as it did to Paule, and he which loued the
world moſt, would giue all that he hath for a
dram of faith, that he might be ſure to go to
heauen when he is dead, though he went towardes
hell ſo long as he liued. Here then is
an anſwere to them which aske,Mat. 3. 14. 
               What profit
is it to ſerue God?
               2. Sa. 19. 33. Howe happie was Barzillai
that would not be exalted? What quiet had
the Shunamite,2. Kin. 4. 13. which cared not for preferment?Luke 5. 11.
When did the Diſciples ſeeme ſo rich,
as when they were willing to leaue all? This
ſhall be your gaine, when you are Vſurers of
godlineſſe. Is not the word gone foorth yet,
which hath killed couetouſneſſe, that I may
end my Sermon? Either you goe away contented,
or elſe you goe away condemned of
your owne conſcience. Before you were vexed

with couetouſnes, but now the word ſhall
vexe you too; for you ſhall neuer couet, nor
lye, nor deceiue hereafter, but a ſergeant ſhall
arreſt you vpon it, and ſome ſentence which
you haue heard, ſhall gnaw you at the heart
with a Memorandum of hell, that yee ſhall
wiſh; Oh that I could abandon this ſinne, or
elſe that I had neuer heard that warning, that
makes it a corroſiue vnto mee before I can
leaue it. If they which are greedie ſtill, could
ſee what peace, and reſt, and ioye go home
with them which are contented (although
they may ſay with Peter,Act. 3. 6. 
               Gold and ſiluer haue
I none) euerie man would be a ſuter to Godlineſſe,
that he might haue the dowrie of contentation.
If anie here be couetous ſtill, let
him alway thinke why Dauid prayeth, Turne
my heart vnto thy law,
               Pſal. 1. 19. 
               and not vnto couetouſnes;
he might haue named pride, or anger, or luſt:
but to ſhewe that no ſinne did ſo keepe his
thoughts from the law, as couetouſnes when
it came vpon him, he ſaith, Turne my hart vnto
thy law, & not vnto couetouſnes, as though a
man could not be couetous, & haue leiſure to
thinke vpon any good.Luke 3. 25. But, as Iohn baptized
with water, ſo I cā but teach you with words.
Now you haue heard what Contentation is,
you muſt pray to another to giue it you.
            It is ſaid of this Citie, that many Citizens

of London haue good wils, but bad deedes;
that is, you doe no good vntill ye die. Firſt, ye
are vngodly, that you may be rich, and then
you part from ſome of your riches, to excuſe
for your vngodlineſſe. It may bee, that ſome
here haue ſette downe in their wils; When I
die, I bequeath 100 pounds to a Colledge, &
100 pounds to an hoſpitall, and 100 gownes
to poore men.Mat. 27. 3. I do maruell that you giue no
more when you are at that point, for Iudas
when he died returned all againe: ſo yee die,
and thinke when ye are gone, that God will
take this for a quittance. Bee not deceiued,
for God doth not looke vpon that which you
doe for feare,2. Cor. 9. 7. but vpon that which ye doe for
loue. If you can find in your heart to do good
while you are in health,Luk. 19. 8. as Zacheus did, then
God hath reſpect to your offering; but before
God hearken how you giue your riches, firſt
he examins how ye came by them: for a man
may be hanged for ſtealing the monie which
he giueth to the poore, becauſe if hee ſhould
count Godlines gaine, much more ſhould he
care to gaine by godlie meanes. Thus you ſee
the fruits of Godlineſſe, and the fruits of Couetouſnes,Nu. 22. 17.
to ſtay Balaam poſting for a bribe,
and the ſonnes of Zebede ſuing for preferment,
leaſt ſeeking for aſſes, they loſe a better
kingdome then Saul found.1. Sam. 10. 1
            
            
               
If you be couetous you ſhall neuer haue enough,
though you haue too much, but whē
ye pray,Luk. 11. 2. 
               Thy kingdome come, ye ſhall wiſh, my
kingdome come. If ye be godlie, ye ſhall haue
enough, though yee ſeeme to haue nothing:
like the Smyrnians,Reuel. 2. 9. of whom God ſaid; I know
thy pouertie: but thou art rich. Therefore what
counſel ſhall I giue you, but as Chriſt coūſelled
his Diſciples, Be not friends to riches, but
make you friends of riches, & know this, that
if ye cannot ſay as Paul ſaith;Phil. 4. 12. 
               I haue learned to
be content, Godlineſſe is not yet come to your
houſe: for the companion of godlines is contentation,
which (when ſhe comes) wil bring
you all things. Therfore as Chriſt ſaith; If the
ſonne make you free,
               Ioh. 8. 46. 
               you ſhall be free indeed: ſo
I ſay, if godlines make you rich, ye ſhall be
rich indeede. The Lord Ieſus make
you doers of that yee
haue heard.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            THE AFFINITIE
OF THE FAITHFVL.
            
               Luke 8.
               
                  19 Then came to him his Mother, & his Brethren,
and could not come neare him for the
preaſe.
                  20 And it was told him by certaine which ſayd,
thy mother and thy brethren ſtand without,
and would ſee thee.
                  21 But he anſwered, and ſaid vnto them, My
Mother & my brethren are theſe which heare
the word of God, and do it.
               
            
            
               HEre is Chriſt preaching, a great
preaſe hearing, his mother
and his friends interrupting,
& Chriſt againe withſtanding
the interruption, with a comfortable
doctrine of his mercies
toward them which heare the word of

God, and doe it. When Chriſt was about a
good worke, and many were gathered together
to heare him, the Diuell thought with
him ſelfe as the Prieſtes and Sadduces did in
the fourth of the Acts; If I let him alone thus,
all the world will follow him, and I ſhall be
like Rachel without children: therefore deuiſing
the likelieſt pollicie to fruſtrate & diſgrace
but one of his Sermons, thereby to
make the people more vnwilling to heare
him againe;Gen. 3. 6. as he ſet Eue vpon Adam, and
made Iobs wife his inſtrument,Iob 2. 9. when hee
could not fit it himſelfe: ſo he ſendeth Chriſts
Mother, and putteth in the mind of his kinſmen
to come vnto him at that inſtant, when
he was in this holy exerciſe, & call vpon him
while he was preaching, to come away, and
go with them.
            Chriſt ſeeing the ſerpents dealing, how he
had made his mother his tempter, that all his
Auditorie might go away emptie, and ſay,
where they came; We heard the man which
is called Ieſus, and he began to preach vnto
vs, with ſuch words, as though he would carie
vs to Heauen; but in the middeſt of his
Sermon came his Mother and Brethren to
him, that it might be knowen what a Kinſman
they had: and ſo ſoone as hee heard
that they were come, ſuddenly he brake off

his Sermon and ſlipt away from vs, to go and
make merrie with them. Chriſt, I ſay, ſeeing
this traine laid by Sathan to diſgrace him, (as
he doth all his Miniſters) did not leaue off
ſpeaking, as they thought he would: but, as if
God had appointed all this to credite and renowne
him; that which was noyſed here to
interrupt his doctrine, he taketh for an occaſion
to teach another doctrine, that there is a
nearer Coniunction betweene Chriſt and the
faithfull, then betweene the mother and the
ſonne, which are one fleſh. Therefore, when
they ſay, Thy mother and thy brethren are
come to ſpeake with thee, hee pointeth to his
hearers and ſaith; Theſe are my mother and my
brethren, which heare the word of God and doe
it: as if hee ſhould ſaie, I haue a Mother indeede
which brought me foorth, but in reſpect
of them which heare the word of God,
and doe it, ſhe is like a ſtepmother, and theſe
are like a naturall mother.
            With this wiſe anſwer hee quieted the
Auditors, and made them heare him better
then they did before. For now they thought
with themſelues, what man is this which loueth
vs more then his mother? his mother
called him, and yet he would not go from vs:
his brethren ſtay for him, and he maketh as if
he did not know them, but ſaith; Who is my

mother? who are my brethren?
            
            Thus Chriſt ſtood vp as it were in an indignation
againſt Sathan, and ſaide; Sathan,
this Sermon was not begun for thee, neither
ſhall it end for thee: this worke was not done
for my mother, neither ſhall it be left for my
mother. Thus he caught the diuell with his
owne baite, and made the people more louing
and attentiue towardes him, by that
which Satan thought to diſgrace him. He was
ſo armed with the Spirite, that let the diuell
tempt him, or the woman tempt him, or princes
tempt him, all is one.
            Here are two doubtes: the firſt is, the difference
betweene the Euangeliſts: For Mathew
ſaith that one brought this meſſage:Mat. 12. 47
Marke and Luke attribute it to mo;Mar. 3. 31. both may
ſtand:Luk. 8. 20. for the word which his mother gaue
of calling him foorth, was receiued of the
reſt, and ſo paſſed amongſt many till it came
to Chriſt: ſo that one may be ſayd to bring
this meſſage, becauſe one noyſed it firſt: and
many may be ſayd to bring this meſſage, becauſe
many noyſed it after.
            The ſecond doubt is, becauſe Chriſt had no
brethren, how they ſaid; Thy brethren would
ſpeake with thee?
            
            You muſt vnderſtand, that they which
are heere called Chriſtes brethren, were his

Coſens by the mothers ſide: that is, her ſiſters
children: for there were three Maries, and
theſe three were ſiſters: Marie the virgin, Marie
the mother of Iames, & Marie the daughter
of Cleophas, whoſe ſonnes theſe were:
their names were Iames, Ioſeph, Iudas, and
Simon; and they are called the Lordes brethren,
becauſe they were kinne vnto him.
Therefore note that in holie Scripture there
be foure ſortes of brethren: Brethren by nature,Gen. 27. 30.
ſo Eſau and Iacob were called brethren,
becauſe they had one father, and one mother:
Brethren by nation, ſo all the Iewes are
called brethren,Den. 15. 12. becauſe they were of one
Countrey: Brethren by conſanguinitie, ſo
all are called brethren which are of one familie,Gen. 13. 8.
and ſo Abraham called Lot his brother,
and Sarah his ſiſter,Gen. 12. 13. becauſe they were of
one line: Brethren by profeſſion, ſo all Chriſtians
are called Brethren,Mat. 23. becauſe they are of
one Religion: Theſe were Brethren of the
third order, that is of Conſanguinitie, becauſe
they were of one Familie.
            Now when his Mother, and his Brethren
were come to ſee him, it is ſayd, that
they could not come neare him for the preaſe.
Here were Auditors inough: Chriſt flowed
now with Diſciples, that his mother coulde
haue no roome to heare him, but after a while

it was low water againe.
            When the ſhepheard was ſtroken,Mat. 26. 31 the
ſheepe were ſcattered: when he preached in
the Streetes, and in the Temple, and in the
Fieldes, then manie flocked after him: but
when he preached vpon the Croſſe, then they
left him, which ſayd they would neuer forſake
him: then there was as great a preaſe to
ſee him dye, as there was heere to heare him
preach:Mat. 27. and many of theſe which ſeemed like
Bretheren, and Siſters, were his betrayers,
and his accuſers, and his perſecutors, ſo inconſtant
we are in our zeale, more than in any
thing elſe.
            Thus much of their comming and calling
to Chriſt, now to the doctrine which lieth
in it.
            Heere be two Speakers: one ſayth, Thy
Mother and thy Brethren are come to ſpeake
with thee: the other ſaith, Theſe are my Mother,
and Brethren, which heare the worde of
God, and doe it. The ſcope of the Euangeliſt is
this: Firſt, that Chriſt would not hinder his
doctrine for mother, or brethren, or any kinſman:
Then, to ſhewe that there is a nearer
coniunction between our Sauiour Chriſt and
the Faithfull, than betweene the mother and
the ſonne.
            
               
The firſt is written for our inſtruction, and
the latter is written for our comfort. Touching
the firſt,Exod. 20. he which teacheth vs to honor
our father and mother, doth not teach vs here
to contemne father and mother, becauſe hee
ſpeakes of another mother: for it is ſaid; That
he was obedient to his parents,
               Luk. 2. 46. in Luke 2. This
he ſheweth, when being found in the temple
among the Doctors, hee left all to goe with
his mother, becauſe ſhe ſought him: ſo he honoured
her, that hee left all for her. This hee
ſhewed againe at his death, being vpon the
croſſe, he was not vnmindfull of her: for pointing
vnto Iohn,Ioh. 19. 26. hee ſaid; Behold thy mother:
and pointing vnto her, he ſaid; Woman behold
thy ſonne: ſo he commended her to his beloued
Diſciple before he dyed.
            Therefore this is not a doctrine of diſobedience,
but a rule how to obey. As he
taught his Diſciples to giue vnto Caeſar that
which is Caeſars,Mat. 22. 21 and to God that which is
Gods:Luk. 20. 25. ſo hee teacheth vs here,Mat. 19. to giue vnto
parents that which is parents, & to the Lord,
that which is the Lordes. When God ſaide,
Honour thy father and thy mother,
               Exod. 20. hee did not
giue a commaundement agaynſt himſelfe:
and therefore he ſaith; Honour me, before hee
ſaith Honour them. The firſt commandement
is Honour God, and the fift commandement is

               nour thy Parents; leaſt you ſhould honor your
Parents before God.1. Kin. 2. 20. When Salomon bad his
mother aske him anie thing, he ſignified that
the mother ſhould be obeied in many things;
but whē he denied his Mother that one thing
which ſhe asked, he ſheweth that the Mother
ſhould not be obeied in al things. Whē Chriſt
ſaide,Mat. 23. 9. 
               You haue but one Father, and one Maſter,
he ſpeakes of Faith and Religion, ſhewing;
that when it concerneth our Faith and
Religion, we ſhould reſpect but one Father
and one maſter, which is the giuer of our faith
and the maſter of our Religion.
            When Paule ſaid,Eph. 6. 1. 
               Children obey your Parents
in the Lord, hee meaneth not that wee
ſhoulde obeye them againſt the Lorde; As
when hee ſaith,Rom. 13. 5. 
               Obey Princes for conſcience
ſake, hee meaneth not that wee ſhould obey
them againſt conſcience. Therefore when it
commeth to this, that the earthly father commaundeth
one thing, and the heauenly Father
commaundeth another thing; then as
Peter anſwered the Rulers, ſo maieſt thou anſwere
thy Parents; Whether is it meete to obey
God, or you? Then theſe are the hands which
thou muſt cut off, then theſe are the eyes
which thou muſt pull out: or elſe they
ſhould be as deare vnto thee, as thy hand or
thine eye.
            
               
In the nineteenth of Mathew, A man muſt
forſake his father & his mother, to dwel with
his wife. In the ſixteenth of Luke, he muſt
forſake father, & mother, & wife too, to dwel
with Chriſt: For He which forſaketh father or
mother for me, ſhall receiue more, ſaith our Sauiour.Luk. 14. 26.
Nay, He which doth not hate father, or
mother, or wife for me, can not be my Diſciple.
Shewing, that our loue toward God ſhould
be ſo great, that in reſpect of it, our loue towards
men ſhould ſeeme but hatred. Thus he
which obeyed his parents more than we, yet
would haue ſome rule, ſome ſentence, ſome
example in Scripture of not obeying them
too, becauſe it is ſuch a hard point, to know
how farre they are to be obeyed, which are
ſet in authoritie ouer vs.
            As none but God ſpeaks alwaies aright, ſo
none but God muſt alwayes be obeyed: we
are not called onely the ſonnes of men, but we
are called the ſonnes of God.
               Gen. 6. 2. Therefore, as
Chriſt anſwered his mother, when ſhe would
haue him turne water into wine, Woman,
what haue I to do with thee?
               Iohn 2. ſo wee ſhould
anſwere father, and mother, and brethren,
and ſiſters, and rulers, and maiſters, and wife
too, when they will vs to do that which is
not meete, What haue I to do with you?
For to leaue doing good, and do euill, were

not to turne water into wine, but to turne
wine into water. Peter was not Sathan, but
when he tempted Chriſt like Sathan, Chriſt
anſwered him as he anſwered Sathan,Mat. 16. 23 
               Come
behind me Sathan: ſhewing, that we ſhould
giue no more attention vnto father, or mother,
or maſter, or wife, when they tempt vs to
euill, than we would giue vnto Sathan, if he
ſhould tempt vs himſelfe.
            Three things children receiue of their parents;
life, maintenance, and inſtruction. For
theſe three they owe other three: for life, they
owe loue; for maintenance, they owe obedience;
for inſtruction, they owe reuerence; for
life, they muſt be loued as fathers; for maintenance,
they muſt be obeyed as maiſters; for
inſtruction, they muſt be reuerenced as Tutors.
But as there is a king of kings, which
muſt be obeyed aboue kings: ſo there is a father
of fathers, which muſt be obeyed aboue
fathers; therfore, ſometime you muſt anſwer
like the ſonne, when he was bid go into his
fathers vineyard, I will go: and ſometime you
muſt anſwer as Chriſt anſwered, I muſt go about
my Fathers buſineſſe.
            
            When two milch kine did carrie the Arke
of the Lord to Bethſhemeſh, their calues
were ſhut vp at home, becauſe the kine ſhuld
not ſtay, when they heard their calues crie

after them: ſo when thou goeſt about the
Lordes buſineſſe, thou ſhalt heare a crie of thy
Father, and thy Mother and thy brethren, and
thy Siſters, and thy Kinred, to ſtaie thee; but
then thou muſt thinke of another father, as
Chriſt thought of another Mother: and ſo as
theſe Kine went on till the Lord brought thē
where the Arke ſhould reſt; ſo thou ſhalt go
on till the Lord bring thee where thou ſhalt
reſt. It is better to flie from our friends, as Abraham
did,Gen. 11. 31 and 12. 1. then to ſtay with ſome friends,Iudg. 16. 4. &c. as
Sampſon did with Dalila.
            I may ſay, Beware of Kinſmen, as well as
our Sauiour ſaid, Beware of men. For this reſpect
of couſenage made Eli his ſons Prieſts;1. Sam. 2.
and this reſpect of couſenage hath made manie
like Prieſtes in Englande: this reſpect of
couſenage made Samuels ſonnes Iudges,1. Sam. 8. 1. and
this reſpect of couſenage hath made manie
like Iudges in England: this reſpect of couſenage
brought Tobias into the Leuits chamber
& this reſpect of couſenage hath brought
manie Gentlemen into Preachers liuinges,Neh. 13. 45
which will not out againe. As Chriſt preferred
his ſpirituall kinſmen, ſo we preferre our
earthly kinſmen. Manie priuiledges, many
offices, and many benefices haue ſtooped to
this voice, Thy Mother calleth thee, or thy
Kinſmen would haue thee.
            
               
As this voice came to Chriſt while he was
labouring, ſo many voyces come to vs while
we are labouring. One ſaith, Pleaſure would
ſpeake with you: another ſaith, profit would
ſpeake with you: another ſaith, Eaſe would
ſpeake with you: another ſaith, a Deanrie
would ſpeake with you: another ſaith; a Biſhopricke
would ſpeake with you: another
ſaith, the Court woulde ſpeake with
you.
            When a man is in a good way, and ſtudieth
the Scriptures, to bee a teacher in the
Church; a voyce commeth to his eare, as this
came to Chriſts, and faith; Thy frends would
haue thee ſtudie the Lawe, for by Diuinitie
thou ſhalt attaine to no preferment; & thine
owne Flocke wil vexe thee, or the Biſhop wil
ſtop thy mouth. This wind ſomtime turneth
Ionas his ſailes from Niniue to Tharſhiſh,Ionas 1. &
makes him burie his talent.
            If he be a Diuine alreadie, and preach his
conſcience, a voyce commeth vnto him againe,
as this did to Chriſt, and ſaith; Thy
friendes would haue thee be quiet, or there
bee Spies which note what thou ſayeſt, or
there be fellowes which lye in wayte for thy
Liuing: ſo ſometimes (with a little intreatie)
he beginneth to drawe vp his hand, and lay
his finger on his mouth, and preach peace

when he is ſent with warre. Thus we are cumbred
like our maſter, before our Sermons, and
in our Sermons, and after our Sermons, euen
of them ſometime, which ſhould encourage
vs:
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . 14 and therefore as Chriſt ſaith, Beware of
men, ſo ſay I, Beware of kinſmen.
            So ſoone as the Children bee borne, their
Parents bring them to the Temple, and baptiſe
them, & offer them to God: but ſo ſoone
as they be able to ſerue him, they tempt them
away from him, to Lawe, or Phiſicke, or
Merchandiſe, or Husbandrie, and had rather
they ſhould be of any Tribe, thā of the Tribe
of Leui,Num. 3. 6. 7. 8. which ſerueth in the Temple. Hee
which will be hindred, ſhall haue blockes inough:
but we muſt learne to leape ouer all,
as Chriſt leaped ouer this. If we ſhould leaue
Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children
for Chriſt; much leſſe ſhould wee care
for labour, or loſſe, or ſhame, or trouble,
or diſpleaſure; for wee woulde aduenture
theſe for our friendes. Thus much of his
naturall kindred: now of his ſpirituall kindred.
            Here is another genealogie of Chriſt, which
Mathew and Luke neuer ſpake of. As Chriſt
ſaith. I haue another bread which you knowe
not: ſo he ſaith, I haue other kinſmen which you
know not.
            
            
               
Saint Iohn writing to a Ladie,2. Iohn 1. 1. which
brought vp her children in the feare of God,
calleth her the elect Ladie: ſhewing, that the
chiefeſt honour of Ladies, and Lordes, and
Princes, is to be elect of God. Saint Luke
ſpeaking of certaine Beroeans,Act 17. 11. which receiued
the word of God with loue, calleth them
More noble than the reſt: ſhewing, that God
counteth none noble, but ſuch as are of a noble
Spirite. As Iohn calleth none elect, but the
vertuous; and Luke calleth none noble, but
the religious: ſo Chriſt calleth none his kinſmen,
but the righteous: and of thoſe onelie
hee ſaieth, Theſe are my Mother, and my
Brethren, which heare the word of God, and
doe it.
            
            As Abrahams Children are not counted
Children after the fleſh,Rom. 9. 8. but Children after
the ſpirite: ſo Chriſtes Kindred are not counted
Kindred after the fleſh, but kindred after
the Spirite;Gen. 1. for the fleſh was not made after
the Image of God, but the ſpirit was
made after his Image: therefore God is not
called the Father of bodies, but the Father of
Spirites.
            Now, God (which is a Spirite) preferreth
them which are a kinne to him
in the Spirite. Therefore Eſau was not bleſſed,
becauſe hee was of Iſaacks fleſh, but

Iacob was bleſſed, becauſe he was of Iſaacks
Spirite. As wee loue in the fleſh, ſo Chriſt
loueth in the ſpirit, therefore he calleth none
his kinſemen, but them which heare the word
of God, and do it.
            
            It ſeemeth that Paule thought of this ſaying,Gal. 4.
when he ſaid; Till Chriſt be formed in you.
If Chriſt be formed in vs, as Paule ſaith, then
we are Chriſts mother: euerie one which wil
haue Chriſt his ſauiour, muſt be Chriſts mother.
The virgin asked the angel how ſhe could
beare Chriſt ſeeing ſhe had not knowen a man?
Luke Chapter 1. Verſe 24. ſo you may aske
how you can beare Chriſt, ſeeing he is borne
alreadie?
            As there is a ſecond comming of Chriſt,
ſo there is a ſecond birth of Chriſt. When we
are borne againe, then Chriſt is borne againe:
the virgin was his mother by the fleſh,Mat. 25. & the
faithfull are his mother by the ſpirit:Luke 21. the holy
Ghoſt doth conceiue him in them: hee was
in her wombe, and he is in their hearts: ſhee
did beare him, and they doe beare him: ſhee
did nurſe him, and they do nurſe him. This
is the ſecond birth of Chriſt. As the ſoule of
man may bee called,2. Cor. 3. 16. 
               The Temple of the holie
Ghoſt, which is the third perſon: ſo it may be
called the wombe of the Sonne, which is the
ſecond perſon.
            
               
Before theſe words it is ſaide, that Chriſt
asked, Who are my brethren? as if hee ſhould
ſay, you thinke that I am affected to my kinſmen,
as you are: but I tell you that I count
them my kinſmen, which heare the word of
God and do it. To ſhewe that Chriſt loueth
vs with an euerlaſting Loue, hee ſheweth
that hee doth not loue vs for anie Temporall
things, but for that which doth endure for
euer.
            If Chriſt loued vs,Gen. 25. 28. as Iſaack loued Eſau, for
veniſon, then we might miſſe the bleſſing as
Eſau did: But as Iohn ſaith; He loued in the
truth, ſo Chriſt loueth in the truth. To loue
in the truth, is the true loue: euerie loue but
this at one time or other hath turned into hatred,
as the truth ouercommeth falſhood.
            Nowe for this loue, Chriſt calleth them
by all the names of loue, his father, and his
brethren, and his ſiſters. In Rom. 6. they are
called his ſeruants. If that be not enough, in
the fifteēth of Iohn they are called his friends.
If that be not enough, in the third of Marke
they are called his kinſmen. If that be not enough,
in the foure & twentith of Luke they
are called his brethren. If that be not enough,
in Mark 1. they are called his children. If that
be not enough, here they are called his mother.
If that be not enough, in Cantic. 5. they

are called his Spouſe, to ſhewe that hee loued
them with all loues; the Mothers loue, the
Brothers loue, the Siſters loue, the Maſters
loue, and the Friends loue. If all theſe Loues
could be put together, yet the loue of Chriſt
exceedeth them all: and the Mother, and the
Brother, and the Siſter, and the Childe, and
the kinſmen, and the Friende, and the Seruant,
would not do, and ſuffer ſo much among
them all, as Chriſt hath done, and ſuffered
for vs alone. Such a loue we kindle in
Chriſt, when we heare his word, and do it,
that wee are as deare vnto him, as all his kinred
together.
            Now as wee are his Mother, ſo ſhould we
carrie him in our heartes, as his mother did
in her armes. As wee are his Bretheren, ſo
wee ſhould preferre him, as Ioſeph did Beniamin,
Geneſis, Chapter fortie three, Verſe
fortie three. As we are his Spouſe, ſo ſhould
we imbrace him as Iſaac did Rebecca: if thou
be a kinſman, do like a kinſman.
            Now wee come to the markes of theſe
kinſmen, which I may call the Armes of his
houſe: As Chriſt ſaith; By this all men ſhall
knowe my Diſciples, if they loue one another, ſo
hee ſaith; By this ſhall all men knowe my
kinſmen, if they heare the word of God, and
doe it.
            
               
As there is a kindred by the Fathers ſide,
and a kindred by the Mothers ſide, ſo there
is a kindred of Hearers, and a kindred of
dooers. In Matthew it is ſaide, Hee which
heareth the Wil of my Father, and doth it: Here
it is ſaide, Hee which heareth the worde of
God and dooth it: both are one; For his word
is his will, and therefore it is called his will.
Pſalme 119.
            As he ſpake there of dooing, ſo hee ſpeaketh
here of a certaine rule, which hee calleth
the worde of God, whereby all mens
workes muſt be ſquared: For if I do all the
workes that I can, to ſatisfie an others
will, or mine owne will; it auaileth mee
nothing with God, becauſe I doe it not
for GOD. Therefore, hee which alwaies
before followed his owne will, when hee
was ſtricken downe and beganne to repent,Acts 9.
cried out: Lorde, what wilt thou haue
mee to doe? as if hee ſhould ſay, I will doe
no more as men woulde haue mee, or as
the Diuell would haue mee, or as the fleſh
would haue mee, but as thou wouldſt haue
me.
            So Dauid prayed, Teach mee O Lord to
doe thy will: not my will, for wee neede not
to bee taught to doe our owne will, no more
than a Cuckoe, to ſing Cuckoe her owne

name. Euerie man can goe to hell without a
guide.
            Here is the rule nowe, if you liue by it,
then are you kinne to Chriſt: as other kinreds
go by birth, and marriage, ſo this kinred goes
by faith and obedience. Hearers are but halfe
kin, as it were in a farre degree; but they that
heare and do, are called his Mother, which is
the neareſt kinred of all. Therfore if you haue
the deed, then you are kin indeed; there is no
promiſe made to hearers, nor to ſpeakers, nor
to readers: but all promiſes are made to beleeuers,
or doers.
            If you aske God who ſhall dwell in the
holie Mountaine;Pſa. 15. 2. he ſaith, The man which
walketh vprightly. Here are none but dooers:
If you aske Chriſt who ſhall enter into
the kingdome of heauen,Mat. 7. 21. he ſaith; Not they
which crie Lord, Lord, (though they crie twiſe
Lord) but they which do the will of my father:
here are none but dooers. If you aske him againe,
howe you may come to heauen, hee
ſaith,Luke. 18. 
               Keepe the Commaundements: here are
none but doers. If you aske him againe, who
are bleſſed?Reu. 22. 7. he ſaith; Bleſſed are they that heare
the word of God and do it: here are none but
doers. If you aske an Angell, who are bleſſed,
he ſaith; Bleſſed are they which keepe the
words of this booke: here are none but dooers.

If you aske Dauid, who are bleſſed? he ſaith;
The man is bleſt which keepeth iudgement,
               Pſa. 106. 3. 
               and
doeth righteouſnes: here are none but doers. If
you aske Salomon, who are bleſſed? hee ſaith;
The man is bleſſed which keepeth the law: here
are none but doers. If you aske Eſay, who are
bleſſed?Eſay 50. 2. he ſaith; Hee which doeth this is bleſſed:
here are none but doers: If you aske Iames
who are bleſſed?Iam. 1. 25. he ſaith; The doer of the word
is bleſſed in his deede: heere are none but dooers.
Thus bleſſing and dooing runne together.
            Leaſt any man ſhould looke to be bleſſed
without obedience,Mat. 7. 21. Chriſt calleth Loue the
greateſt commaundement:Ro. 12. 13. but Salomon calleth
Obedience the end of all, as though without
obedience all were to no end.
            When Michah had got a Leuite into his
houſe,Iudg. 17. 8. 
               Now (ſaith hee) I know the Lord will
be good vnto mee, ſeeing I haue a Leuite in my
houſe: So many thinke, when they haue gotten
a Preacher into their pariſh; Now the
Lorde will be good vnto vs, now Chriſt will
loue vs, now we are good ſonnes, ſeeing we
maintain a Preacher amongſt vs. But Michah
was not bleſſed for a Leuite, nor you for a
Preacher: but as you would haue vs do as we
teach, ſo God woulde haue you doe as you
heare: for you ſhalbe no more ſaued for hearing,

than we are for ſpeaking.
            When God created the Tree,Gen. 1. hee commanded
it to bring foorth fruite: ſo when he
createth Faith, he commaundeth it to bring
foorth workes: and therefore it is called a
liuely Faith. VVhen our Sauiour woulde
prooue him ſelfe vnto Iohn, to be the true
Meſſias indeed, he ſayd to his Diſciples, Tell
Iohn what things you haue heard and ſeene:
Matth. 11. 4. not onely heard, but ſeene: So
if wee will prooue our ſelues to be Chriſtes
kinſmen indeede, we muſt worke that thing
which may be ſeene as well as heard. Iohn
was not onely called, The voyce of a Crier,
Luke the ſeuenth Chapter and two & twentieth
verſe, but, Aburning Lampe, Mathew
chap. 3. verſe 3. which might be ſeene: ſo all
which are crying voyces, muſt be burning
Lampes.
            Iames dooth not ſay, Let me heare thy
faith,Iames 2. 18 but Let me ſee thy faith. As the Angels
put on the ſhape of men,Gen. 18. 2. that Abraham
might ſee them: ſo faith muſt put on works,
that the world may ſee it. The workes which
I do (ſaith Chriſt) beare witneſſe of me:
               Iohn 5. 16. So the
workes which wee doe, ſhould beare witneſſe
of vs. Therefore Chriſt linketh Faith
and Repentance together. Repent and beleeue
the Goſpell. Marke the firſt chapter, verſe

fifteene. Therefore I conclude, That which
Chriſt hath ioyned, let no man ſeparate. Marke
chap. 10. ver. 9.
            Thus I haue ſhewed you Chriſt preaching,
a great preaſe hearing, his Friends and
Kinsfolke interrupting, and Chriſt againe
withſtanding the interruption: By this you
may ſee what a ſpirite the diuell hath to hinder
one Sermon, therfore no maruell though
he cauſe ſo many to be put to ſilence; no maruell
though he ſtand ſo againſt a learned Miniſterie;
no maruell though he raiſe vp ſuch
ſlaunders vpon Preachers; no maruell though
he write ſo manie bookes againſt the Chriſtian
Gouernment in the Church; no maruel
though he make ſo manie Non-reſidents;
no maruel though he ordain ſo many dumbe
Prieſtes; for theſe make him the God of this
world.
            The Diuell is afrayde that one Sermon
will conuert vs, and we are not moued with
twentie: So the diuell thinketh better of vs
than we are.
            Againe, by this you may learne howe to
reſiſte and withſtande temptations: whether
it bee thy father which tempteth thee,
thy mother which tempteth thee, or thy brother
which tempteth thee, or thy ſiſter which
tempteth, or thy kinſman which tempteth,

or Rulers which tempteth, or Maſter which
tempteth, or wife which tempteth. As Chriſt
would not know his mother, againſt his father:
ſo thou ſhouldſt not know any father, or
mother, or brother, or ſiſter, or friend, or kinſman,
or maſter, or childe, or wife againſt God.
If the mothers ſute may be refuſed ſometime,
a noble mans letter may be refuſed too: Hee
that can turne his hinderance to a furtherance
as Chriſt did heere, may make vſe of euerie
thing.
            Againe, by this you may learne how to
chooſe your friends. As Chriſt counted none
his kinſmen but ſuch as heare the worde of
God and doe it: ſo we ſhould make none our
familiars, but ſuch as Chriſt counteth his
kinſmen.
            Againe, you may ſee the difference betweene
Chriſt and the worlde: Chriſt calleth
the godly his kinſmē, be they neuer ſo poore;
and we ſcorne to call the poore our kinſmen,
be they neuer ſo honeſt, ſo proude is the ſeruant
aboue his maſter.
            Againe, by this you may ſee how Chriſt is
to be loued, for when hee calleth vs his mother,
hee ſheweth vs the way to loue him as a
mother, for indeede hee is the mother of his
mother, and his brethren too.
            Againe, by this all vaunting and boaſting

of Kinred is cut off. Glorie not in that thou
haſt a Gentleman to thy Father, glorie not
that thou haſt a Knight to thy Brother, but
glorie that thou haſt the Lord to thy Brother.Luke 16.
He which called Abraham his Father fried in
Hell, becauſe GOD was not his Father.
If Marie might not bee prowde of ſuch a
Sonne as our Sauiour Chriſt, much leſſe may
you bragge of any friend or Sonne that you
haue.
            Againe:Eſay 2. by this you may know, whether
you be kinne to Chriſt. As thoſe Prieſtes
were ſhut out of the Temple, which could
not count their Genealogie from Aaron:
ſo they ſhall bee excluded out of Heauen,
which cannot reckon their Pedegree from
Chriſt.
            Heere are the Armes now, whereby you
may ſhewe of what Houſe you come. If you
heare the woord of God, and doo it, then
Chriſt ſaith vnto you, as hee ſaid vnto them,
Theſe are my Mother, and my Bretheren, and
my Siſters: You women are his Siſters, and
you men are his Bretheren: and if you be
Chriſts Brethren, then are you Gods Sonnes:
and if you be Gods Sonnes, then are you his
Heyres; for all Gods Sonnes are called heires
Rom. 8. 7.
            Laſtly, by this you may know the Diuels

Kinſemen: and therefore our Sauiour
Chriſt ſaith,Ioh. 8. 44. 
               You are of your father the diuell:
Shewing that the diuel and the wicked are as
neare kinne as Chriſt and the faithfull.
            Now as Dauid ſaith:1. Sa. 16. 23 
               Seemeth it a light thing
vnto you to be the Sonne of a king, ſeeing I am
a poore man and of ſmall reputation? So may I
ſaie, ſeemeth it a light thing vnto you, to be
the ſonnes of the king of kings, ſeeing you are
poore men and of ſmal reputation? It is counted
a great honor to Abraham,Heb. 11. 16. Iſaac & Iacob
that God was not aſhamed, to be called their
God; What an honor then is this, that God
is not aſhamed to be called our Father? nay,
our brother, as though we were matched with
him.
            If the Iſraelites had ſuch care to match with
the ſeruants of God, what a bleſſing is this to
marrie with the ſonne of God? Therefore if
any affect rich kinſmen or great marriages:
heere is a greater then Salomon, marrie thou
him. This kinſman of ours is now gone vp
into heauen, that we may haue a friend in the
Court.
            Ioſeph deſired the Butler to remember him
when hee ſtood before Pharaoh,Gen. 20. 40. and hee forgot
him though hee had pleaſured him.Gen. 40. 14. But
a Theefe deſired Chriſt to remember him
when he came into his kingdome,
               Luk. 13. 48. and hee receiued

him into paradiſe the ſame day, though
he had alwayes offended him: to ſhewe that
although wee haue beene as bad as theeues,
yet we may hope in Chriſt. Therefore, now I
may conclude, you haue heard the word, if
you goe away and doe it: then you are the
Mother, and Brethren, and Siſters of this heauenly
King. To whome with the Father and
the holy ſpirit, be all praiſe, maieſtie and
dominion, now and euermore,
Amen.
         
         
            
            THE CHRISTIANS
SACRIFICE.
            
               To my late Auditors, the congregation
of Clement Danes: all the good
will which I can wiſh.
               
                  BEloued in Chriſt Ieſus, my firſt
fruites, I haue nothing but this
myte to leaue with you, which
is the ſumme of all my Sermons:
ye haue heard it alreadie; and
as the Apoſtle calles the Corinthians
his Epiſtle, ſo ye ſhould be my Sermon,
that is,2. Cor. 3. 2. my Sermon ſhould bee printed in your
hearts, as this is printed in paper. If you haue not
giuen your hearts to him which ſent for them, now
thinke that God hath ſent for them againe: and
heare mee writing, whom yee cannot heare ſpeaking.

Take not cuſtome for Religion, ſhunne occaſion,
aſwell as ſinne, ſeeke the vſe of euery thing,
deſire not to haue your Kingdome here. And ſo I
leaue you all with Chriſt, (whom I haue preached)
to bring forth the fruite of that ſeed which
is ſowne: beſeeching you for all the loue that you
haue of heauē, that ye would not count any thing
in this world, worthie to keepe your hearts from
God, but thinke of the day when ye ſhall giue account
for euery leſſon which ye haue heard, and he
which hath called you in this priſon, will glorifie
you in his Pallace: where ye ſhall ſee him to whom
ye haue giuen your hearts, and enioy that bleſſing
of bleſsings, which makes all the world to worſhip
him. The Father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, which
hath begun to draw you to his kingdome, neuer
leaue you vntill you come vnto it. Amen.
               
                  Your late vnworthie ſeruant
for the Lord
Henrie Smith.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE CHRISTIANS
SACRIFICE.
            
               Prouerbs 23. 26.
               My Sonne giue me thy heart.
            
            
               TO binde all the leſſons together
which yee haue learned
ſince I came, this ſentence
came to my mind,Iob. 22. 22. 
               My Sonne,
giue me thy hart:
               Luke 2. 19. which is the
ſumme of all that yee haue
heard,Pſal. 37. 32 and ſhewes in what cheſt you ſhould
lay vp theſe treaſures,Dan. 7. 28. in your heart, and then
giue that heart to God, & he wil keep all ſafe.
            A ſupplication is come, as it were frō God
to man, that man would ſend God his heart,
penned by Salomon vnder the name of Wiſdome,Pro. 9. 1.
and directed to her ſonnes, Wiſedome
intreateth her ſonnes, that they would giue
her their hearts;Rom. 8. 15. this Wiſedome is God, we
by adoption are his ſonnes,Gal. 4. 24. and our heart is
that which Chriſt calls ſpirit and truth,Iohn 4. 14. without

hypocriſie, Giue me that heart, ſaith God.
He which giues anie thing to another, conſiders
before what he loues, & giues that which
he thinkes will be accepted, that he may bee
loued for the gift: therefore Dauid as though
he were at a ſtand, & ſorrowed that he could
not do enough for God, breakes forth to him
ſelfe,Pſa. 116. 12 
               What ſhall I giue vnto the Lord, for all
that he hath giuen me? The Lord hearing as it
were theſe ſighs of his ſeruants, which care &
ſtudie what they may do to pleaſe him, comes
in their ſuſpence, and like a friend which deſires
nothing but good will, anſwers from
heauen, My ſonne giue me thy heart. Vnder
which ſute he taxeth them beſide which are
ſuters alwayes to him, and looke ſtill to receiue
like the Publicans, but neuer caſt in
their minds what they ſhould giue: therefore
their tribute is ſet downe by equall meaſure
vnder the kings ſeale, euerie man muſt homage
his heart.
            Hee which alwayes gaue, nowe craues,
and hee which craued alwayes, nowe giues:
Chriſt ſtands at the doore like a poore man,
and askes not bread, nor clothes, nor lodging,
which we ſhould giue to his members,
but our heart, that is, euen the continent
of all, and Gouernour of mannes houſe,
which ſits on the Bench like a Iudge, to giue

the charge, and teach the tongue to ſpeake,
the hand to worke, the foote to walke, the
eare to attend, the eye to obſerue, the minde
to chooſe,Leu. 1. 9. & 13. and the fleſh to obey. That wee
muſt preſent to God like a burnt Sacrifice,
wherein all is offered together, a wiſe tongue,
a diligent hand, a warie foot, a watchfull eye,
an attentiue eare, an humble minde, an obedient
fleſh, put all together, and it is but the
heart; My ſonne (ſaith God) giuee me thie
heart. Here thou art the giuer, God the petitioner,
thy heart the gift, which he claimeth
by the name of a Son: ſhould God be a ſuppliant
vnto thee & me? but that our vnthankfulneſſe
condemnes vs, that for all the things
which he hath giuen vs, we neuer conſidered
yet what we ſhould giue vnto him before he
asketh. He is faine to put in his petition like
a Suter, and ſay, Giue me thy heart.
            
            Marke what God hath choſen for himſelf,
not that which any other ſhall looſe by, like
the demaunds of them which care for none
but themſelues; but that, which being giuen
to God, mooues vs to giue vnto euerie man
his due, as Zacheus when hee gaue his heart
to Chriſt,Luke 19. 8. parted his goods to the poore, and
reſtored to all, that which he had gotten by
wrong.
            Once God required offerings and ſacrifices,

which men were vnwilling to giue,Mal. 1. 13. and 3. 18. becauſe
it was a deare ſeruice of God: but now
he ſaith, that the heart is more than all burnt
offerings and ſacrifices. Iacob loued Ioſeph
more than all his brethren:Mar. 12. 23 ſo God loueth the
heart more than all her fellowes;Gen. 27. this myte
God will haue for all his benefites, which we
may beſt affoord him; thy almes to the poore,
thy counſell to the ſimple, thy inheritance to
thy children, thy tribute to Caeſar, but thy
heart to God:Iohn 4. 24. he which is a ſpirite, requires
the ſpirite, and delights to dwell in the hearts
of men. Here God plants himſelf as in a caſtle,
which is alwayes beſieged with the world,
the fleſh, and the diuell. If the enemie get a
thought, or a word, or a worke, yet he hath
but razed the walles, but if he take the heart,
then the fortreſſe is loſt. For that time all our
thoughts, words and works, are captiue vnto
him: he bids them go, and they go, do, and
they do it.
            That man is like Eſau, which had an inheritance,
which had a heart,Gen. 25. 23. but now he hath
not poſſeſſion of his owne, therfore giue God
thy heart, that he may keepe it, not a peece of
thy heart, not a roome in thy heart, but thy
heart. The heart diuided, dieth: God is not
like the mother, which would haue the child
diuided, but like the naturall mother, which

ſaid, rather then it ſhould be diuided, let her
take all. Let the diuell haue all, if he which
gaue it bee not worthie of it: God hath no
copeſmate, therefore he will haue no parting
of ſtakes, but all or none, and therefore hee
which askes heere thy heart, in the ſixt of
Deuteronomie, and the fift verſe, askes all thy
heart, all thy ſoule, all thy ſtrength; thriſe he requireth
all, leaſt we ſhould keepe a thought
behind: yet it is thy heart, that is, a vayne
heart, a barren heart, a ſinfull heart, vntil thou
giue it vnto God, and then it is the ſpouſe of
Chriſt,Eſa. 47. 17. the temple of the holy Ghoſt, and the
image of God,Eccleſ. 11. 9. ſo changed and formed,1. Cor. 3. 16. and
refined,1. Cor. 6. 19. that God calls it a new heart.
            Some haue a double heart, as it is in the
twelfth Pſalme: but God acknowledgeth
but one heart,Pſal. 12. 2. ſaying, Giue me thy heart, not
giue thy hearts; declaring that a ſingle heart
is pleaſing vnto him, and that they which
haue a double heart, a heart and a heart, haue
neuer a good heart.
            God doth not require the heart, as though
he required no more but the heart, like the
Pope, which ſaith, Giue my thy heart, and it
ſufficeth. To maintaine his Papiſts pendant
and crouehant, which liue among Chriſtians;
he requireth nothing of ſuch but their heart,
that they may worſhip God with their lips,

and diſſemble their religion, and forſweare
their opinion, and come to ſermons, and ſubſcribe
to other lawes, and ſeeme Proteſtants,
as the diuell licenſeth witches to ſeeme Chriſtians,
ſo they giue him their heart, he diſpenceth
with them to diſſemble, and giue the
reſt as they liſt: but God requireth the heart,
becauſe we ſhould not diſſemble; for in the
twelfth to the Romanes, he commandeth the
bodie too,Rom. 12. 1. 
               Offer vp your bodies: which we can
not do, vnleſſe we giue heart, and hand, and
tongue, and eyes, and eares, and all; for the
bodie is all: but the heart is chiefe in requeſt,
becauſe if there be anie goodneſſe, it lyes in
the heart, & becauſe he which giues the heart,
giues all:Luke 6. 45. for out of the abundance of the hart
the mouth ſpeaketh, the hand worketh, the
eye looketh, the eare liſteneth, the foote walketh
to good or euill.
            Therefore there is ſuch ſtrife for the heart,
as there was for Moſes bodie,Iud. 9. Giue it mee
ſaith the Lord, giue it me ſaith the Tempter,
giue it me ſaith the Pope, giue it me ſaith riches,
giue it me ſaith pleaſure, as though thou
muſt needes giue it: now here is the choyce,
whether thou wilt giue it to God or the diuell,
Gods heart or the diuels heart, whoſe
wilt thou be?
            Thus doth man hang in a ballance, like

a yong virgin which hath manie ſutors: ſome
ſhe fancieth for parentage, ſome for perſonage,
ſome for friends, ſome for wealth, ſome
for wit, ſome for vertue, and after all, chooſeth
the worſt of all; ſo the heart hath ſo many ſuters
beſides God, that ſometime ſhe marrieth
with one, ſometimes with another, the world
keeps her, the fleſh keeps her, the deuil keeps
her, which haue no more intereſt in her, than
Herod to his ſiſter,Mat. 14. 4. but ſeeke her ſpoile, like
them which marrie for riches, are glad when
one dies, that another may come. Theſe ſuters
are like Abſolon, which did not ſeeke
the hearts of the people like Dauid, but ſtole
them with flatterie and lies:2. Sam. 5. 6. but God would
haue thee giue thy heart.
            
            As a man conſiders what he doth when he
giues: ſo God licenſeth vs to conſider of that
which we do for him, whether he deſerues
it, whether we owe it, whether he can requite
it, leſt it ſhould come againſt our will, therefore
giue me, ſaith God: as though he would
not ſtraine vpon vs, or take from vs, but if
thou wilt giue him thy heart, then he accepts
it; it muſt come freely like a gift, as his bleſſings
come to vs, and then his demaund is
graunted.
            Here is no reſpect of time, how long thou
maiſt ſtay it, or how long he wil keepe it, but

giue it, is the preſent time, as though he wold
haue it out of hand, while hee askes, before ye
goe out of the Church: for what can we aske
of him, while we denye him but one thing
when he askes of vs? therefore conſider who
is a ſutor to you. Now I am a Collector for
God, to gather hearts, either you muſt grant
him, or denie him; thinke who ſhall looſe by
it, if thou wilt not pay thy Land-lord his rent.
How many ſubiectes would reioyce if they
had any thing to giue to their prince, & pray
her to accept it, and be glad if ſhe would take
it, that they might but ſay; I haue giuen a
preſent to the Queene.Mar. 14. 3. So Mary reioyced
that ſhee had a little Oyle to ſprincke vpon
Chriſt, that ſhee would take no mony for it;
yea the widdow of Zareptah was ſo ioyfull
that ſhe had a little food for the Prophet,1. Reg. 17. 13 that
ſhe ſpared it from her children and her ſelfe,
to ſerue him firſt: ſo they which loue the
Lord like his diſciple, which left all to follow
him,Luke 5. 11. had rather that he ſhould haue their riches,
their honors, their hearts and their liues,
then they themſelues.
            Why is Dauid called a man after Gods
owne heart;
               1. Sa. 13. 14 but becauſe when God ſaid, Giue
me thy heart, his ſpirite anſwered like an Eccho,
I giue thee my heart? Is God ſo deſirous
of my heart? what good can my heart doo to

God? It is not woorthie to come vnder his
roofe, I would I had a better gift to ſend vnto
my Lorde, goe my heart to thy Maker, the
Bridegroome hath ſent for thee, put on thy
wedding garment, for the King himſelfe will
marrie thee. Who is not ſorrie now, that hee
did not giue his heart before? Is hee not worthie
to die which will take his heart from him
that made it, from him which redeemed it,
from him which preſerues it, from him which
will glorifie it; to giue it vnto him which will
infect it, torment it, condemne it? Will a
ſeruant reach the cup to a ſtranger, when his
Maſter cals for it? Or will a man ſell his coate
if he haue no moe? What dooſt thou reſerue
for God, when thou haſt giuen Sathan thy
heart?Reu. 3. 20. Chriſt hath promiſed to come and
dwell with thee, where ſhall he ſtaie, where
ſhall he dine, if the chamber be taken vp, and
the heart let foorth to another? Thou art but
a Tenant, and yet thou takeſt his houſe ouer
his head, and placeſt in it whom thou wilt, as
if thou wert Landlord,
            Canſt thou poſſeſſe another mans goods
but he will moleſt thee, and trouble thee vntill
he haue his owne? and dooſt thou thinke
to keepe that which is Gods, and holde it in
peace? No hee will neuer ſuffer thee to reſt,
but crie vpon thee daie and night, as Moſes

vexed Pharaoh vntil he let the people goe;2. Sam. 3. 8. ſo
thou ſhalt bee diſtracted with feares▪ and
thoughts,Exod. 8. 13. & 9. 28. as one plague followed another,Act. 16. 14.
vntill thou let thy heart goe,Exo. 8 & 9. & 10. that it may
ſerue God: for, as if a man ſhould pull
out thy heart, and take it from thee, ſo
greeuous is it to God to keep thy heart from
him.
            Therefore let all Sutors haue their anſwere,
that thy heart is married alreadie. As
Iſaac anſwered Eſau,Gen. 27. 
               Iacob haue I bleſſed, and
he ſhalbe bleſſed: ſo thou maiſt ſay, God hath
my heart, and he ſhall haue it; and them that
craue it hereafter, ſend them to Chriſt for it,
for it is not thine to giue, if thou haue giuen it
to God alreadie. But take heede thy heart do
not lye to thy ſelfe, and ſay it is Gods when it
is the worldes,1. Reg. 24. 6. like Ieroboams Wife, which
woulde not ſeeme to bee Ieroboams Wife.
By this thou ſhalt knowe whether thou haſt
giuen it to him or no; if the Heart be gone,
all will followe. As the Sunne riſeth firſt,
and then the beaſtes ariſe from their dennes,
the Fowles from their neaſtes, and men from
their beddes: ſo when the Heart ſets forwarde
to God, all the members will follow
after it, the tongue will praiſe him, the
foote will follow him, the eare will attend
him, the eye will watch him, the hand will

ſerue him, nothing will ſtaie after the heart,
but euerie one goes like handmaydes after
their miſtreſſe:Pſal. 123. 2 this Chriſt verifieth, ſaying:
make cleane within,Mat. 13. 26 and all will bee cleane:
therefore the Publican did beat vpon his hart,
as though hee were angrie with it, becauſe it
did not waken all the reſt: ſhewing that as
the Father gaue vs all, when hee gaue his ſon,
ſo we giue him all when wee giue our heartes.Rom. 8. 32.
This is the melodie which Paul ſpeaketh of,
Epheſ. 5. 19. Make melodie in the Lord in your
hearts: ſhewing that there is a conſort of all
the members, when the heart is in tune, and
that it ſoundes like a melodie in the eares of
God, and makes vs reioyce while wee ſerue
him. Wee haue example heereof in Chriſt,
which ſaid it was meate and drinke vnto him
to doo his fathers will:Iohn 4. 34. and in Dauid, which
daunced to ſee the Arke;2. Sa. 6. 14. and in the Iſraelites,
of whom it is ſaide,1. Chro. 29. 9 that they reioyced, when
they offered from their heart vnto the
Lord.
            Therefore Salomon pricking out the heart
for God, ſpake as though he would ſet out the
pleaſanteſt, and faireſt, & eaſieſt way to ſerue
him, without any grudging, or toyle, or wearineſſe:
touch but the firſt linke, and all the
reſt will follow; ſo ſet the heart a going, and it
is like the poize of a clocke, which turnes all

the wheeles one way; ſuch an Oyle is vpon
the heart, which makes al nimble and currant
about it: therfore it is almoſt as eaſie to ſpeak
well and doe well, as to thinke well. If the
heart indite a good matter, no maruel though
the tongue be the Pen of a readie writer:Pſal. 45. 1. but
if the hart be dull, all is like a left hand, ſo vnapt
and vntoward, that it cannot turne it ſelfe
to any good.
            Therfore Gods ſutes haue ſo hard paſſage
in mens counſailes, iudgements, and Parliaments,
becauſe they doe not giue him their
harts, which ſhould be the firſt offering of all;
if they woulde giue him their hearts before
they ſit downe to heare his cauſe, they could
not denie him anie thing that is for his honour,
though it were againſt their profit: but
as Chriſt ſaieth,Mat. 26. 39 
               Not my will, but thy will: ſo
they would ſay, It is not our Kingdome, but
thy Kingdome; it is not our Church, but thy
Church; therefore not our will, but thy will;
not our law, but thy law; not our diſcipline,
but thy diſcipline raigne in it; and all that
giue their hearts ſubſcribe to this: the reſt ſay,
not thy wil, but our wil; not thy law, but our
law; not thy diſcipline, but our diſcipline, becauſe
as the Apoſtle ſayth, They ſeeke their
owne glorie, and not Chriſts, Phil. 2. 21. This
hath bene the rub euer ſince Antichriſt was

firſt reſiſted.Mat. 2. 3. Herode could not ſee how hee
ſhould be King, if Chriſt ſhould raigne, therfore
as the Image-makers cried and ſtormed
when Images ſhould goe downe,Act. 19. 25. alleadging
that they liued by that craft: ſo, if you marke
what kind of men they were which did preach
and write, and labour ſo hotly againſt religion,
it is they that were like to looſe ſome of
their dignities, or their commodities by it.
            The Scribes and Phariſies reſiſted Chriſt
more than the people,Ioh. 11. 48. becauſe hee denounced
woe to them,Mat. 23. 7. and miſliked that they ſhould
bee called Rabbi:Mar. 10. 21 how hard it is to follow
Chriſt, when he ſaith, Leaue all; nay, if he bid
vs leaue any thing for him, though we ſhould
leaue our ſelues, Matt. 16. 24. The tongue wil
not praiſe, becauſe the heart doth not loue;
the eare doth not heare, becauſe the heart
doth not minde; the hand doth not giue, becauſe
the heart doth not pitie; the foote will
not goe, becauſe the heart doth not ſtirre; all
ſtaie vpon the heart, like the Captaine that
ſhould giue the onſet. Thus to ſhew that hee
deſerueth all, the Lord requireth that which
bringeth all.
            Secondly, God requireth the Heart,
ſhewing that all the things of this worlde are
not woorthie of it, nor a peece of it, nor a
thought, vnles it be to contemne them, as Salomon

thought of vanitie:Eccl. 1. 13. & 14. for if the heart be
the Temple of God, hee which giueth it
to anie thing elſe, committeth Sacriledge,
and breaketh that Commaundement, Giue
vnto GOD that which is Gods, Matthewe
22. 21.
            Thirdly, that all ſhould conſent ſo with
the heart,Pſal. 4. 4. that wee ſhould ſpeake as if our
heart did ſpeake,Iob 22. 22. pray as if our heart did pray,
heare as if our heart did heare, giue as if our
heart did giue▪ remit as if our heart did remit,
and counſell as if our heart did counſell,
as the Apoſtle ſayth, Doe all things heartely.
Col. 3. 23. which if we could keepe, nothing
that wee doe ſhould trouble vs, becauſe nothing
is troubleſome, but that which goeth againſt
the heart.
            Fourthly, that wee ſhould ſerue God for
himſelfe, and not for our ſelues, as he which
giues his heart, doth all for loue: this Chriſt
requires, when he caſts off that Diſciple, that
offred to follow him for aduantage,Mat. 8. 19. 
               The birds
haue neaſtes, and 
                     •
                  he foxes haue hoales (ſaieth
Chriſt) but the Sonne of man hath not a place
to hide his head: ſhewing his Disciple, if hee
will follow him, 
                  〈◊〉
                muſt not looke for a place
to hide his head: we muſt leaue all to follow
Chriſt,Mat. 4. 20. as Peter did, & not ſeeke all by following
him,Ioh. 9. 26. as they that wēt after him for bread.
            
               
Fiftly, that wee ſhould not ſerue God by
fits, as we vſe to pray when the night comes,
to heare when the Sabboath comes, to faſt
when Lent comes, to repent when death
comes: but the ſeruice of the heart is a continuall
ſeruice,1. Theſſ. 5. 16. like that in 1. Theſſ. 5. 16. Reioyce
euermore, praye continually, in all things
giue thankes. Who is this which reioyceth, and
prayeth, and thanketh continually? The tong
prayeth but ſometime, the eare attendeth but
ſometime, the hand giueth but ſometime; but
the heart prayeth, and praiſeth, and worſhippeth
alwaies; a man may ſerue God alwaies
with his heart and neuer bee wearie, becauſe
the heart cannot ſerue him, vnles it reioyce in
his ſeruice: and therefore the Iſraelites praiſed
God with muſicke,1. Chro. 15. 16. which did not delight
God, but ſhewed that they delighted in his
ſeruice, as they did in muſicke. But if the
tongue, or the hande, or the eare, thinke to
ſerue God without the heart, it is the irkſomeſt
occupation in the world, the houre of tediouſneſſe,
like a long ſickneſſe, he is tyred
before he begin, and thinketh himſelfe in the
ſtockes, vntill the Sermon bee ended, and
vntill his Prayer bee done, that hee may
bee at libertie, and returne to his olde byas
againe.
            Laſtly, this ſhewes how God miſlikes

our coldneſſe in hearing, or praying, if we
cannot ſay with the Virgin in Luke, the firſt
Chapter and ſixe and fortieth verſe,Luk. 1. 46. 
               My hart
doth magnifie the Lord. All that comes ſhort
of this is hypocriſie,Gen. 4. 5. & pleaſeth God like the
offering of Cain.Gen. 42. 15. As Ioſeph charged his
brethren that they ſhould not come to him
for corne vnleſſe they brought Beniamin vnto
him,Mat. 15. 8. whom they left at home: ſo God will
not haue vs to ſpeake to him, nor come to him
for any thing, vnleſſe we bring our heart vnto
him which we leaue behinde. The tongue
without the heart is a flattering tongue, the
eye without the heart is a wicked eye, the eare
without the heart is a vaine eare, the hand
without the heart is a falſe hand. Doeſt thou
thinke that God wil accept a flattering tong,
a wicked eye,Leu. 22. 22, 23, 24. a vaine eare, a falſe hand; which
reiecteth a ſacrifice if it be but leane, or bruſed?
No ſaith Paule, in his firſt Epiſtle to the
Corinthians, the thirteenth Chapter and firſt
verſe,1. Cor. 13. 1. 
               If I giue all that I haue, and haue not loue,
that is, giue not my heart, it auailes me nothing:
he ſaith not, that they which giue not their
heart, giue nothing, but that they ſhall haue
nothing for ſuch offerings: he which brings
but a myte and brings his heart,Mar. 12. 42 brings more
than he which offers a talent, and hee ſhall
goe away more iuſtified than he which ſayd,

               All theſe haue I kept from my youth vpward:
               Mat. 19. 20
for God is not mocked,Gal. 6. 7. but knowes howe
much is behinde, though Ananias ſeeme to
bring all.Act. 5. 3. He markes how I ſpeake, and how
you heare, and howe wee pray in this place,
and if it come not from the heart, hee repelles
it as faſt as it goes vp, like the ſmoke
which clymes towardes Heauen, but neuer
comes there. Man thinkes when he hath the
gift he hath the heart too, but God when he
hath the gift calls for the heart ſtill;Pſal. 73. 1. the Phariſies
prayer, the harlots vowe, the traytors
kiſſe the Sacrifice of Cain, the faſt of Iezabel,
the oblation of Ananias, the teares of Eſau, are
nothing to him, but ſtill he cries, Bring thy
heart, or bring nothing, like a iealous husband
whē he hath a wife, yet he is iealous whether
he hath her heart; ſo whatſoeuer thou do, yet
God is iealous ſtill, and reſpectes not what
thou doeſt, but whether thou do it from thy
heart, that is, of meere loue toward him. If
Pilate had waſhed his heart when he waſhed
his hands,Mat. 27. 42 he had bene cleaner than Naaman
when hee came out of Iordan;2. Reg. 5. 13 if the Sichemites
had circumciſed their hearts,Gen. 34. 22. when
they circumciſed their fleſh, they had ſaued
their ſoules when they loſt their liues; if Cain
had offered his heart when hee offered of
the fruites,Gen. 4. 3. his offering had bene as acceptable

as Abels.Leu. 10. 7. But as Swines fleſh was like
Sheepes fleſh, yet was not accepted, because
it came from an vncleane beaſt: ſo Cains offering,
Pilates waſhing, the Sichemites circumciſion,
the Phariſies prayer, and faſtes,
and almes, were as faire as the Apoſtles; yet
they had no reward,Matth. 23. but Wo to you hypocrites;
becauſe they wanted the heart; which is like
the fire that kindleth the Sacrifice.1. Re. 18. 25 But will
he require our prayers, and faſtes, and almes,
as he did theirs?Mat. 5. 20. Yea ſaith Chriſt, Except your
righteouſneſſe exceede the Phariſies, that is,
Except we giue our hearts beſide our lippes,
and our eares, & our almes, which they gaue
wee ſhall not enter into the Kingdome of Heauen;
becauſe our righteouſneſſe doth not exceede
the righteouſneſſe of the Phariſies,
but their righteouſneſſe verie farre exceedeth
ours.
            Chriſt doth not bid them wo, becauſe they
were Phariſies as we are not, but becauſe they
were hypocrites as we are. God delights him
ſelfe in giuing,Mica. 7. 18 and therefore he loueth a
cheerefull giuer; but he cannot giue cheerfully,1. Cor. 9. 7.
which giues not his heart. Therefore, as
Iudas thought the Oyle ſpent which was
powred vpon Chriſt,Mat. 26. 9. and wiſhed the price of
it in his purſe: ſo they grutch & grieue when
they ſhould doe good, and thinke, Shall I

giue it? Can I ſpare it? What will it bring?
So the good worke dieth in the birth, like a
bird which droupeth in the hand, while the
head conſiders whether he ſhall let her goe,
or hold her ſtill: as eaſie to wring Hercules
club out of his fiſtes, as to wring a penitent
teare from their eyes, a faithfull prayer from
their lips, or a good thought from their heart,
which cannot affoord the heart it ſelfe: all is
too much, which they do, and they thinke
God more beholding to them for blurting
out a Pater noſter, or ſtaying a Sermon, or faſting
a Friday, than they to him for all his benefites:
and when they haue done, what is
their reward?Matth. 23. Woe bee vnto you like the
Scribes and Phariſies, becauſe you giue not
your hearts but your mouthes,Mat. 15. 8. therefore we
do but vexe our ſelues, and looſe our labour,
thinking to make God beleeue that we pray,
when indeed our lips do but pray: whereby
it comes to paſſe, as we ſerue him, ſo he ſerueth
vs, our peace is not in deed but in word,
our ioy is not in heart but in countenance, a
falſe comfort, like our falſe worſhip: for he
which giueth God his lips in ſtead of his hart,
teacheth God to giue him ſtones in ſtead of
bread: that is, a ſhadow of comfort for comfort
it ſelfe.
            Now whē we haue giuen God faire words,

and long prayers, and ſolemne faſtes, and
mourning countenances, hee puts in but a
word more to fill vp the Sacrifice, Giue me thy
heart, and it ſufficeth. It is like the laſt ſute of
Abraham when he ſaid to God, I will ſpeake
but this once: ſo if thou wilt heare him in this,
he will aske no more, therefore nowe conclude,
whether God ſhall haue thy heart or
nothing: if thou conſider what right he hath
to aske it, and what cauſe thou haſt to giue it,
thou canſt not keepe it till I ende my Sermon.
            Of all the ſuters which come vnto you, it
ſeemes there is none which hath anie title to
claime the heart but God, which challengeth
it by the name of a ſonne:Mal. 1. 6. as if he ſhould ſay,
thou ſhalt giue it to thy Father, which gaue it
to thee: art thou my ſonne? My ſonnes giue
me their hearts, and by this they know that
I am their father, if I dwell in their hearts, for
the heart is the temple of God,1. Cor. 4. 16. therefore if
thou bee his ſonne, thou wilt giue him thy
heart, becauſe thy Father deſires it, thy Maker
deſires it, thy Redeemer deſires it, thy Sauiour
deſires it, thy Lord, & thy King, & thy maſter
deſires it,Rom. 8. 32. which hath giuen his Sonne for a
ranſome, his Spirite for a pledge, his Word
for a guide, the World for a walke, and reſerues
a kingdom for thine inheritance. Canſt

thou denie him anie thing, which hath giuen
the heire for the ſeruant, his beloued for his
enemie, the beſt for the worſt? Canſt thou
denie him anie thing, whoſe goodneſſe created
vs, whoſe fauour elected vs, whoſe mercie
redeemed vs, whoſe wiſedome conuerteth vs,
whoſe grace preſerueth vs, whoſe glorie ſhall
glorifie vs?Iohn 4. 10. O, if thou kneweſt (as Chriſt
ſaid to the womā of Samaria, when ſhe huckt
to giue him water) if thou kneweſt who it is
which ſaith vnto thee, Giue me thy heart, thou
wouldeſt ſay vnto him as Peter did, when
Chriſt would waſh his feete,Iohn 13. 9. 
               Lord, not my feet
onely, but my hands, and my head; not my heart
onely, but all my bodie, and my thoughts, &
my words, and my works, and my goods, and
my life, take all that thou haſt giuen. For why
ſhould we not giue him our hearts aſwell as
our lippes, vnleſſe we meane to deceiue him
with words for deeds?
            If Abraham gaue Lot leaue to chuſe what
part he did like,Gen. 13. 8. 9 ſhall we not giue God leaue
to chuſe that which he loueth? If he did not
loue thee, he would not require thy heart; for
they which loue, require the heart. The Maiſter
requires labour, the Landlord requires
ſeruice, the Captaine requires fight; but he
that requires the heart, requires it for loue, for
the heart is loue.
            
               
We will giue him litle, if we will not giue
him that which he askes for loue toward our
ſelues:Pſal. 31. 5. though he ſay,1. Pet. 1. 18 19. Giue it, yet indeed he
hath bought it, and that deerely, with the deereſt
blood that euer was ſhed. He gaue thee
his heart before he deſired thy heart, but a
heart for a heart, a liuing heart for a heart
which died: thou doeſt not loſe thy life, as he
did for thee, but thou beſtoweſt thy life to
glorifie him: thou doſt not part from thy hart
when thou giueſt it, but he doth keepe it for
thee, leſt the Serpent ſhould ſteale it from
thee,Gen. 3. 1. as he ſtole Paradiſe from Adam when
it was in his owne cuſtodie. He can keepe it
better than we,Pſal. 31. 5. and he will keepe it if wee
commit it to him,Iohn 10. 26 and lay it in a bed of peace,
and lap it with ioy, and none ſhall take it out
of his hands. Therefore, if ye aske me, why
you ſhould giue your hearts to God? I doe
not anſwer like the diſciples which went for
the Aſſe and the Colt,Mat. 21. 3. 
               The Lord hath neede:
but we haue neede: for vnleſſe we giue our
ſoules, how can he haue them? and vnleſſe he
haue them, how can he ſaue them? Therefore
we haue neede. If euer the ſaying were
true,Act. 20. 35. (It is more bleſſed to giue than take:)
more bleſſed are they which doe giue their
hearts to God,1. Sa. 25▪ 42 than they which take poſſeſſion
of the world. Abigail did not gaine ſo

much by her gift to Dauid, as we for our gift
to God: for ſhe was married vnto Dauid, but
wee are married vnto Chriſt, of whom the
Church dooth ſing in the fift of Canticles,
that no welbeloued is like her beloued: what
heart would not bee loued of him, though
it do not loue him? VVho can aſſoyle this
riddle? VVe would haue Chriſt our bridegroome,
and yet we will not be his ſpouſe; I
would haue him take my heart, and yet I will
not giue it. How ſhould he keepe it, or ſaue
it, or glorifie it, if I hide it away, like the ſeruant
that buried his talent in the earth?Mat. 26. 24 So
much as I keepe from God, ſo much I keepe
from heauen, and wil not ſuffer him to glorifie
it, as if I did wiſh one part to be ſaued, and
another damned. He which would haue his
heart ſanctified, and comforted, and enlightned,
and wil not giue it to God which ſhould
do it, is like a woman which would haue her
dough leauened, and layeth her dough in one
place, and the leauen in another, where one
cannot touch the other: then commeth the
tempter, and takes them aſunder, and ſeazeth
vpon the heart, becauſe he findes her alone.
This is his ſeed time, now he enters into it, &
fils it with his poyſon, till the temple of God
be the ſinke of ſin, & the heart which ſhould
be the ſeat of holineſſe, grace, and wiſedome,

a heart of pride, a heart of enuy, a heart of luſt,
more like a belly than a heart: how many
things lodge in the heart, when God is not
there? It is a world to thinke how the diuine
ſoule, which deſcended from heauen to bring
forth fruit, is become a fit ſoil for euery weed,
whereby wee may ſee what hearts wee haue,
before we giue them to God.
            Therefore now aske your hearts, whoſe
they are, and how they are moued with theſe
wordes; how many here will giue to this collection?
whoſe hart is gone vp vnto him ſince
I began to ſpeake? Here one and there one
runnes vp the ladder,Gen 28. 13. like the Angels that Iacob
ſaw in his dreames, and ſing with Dauid,
My heart is prepared,
               Pſal. 47. 47 
               my heart is prepared: and
why not thou as well as he? Doth not he ſend
for all alike? Wilt thou be the thorne or the
ſtone,Mat. 13. or the high way, where the ſeede dooth
looſe his fruite? Why, hadſt thou rather bee
compelled than inuited,Mat. 22. ſince thou art called
to a banket? How many hearts mo might we
drawe to God, if all that be here would go to
him this day? but thus it ſtandes, God hath
ſent vnto vs for our hearts, and wee anſwere
him as the husbands of the vineyard when he
ſent for fruites;Mat. 21. 23. or as Nabal anſwered Dauid,
when he ſent for food,1. Sa. 25. 10 
               Who is Dauid? or who
is the Lord? that I ſhould take my heart from

pleaſure and ſin, and giue it vnto him? Thus
we demurre vpon the cauſe when we ſhould
giue, whether we ſhould giue or no; and aske
the fleſh, and our luſts, and our pleaſures: and
if the diuell will not giue his aſſent, then wee
returne an excuſe, it is not mine to giue, or if
thou canſt get the diuels good will, I will not
ſtand; or let ſinne and pleaſure haue it for a
while, and when they haue done with it, then
God ſhall haue it.
            Thus euery thing which ſhould be thrown
out, hath a place in our heart; and he which
ſhould bee receiued in, can haue no roome
there, though hee would open the doores of
heauen, if we would open the doores of our
hearts,Pſal. 24. 4. that the King of glorie might come
in. What ſhall become of thoſe hearts, when
he which craues them now, ſhall iudge them
hereafter? Then ſhall they ſtand like Eſau,
and ſee them bleſſed like Iacob which gaue
their hearts;Gen. 27. 36. and crie themſelues as hee did to
his father Iſaac, Haſt thou not reſerued a bleſſing
for vs? What a heauie heart will it bee
then, when it may not ioy any longer here,
and the ioyes of Heauen are ſhut agaynſt it?
and hee which deſired it, will not haue it, becauſe
it comes like the fooliſh Virgins,Mat. 25. 11 when
the doores of mercie are ſhut. Thus ye haue
heard what God requires for all that hee hath

giuen you, and how all your ſeruices are loſt
vntill you bring it. What ſhall I wiſh you
now before my departure? I wiſh you would
giue all your hearts to God while I ſpeake,
that yee might haue a Kingdome for them.
Send for your hearts where they are wandering,
one from the Banke, another from the
Tauerne, another from the Shop, another frō
the Theaters; call them home, and giue them
all vnto God, and ſee how hee will welcome
them,Luk. 15. 22. as the Father imbraceth his Sonne. If
your hearts were with God, durſt the Diuell
fetch them, durſt thoſe ſinnes come at them?
Euen as Dina was defloured when ſhe ſtrayed
from home:Gen. 34. 1. ſo is the heart when it ſtraieth
from God. Therefore call the members together,
and let them faſt like a queſt of twelue
men, vntill they conſent vppon lawe, before
anie moe Tearmes paſſe, to giue God his
right, and let him take the heart which hee
wooeth, which hee would marrie, which hee
would endowe with all his goods, and make
it the heyre of the crowne. When you pray,
let your heart pray; when you heare, let your
heart heare; when you giue, let your heart
giue; whatſoeuer you doe, ſet the heart to
doe it: and if it be not ſo perfect as it ſhould
bee,Pro. 3. 1. yet it ſhalbe accepted for the friend that
giues it.Dan. 10. 12.
            
            
               
Now if you cannot command your hearts
to turne vnto God, becauſe the diuell pleades
cuſtome, and the fleſh will not agree to leaue
her poſſeſſions, then remember what Chriſt
ſaith,Mat. 6. 2. 
               When ye giue almes, let not your left hand
know what the right hand doth: ſo the fleſh
muſt not knowe what the ſpirite doth. Thou
muſt not make thy luſts of counſel; but as Abraham
when hee was bid to offer his ſonne,
roſe vp betime and left his wife at home, and
neuer made Sarah priuie leſt ſhe ſhould ſtop
him,Gen. 22. 6. being more tender ouer her childe (like
women) than the father is: ſo thou muſt giue
thy heart to God, before the fleſh heare of it:
for if Abigaile had conſulted with Nabal,1. Sa. 25. 18
whether ſhe ſhuld haue ſupplied Dauid with
victuals or no, when he ſent; the miſer would
neuer haue giuen his conſent, which ſcolded
ſo ſoone as he heard of it, therefore ſhe went
alone, and gaue that which hee asked, and neuer
tolde her husband what ſhee would doe,
leſt hee ſhould hinder her, which ſought her
welfare and his too: ſo wee ſhould ſteale our
harts from the world, as the world ſtole them
from vs, and tranſport them to God when the
fleſh is a ſleepe.
            I haue but one daye more to teach you all
that you muſt learne of me, therefore I would
holde you heere vntill you aſſent to giue all

your hearts to God. If ye giue them not now,
where haue I caſt the ſeede, and how haue ye
heard all this yeare? If ye will giue them now
ye ſhall bee adopted this daye the ſonnes of
God, and I ſhall leaue you in the boſome of
Chriſt,1. Cor. 2. 16. which will giue you heauen for your
hearts. The Lord Ieſu graunt that my wordes
bee not the ſauour of death vnto my ſoule
here, but that you may goe in ſtrength thereof,Mat. 25. 34
through proſperitie and aduerſitie, till you
heare that comfort from heauen, Come ye
bleſſed and receiue the inheritance prepared for
you.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            THE TRVE TRIAL OF
THE SPIRITES.
            
               To the Reader.
               TWo things we are apt to forget, Gods benefites
and our ſinnes: for the firſt, the Lord
ſaith,Mal. 12. 6. I haue loued you, and they ſay, Wherein
haſt thou loued vs? For the ſecond hee ſaith, Ye
haue deſpiſed me: and they ſay, Wherein haue we
deſpiſed thee?
            
         
         
            
            THE TRVE TRIAL OF
THE SPIRITES.
            
               1. Theſſ. 5. 19, &c.
               
                  19 Quench not the ſpirit,
                  20 Deſpiſe not prophecying:
                  21 Trie all things, and keepe that which is
good.
                  22 Abſtaine from all appearance of euill.
               
            
            
               AT the laſt time which I ſpake
of theſe wordes, In all things
giue thanks, & Quench not the
Spirit: Touching the firſt, I
ſhewed you that it is an eaſier
thing to obtaine of God,
than to bee thankfull to him:Luk. 17. 17. for moe haue
gone away ſpeeders, than haue gone away
thankers. Then how the wicked are beholding
to God, as well as the iuſt: and therfore
it is ſayd,Mat. 5. 45. that the Sunne doth ſhine vpon the
iuſt and the vniuſt. Then how Iacob came

not ſo barely to Laban,Gen. 19. 13. when he brought nothing
with him, but his ſtaffe in his hand: as
man commeth into this worlde without
ſtrength or ſtaffe to ſuſtaine him, which made
the Apoſtle to aske,1. Cor. 4. 4. 
               What haue you which you
haue not receiued? Therefore, to teach man
to be thankfull vnto his maker, hee was not
made in Paradiſe the place of ioy and happines,Gen. 2 8.
but being made out of Paradiſe, hee was
brought into Paradiſe, to ſhew how all his ioy
and happines came from God, and not from
nature, that he might know where to beſtow
his thankes. Therefore Dauid to perſwade all
men vnto thankfulneſſe, ſaith, It is a good and
pleaſant thing to be thankfull.Pſal. 147. 1 If he had ſayd
no more but good, all which loue goodneſſe
were bound to be thankful, but when he ſaith
not onely good but pleaſant too, all which
loue pleaſure are bounde to be thankfull, and
therefore as Peters mother in lawe, ſo ſoone
as Chriſt healed her of a feauer, roſe vp immediatly
to miniſter vnto him,Matth. 8. ſo we ſo ſoone as
Chriſt hath done any thing for vs, ſhould riſe
vp immediatly to ſerue him.1. Sam. 1. And as Annah
when ſhe had receiued a ſonne from God, did
conſecrate him to God againe: ſo whatſoeuer
wee receiue of God, wee muſt giue it to
God againe, that is, vſe it to his glorie, and
make it one of our meanes to ſerue him, for

all things which wee receiue in this life, are
giuen vnto vs, leſt we ſhould want any means
to ſerue God. Then becauſe the Apoſtle requireth
Thankes for all things, I ſhewed you
that hee is not thankfull before God, which
thankes him onely for his benefites, but he is
thankfull indeede, which thankes him for his
chaſtiſement. It may be, while the Lord giueth,
many will ſay, Bleſſed be the name of the
Lord. But when the Lord taketh, who wil ſay,
Bleſſed bee the name of the Lorde? When the
Lord did take,Iob. 1. Iob ſayd, Bleſſed be the name of
the Lord. There is one example then of Pauls
doctrine, which in all things gaue thankes. The
Prophet Dauid ſaith,Pſa. 23. 24. 
               Thy ſtaffe and thy rodde
haue comforted me, there is another example
of Paules doctrine, which gaue thankes vnto
God for his rod, for an obedient childe doth
not only kiſſe the hand which giueth, but the
rod which beateth.
            After ſpeaking of theſe wordes, Quench
not the Spirite; I ſhewed you that Spirit doth
ſignifie the giftes and the motions of the Spirite.Mat. 3.
The Spirite in the third of Matthew is
likened to fire, and therefore Paul ſaith well,
Quench not the Spirite, becauſe fire may bee
quenched.
            Heere I tooke occaſion to ſpeake of zeale,
which is the fire of the ſpirit;Matt. 3. 11. ſhewing you,

that God is pleaſed with zeale, as men are
pleaſed with loue:Mat. 3. 11. but as Chriſt did baptize
with fire, ſo Iohn did baptize with water; and
as the holy Ghoſt deſcended with fire,Act. 2. ſo he
did deſcend with winde, that cooleth fire:
ſhewing that our zeale ſhould be a temperat
zeale,Eſa. 58. 1. as our Maiſters was. Eſaiah was commaunded
to crie, but not to roare; the Iewes
might not gather too much Manna,Exod. 16. 18 no more
than they might gather too little. As there is
a meaſure in knowledge, ſo there is a meaſure
in zeale,Rom. 12. 3. that is, Be zealous according to
diſcretion, as Paule ſaith, Be wiſe according to
ſobrietie.
               Mar. 10. 28 The Diſciples were commended
for their zeale, when they left all to followe
Chriſt: but Chriſt reprooued them for their
zeale, when they would pray for fire from
heauen to conſume the Samaritanes. Therefore
zeale and diſcretion vnited together,Luke. 9. 55. are
like vnto the two lyons which ſupported the
Throane of Salomon:1. King. 20. and hee which hath
them both, is like Moſes for his mildneſſe, &
like Phineas for his feruencie: therefore, as
wine is tempered with water, ſo let diſcretion
temper zeale. But I neede not bring water to
quēch that fire which is out alreadie, I would
rather I could ſay of you, You are too zealous,Act. 17. 22
as Paule told the Athenians, they were
too ſuperſtitious. But our ſickneſſe is not a

hot ſickneſſe, but a colde ſickneſſe, the hot
bodie is diſtempered, but the colde bodie is
dead. Zeale was neuer infamous before our
dayes: the Papiſts are commended, if they
be zealous; but the Proteſtant if he be zealous,
is held in deriſion.
            Then I ſhewed you how the ſpirit is quenched,
as a man doth quench his reaſon with
ouermuch wine: and therefore we ſay, when
the wine is in, the wit is out; becauſe before
he ſeemes to haue reaſon, and now he ſeemes
to haue none: ſo our zeale, and our faith, and
our loue are quenched with ſinne. Euerie
vaine thought, and euery idle word, and euery
wicked deed, is like ſo many drops to quench
the Spirit of God. Some quench it with the
buſines of this world, ſome quench it with the
luſtes of the fleſh, ſome quench it with the
cares of the minde, ſome quench it with long
delayes, that is, not plying the motion when
it commeth, but croſſing the good thought
with bad thoughts, and doing a thing when
the Spirite ſayth, Doo it not; as Achab went
to battell after he was forbidden. Sometime
a man ſhall feele him ſelfe ſtirred to a good
worke, as though hee were led to it by the
hand; and againe he ſhall be frighted from
ſome euill thing, as though he were reprooued
in his eare▪ then, if hee reſiſt hee ſhall

ſtraight feele the ſpirit going out of him, and
heare a voyce pronouncing him guiltie, and
hee ſhall hardly recouer his peace againe.
Therefore Paule ſaith,Epheſ. 4. 30. 
               Grieue not the Spirite;
ſhewing, that the ſpirite is often grieued before
it be quenched: and that when a man begins
to grieue, and checke, and perſecute the
ſpirit, lightly he neuer ceaſſeth vntill he haue
quenched it, that is, vntill he ſeeme to haue
no ſpirit at all, but walketh like a lumpe of
fleſh.
            After Quench not the Spirite, followeth,
Deſpiſe not prophecying. In the ende of this
Epiſtle, Paule ſpeaketh like a father which is
come to the ende of his life; who becauſe he
hath but a while to ſpeake, heapeth his Leſſons
together, which he would haue his ſons
remember when he is gone: ſo Paul, as though
he were ſet to giue good counſel, and had not
leaſure to ſpeake that he would, ſendeth the
Theſſalonians a briefe of his minde, which
their meditation ſhould after amplifie & expound
vnto them.
            His firſt aduice is, Quench not the Spirite,
that is, when a good motion commeth, welcome
it like a frend, and croſſe it not with thy
luſts. The ſecond admonition teacheth how
the firſt ſhould be kept, Deſpiſe not prophecying,
and the ſpirite will not quench, becauſe

propheſying doth kindle it. The third admonition
teacheth how to make fruite of the ſecond;
Trie the doctrines of them which prophecie,
and thou ſhalt not beleeue errour for
truth, but hold the beſt. The fourth admonition
is the ſumme of all, and it commeth laſt,
becauſe it is longeſt in learning; that is, Abſtaine
from all appearance of euill. This is the
ſumme of all, for he which can abſtaine not
onely from euill, but from the appearance of
euill, is ſo perfect as a man can be in this ſinfull
life: put all theſe together, and it is as if
Paule ſhould ſay, Quench not the ſpirite by
deſpiſing of propheſying; neither deſpiſe propheſying,
becauſe all do no prophecie alike:
but rather when you heare ſome preach one
way and ſome another, when you ſee ſome
follow him, and others follow him, do you
trie the doctrines by the Scripture, as the men
of Beroea did,Act. 17. 11. and chuſe that which is beſt,
and ſoundeſt, and trueſt, hauing alway ſuch
an eye to the truth, that you abſtaine from all
appearance of error; ſo iealous the holy ghoſt
would haue vs of our faith, that we ſet no article
vpon our religion but that which is an
vndoubted truth. As Moſes did nothing in
the Tabernacle, but that which was ſhewed
in his patterne. It ſeemes that there were ſome
among the Theſſalonians, as there be among

vs, which did forſake all religion becauſe the
preachers did not agree, or becauſe the liues
of profeſſors gaue ſome offence, therefore
Paul ſheweth that there is no cauſe why they
ſhould miſlike the word for the Preacher, or
why they ſhould deſpiſe religion for the profeſſor,
becauſe the word and the religion are
not theirs which teach it and profeſſe it, but
Gods, and therefore can not be polluted by
them no more than God. Then hee concludeth,
that ſeeing it is neceſſarie, that there ſhal
be alwayes errours and hereſies to trie vs, we
ſhould alſo trie them, and thereby be prouoked
ſo much the more from errour, or hereſie,
or ſuperſtition, that we abſtain euen from the
appearance thereof, leſt we fall into the ſinne;
this is the ſcope of theſe words.
            
               Deſpiſe not prophecying. This admonition
is as it were the keeper of the former, for by
prophecying the Spirit is kindled, and without
prophecying the Spirit is quenched, and
therefore after Quench not the Spirite, Paule
ſaith, Deſpiſe not prophecying; ſhewing that as
our ſinne doth quench the Spirit, ſo prophecying
doth kindle it.Luk. 24. 32. This you may ſee in the
Diſciples that went to Emaus, of whom it is
ſayd, when Chriſt preached vnto them out of
the law and the Prophets, the ſpirite was ſo
kindled with his propheſying, that their harts

waxed hot within them. This you ſee againe
in Sauls meſſengers,1. Sa. 19. 20 which were ſent for Dauid,
when they came among the Prophets &
heard them prophecie, their ſpirite was ſo
kindled, that they could not chuſe but prophecie
alſo, inſomuch that Saul came after
him ſelfe, and hearing the Prophets as they
did, the Spirit came vnto him likewiſe, and he
prophecied too;1. Sa. 19. 23 wherupon it was ſaid, Is Saul
alſo among the Prophets? This is no maruell,
that the ſpirit of man ſhould be ſo kindled,
and reuiued, and refreſhed with the word, for
the word is called the Food of the ſoule; take
away the word from the ſoule,Hebr. 5. and it hath
no foode to eate. As if you ſhould take food
from the bodie, the bodie would pine. And
therefore Salomon ſaith,Pro. 26. 18. 
               Without viſions the
people periſh: that is, without prophecying the
people famiſh. Therefore hee which loueth
his ſoule, had no need to deſpiſe prophecying;
for then he famiſheth his owne ſoule, and is
guiltie of her death; therefore that Paſtor or
that Patron, which is the cauſe why any place
doth want preaching, is guiltie of their deſtruction,
becauſe he which taketh, or keepeth
away the food, doth famiſh the bodie.
The Apoſtle might haue ſayd, loue prophecying,
or honor prophecying; but he ſaith,
Deſpiſe not prophecying. And why doth hee

forbidde to deſpiſe Prophecying? Why did
Chriſt ſay,Mat. 11. 5. 
               The poore receiue the Goſpell? but
to ſhew that the rich did contemne it. Why
doth Paul ſay,Rom. 1. 16. 
               I am not aſhamed of the Goſpell?
but to ſhew that many are aſhamed of it. Euen
ſo he ſaith, Deſpiſe not prophecying; ſhewing,
that the greateſt honour which we giue
to Prophets, is not to deſpiſe them; and the
greateſt loue which we carrie to the Word, is
not to loath it. If we do not deſpiſe the preachers,
then we thinke that we honour them
enough: and if wee do not loath the Word,
then we thinke that we loue it enough: therfore
the Apoſtle ſayth, Deſpiſe not prophecying,
for Honour prophecying. Prophecying
here dooth ſignifie Preaching, as it dooth in
Rom. 1. 14. Wil you know why preaching is
called prophecying?
               Rom. 1. 14. To adde more honor and
renown to the preachers of the word, to make
you receiue them like Prophetes, and then
Chriſt ſaith,Mat. 10. 41 
               You ſhall haue a Prophets reward;
that is, not ſuch a reward as you giue, but ſuch
a reward as God giueth.
            Laſtly, (if you marke) Paul ſaith not, Deſpiſe
not Prophets, but prophecying: ſignifiing,
that from the contempt of the Prophets,
at laſt we come to deſpiſe Prophecying too,Ier. 11. 27.
like the Iewes, who when they were offended
with the Prophet, charged him to prophecie

no more. Therefore, as Chriſt warned his diſciples,Mat. 23. 3.
to heare the Scribes and Phariſies, although
they did not as they taught; ſo Paule
warneth the Theſſalonians, that if anie prophets
among them do not as they teach, and
therefore ſeeme worthie to bee deſpiſed like
the Scribes and Phariſies, yet that they take
heed that they do no deſpiſe prophecying for
the Prophets. Becauſe the preachers are deſpiſed
before the word be deſpiſed, therefore
we will ſpeake firſt of their contempt.
            Chriſt asked his Diſciples,Mat. 16. 13 what they
thought of him; ſo; I would aske you, what
you thinke of Preachers?2. Cor. 5. 20. Is he a contemptible
perſon,Reuel. 1. 20. which bringeth the meſſage of
God? which hath the name of an Angel? and
all his words are meſſengers of life? Prophets
are of ſuch account with God,Amos 3. 7. that it is ſayd,
God will do nothing before he reueale it vnto his
Prophets; ſo prophets are (as it were) Gods
counſellers. Againe, Kings and Prieſts, and
Prophets were figures of Chriſt, al theſe three
were annointed with oyle, to ſhew that they
had greater graces than the reſt:1. Kin. 13. 1. but eſpecially
the Prophets are called, Men of God; to
ſhewe, that all which are of God will make
much of Prophets for Gods ſake. Therefore
women are forbidden to take vpon them to
prophecie,1. Cor. 14. 34 leſt that noble calling ſhould become

vile and deſpiſed, by ſuch vnskilfull
handlers of it. Therfore when the Prophet Eliſha
would ſende for Naaman the leaper to
come vnto him, theſe were his wordes,2. King. 5. 8. 
               Naaman
ſhall know that there is a Prophet in Iſrael;
as though all the glorie of Israel were
chieflie in this, that they had Prophets, and other
had none: as if one Pariſh ſhould triūph
ouer another, becauſe they haue a preacher,
and the other haue none. Therefore when this
Prophet was dead, Ioaſh the King came vnto
his coarſe, and wept ouer his face, and cryed;2. K. 13. 14.
               O my Father, my Father, the Chariot of
Iſrael, and horſemen of the ſame: ſhewing,
that the Chariots, and horſes, and ſouldiers
doe not ſo ſafegarde a Citie, as the Prophets
which teach it, and praye for it. Therefore
when God would marke the Iſraelites with a
name of greateſt reproach, hee calleth them,
A people which rebuke their Prieſts: as if he
ſhould ſay, vſurpers of the Prieſts office: for
they rebuke their Prieſts, which are appointed
to rebuke them.
            How ioyfull and glad was Lydea when ſhe
could drawe Paul and Sylas to her houſe?Act. 16. 15. 
               If
you thinke me to be faithfull (ſayth ſhee) come
to my houſe: ſhewing, that neuer any gueſts
were ſo welcome to her houſe before. How
tender was the Shunamite ouer Eliſha, that

ſhe built an houſe to welcome him,2. Kin. 4. 10 and to
keep him with her; thinking all the places in
her houſe too bad for him, ſhe built him a new
roome, to make him ſtaie with her. How
much did the Galatians make of Paul,Gal. 4. 15. that
he ſaith, they would pull out their owne eyes
to doe him good: So once a Prophet was eſteemed
like a Prophet. And hath he bid you
deſpiſe them now, which bad you to honour
them before? No, Paule chargeth vs to receiue
our teachers, as hee was receiued himſelfe:
ſaying, He which laboureth in the word,
is worthie of double honour;
               1. Tim. 5. 14 that is, the Preacher
(after a ſort) is more to be honoured than
the Ruler: for Aaron was the elder brother,
but Moſes was the yonger brother; & therefore
if there be any appendix, the Magiſtrate
is the appendix:Exo. 28. 30. for if Aarons Vrim & Thumi
would haue ſerued, Moſes rod and ſtaffe
ſhould not haue needed; but when the tongue
could not perſwade, the rod did compell, and
ſo came in the Magiſtrate. As Paul ſheweth
the Theſſalonians how the Preachers of the
Word ſhould be honoured: ſo hee teacheth
the Philippians how to honor their teachers;Phil. 2. 29.
ſaying, Receiue him in the Lorde with great
gladneſſe, and make much of ſuch; that is, ſhewe
your ſelues ſo glad of him, that hee may bee
glad of you. Haue you neede to bee taught

why Paule would haue you make much of
ſuch? Becauſe they are like Lampes, which
conſume themſelues to giue light to other;
ſo they conſume themſelues to giue light to
you: becauſe they are like a Henne, which
clocketh her Chickens together from the
Kite; ſo they clocke you together from the
Serpent: becauſe they are lyke the ſhowte
which did beate downe the walles of Iericho;Ioſua 6. 20.
ſo they beate downe the walles of ſinne: becauſe
they are like the fiery piller which went
before the Iſraelites to the Land of Promiſe;Exo. 13. 21.
ſo they goe before you to the Lande of Promiſe:
becauſe they are like good Andrewe,
which called his brother to ſee the Meſſias;Ioh. 1. 41.
ſo they call you to ſee the Meſſias: and therefore
make much of ſuch.
            If wee ſhoulde make much of Prophets,
how much ſhoulde wee make of Prophecying?
If wee ſhould loue our Inſtructors, how
much ſhould wee loue inſtruction?Luk. 2. 28. Symeon
keeping in the Temple, met with Chriſt; ſo
manie hearing the Worde, haue met with
knowledge, haue met with comfort, haue
met with peace, haue met with ſaluation:
but without the Worde neuer any was conuerted
to GOD. Therefore whenſoeuer
the Word is preached, euerie one may ſay
to himſelfe, as the Diſciples ſayd to the blinde

man,Mar. 10. 49. 
               Be of good comfort hee calleth thee: Be of
good comfort, the Lorde calleth thee: but
when the word is not preached, then euerie
man may ſay to himſelfe; beware, the diuell
calleth thee. When the Prophets went from
Ieruſalem, then ſword, and famine, and peſtilence,
and all the plagues of God rained vpon
them, euen as fire came vpon Sodome, ſo
ſoone as Lot was gone out:Gen. 19. 24. therefore what
may thoſe Landes feare, which vſe their Prophets,
as the Iewes vſed them which ſent
them? Amos calleth it an euill time, wherein
the prudent keepe ſilence, Chapt. 5. verſe 13.
therfore this is an euil time, wherein the prudent
are ſilent.
            There be two trades in this Land, without
which the Realme cannot ſtand; and one is
the Queenes ſouldiers, and the other is the
Lordes ſouldiers, and the Lords ſouldiers are
handled like the Queenes ſouldiers, for from
the Merchant to the porter, no calling is ſo
deſpiſed, ſo contemned, ſo derided, that they
may beg for their ſeruice; for their liuing is
turned into an almes. One ſaith, that Moſes
is Quis, that is, the Magiſtrate is ſome bodie:
but Aaron is Quaſi quis, that is, the Miniſter
is no bodie, becauſe no bodie is deſpiſed
lyke him. Receiue a Prophete in the
name of a Prophet: naye, Receiue a Prophet

in the name of an enemie, as Ahab
receiued Elias;1. King. 21. 20. Art thou here mine enemie?
If Paule had liued in our dayes he would not
haue ſaid, Deſpiſe not the Prophets, but perſecute
not the Prophets, for he ſhould haue ſeen
not onely deſpiſers of the Prophets, but mockers
of them, not onely mockers, but ſlanderers
of them, not onely ſlanderers, but hunters
and biters,Gen. 37 4. and ſmiters of them. Ioſeph was
troubled ſo ſoone as hee began to feed his Fathers
ſheepe, ſo the Paſtours are troubled ſo
ſoone as they beginne to feede their fathers
ſheepe, euerie man thinkes to finde friends againſt
them, and though there be no lawe to
hurt them, yet no man feares to accuſe them,
becauſe authoritie doth disfauour them, they
cannot tell how to preach, nor what to ſay,
becauſe there bee ſo manie Ahabs which
woulde haue them ſay that which pleaſeth
them,1. Kin. 22. 13 though it be not true. Charme the
charmer neuer ſo ſweetely, let his ſong be neuer
ſo pleaſant, yet many adders are readie to
ſtop their eares, & ſtop his mouth, like a bird
which was ſmitten in her ſong, of the Archer
whom ſhe ſingeth vnto,1. Sa. 19. 20 euen as Saul let his
ſpeare flie at Dauid, while he played vpon his
harpe to ſolace and comfort▪ and driue the euill
ſpirite from him: ſo while we play vpon
Dauids harpe to ſolace and comfort, & driue

the euill ſpirite from you, many let the dartes
of reproach, and the arrowes of ſlaunder flie
at vs;1. King. 17. 18. ſaying, as the woman ſaid to Eliah, If
thou hadſt not beene, my childe had not dyed: If
wee had not bene, their peace had not dyed;
if we had not bene, their ſports had not dyed;
if wee had not bene, their cuſtomes, and their
titles, and their honors had not dyed. And
why ſhould not Herode and Archelaus dye,Mat. 2. 15.
which ſought the death of the childe? Why
ſhould not any cuſtome, or honour, or pleaſure
dye, which ſeeketh the death of religion?
Alas (ſaith Ieremiah) what haue I done,
               Ier. 15. 10. 
               that
all men ſhould curſe mee? If wee do but preach
the truth, you ſhould not hate vs for the truth.
Now Obadiah had neede to hide the Prophets
again to ſaue them out of priſon,1. K. 18. 3. 4 where
is Rahab that ſhee might conuey away the
ſeruants of God?Ioſua 2. 1. Once Baals prophets were
puniſhed,2. K. 10. 19. but now Chriſtes Prophets are
puniſhed:1. Sam. 9. 9. once they did aske, Where is the
Seer that he may teach vs? but now they aske,
where is the Seer, that we may take him? once
they did builde houſes for the prophets, lyke
the Shunamite;2. Kin. 4. 10 but now they take their houſes
from them, and thinke they doo God ſeruice,
when they make them, & their wiues, &
their children, & their ſeruants beggers; once
Paul ſaid to Timothie,1. Tim. 4. 12 
               Let no man deſpiſe thy

youth; ſhewing that preachers ſhould not be
deſpiſed for their youth▪ but now they deſpiſe
the yong prophets and the old too. How is the
double honour turned to ſingle honour? nay,
how is our honour turned to diſhonor.Mal. 1. 3. 
               If I be
a Maſter (ſaith God) where is my feare? ſo, if
we be prophets, where is our reuerence? doth
not the contempt of prophets cry vnto God,
as well as the blood of Abel?Gen. 4. 10. When the meſſengers
which were ſent vnto the vineyard for
fruit, were beaten of them which ſhould haue
laden them; then it is ſaid that the Lord of the
vineyard waxed wroth,Mat. 21. 43 and ſaid that he wold
let the vineyarde vnto others, which ſhould
yeeld him the fruites thereof. The meaning
hereof is this, that when the preachers & teachers
which Chriſt ſendeth to his Church for
fruits, are abuſed & perſecuted of them whom
they call to the banket, then he will remooue
their light and his Goſpell to other which wil
yeeld him the fruites thereof. Therefore what
may this Land feare, which hath vſed Chriſts
ambaſſadors as Ammon vſed Dauids ambaſſadors?2. Chro. 10. 4
Ieruſalem is left without one prophet
becauſe ſhe deſpiſed them, Sodome was burned
becauſe ſhe deſpiſed Lot, and the whole
worlde was drowned becauſe it deſpiſed Noah;
and are not theſe examples written for our
warning?1. Sam. 28. 6 The time came that Saul ſought for

a Prophet, and God would not anſwere him
by Prophets, becauſe he had deſpiſed his Prophets
before: ſo the time commeth when you
ſhall aske where is the ſeer? and they ſhall
ſay,2. Kin. 2. 11. he is rapt away like Elias: a Prophet was
amongſt vs, but when hee was deſpiſed in Ieruſalem,
he was ſent to Nineueh. Is not iudgement
begun alreadie? Doth not the Goſpell
ſtand at the doore, as if ſhe were ready to take
her leaue? Are we not come from deſpiſing
of Prophets almoſt to the deſpiſing of Prophecying
too? Do not many runne vnto the
rulers, as yong Ioſhua ranne to Moſes, and
crie maſter, forbid them to prophecie? Do not
many walke in the ſtreetes while wee preach
in the Temple?Gen. 7 9. The beaſtes came to the arke

                  〈◊〉
                ſaue themſelues, and men will not come to
the Church to ſaue themſelues: but wee may
crie vnto them as the Children did to their
fellowes in the market;Mat. 11. 17 
               We haue piped vnto you
and you would not daunce, wee haue lamented
vnto you, and you woulde not mourne.
Some come to heare vs, as Naaman came to
Eliſha, when the Prophet had tolde him
what hee ſhould doo, hee mocked him for it,
hee thought that hee knew a better way than
that himſelfe.2. Kin. 5. 11. So they come to heare vs: but
they thinke they can teach vs, but they muſt
remember that Paule ſaith,1. Cor. 1. 27. 
               God hath choſen

the fooliſh to confound the wiſe; therefore if they
thinke them ſelues wiſe, let them thinke vs
thoſe fooles whom God hath choſen to confound
them. For although at all other times
we are plaine and ſimple as Iacob, yet at this
time we haue a promiſe, and it is giuen to vs
for your ſake, to ſpeake ſometime that which
we conceiue not our ſelues, becauſe the houre
is come wherein God hath appointed to call
ſome of you, as he hath done ſome of you before,
therefore as the princely Spirite came
vpon Saul when hee ſhoulde raigne,1. Sa. 11. 6. to
teach him how he ſhould rule, ſo the propheticall
ſpirite commeth vpon Preachers
when they ſhould teach, to teach them how
they ſhould ſpeake:Mat. 3. 18. therefore as Chriſt was
content to be baptized of Iohn, ſo bee you
content to be inſtructed of vs, that (if wee
bee more ſimple than you) the glorie of
God may appeare more in conuerting you
by vs.
            Hath not this deſpiſing of the Preachers,
almoſt made the preachers deſpiſe preaching?
the peoples neglect of the prophets hath
made the Prophets neglect prophecying? the
Nonreſident keepes himſelfe away, becauſe
hee thinkes the people like him better, becauſe
dee dooth not trouble them. And the
droane neuer ſtudieth to preach, for hee

ſaith, that an Homelie is better liked of than
a Sermon: and they which would ſtudie Diuinitie
aboue all, when they looke vpon our
contempt, and beggerie, and vexation, turne
to Law, to Phiſicke, or trades, or anie thing,
rather than they will enter this contemptible
calling. And is not the Arke then readie to
depart from Iſraell?
            Now if you will knowe what makes Prophets
and prophecying ſo deſpiſed, you may
ſee firſt in Ieroboams Prieſts. It is ſayd, that
Ieroboam made Iſrael to ſinne;
               
                  
                     •
                  . Kin. 15. 26 that is, Ieroboam
made Iſraell to contemne Religion, becauſe
he made Prieſts of the baſeſt of the people;1. Kin. 13. 33.
therefore they which make Prieſts like
Ieroboams Prieſts, make the people contemn
the Prieſts & religion too. Why might none
carrie the Arke but the Leuites?Deu. 10. 18. Was it not
leaſt the Arke (which was a ſigne of God)
ſhould be deſpiſed? Therefore none ſhould
meddle with the Word (which is the law of
God) but they which are fit, leaſt they make
it deſpiſed. Anna ſaid, I will not offer the child
to God,
               1. Sam. 1. 22 
               before he be weaned, that is, before he
be taken from the dugge: but now they offer
their children to God, before they be weaned,
before they can go, before they can ſpeake;
and ſend them to fight the Lordes battailes,
before they haue one ſtone in their hand to

fling at Goliah;Mat. 4. that is, one Scripture to reſiſt
the Tempter. This is either becauſe the
Patrones, or the Biſhoppes haue lime vpon
their fingers; which makes them like blinde
Iſaac,Gen. 27. 11. that they take no heede whome they
bleſſe.
            The ſecond thing which makes Prophets
and prophecying deſpiſed, is the lewdneſſe
and negligence of them that are able to doe
well in their Miniſterie, and yet do contrary.
It is ſaid of Hophni and Phineas,1. Sa. 2. 17. that by
their corrupt ſacrificing, they made the people
abhorre the ſacrifices; ſo, many by their
ſlubbering of the Word, (for want of ſtudie
and meditation) do make men thinke, that
there is no more wiſedome in the word of
God, than they ſhew out of it: and therefore
they ſtay at home, & ſay, they know as much
as the preacher can teach them.
            There is a kinde of Preachers riſen vp but
of late, which ſhrowde and couer euerie ruſticall
and vnſauerie, and childiſh, and abſurd
Sermon, vnder the name of the ſimple kind
of teaching, like the Popiſh Prieſtes, which
make ignorance the mother of deuotion: but
indeede to preach ſimplie, is not to preache
rudely, nor vnlearnedly, nor confuſedly, but
to preach plainly and perſpicuouſly, that the
ſimpleſt man may vnderſtand what is taught

as if he did heare his name. Therefore if you
will knowe what makes manie Preachers
preach ſo barely, and looſely, and ſimplie, it is
your owne ſimplicitie, which makes them
thinke that if they go on and ſay ſome thing,
all is one, and no fault will be found becauſe
you are not able to iudge in or out; and ſo becauſe
they giue no attendance to doctrine, as
Paul teacheth them,1. Tim 4. 16 it is almoſt come to paſſe
that in a whole Sermon the hearer can not
picke out one note more than hee could gather
him ſelfe. Wheate is good, but they
which ſell the refuſe of wheate are reproued,
Amos the eight Chapter and ſixt verſe: ſo
preaching is good, but this refuſe of preaching
is but like ſwearing, for one taketh the
name of God in vain, and the other takes the
word of God in vaine. As euerie ſound is not
muſicke, ſo euerie Sermon is not preaching,
but worſe than if he ſhould reade an Homelie.
In the eight and fortieth of Ieremiah,
there is a curſe vpon them which doe the buſineſſe
of the Lord negligently. If this curſe
doo not touch them which doo the chiefeſt
buſineſſe of the Lord negligently, truely I
can not tell whome the Prophet meaneth.
Theſe woulde not haue prophecying deſpiſed,
and yet they make it deſpiſed themſelues.
            
               
The laſt thing which makes Prophets and
prophecying deſpiſed, is the diuerſity of minds,
while one holdeth one way, and another another
way, ſome leaue all, and will be of no
Religion, vntill both parties agree: as if a patient
ſhould pine himſelfe and eate no meate
at all, becauſe one Phiſition ſayth, that this
meate will hurt him, and another ſayth, that
meate will hurt him. Theſe are the three enemies,
which make vs and our labours deſpiſed.
            Now what ſhall we anſwere to our deſpiſers?
Reioyce not againſt mee, O mine enemie!
(ſaith the Church) for I ſhall be raiſed:
               Micah. 7. ſo, Deſpiſe
not the Prophets, O ye Iſmaelites, for
they ſhall be honored.Act. 5. 3. Peter ſaith to Ananias
and Saphira, You haue not lyed vnto men, but
vnto God: ſo, you haue not deſpiſed man but
God;Luk. 10. 16 for Chriſt ſaith, He which deſpiſeth you,
deſpiſeth mee. VVhen Sathan ſlew Iobs ſeruants,
his malice was agaiuſt Iob:Iob 1. 16. ſo, when
you deſpiſe Gods ſeruants, your preſumption
is againſt God;Mat. 10. for That which you doo vnto
them (ſaith Chriſt) you do vnto me. Why then
if they deſpiſe Chriſt, Chriſt wil deſpiſe them,
for he told Saul that he ſpurned againſt the
pricke; that is, he ſpurned againſt that which
would ſpurne againſt him. Therefore, if you
giue vnto Chriſt when you giue vnto the

poore; and if you honour Chriſt when you
honour his Prophetes: as you giue vnto the
poore for Chriſts ſake, ſo deſpiſe not the prophets
for Chriſts ſake. If for all this we muſt
be deſpiſed ſtil, then this is our remedie, Paul
ſaith,2. Cor. 2. 15. 
               Whatſoeuer wee are to you: yet wee are a
ſweet ſauour to God, both in them which are ſaued,
and them which periſh: that is, though we
bring him word that you will not come to
the banquet, yet we ſhalbe welcome without
you. And ſo much of that.
            After Deſpiſe not Prophecying, followeth▪
               Trie all things: as if he ſhould ſay, Deſpiſe
not prophecying, but for all that try prophecying,
leſt you beleeue errour for truth: for
as among Rulers, there bee bad Rulers: ſo among
Prophets therebe falſe Prophets. This
made Chriſt warne his Diſciples to beware
of the leauen of the Phariſies,Mar. 8. 25. that is, of their
falſe doctrine. This made Iohn ſay, Trie the
Spirites.
               1. Iohn 4. 1. And therefore wee reade in the ſeauenteenth
Chapter of the Acts of the Apoſtles
and the eleuenth verſe, how the men of
Beroea would not receiue Paules doctrine before
they had tried it, and how did they trie
it? It is ſayd, that they ſearched the Scripture.
This is the way which Paule woulde
teach you to trie other whereby he was tryed
him ſelfe: whereby you may ſee, that if

you vſe to reade the Scripture, you ſhal be able
to trie all doctrines: for the word of God
is the touchſtone of euery thing,Gen. 1. 2. like the light
which God made to behold all his creatures;
ſo is the Scripture to decide all queſtions, euerie
doubt muſt come to the Word, and all
cōtrouerſies muſt be ended at this Tribunall,
the Scripture muſt ſpeake which is right, and
which is wrong, which is truth, and which is
errour, and all tongues muſt keepe ſilence to
heare it: ſo God hath appointed that the
Iudge of our controuerſies, which he ſaith in
the twelfth chapter of Iohn and the eight and
fortieth verſe, ſhall iudge vs in the last daye.
Here a man may aske, If it be ſo that God
would haue vs to trie all our Religion by the
Scripture, and not by Fathers, nor by Doctors,
nor by Councels, nor by Angell, nor by
Pope; how then do the Papiſts ſay, we muſt
beleeue as the Church beleeueth? and neuer
looke into the Scripture, whether our teachers
ſay as God ſaith, but take it vpon their
credit, as a blind man eateth his meate.
            A man trieth his horſe which muſt beare
him, and ſhall hee not trie his faith which
muſt ſaue him? Paule ſaith, Let euerie one be
able to giue a reaſon of his faith. Is this a reaſon
of our faith to ſay, I beleeue ſo, becauſe
Rome beleeueth ſo? or rather becauſe that

the word doth teach me ſo. It will not anſwer
for them which die in hereſie, to ſay, the
Prieſts taught vs ſo; no more than it would
excuſe Eue to ſay,Gen. 3. 13. the Serpent taught her ſo:
for God ſaith, Be not deceiued, neither by ſerpent,
nor by Prophet, nor by Angell. Therefore
I conclude with Paule, Deſpiſe not Prophecying,
leſt the Goſpell be taken from you;
and yet trie prophecying, leſt you receiue error
for truth.
            As we are to trie doctrines, ſo Paul would
haue vs to trie our thoughts, and our ſpeeches,
and our actions: therefore he ſaith, Trie
all things. He doth not bid vs take a taſt of all
ſinnes and vanities, as Salomon did to trie
them; for they are tried alreadie: but that we
ſhould ſet the word of God alway before vs
like a rule, & beleeue nothing but that which
it teacheth, loue nothing but that which it
preſcribeth, hate nothing but that which it
forbiddeth, doo nothing but that which it
commaundeth; and then we trie all things by
the word. As the Eunuch ſayd, How ſhould I
vnderstand without an Interpreter?
               Act. 8. 31. ſo thou
mayeſt ſay: Howe ſhould I trie without the
word, which is the touchſtone of good and
euill?
            Now, when wee haue tried by the word
which is truth, and which is error; what ſhuld

we doo then?Mat. 2. 2. 
               Keep that which is beſt: that is,
ſtay at the truth, as the wiſe men ſtayed when
they came to Chriſt. We muſt keep and hold
the truth, as a man gripeth a thing with both
his handes; that is, defend it with thy tongue,
maintain it with thy purſe, further it with thy
labour, in danger, and trouble, and loſſe, and
diſpleaſure, come life, come death; thinke, as
Chriſt did ſeale the truth with his blood, ſo
thou muſt ſeale it with thy blood, or elſe thou
dooſt not keepe it, but let it goe. Well dooth
Paul put Trie before Chooſe, for he which trieth
may chuſe the beſt; but he which chuſeth
before he trie, takes the worſt ſooner than the
beſt: and therefore the Popes prieſts becauſe
the people ſhould take ſuperſtition before religion,
will neuer let them haue the Touchſtone,
but keep them from the Scripture, and
locke it vp in an vnknowen tongue, which
they cannot skill of, leaſt they ſhould try their
doctrines,Act. 17. like the men of Boerea, making religion
a craft, as men call their trades. Therefore,
as Ioſiah reioyced that the booke of God
was found againe; ſo we may reioyce that the
booke of God is found againe: for when the
people might not reade it, it was all one as if
they had loſt it.
            After Trie all things, and keepe the beſt: foloweth,
Abſtaine from all appearance of euill:
               
As if hee ſhould ſaie, That is like to be beſt
which is ſo farre from euill, that it hath not
the appearance of euill; and that is like to be
the truth which is ſo farre from errour, that
it hath not the ſhewe of errour; whereby hee
ſheweth, that nothing ſhould be brought into
the Church, or added to our Religion, but
that which is an vndoubted truth without
ſuſpition of errour. It is not inough to bee
perſwaded of our faith, but we muſt be aſſured
of it; for Religion is not built vppon
doubtes, but vpon knowledge. Here we may
maruell why Paul biddeth vs Abſtaine from
all appearance of euill: becauſe ſinne, and hereſie,
and ſuperſtition are hypocrites; that is,
Sinne hath the appearance of Vertue and hereſie
hath the appearance of Truth, & Superſtition
hath the appearance of Religion: but
by this the Apoſtle doth note, that there is no
Sinne, nor Hereſie, nor Superſtition, but if the
viſor bee taken away from it, it will appeare
to be a Sinne, and Hereſie, and Superſtition,
though at the firſt ſight the viſor doo make it
ſeeme none, becauſe it couereth the euill,
like a painted Sepulcher vpon wormes and
rotten bones.
            Heereby wee are taught to iudge of all
thinges as they are, and not as they ſeeme to
bee. As wee drawe aſide the curtaine before

we beholde the picture: ſo wee muſt remooue
our prudence and all ſurmiſes, and
then behold the thing naked as it is, if we will
know it indeed.
            Heere I might admoniſh them which ſeparate
themſelues from our Church: As Paul
ſayth, Examine whether you bee in the faith:
ſo examine whether you haue the ſhewe of
errour. Hath it not the ſhewe of errour, to
broach a Religion which was neuer heard of
before? Hath it not the ſhewe of errour, to
retaine an opinion, which the Author himſelfe
hath recanted? as though yee would
ſucke vp that which the Dogge hath vomited?
Hath it not the ſhewe of errour, to affirme,
that thoſe preachers may not bee
heard, which (by their owne confeſſions)
haue conuerted them to the Knowledge of
God, and dailie conuert other? Hath it
not the ſhewe of errour, to affirme that the
Lordes prayer may not bee vſed for a prayer,
which for anie thing that wee or they
can reade, was ſo vſed from the beginning?
            Hath it not the ſhewe of errour, to ſaie
that no man may vſe anie ſet prayer? ſeeing
there bee manie prayers, and pſalmes, and
bleſſings in the holie Scripture, which were
vſed in the ſame forme? Hath it not the ſhew

of error, to affirme that we haue no Church;
and yet to graunt that our Martyrs which died
in Poperie, were true members of the
Church? Hath it not the ſhewe of errour to
affirme that two or three may excommunicate
all the reſt without a Miniſter, ſeeing the
Paſtor is the mouth of the church? hath it not
the ſhew of error to affirm, that the church of
Chriſt was euer inuiſible before this age, and
that it is ſuch a ſmall flock as their nūber is? &
that it hath ſet foote no where but in England?
Hath it not the ſhewe of error to hold
that for ſound and good religion, which is altered
euerie day, adding and detracting, as
though a man ſhould make a Religion of his
owne inuention, ſo faſt as new conceits come
into his braine? Let them thinke that Paul
ſaith vnto them,Rom. 12. 3. 
               Be wiſe vnto ſobrietie, and
ſuſpect that conſtruction which your ſelues
deuiſed;Pro. 4. 27. for Salomon ſaith, There is an error
vpon the right hand, as well as vpon the left,
that is, (as I may call it) the zealous error, and
if this bee not it, I knowe none within this
Land.
            Yet, ſhall I ſay that we haue not the ſhewe
of error? Nay, I would that we were but in
the ſhew of error. I may not call euill good,
no more then I may call good euill; and therfore
let vs pull out the beame out of our own

eyes, as we would pull the moate out of their
eyes. If Paul would haue vs abſtaine from euerie
appearance of euill, ſure hee would haue
vs abſtaine from hereſie and from idolatrie;
for theſe are the greateſt euils. But if wee bee
not idolaters, yet we haue the ſhewe of idolatrie;
if we be not of Antichriſts religion, yet
we are of Antichriſts faſhion, ſo long as we
haue the ſame veſtures, and the ſame orders,
and the ſame titles that Antichriſt knoweth
his miniſters by. It is ſaid, that the Serpents
ſting is in his taile, and ſo it ſeemes:Nu. 33. 55. for this
taile of Antichriſt (which the Pope hath left
behinde him, like an euill ſauour) is vnto vs as
the remnants of the Chanaanites were vnto
the Iewes: they ſhould haue deſtroyed all the
Chanaanites, but becauſe they ſpared ſome,
therefore they whom they left were goades
in their ſides, and pricks in their eies, that they
could neuer be quiet for them; ſo wee ſhould
haue expelled the head and the taile too of
Antichriſt, but becauſe we did not, therefore
the remnants of Poperie are goades in our
ſides, and prickes in our eyes, that wee cannot
yet be quiet for them. Therefore let vs pray
that he which hath taken away the euill, will
take away the ſhew of euill too.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               TO controll thoſe falſe copies of
this Sermon, which were Printed
without my knowledge, patched
(as it ſeemeth) out of ſome
borrowed notes; and to ſtop the
Printing of it againe without
my corrections, as it was intended, becauſe they
had got it licenſed before, although vtterly vnwilling
(for ſome reſpects) to haue it publiſhed:
which made mee withſtand their importunitie ſo
long, yet ſeeing more inconuenience than I thought
of, I ſuffered that which I coulde not hinder.
And now hoping that it is Gods wil to profit ſome
by it,Gen. 43. 11. as Iacob parted from Beniamin: ſo that
which muſt be, let be: and the Lorde giue thee a
bleſsing with it.
         
         
            
            THE VVEDDING
GARMENT.
            
               Rom. 13. 14.
               Put ye on the Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
            
            
               I Haue choſe a Text which is
the ſumme of the Bible. For
all Scripture runneth vpon
Chriſt lyke the Title of a
booke, becauſe hee is Alpha
and Omega, the beginning
and the end of mans ſaluation:Reue. 1. 8. therefore he is
figured in the Law, foretold in the Prophets,
and fulfilled in the Goſpel. Some places point
to his Diuinitie, ſome to his humanitie, ſome
to his Kingdom, ſome to his Prieſthood, ſome
to his Prophecie, ſome to his Conception,
ſome to his Birth, ſome to his life, ſome to his
miracles, ſome to his Paſſion, ſome to his Reſurrection,
ſome to his Aſcention, ſome to
his Glorification; all poynt to the Sauiour,
lyke Iohn Baptiſt,Ioh. 1. 29. when hee ſaide, This is

the Lambe of God, which taketh away the
ſinnes of the worlde. Therefore learne Chriſt,
and learne all. Now to teach vs how we ſhuld
heare, and how we ſhould loue, and how we
ſhould feare, and how we ſhould beleeue, and
how we ſhould follow Chriſt, that wee may
knowe when wee haue learned him: the
Apoſtle ſaith, Put ye on the Lord Ieſus Chriſt:
as though this word did containe all our duties
vnto Chriſt, to put him on: (which ſeemes
to bee the leuell of this phraſe, if you marke
how it commeth in) for before Paule ſayth,
Caſt away the workes of darkneſſe,
               Verſe 12. 
               and put on
the armour of light: then hee nameth the
workes of darknes which we ſhould caſt off,
that is,Verſe 13. gluttonie, drunkenneſſe, ſtrife, enuie,
chambering, wantonneſſe; after hee nameth
the armour of light,Verſe 14. which we ſhould put on,
and calleth it by the name of the giuer, The
Lord Ieſus Chriſt. In ſtead of gluttonie, and
drunkenneſſe, and ſtrife, and chambering,
and wantonneſſe, and other patches of the
Diuell, wherewith man cloatheth himſelfe as
with a Garment; the Apoſtle giueth him an
other Garment,Pſa. 109. 18 which hee calleth Ieſus
Chriſt: hee doth not oppoſe vertue to vice,
as one would thinke when he had ſayd, Caſt
off gluttonie, he ſhould haue ſaid, Put on ſobrietie:
when hee had ſaid, Caſt off wantonneſſe,

he ſhould haue ſaid, Put on continencie:
when he ſaid, Caſt off enuie, he ſhould
haue ſaid, Put on loue: But in ſtead of all vertues,
he commendeth the example of Chriſt
for euerie vertue, and oppoſeth it to euerie
vice: as if he ſhould ſay, He which thinketh
onely to follow Chriſt, needeth not bee led
by the hand frō vertue to vertue, but his example
will teach him what he ſhall follow,
and what he ſhall flie, better than all precepts
in the world. Therfore this is the beſt thought
in euerie action for a man to thinke, what
Chriſt would do, which was made not onely
redemption and ſaluation to ſaue vs,1. Cor. 1. 30 
               
                  〈◊〉
               
wiſdome and example to guide vs. Therfore
hee ſaith,Mat. 11. 20 
               Learne of mee, and followe mee: as
though we ſhould thinke before we ſpeake
whether hee would ſpeake ſo,Mar. 10. 21 and conſider
before we do, whether he would do ſo; and
doe all by his example as the Scholler writeth
by his coppie: or elſe we do not learne
of him, but of our ſelues; and then we go awrie,
like a childe which ſcribleth without a
rule. If thou reſolueſt to ſpeake and doe no
otherwiſe than Chriſt would ſpeake and doe
himſelf, thou ſhalt be ſure to do al things wel,
becauſe thou followeſt a ſtraight patterne:
therefore ſtudie what this meaneth, To put on
Chriſt. It is a ſtrange ſpeech, & a ſtrange Garment.

They which cannot tell (like Nicodemus)
what Chriſt meaneth when he ſayeth,Iohn 3. 4.
that we muſt be borne againe, cannot tell
what Paul meaneth when he ſayth, Put on
Chriſt: as if one man ſhould put on another,
I thinke manie here may go to the Apoſtle,
as the Apoſtles went to Chriſt, and aske of
him, Maiſter, expound to vs, what is the parable?
            This phraſe is read in none but Paul, which
hath written moſt of iuſtification by Chriſt:
and therefore he vſeth all fit phraſes,Gal. 3. 27. to expreſſe
how we ſhould applie Chriſt vnto vs;
and in no tearmes hee hath ſhewed it more
liuely than in this phraſe, Put on Chriſt: for it
ſignifieth that Chriſt dooth couer vs like a
Garment, and defend vs alſo ſafely like an
armour.
                  
                     •
                  om. 4. 7. Hee hideth our vnrighteouſneſſe
with his righteouſneſſe, he couereth our diſobedience
with his obedience, hee ſhadoweth
our death with his death, that the wrath
of God can not finde vs, iudgement can not
ſpie vs, the curſe can not ſee vs,Gen. 37. 29. for the Garment
which couereth and hideth vs. But, as
Iacob got the bleſſing in the name and apparell
of Eſau his elder brother: ſo in the
name and apparell of Chriſt our elder brother,
we receiue the bleſſing, and are receiued
into fauour like Chriſt him ſelfe. For

God ſayth not, This is my beloued Sonne,
which pleaſeth me,Mat. 3. 17. but, In whom I am pleaſed;
meaning, that not onely Chriſt pleaſeth
God,1. Cor. 11. 3. but we pleaſe God in Chriſt; for Chriſt
is our head.
            Therefore, as one looking in the face of a
man, dooth like him ſtraight if hee like his
face:Epheſ. 5. 23. ſo, God beholding vs in the face of
Chriſt, doth loue vs ſtraight, becauſe the face
dooth pleaſe him. But Chriſt is not our head
vnleſſe we be his members, Chriſt is not our
garment vnleſſe we put him on: as Chriſt did
put on our Garment when he cloathed himſelf
with our fleſh; and tooke our infirmities
and bore our curſe: ſo wee muſt put on his
Garment, that is, his righteouſneſſe, his merites,Reu. 3. 4.
and his death, which is as ſtrange a veſture
to vs, as our fleſh was to him, and much
a doo wee haue to put it on, and when it is
on, there is great cunning to weare it cleanly
and comely from ſoyling and renting, that
ſuch a precious Garment bee not taken from
vs againe.Mat. 22. 11
            
            Therefore many ſeeme to weare this Garment
which ſhall be thruſt from the banket,Mat. 7. 23.
becauſe they weare it not: as thoſe which will
ſay, when the Lord ſhall come to iudgement,
We haue ſeene thee in our ſtreetes,Luk. 13. 26. we haue
heard thee in our Sinagogues, we haue prophecied,

we haue caſt out Diuels, we haue
wrought miracles by thy name: as though if
anie had put him on, or borne his markes,
they were the men which were marked like
his ſeruants: therfore who but they ſhall enter
into Heauen?Luke. 13. 27 Yet Chriſt ſaith, I know you
not: there is their reward, I know you not: as
if he ſhould anſwere, You weare not my liuerie,
you beare not my cogniſance for all
your ſhewes, therefore depart from me: ſo he
put them off, becauſe they had not put him
on: for though they had ſeene his perſon, and
heard of his vertues, yet they had no faith to
apply his mercies, his merits, his death and his
righteouſneſſe vnto them, without which no
man can put on Chriſt nor weare him. Faith
is the hand which putteth him on, Faith taketh
firſt his righteouſneſſe and couereth her
vnrighteouſnes, then ſhe taketh his obedience
and couereth her diſobedience, then ſhe taketh
his patience, and couereth her impatiencie,
then ſhe taketh his temperancie, & couereth
her intemperancie, then ſhe taketh his
continencie, and couereth her incontinencie,
then ſhe taketh his coſtancie, and couereth
her inconſtancie, then ſhe taketh his faith, and
couereth her diffidence: then ſhe taketh his
humilitie, and couereth her pride: then ſhee
taketh his loue, and couereth her rancour:

and ſo taketh one robe after another, and
tricketh her ſelfe, vntill ſhe haue put on Ieſus
Chriſt, that is, vntill ſhe appeare in the ſight
of God, like Ieſus Chriſt, clothed with his
merites and graces: that God hath no power
to bee angrie with her, becauſe ſhee commeth
ſo like his ſonne. This is to put on Ieſus
Chriſt, as you ſhall ſee more liuely, when
you haue taken a view of the Garment, for
we are to ſpeake of Chriſt the Garment, and
of our putting it on. There be many faſhions
of apparell, but they are too light, or too heauie,
or too ſad, or too courſe, or too ſtale, and
all weare out. At laſt the Apoſtle found a faſhion
that ſurpaſſeth them all: it is neuer out
of faſhion, meete for all ſeaſons, fit for all perſons,
& ſuch a profitable weed, that the more
it is worn, the freſher it is. What faſhion haue
you ſeene comparable to this?2. Sa. 10. 4. It is not like
the clothes of Dauids Ambaſſadours, which
couered their vpper parts; nor like Sauls armour,1. Sa. 17. 29
which tired Dauid when hee ſhould
fight with it:2. Kin. 14. 2. nor like the counterfait of Ieroboams
wife, which diſguiſed her ſelfe to go
vnknowen: nor like the olde ragges of the
Gibeonites,Ioſhu. 9. 4. 5 which deceiued Ioſua: nor like
the paultrie ſute of Micah,Iud. 17. 10. which hee gaue
once a yeare to his Leuite:Mat. 11. 8. nor like the gluttons
flaunt which ietted in purple euery day:

nor like the light clothes which Chriſt ſayd
are in kings Courts, and make them lighter
that weare them. But it is like the garment of
the high Prieſt,Exod. 28. 21 which had all the names of
the Tribes of Iſraell written vpon his breaſt:
ſo all the names of the faithfull are written in
the breaſt of Chriſt,Mal. 3. 16. and regiſtred in the book
of his merites:2. Kings 2. 8 it is like Elias mantle, which
diuided the waters: So he diuideth our ſinnes
and puniſhments, that they which are clothed
with Chriſt, are armed both againſt ſinne and
death.Deut. 26. 5. It is like the garments of the Iſraelites
in the wilderneſſe, which did not weare; fortie
yeares together they wandered in the deſert,
and yet ſaith Moſes, their ſhooes were
not worne, but their aparell was as when they
came out of Egypt: So the righteouſneſſe of
Chriſt doth laſt for euer, and his mercies are
neuer worne out.Heſt. 6. 11. As Mardocheus ſhined in
the kings roabes before the people: ſo and
more glorious are the faithfull in the roabes
of Chriſt before God.Mat. 17. 2. When Chriſt was
transfigured vpon the mount, Mathew ſaith
that his face ſhined like the Sun, & his clothes
were as white as the light:Pſal. 136. 1 So when we are
transfigured into the image of Chriſt, wee
ſhall ſhine before other men like lights, and
therefore Chriſts diſciples are called Lights,
becauſe they were clothed with light,Mat. 5. 14. and ſhined

to the world.Mat. 6. 29. Salomō was not ſo glorious
in all his royaltie, nor the Lillies which are
brauer than Salomon, as he which is clothed
with Chriſt, becauſe the apparel vpon him is
better than al the world about him. Therfore
if Dauid ſaid,2. Sa. 1. 14. 
               Weepe ye daughters of Iſrael, for
Saul which clothed you in purple: I may ſay, reioyce
ye daughters of Iſrael, for Chriſt which
hath clothed you with righteouſnes, as it were
with a veſture, before you come to yt
                banket.
            This is the Wedding Garment,Mat. 22. 12. without
which no man can feaſt with the Lord. This
Garment is called an Armour,
               Epheſ. 6. 11. becauſe it defendeth
vs from all the aſſaults of the diuell,
the fleſh, the world, the heate of perſecution,
and the cold of defection. This Garment is
called Light,Rom. 13. 2. becauſe it is the beautie & glorie
of them which weare it. This Garment is
called a Kingdome, becauſe none but Kings
do weare it,Mat. 6. 3. that is, they are inthroned in the
kingdome of Chriſt, & made kings ouer the
world, the fleſh, and Satan: which weare this
Garment like the haire of Sampſon, which
while he wore he was like a king,Iud. 16. 6. and all his
enemies had no power to hurt him.
            This Garment Paul hath ſent vnto you, to
go before the king of heauen and earth, a
holy Garment, a royal Garment, an immaculate
garment, an euerlaſting garment: a garment

whereof euerie hem is peace of conſcience,
euerie pleate is ioy in the holy Ghoſt, euerie
ſtitch is the remiſſion of ſome ſinne, and
ſaueth him which weareth it. If ſhee which
touched the hemme of Chriſts garment was
healed, he which weareth the Garment, nay,
he which weareth Chriſt him ſelfe, ſhall not
he be healed of all his ſores, though he were
wounded from head to foote? You need not
cloath him now which ſaith,Mat. 25. 43 
               When I was naked
ye did not cloath me,
               Mat. 21. 8. nor caſt your garments
in the way,Gen. 9. 23. as they did,Luke 10. 34 when he came
to Ieruſalem, but take his Garments, and ſuffer
your ſelues to be clothed, as Noah did, to
couer your nakedneſſe.This Samaritane doth not ſignifie Chriſt, but yet may be reſembled to Chriſt. As the good Samaritane
put him vpon his owne beaſt which was
ſpoiled with theeues, and bound vp his ſores,
when hee was wounded: So Chriſt Ieſus
mounteth the faithfull vpon his righteouſneſſe,
and healeth their ſinnes, as though he
ſhould couer them with his garments, whom
the world,Gen. 3. 1. the fleſh, and the diuell haue robbed
of their garments, that is, the righteouſneſſe
which they had in Paradiſe before the
ſerpent came: ſo if we put on Chriſt, we are
clothed with his obedience, wherby our wickednes
is couered: we are clothed with his merits,
wherby our ſins are forgiuen: we are clothed
with his ſpirit, whereby our hearts are

mollified and ſanctified, and renued, til we reſemble
Chriſt himſelfe. This is the Apoſtles
meaning, to put on Chriſt, as it is vnfolded in
Col. 3. 12. Where he brings forth all the robes
of Chriſt,Verſ
                     •
                   10. and ſorts them, & ſaith, put on mercie,
put on meeknes, put on humilitie, put on
patience, put on loue, all which before he called
the new man. So that to put on Chriſt, is
to put on the new man with all his vertues,
vntill wee be renued to the Image of Chriſt,
which is like a new man amongſt men. They
which labour to be righteous, and yet beleeue
that Chriſts righteouſnes ſhal ſaue them, haue
put on Chriſt as Paule would haue them. We
are not taught to put on Angels, nor Saints,
nor the virgin Mary, nor Paul himſelfe, to couer
our ſinnes with their righteouſnes, as the
Papiſts do: but we are commanded to put on
Chriſt, and couer our ſinnes with his righteouſnes.
The bodie hath manie Garments, but
the ſoule hath one Garment. Euery clout will
couer our ſores, but the fineſt ſilke wil not couer
our ſinnes. Therfore when we ſeeme braue
to others, we ſeeme foule to God, becauſe his
eie is vpon our ſins, which lie naked whē al the
reſt is couered, vntil we put on Chriſt, & then
we hear yt
                voice,Mat. 9. 
                     •
                  . 
               Thy ſins are couered, & thē we
haue that bleſſing,Pſal. 32. 1. 
               Bleſſed is the man whoſe ſin is
couered: ſo we are clothed & bleſſed together.

Yet this garment is out of requeſt, too rough
for ſome, too graue for others, too baſe for others.
And therefore in ſtead of putting on
Chriſt,Luk. 11. 37. they put him off, in ſtead of welcomming
him,Mat. 8. 34. they diſcharge him, like the Gadarens,
that they may keepe their ſwine, that is
their beaſtly pleaſures, which he wold caſt into
the ſea.Ma. 27. Theſe are like the fooliſh ſouldiers
which ſhould haue made Chriſt their Garment,
and they caſt lots vpon his Garments,
and diuided them, and ſo ſpoiled them. So do
the Papiſts deale with this Garment, they ſay
it is not fit for them, and therfore they breake
it, and mangle it, and peece it with ragges of
their owne inuentions: they ſay it is too light,
and not able to beare off the ſtormes of death
and heate of hell, and therefore chooſe rather
to make themſelues garments of their merites,
and their maſſes, and their penance, and
their pardons, and their pilgrimages: like Adam
and Eue,Gen. 3. 7. 31 which made themſelues coates
of fig leaues, which God deſtroyed againe, to
ſhewe that when men haue patched all their
leaues of maſſes, of pardons, of pilgrimages, &
ſatisfactions together, yet they will not couer
their nakedneſſe, nor keepe off the heate of
Gods wrath, but are like the curtall skirtes of
Dauids Ambaſſadors,2. Sa. 29. 4. which hidde not their
ſhame. Therefore when wee may goe in our

maſters attyre, ſhall we ſcrubbe like beggers
patched in our ragges?Iob. 9. 31. Mine owne garments
defile mee, ſaith Iob: Our owne Garmentes,
our owne righteouſnes defileth vs, for what
garment, what righteouſnes haue we of our
owne,Eſa. 64. 6. but that which is like a menſtruous
cloth, which had more neede to be waſhed it
ſelf, thā to wipe that which is foule? Therfore
Chriſt muſt make vs Garments, or elſe when
our backes flaunt it like Courtiers, our ſoules
ſhall ſtrip like beggers. And the diuels will
ſport themſelues like Cham,Gen. 9. 22. to ſee our nakedneſſe.
            Firſt, the Father made vs Garmentes in
Paradiſe,Gen 3. 21. now the Sonne makes vs Garments
in the Wilderneſſe, nay, the Sonne is made
our Garment, as Paul ſaith, Chriſt is made vnto
vs righteouſneſſe:
               1. Cor. 1. 30. that is, Chriſts righteouſneſſe
muſt be our Garment, or elſe we ſhall be
aſhamed when our righteouſneſſe doeth not
reach to couer our nakedneſſe, but ſtill ſome
part will peepe bare vntill he caſt his righteouſneſſe
vpon it,1. Sa. 17. 42. and then all is couered. As
Dauid needed no other armour againſt the
Giant than a ſling: ſo we need no other Garment
againſt ſinne than Chriſt. There wanteth
nothing but this, to put it on.
            Now let vs ſee how to put this Garment
on. Many fumble about it, like childrē which

had neede of one to put on their cloathes.
Some put on Chriſt like a precious head tire,
which all day is worne, beautified with iewels,
and beſet with gemmes, to make the face
ſeeme more amiable: but at night, that riches
is layd aſide, and the head muffled with ſome
regardleſſe tyre. Thus do our curious women
put on Chriſt, who when they heare the meſſengers
of grace offering this Garment, and
preparing to make the bodie fit to bee garniſhed
with ſo glorious a veſture, as Paul did
the Romanes, firſt waſhing away drunkennes
and gluttony, then chambring and wantonnes,
then ſtrife and enuie, and ſo ſinne after
ſinne, they ſeeme like the ſtonie grounde
to receiue it with ioy, and thinke to beautifie
their head with this precious ornament: but
when hee tels them there is no communion
between Chriſt & Belial, that if this Garment
be put on, all other vanities muſt be put off;
they then turne their day into darkneſſe, and
reiect Chriſt, that woulde bee an eternall
crowne of beautie to their heades, and wrap
their temples in the vncomely rags and refuſe
of euerie Nations pride: and in theſe toyes
they cauſe their ſeruants to ſpend manie howers
on euerie day in the weeke, but eſpeciallie
on the Sabboth day to decke their bodies,
as if they were but little children, which

had neede of one to put on their cloathes.
Some put on Chriſt as a cloake, which hangeth
vpon their ſhoulders, & couereth them:
when they goe abroad to bee ſeene of men,
they can caſt on the cloake of holineſſe, and
ſeeme for a while as holie as the beſt; but ſo
ſoone as they come home, the cloake goeth
off, & the man is as hee was, whoſe vizard was
better than his face. Thus Hypocrites put on
Chriſt, as many retaine vnto Noble men, not
to doe them anie ſeruice, but to haue theyr
countenance. Many put on Chriſt like a hat
which goeth off to euerie one which meetes
them: ſo euerie temptation which meetes
them, makes them forget what they heard,
what they promiſed, what they reſolued, and
change their way, as though they had not repented
at all. So the common people (lyke
your ſelues) put on Chriſt, they are zealous ſo
long as they are in the Church, and beate
their breaſts,Luk 18. 11. and caſt vp their eyes like the
Publican, when they heare a ſentence which
mooues them, as though they would do no
more againſt that ſaying while they liue: but
the next buſineſſe putteth all out of mind,
till they come to the Church againe. Some
put on Chriſt as a gloue, which couereth but
the hand; ſo they put on the face of Chriſt, or
the tongue of Chriſt: but their hands worke,

and their feete walke, as they did before: So
manie profeſſours of Religion put on Chriſt,
which call but for diſcipline and reformation,
that they might get a name of zeale and
ſinceritie, to couer ſome fault, which they
would not be ſuſpected of. Thus euery man
would couer himſelfe with Chriſt, but they
haue not the skill, or they haue not the will to
put him on. What will you do then? Though
the Garment bee neuer ſo good, yet it is not
good to them that do not weare it: for what
profite haue we of the Garments which we
doe not weare? they neither keepe vs from
heate, nor colde. Therefore Paul doth not
bring you a Garment to laye by you for the
moaths, but he bids you put it on. Here is the
cunning now in putting it on. If Paule had
taught vs this, then you would hearken vnto
him. Well, you ſhall heare what Paul ſaith to
the putting it on.
            Firſt (ſaith Paul) you muſt caſt away the
workes of darkneſſe,Verſe 12. and then put on the armour
of light: firſt you muſt put off, and then
put on. As the Eagles feathers will not lye
with anie others feathers, but conſume them
which lye with them: ſo the Wedding Garment
will not bee worne with filthie Garments,1. Sam. 5. 8.
but ſcornes like the Arke that Dagon
ſhould ſtand by it. If any man may not weare

womens apparell for lightnes; may he weare
the diuels apparell, and cloath himſelfe with
pride, with couetouſnes, with enuie, with hypocriſie,
with vncleanneſſe, and when hee is
like the diuell,Matt. 2. 21 ſit at Gods table? No man
(ſaith Chriſt) patcheth a new peece to an olde
Garment, and wilt thou patch an olde peece
to a new Garment? God forbad the people
to weare linſey wolſey,Leu. 19. 15. becauſe it was a ſigne
of inconſtancie: but this is incōſtancie it ſelf.
            He doth not put on Chriſt, but putteth off
Chriſt and putteth on Belial,Ioh. 19. 23. which faſhions
himſelfe to God,
                  
                     •
                  eu. 3. 15. and the Worlde too. As
Chriſtes coate was without ſeame, ſo they
muſt bee without ſtayne that weare it. For
when a man putteth on faire clothes, hee maketh
himſelfe faire too, and auoydeth euerie
foule thing, leſt it ſhould fowle his cloathes:
ſo muſt he which putteth on Chriſt; for the
fineſt Garment is ſooneſt ſtained. Therefore
when thou haſt put on this Garment, thou
muſt waſh thy ſelfe, and picke thy way, and
chooſe thy workes, and handle nothing that
is foule for marring thy cloathes, that is, thou
muſt not thinke as thou diddeſt, nor ſpeake
as thou diddeſt, nor liue as thou diddeſt, but
remember that thou haſt chaunged thy maſter,Iude 3.
& ſerue him with whom thou art bound.
For if God and the diuell coulde not agree

vpon Moſes bodie, for one to haue one part,
and the other another part, but God would
haue all: much leſſe will God agree that the
diuell ſhould haue part of the ſoule, which
would not yeeld him part of the bodie. Thus
haue you heard what you muſt put off: now
heare how Chriſt muſt be put on. As the Angell
taught Iohn to reade the Booke,Reuel. 10. 9. when he
bad him eate it: ſo we muſt put on Chriſt, as
if wee did eate him, not as the Papiſts doe in
their Maſſe, but as the meate is turned into
the ſubſtance of the bodie, & goeth through
euerie part of man: ſo Chriſt and his Word
ſhould goe from part of part, from eare to
heart, from heart to mouth, from mouth to
hand, til we be of one nature with them, that
they bee the verie ſubſtance of our thoughts,
and ſpeeches, and actions, as the meate is of
our bodie. This is to eate Chriſt and his
Word,Ephe. 3. 30. or elſe we do not eate them, but chew
them, & when our taſte is ſatiſfied, ſpue them
out againe. Thus we muſt put on Chriſt: for
the Worde ſignifieth ſo to put him on: as if
thou wouldeſt put him in, that he may be one
with thee, and thou with him, as it were in a
bodie together. As hee hath put on all our infirmities,
ſo we muſt put on all his graces, not
halfe on, but all on, and claſpe him to vs, and
gird him about vs, and weare him, euen as we

weare our skinne, which is alway about vs.
Then there ſhall be no neede of Wyres, nor
curles, nor perriwigs: the husbands ſhall not
be forced to racke their rents, nor inhaunce
their fines, nor ſell their lands, to decke their
wiues;2. Kin. 2. 13. but as the poore mantle of Eliah ſeemed
better to Eliſha than all the roabes of
Salomon: ſo the Wedding Garment ſhall
ſeeme better than all the flaunts of vanitie; &
put euery faſhion out of faſhion, which is not
modeſt and comely like it ſelfe. If you will
know farther how to put on Chriſt, you ſhall
ſee how your Text will Catechize you in his
three names, Lord, Ieſus, Chriſt. The Apoſtle
ſeemeth to ſpell out the way vnto vs, how
we ſhould weare this Garment: Firſt we muſt
put him on as Lord; then we muſt put him on
as Ieſus; laſtly, we muſt put him on as Chriſt.
Thou muſt put him on as Lord, that is, thy
ruler to command thee, thy tutor to gouerne
thee, and thy maſter to direct thee: thou muſt
be no mans ſeruant but his, take no mans part
againſt him,Acts. 4. 19. but ſay with the Apoſtle, Whether
is it meete to obey God,
               Ioſua hath the like name, but not from God, nor to that end. 
               or you? Thou muſt
put him on as Ieſus, that is, thy Sauiour in
whom thou truſteſt, thy protector on whom
thou dependeſt, thy redeemer in whom thou
beleeueſt: thou muſt not look for thy ſaluatiō
from Angel, nor Saint, nor anie thing beſide

him. For the name of Ieſus ſignifieth a Sauiour,
and is giuen to none but him; and he is
not onely called the Sauiour, but the Saluation,Luk. 1. 69.
in the Song of Simeon; to ſhew that he is
the onely Sauiour; for there may be many Sauiours,Iudg. 3. 9.
but there can be but one ſaluation: as
there may be many tortures, and yet but one
death. Therefore, when hee is called the Saluation,
it implieth that there is no Sauiour beſide
him.Luk. 3. 35. Thou muſt put him on as Chriſt,
that is,Act. 3. 22. a King to rule, a Prophet to teach, a
Prieſt to praie and ſacrifice,Heb. 8. 3. and pacifie the
wrath of God for thee.Mat. 1. 16. For this name Chriſt
doth ſignifie that hee was annoynted a King,
a Prieſt,Heb. 1. 8. and a Prophet for man: a King to
rule him, a Prieſt to offer ſacrifice for him, a
Prophet to teach him. So that hee putteth
on Chriſt as Lord, which worſhippeth none
but him, hee putteth on Chriſt as Ieſus, which
beleeueth in none but him;Gal. 3. 17. and he putteth on
Chriſt as Chriſt, which worſhippeth none
but him, beleeueth in none but him, and heareth
none but him.
            You put on Chriſt firſt, when you are baptized:
then you were ſealed and conſecrated
to his ſeruice: ſo ſoone as you came into the
world, you vowed to renounce the world and
follow God. How many haue put on Chriſt
thus, and ſince haue put him off againe? which

haue broken the firſt promiſe that euer they
made,Rom. 6. 3. and were neuer faithfull to God ſince.
You put on Chriſt againe,Eph. 4. 22. when you are called
and ſanctified; that is, when you caſt off
the olde man, which is corrupt with the luſts
of the fleſh, the pride of life, and the cares of
this worlde; and put on the newe man, which
is regenerate in righteouſneſſe & holineſſe, to
the Image of Chriſt, or likeneſſe of Adam in
his innocencie:Rom. 12. 2. for to put on the new man, is
to become a newe man, as if thou were borne
againe, and conceiued of the holie Ghoſt. Of
this Iob ſpeaketh when he ſayth,Iob. 29. 14. 
               I put on Iuſtice,
               1. Cor. 10. 16
               and it couered mee. You put on Chriſt againe,
when you receiue his holy Sacrament,
and are partakers of his bodie and blood, that
is, the merites of his obedience and paſſion
by Faith, which heareth him as if ſhe did ſee
him, and ſeeth him as if ſhe did feele him▪ and
feeleth him as if ſhe did taſte him, and taſteth
him as if ſhe did digeſt him, then Chriſt is become
yours, and dwelleth in you, and feedeth
you with his grace to eternal life, as the bread
and wine ſuſtaineth the life preſent. Laſtly,
when you haue put on Chriſt in theſe three
ſortes,Phil. 3. 21. which is your Garment for this world;1. Cor. 15. 49▪
               
after you ſhall put on Chriſt in heauen, and
be cloathed with his glorie, and that ſhall be
your laſt veſture, which ſhall neuer weare out.
            
               
Thus haue you heard what is ment by putting
on Chriſt: firſt to cloath our ſelues with
righteouſnes and holines like Chriſt; & then
becauſe our own righteouſnes is too ſhort to
couer our armes, and legges, and thighes of
ſinne, but ſtill ſome bare place will peere out
and ſhame vs in the ſight of God, therefore
we muſt borrow Chriſtes Garments,Gen. 27. 15. as Iacob
did his brothers; and couer our ſelues
with his righteouſnes, that is, beleeue that his
righteouſnes ſhal ſupply our vnrighteouſnes,
& his ſufferings ſhal ſtand for our ſufferings,
becauſe he came to fulfill the lawe, and beare
the curſe, and ſatisfie his Father for vs, that
all which beleeue in him might not die,Iohn 3. 16. but
haue life euerlaſting.
            Now I haue ſhewed you this goodly Garment,
you muſt go to another to helpe you
to put it on; and none can put this Garment
vpon you, but he which is the Garment,
the Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
Therefore to him let
vs pray.
            FINIS
         
         
            
            THE WAY TO
VVALKE IN.
            
               Rom. 13. 13.
               Let vs walke honeſtly, as in the day, not in gluttonie
and dronkenneſſe, neither in chambering
and wantonneſſe, nor in ſtrife and enuying,
&c.
            
            
               HAuing alreadie ſhewed you a
kingdome, nowe I will ſhew
you wherein this kingdome
conſiſteth, and in what it doth
not cōſiſt, as in the fourteenth
of the Romanes, hee ſheweth
that it conſiſteth not in meates and drinkes,
&c. but in righteouſneſſe, and peace, & ioy in
the holy Ghoſt. But becauſe I am to ſpeake of
ſome vices which this text calleth me vnto, I

will firſt proceede in them, beſeeching you,
as you can heare them to bee condemned, ſo
ſpeedily to proceed in execution, to put them
to death, and ſo to go forward with the reſt of
your ſinnes.
            
               Let vs walke honestly as in the day, not in
gluttonie and drunkenneſſe, &c. As if he ſhould
ſaie, know you that I bidde you put away
from you the workes of darkneſſe, he nameth
not all the workes of darkeneſſe, but chiefly
thoſe that doe raigne and are cauſe of more
wickedneſſe, that is, gluttonie, drunkenneſſe,
ſtrife and enuying, &c. three monſters come
out of hell, and trouble the whole worlde,
therefore caſt off theſe, and you haue caſt off
all.
            Now to ſpeake of them, I wil begin where
the vices begin, and as I point them out vnto
you, ſo I pray you to ſlay them, as if you had
marſhall lawe in your handes to put them to
death. By this narration the Apoſtle ſheweth
the chaine of ſinne, how one ſinne will draw
on another after it, for no ſinne is ſo baſe, that
it will goe alone, wherefore reſiſt all ſinnes or
none, for if you entertaine one ſinne, it will
preſently drawe another after it, and ſo the
whole houſe will be full of theeues, as Gehezi
his pride made him to lye, and Adams fall
made him to excuſe himſelfe, & Peters deniall

made him ſweare, and after his ſwearing,
made him curſe himſelfe, &c. for the ſinner
cannot ſtaie after he hath committed one ſin,
to commit another, nor till hee hath come to
the bottome, euen to the bottome of hell. If
I ſhould ſtand to anatomize and paint out all
vices in their kinde, I ſhould craue a longer
time than is allotted to mee, therefore I will
briefly touch them.
            As huge as the ſea is, yet one maye
taſte the ſaltneſſe of it in a droppe, ſo in one
ſinne you may ſee how ill fauoured all the
reſt bee, for there is no ſinne but weakeneth
the bodie, ſhorteneth the life, corrupteth and
conſumeth the goods, preuenteth grace, and
maketh vs odious to GOD and to Angels.
You are giuen to hate your enemies, theſe are
they, therefore hate them: they keepe you
from repentance, leaſt you ſhould bee ſaued,
wherefore I wil ſhew you what is in this box,
leſt the ſame goe to your eyes and ſo blinde
you.
            
               Walke not in gluttonie, drunkenneſſe, & ſtrife,
&c. Theſe come lyke fayre Ladies, with
preſents in their handes to wooe the vnſtable
ſoule of man, Gluttonie commeth with the
pleaſure of the fleſh, Drunkenneſſe with the
ſatisfying of the thirſt, Strife with the reuenge
of the enemie.
            
               
And firſt what gluttonie and drunkennes
offereth, and how many haue bene deceiued
with their ſweete meates and ſtrong drinkes,
till all haue bene turned into a bellie, and ſo
turned the body into ſinne, dayly experience
teacheth vs.
            Now by the way, the Apoſtle (we muſt
note) doth approue ſobrietie & vertue, that as
a man may drinke and not be drunken, ſo he
may eate that he loueth, and not glut himſelfe;
for he forbiddeth not to eate meate, but
not to eate too much, leſt thou ſurfet, for the
golden meane is good for all things. Salomon
doth not forbid to eate honie, but eate not
too much, leſt thou ſurfet. As the bodie may
not offend the ſoule, ſo the ſoule may not iniurie
the bodie, leſt it bee vnfit to ſerue the
ſoule.
            Manie there bee that thinke they haue
not ſinned in gluttony til they ſurfet, but this
is gluttonie in exceſſe, and puniſheth it ſelfe
with many diſeaſes, as dulnes of wit, want of
memorie, and ſhortnes of life. Now that you
may ſinne in gluttonie, and not to ſurfet, appeareth
by the rich man in the ſixteenth of
Luke, who fared deliciouſlie euerie day, and
neuer ſurfeted, yet for all that hee is called a
glutton, to teach vs that there be gluttons
which do not ſurfet. This kinde of ſin much

diſpleaſeth God, when men eate and drinke
and riſe vp to play, and remember not the afflictions
of Ioſeph and Lazarus lying at the
doore: many be ſuch banquets, where none
do come with a Wedding garment, & where
Chriſt is neuer inuited. Manie thinges may
perſwade vs to temperance, & we may learne
it of the beaſtes, who deſire no chaunge, nor
hoord not, and are content. God prouided
meate for all creatures, as hearbes, rootes, and
graſſe, before hee prouided anie for man, to
teach vs, what little care wee ſhould haue of
our belly, for we liue not by bread onely, but
by euerie worde that proceedeth out of the
mouth of God. Chriſt hath taught vs to faſt,
when he prepared himſelfe thereunto in the
wilderneſſe, but hee neuer by anie example
taught vs to feaſt: ſome there be which thinke
hee did neuer eate fleſh but in the paſchall
Lambe, which although it doth not teach, or
debar vs from eating fleſh, which Peter was
willed to eate in the viſion, yet it teacheth vs
to tame the fleſh, leſt Hagar ſhould get the
vpper hand of her miſtreſſe.
            When the belly is full, the fleſh luſteth, the
tongue prateth, the wit ſleepeth, and Satan
carrieth away the minde when the vnderſtanding
is away: As the moyſt and wateriſh
groundes bring forth nothing but frogs and

toades, ſo the belly and watrie ſtomacke that
is ſtuffed like a tunne, bringeth forth nothing
but a drouſie minde, foggie thoughts, filthie
ſpeeches, and corrupt affections: therefore
the Phiſition ſaith, nothing better for the
bodie then abſtinence, the Diuine ſaith, nothing
better for the ſoule then abſtinence,
the Lawyer ſaith, nothing better for the wits
then abſtinence; but becauſe there is no lawe
for this vice, therfore it breaketh out ſo mightilie.
Whoredome hath a lawe, Theft hath a
lawe, Murther hath a lawe, but this ſinne is
without law.
            Now to the ſecond ſinne, which is Drunkennes:
theſe are two ſiſters, betwixt whom
there is little difference: in this ſinne ſome
are mad, ſome are merrie, ſome doe vomite,
ſome doe ſleepe, and ſome doe reele, and then
there is no difference betweene a man and a
beaſt, ſauing that the one can ſtand, and the
other cannot.
            As euerie Scripture that maketh againſt
Theft, maketh againſt Nonreſidencie; ſo euerie
reaſon which maketh againſt gluttonie,
maketh againſt drunkenneſſe.
            Now after theſe commeth chambering
and wantonneſſe, and no meruaile ſayth
one, though the impes doe followe, when
the diuell goeth before: for fulneſſe of bread

went before the ſinne of the Sodomites. So
when Dauid had dined and was full, walking
vpon his pallace, his eyes glaunced, his
fleſh luſted, his heart conſented, the fire burned,
and there was no water to quench it.
And therefore in that ſo great a champion
as Dauid did fall, let him that ſtandeth take
heede leſt hee fall. And ſeeing that thou in
thy ſelfe art no ſtronger, or mightier, imitate
and followe the example of thoſe that
are cunning wraſtlers, who to caſt downe another
wil firſt fall downe themſelues: ſo we
to ouerthrowe our enemies muſt ſubiect our
ſelues, and humble our ſelues firſt by faſting
and praier.
            Sodome was burned, but the ſinnes
haue eſcaped. Sweete wordes, ſoft attyre,
wanton behauiour, and ſuch like, haue conſpired
and agreed all together to ſette honeſtie
to ſale. And wee vſe dailie to pray
that wee bee not ledde into temptation:
and yet wee doe leade our ſelues into temptation.
For our fayre wordes, wanton geſtures
and daintie fare: with manie other
pleaſures, doe becken vnto ſinne: and if
there bee no wine why hanges the buſhes?
and if there be no wantonneſſe, why is there
anie wanton, or vnſeemely, or vngodly attyre?
            
               
               Let vs not walke in gluttonie and drunkenneſſe,
neither in chambering and wantonneſſes, nor
in ſtrife and enuying. It is hard to ſay which of
theſe ſins is moſt in the world; happily ſome
will ſay, I haue bene no glutton, no drunkard,
no whoremonger, no murtherer, no falſe image
worſhipper, &c. but who can come
forth and ſaie, hee is free from ſtrife, for ſtrife
hath compaſſed the whole worlde, ſtrife in
Countrey, ſtrife in Citie, ſtrife in the Court,
ſtrife in the Common-weale, ſtrife in the
Church, who can ſay that he is free frō ſtrife,
or that he hath not iniured his brother? ſurely
that man ſhall ſtand alone, for it wil light vpon
none but Chriſt.
            I can but exhort you with the Apoſtle, that
you would not walke in ſtrife and enuying,
therefore put away theſe among the reſt, for
he that hath not put off theſe hath not put on
Chriſt, and if he hath not put on Chriſt, hee is
then no Chriſtian. Enuie is a ſinne, and it puniſheth
it ſelf like gluttonie, for it fretteth the
heart, ſhortneth the life, and eateth the fleſh,
as a fire conſumeth the wood, it is the mother
of ſtrife, and a great worker in the Court, this
is it which brought labour and ſickneſſe, and
death into the worlde, euen the enuie of the
ſerpent, and the diuell, and it will condemne
thee in thy conſcience if thou bee an enuious

man. Nothing reſembleth God more than
loue; for GOD is loue: ſo if thou haſt loue,
thou reſembleſt God. But if thou haſt enuie,
and art an aduerſarie, thou reſembleſt the diuell:
for thou canſt not come neerer the diuell
any way, than to bee enuious. As the
duſt commeth with the winde, ſo the diuell
commeth with enuie; and hee that is poſſeſſed
with enuie; is poſſeſſed with the diuell.
Why doth the Apoſtle say in the third chapter
of his Epiſtle to the Coloſſians, Aboue all
things put on loue? Becauſe loue is beſt of all.
Why doth he call loue the band of perfection?
Becauſe it bindeth all vertues together. If
loue be the band of perfection, to bind al vertues
together: then enuie is the band of impietie,
to binde all ſinnes together: therefore
if we muſt caſt off all but loue, wee muſt caſt
off enuie. Thou canſt not come to the kingdome
of peace, without loue. The kingdome
of Satan is at peace, and ſhall not Gods kingdome
be at peace? Shall we be at peace with
the fleſh, the world, and the diuell, and bee
at variance with God, and at ſtrife one with
another? Fire is cruell, wrath is raging: but
who can ſtand before enuie? Prouerbs 27. And
if none can ſtand before enuie, how can enuy
ſtand before God?
            If thou canſt not forgiue him that dooth
offend thee, thou prayeſt againſt thy ſelfe, and

askeſt vengeance vpon thee, therefore the Apoſtle
exhorteth thee not to let the Sunne go
downe vpon thy wrath, Epheſ. 5. 26. Charitie
enuieth not (ſaith Paul) therefore ſee thou
haue charitie, leſt thou bee counted an enuious
perſon.
            The beaſtes of the field are armed with
hornes, with hoofes, with tuskes, and ſuch like
to take reuenge: but nature hath left nothing
for man to put him in mind of reuenge; and
yet man aboue al other creatures, is moſt deſirous
of reuengment, for he hateth his owne
life, therefore it is againſt nature to enuie.
Iohn ſayth, he that hateth his brother is a
manſlaier and loueth not God, neither knoweth
God: if an enuious man (ſayth he) ſay he
loueth God, he is a lyar, becauſe he hateth his
image: if he ſay he knoweth God, he is a lyar,
how canſt thou loue God, and hate good
men? & how canſt thou loue learning, when
thou hateſt the learned? ſo doth the enuious
man all both good and bad: therefore this is
the worſt ſinne, becauſe it commeth neereſt
the ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt.
            Conſider therefore whom thou hateſt, euen
thy image. The diuell was appoynted to
hate man, and not man to hate man; and if
thou hateſt a good man, thou hateſt God: if
thou hateſt an euil man, thou hateſt one like
thy ſelfe; and if thou hateſt one like thy ſelfe,

thou hateſt thine owne ſoule: therefore as S.
Paul ſayth, Haue peace with all men. Canſt
thou not hate the ſinne, and loue the perſon?
as the Phiſition hateth the diſeaſe, and yet loueth
the diſeaſed.
            As a great manie of Bees can lodge together
in a hiue: ſo a legion of diuels can neſtle
together in one man, but many although they
cannot liue aſunder, yet they cannot liue together.
            Wherefore now conſider the pedigree of
peace; God is the God of peace, the holy
Ghoſt is the Spirit of peace, the Angels are
the meſſengers of peace, the miniſters are the
preachers of peace, and the Magiſtrate is the
defender of peace; ſhall wee then that haue
the God of peace, the Spirit of peace, the
meſſengers of peace, the preachers of peace,
the magiſtrates of peace, & (as I may ſay) the
Queene of peace, bee at enuie and warre one
with another? Meruaile not though I am ſo
long vpon this ſinne; for there is none of you
that heare me this day, but you can giue mee
ſufficient matter to ſpeake hereof. Then can I
want words when ye bring matter? Shal I not
wraſtle, and ſeeke to ouerthrowe this giant,
which challengeth euery man?
            As no man finding a Serpent leaueth him
before hee bee dead; ſo let vs ſlaughter this
monſter while he is vnder the axe, that he neuer

riſe anie more. Conſider of the wrong
thou doeſt to thy ſelf when thou enuieſt another,
for the ſtroake of enuie redounds vnto
thee. It were better thou didſt gratulate them
with good things, as good men haue done
and doe daylie: but in ſtead of imitating their
vertues, or commending their gifts, wee enuie
them and maligne them, and ſo their ioye
is our ſorrow. But the enuious man doth pay
for his ſpite, for it requoyles vpon himſelfe;
and enuie is puniſhed with enuie, and hatred
alſo with hatred: for hee which hateth all,
ſhall bee hated of all. Thus hee is tormented
for another, as Herode tormented himſelfe
for Chriſt, & the Iewes troubled themſelues
for Paul: for enuie is as gall to the heart, as
prickes to the ſtomack, and as a canker in the
mouth, and euer vexeth thee, as the euill ſpirit
of Saul vexed him.
            Loue is ſo contrary to enuie, as that it hath
more ioy of others welfare, then enuie hath
of his owne. Therefore an enuious man may
bee compared to Cain, who when hee killed
his brother Abel, was ſo troubled, that hee
ſaid, Whoſoeuer findeth me ſhall kill me.
            
            The couetous man, though hee will not
communicate his owne goods, yet he would
haue others to communicate their goods:
the proud man although hee bee proud himſelfe,
yet he would haue others to be humble:

but the enuious man careth not who doth any
good.
            As the Eagle doth account them baſtards
that cannot abide to looke vpon the Sunne:
ſo Chriſt doth account them baſtards which
will not take him to bee an example of lowlineſſe.
            Euery creature doeth impart his good vnto
man: but the enuious man he hath ſeparated
himſelfe from dooing good to any, euen
as an Apoſtata.
            Euerie vice is the contrarie of ſome vertue,
as intemperance to moderation, incontinence
to chaſtitie, pride to humilitie, but
enuie is contrarie to all. This is the cogniſance
of the diuell: for God ſaith, By this ſhal
men know that you are my diſciples, if you loue
one another: ſo the Diuell hee ſaith, By this
ſhall men knowe that you are my Diſciples
if you enuie and hate one another. The proud,
the prodigall, the couetous, the laſciuious,
they are loued of ſome, but the enuious man
is hated of all. And this ſinne is ſo lothſome
vnto him, that hee cannot abide it in any but
in himſelfe.
            Therefore, if wee loue our ſelues, let vs
loue our neighbours; for nothing doth more
pleaſe God than loue: ſo that if the blacke
Moore could be cleane, here is water inough
to waſh him. But the fleſh of man is more

ſtrong then all theſe reaſons.
            God hath put enmitie betweene vs and
the Serpent, and the Serpent hath put enmitie
betweene man and man.
            When Ioſeph had laden his brethren full
of corne, and ſent them away, he bade them
not to fall out by the way: ſo I would this leſſon,
when we haue plentie of all things, and
are full, had deepe impreſſion in our
hear is that we forget it not,
Fall not out by the
waye.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               WHereas theſe Sermons of Nabuchadnezzar
haue heretofore been printed
by an vnperfect Copie, and by meanes
thereof haue paſſed through the handes of diuers;
hauing in ſome places the minde of the
Author obſcured, in other ſome the ſentences
vnskilfully patched together: whereby the Authors
diſcredit might bee furthered, and the
ſale of the Sermons haue been hindered. Now as
I haue cauſed them to be examined by the best
Copies, and to bee corrected accordingly: ſo I
thought good to certifie thee of the ſame, that
the wants which were in the first impreſſion,
might not cauſe thee to ſuſpect this impreſſion
alſo, and ſo diſcourage thee from acquainting
thy ſelfe with the excellent Instructions,
offered in theſe
Treatiſes.
         
         
            
            THE PRIDE OF
Nabuchadnezzar.
            
               Dan. 4. 26.
               
                  26 At the end of twelue moneths he walked in
the royall pallace of Babel,
                  27 And the king ſpake and ſayd, Is not this
great Babel, that I haue built for the houſe
of my kingdome, by the might of my power,
and for the honour of my maiestie?
               
            
            
               I Haue choſen this ſtorie of
Nabuchadnezzar, wherein
is laide downe his Pride,
his Fall, and his Reſtitution.
This Nabuchadnezzar
was a wicked King, and
therefore God warned him by a dreame,
and by Daniel, to amend his life, but all
would not ſerue, hee made many ſhewes,
but hee reuolted againe, therefore at the
laſt GOD gaue him ouer for a time, and he
became like a beaſt, vntill he acknowledged

his power to come from God. A warning to
all rulers, to put them in remembrance that
one ruler is aboue, which muſt bee ſerued of
them all, or elſe all their buildings and treaſures,
and guard, will not ſhield them from
iudgement when the ſtroake commeth, no
more than they could ſaue Nabuchadaezzar.
At the end of twelue moneths (ſaith Daniel)
this king walked in his royall pallace. The Prophet
ſheweth that hee had deſerued this puniſhment
before, and that his dreame which
he had, did tell him that his kingdome ſhould
depart from him for his Pride, yet this reſpite
of twelue moneths was granted him, like the
fortie dayes which were granted to the Niniuites,
to trie what hee would doe vpon his
warnings, and whether hee would repent as
the Niniuites did, therefore the holy Ghoſt
ſheweth how the time ranne, and how he liued
after: as if he ſhould ſay, If he will returne
yet, and be warned by the dreames, or by the
Prophets which I ſent him, I will ſtay my
hand, and his kingdome ſhal not depart from
him. But here he ſheweth, that he forgot his
dreame like a dreame, and was more deſirous
to knowe what it meant, than to bee warned
by it. The twelue months ranne moneth after
moneth, yet Nabuchadnezzar is all one.
Now his dreames are gone, he thinketh that
all is ended, therefore hee getteth him vp into

his pallace amiddeſt his delights, to beake
himſelfe, as it were, in the ſunne of all his
pleaſures, where indeede hee haſtened God
to take away all his pleaſures and delightes
from him, when hee ſhould haue repented,
as the Prophet Daniel willed him, and ripped
vp his ſinnes, and bewailed his wicked
life, and poured foorth teares, and preuented
his iudgement with prayer vpon his knees,
then was hee ſtalking in his galleries, and
thinking what ſinne ſhould bee next, to fill
vp the number of his rebellions, that GOD
might not ſpare him when he iudged: ſo the
wicked will not ſuffer the propheſies of God
againſt them to be in vaine, but they will put
GOD in minde of their puniſhments, and
ſinne till the puniſhment doe come vppon
them to fulfill the threatnings due vnto
them.
            Some thinke that Nabuchadnezzar walked
vppon the roofe of his pallace, from
whence hee might ſee all partes of the Citie
round about him, like the mountaine whither
the tempter led our Sauiour Chriſt, to
ſhew him the beauty of the world.
            This the Prophet Daniel would ſignifie,
that the King liued in eaſe as he liued before,
and pleaſed himſelfe in vanitie ſtill for all his
warnings, and turned his time of repentance
to ſinne againe.
            
               
Therefore God would deferre the time
no longer, but cut him downe, like the barren
and fruitleſſe figge tree, to teach vs to take
mercie when it is offered, and repent while
wee haue time and ſpace, and that if GOD
ſpeake vnto vs but once, to lay it vp in our
hearts for euer, not looking or expecting to
be ſpoken to againe, becauſe GOD is not
bound to admoniſh or giue vs any warning
at all.
            One woulde haue thought that Nabuchadnezzar
woulde haue remembred his
warning while hee had liued, which had
ſuch a ſtrange and fearefull Dreame, and
after that another dreame, being no leſſe
ſtrange and fearefull than the former dreame
to confirme it, and after ſuch a Prophet to
expound it, and the expoſition of it threatning
ſuch a miſerable ruine and downfall vnto
himſelfe.
            One would haue thought and beleeued
that he could neuer haue forgotten it, or put
it out of his remembrance although he had
liued vnto this day. But like a wonder which
laſteth not aboue nine dayes: ſo is the repentance
of them which ſinne by cuſtome, for
when ſinne is rooted it ſticketh faſt, and will
hardly be weeded out, though GOD ſhould
ſend vs dreames, though he ſhould ſhewe vs
viſions, though he ſhould raiſe vp Prophets,

Daniel himſelfe cannot make this blacke
Moore white, which alwaies hath been black
before. And this we may ſee in our ſelues, for
why haue we neede to heare ſo often of repentance,
more then of anything elſe, but
that it is ſuch a thing as we cannot frame our
ſelues vnto? If we bee warned of any thing
but of ſinne, one warning will ſerue. But we
are ſo incorporate and inured to ſinne, that a
thouſand ſermons will not ſerue: ſo cuſtome
hath made ſinne ſtronger in many than the
word of God. Well, remember, or conſider,
or applie it how he will, after twelue moneths
God wil come & take account of his dreames
and of his Prophets, which he ſent him, to ſee
what he hath profited by them. Although he
hath leaden feete which are long in comming,
yet hee hath yron hands, which when
he commeth, will ſtrike home.
            Now the twelue moneths are expired, God
comes & findes Nabuchadnezzar vpon his
towres, when hee ſhould haue caſt himſelfe
downe to the ground, and thought vpon his
dreame, and Daniel, and ſo haue humbled
his pride; hee was pearched vpon his rooſt,
and there he begins to crowe of his wealth;
Is not this great Babel which I haue built
for the houſe of my kingdome, by the might of
my power, and for the honour of my maiestie?
See how the man ſtandeth in admiration of

his vanitie, like a vſurer which doateth of his
money, as though hee had deſerued immortall
fame for ſpending his money vainely. Is
not this great Babel, &c. he ſhould rather haue
ſaide, Is not this Nabuchadnezzars follie,
which hee hath built for a mocke to his
name, and an impeachment to his wiſdome,
for men to ſay when they paſſe by, look how
our King hath beſtowed his reuenues, heere
lie our ſubſidies & tributes in this ſtone wall?
But Nabuchadnezzar thinkes that euerie one
will praiſe him for his follie. Therefore like a
woman when ſhee is pricked vp in her brauerie,
thinkes that all doe admyre her, and
hath as goodly an opinion of her ſelfe as the
Pecocke hath of his feathers, and frameth all
her lookes, and geſtures, and ſpeeches accordingly:
ſo when Nabuchadnezzar ſate
in his Pallace, and ſawe ſuch ſhewes about
him, now ſaith Pride thou muſt frame thy
lookes, and geſtures, and ſpeeches, accordingly,
or elſe the Kings Pallace will be brauer
than the King himſelfe: ſo hee beginneth
to exalt his minde higher than his pallace,
and to looke and ſpeake ſtouter than
hee did before. The temptation was no ſooner
in his heart, but the words were in his
mouth, and hee pleaſed himſelfe therein ſo
well, that he could not refraine being alone,
but as a foole admyres himſelfe in a glaſſe, ſo

when hee was alone and no bodie with him,
hee ſtrouted alone and bragged by himſelfe,
to thinke what a iolly fellow he was, and how
men began to talke of his buildings. By this
we may ſee how wealth and honours change
manners, and how a gay coate, or a great
band, or a gold ring can braue a mans mind,
and make him looke and ſpeake after another
manner then hee is accuſtomed, when
they are from him.
            It is a wonderfull thing to ſee what power
theſe pettie vaine toyes haue ouer the minde,
to alter and change a man ſodainelie, to
make him thinke better of himſelfe that day
hee weares them, than anie other daye beſides.
            
               Is not this great Babel, which I haue built
for the houſe of the kingdome, by the might of
my power, for the honour of my maieſtie. Before
the holy Ghoſt laieth downe Nabuchadnezzars
words, marke how hee commeth vnto
them, The King ſpake and ſayd. Spake & ſayd,
was not one enough, but hee muſt ſay ſpake
and ſayd? This doubling of the words ſheweth,
that hee ſpake with a premeditate pride
from his heart roote, which paſſed not whether
it were a ſin or no, come what will come
of it. The holy Ghoſt doth bring other ſpeeches
with He ſayd, and no more: but here he
ſaith, Spake and ſayd, as though he ſpake twiſe,

not as he ſpake at other times, but like a man
at defiance, which woulde not recall any
word, but if he could ſay more he would ſay
more to anger.
            Did I call it great Babel? I may call it
great Babel? Did I ſay that I built it? I will
ſay that I built it. Did I adde, for the honour
of my maieſtie? let it goe, for the honour of
my maieſtie. Thus hee ſpake and ſayde, as
though he would bee conſtant in his pride,
although hee were conſtant in no other
thing.
            Is not this great Babel, which I haue built
for the houſe of the kingdome, by the might of
my power, and for the honor of my maieſtie?
            Three things I note in this ſaying. Firſt,
what a glorious opinion Nabuchadnezzar
had of his vaine building, out of theſe words,
Is not this great Babel? The ſecond out of
theſe words, which I haue built by the might of
my power; wherein he tearmeth himſelfe the
founder of it, as if he had done all without a
helper. The third is, that in all his worke, hee
ſought nothing but vaine-glory, out of theſe
words; for the honour of my Maieſtie. Theſe
three ſinnes Nabuchadnezzar doth bewraie
in one bragge, and in all theſe three we are ſo
like, that the beaſts were not ſo like him
when 
                  〈◊〉
                became like a beaſt.
            Firſt we haue not ſo wonderfull an opinion

of GOD, or of his word, or of heauen, as
wee haue of our owne acts, although we be
neuer able to do halfe that Nabuchadnezzar
did. Secondlie, this is our manner, to attribute
all to our ſelues whatſoeuer it be, riches,
honour, health, or knowledge; as though all
came by labour, or policie, or arte, or literature:
if wee cannot drawe it to one of theſe,
then we think it fortune, although we vnderſtand
not what fortune is. If wee did count
our ſelues beholding vnto God for them,
then we would finde ſome time to be thankfull
vnto him.
            Laſtly, when we ouer-view theſe matters,
this is our ſolace and comfort, to thinke theſe
are the things which make mee famous and
ſpoken of, and pointed at, and then we end, as
though it were inough to bee poynted at. Is
not this great Babel? That which one loues,
ſeemes greater and more precious aboue all
which he loueth not, although they be better
than it: ſo did theſe buildings ſeeme to Nabuchadnezzar.
            One would not thinke that a houſe were
a matter to make a king proude, although it
were neuer ſo faire; ſtone wals are not ſo precious,
that he ſhould repoſe al his honour vpon
lime and morter. But this is a iuſt thing
with God, that vaine hope, vaine proſperitie,
vaine comfort, and vaine glory, that may deceiue

them when they truſt vnto it: therefore
as the faithfull ſoule looketh vp to GOD,
or vpon the word, or vp to heauen, and ſayth
to it ſelfe, is not this my hope, is not this my
ioy, is not this my inheritaunce? So the carnall
man when hee looketh vpon his buildings,
or his grounds, or his money, ſayth
to himſelfe, is not this my ioye, is not this
my life, is not this my comfort? So while he
poares and gapes vpon it, by little and little
the loue of it growes more and more in his
heart, vntill at laſt he haue mind on nothing
elſe.
            This was the firſt dotage of Nabuchadnezzar:
the ſecond was, which I haue built
by the might of my power. What a vaunt was
this to ſay, that he built Babylon, when al hiſtories
accorde, that it was built by Semyramis
before Nabuchadnezzar was borne,
therfore why doth he boaſt of that which an
other did?
            The anſwere is eaſie, why doe other men
ſo now, wee ſee that euery one doth labour
to obſcure the fame of others, that they may
ſhine alone, & beare the names themſelues,
eſpecially in great buildings: for if they doe
but adde or alter any thing in Schooles, or
Hoſpitals, or Colledges, they looke ſtraight
to bee counted the founders of them, and ſo
the founders of many places are forgotten.

So it is like that Nabuchadnezzar did adde
or alter ſome thing in this Citie, and therfore
hee tooke all to himſelfe, as the faſhion hath
bin euer ſince: but if none had built it, but he
had been the founder of it (as ſome would
ſeeme) yet this had been a proude and arrogant
ſpeech to ſay, which I haue built by the
might of my power: for it was not he which
could build Babel, no more then Nemrod
could finiſh Babel, but vnles the Lord build
the houſe the builders build in vaine. Therefore
when he ſayth, By the might of my power,
he ſhould haue ſayd, by the might of Gods
power.
            But by this you plainely diſcerne, how
hard and difficult a thing it is to hit vpon a
right word or a good worke, which hath not
a good thought to bring it foorth. Therefore
make the roote ſweete, or the fruite will
bee ſower, counterfaite as cunningly as you
can.
            Laſtly, when he putteth in for the honour
of my maiestie, hee ſheweth that he was of
Abſoloms humour, who although he had
deſerued ſhame, yet he would haue fame, becauſe
hee had no children to keepe his name
in remembrance, therefore he erected a piller,
which hee called Abſoloms place: ſo
many ſtately houſes and places in England,
beare their names of thoſe Lords or others

that do poſſeſſe or owe them, for the like vanitie.
            Heere Abſolom thought to bee buryed,
as Nabuchadnezzar thought to dwell in
his pallace, but he was caſt into a pit as Nabuchadnezzar
was turned into the wilderneſſe:
So Shebna made his ſepulchre in one
Countrie, and was buryed in another: for
why ſhould pride haue the reward of humilitie?
Humilitie (ſaith Salomon) goeth before
honour, that is to ſay, honour is the reward
of humilitie: & yet Nabuchadnezzar would
bee honoured for his pride. What had he, or
Shebna, or Abſolom done, that they ſhould
erect ſuch monuments, to bee praiſed after
death, which were not worthy to be praiſed
in their life? before the building Nabuchadnezzar
had done nothing worth ſpeaking
of, for becauſe he liued alwayes like a beaſt,
therefore GOD puniſhed him like a beaſt,
and did hee deſerue now to bee ſpoken of
in all ages, for heaping ſtones together?
Wee may ſee that great men are proude
of a ſmall matter, and they looke to bee
praiſed for euerie thing they doe. But looke
how GOD ouerthwarteth them: for oftentimes
in that they looke to make theyr
greateſt glorie, they ſhame themſelues moſt
of all, and that which they practiſe to exalt
them doth diſgrace them, & that which they

doe to winne them loue, getteth them hatred,
ſinne ſo deceiueth them like the blinde
Aramites, that they take a cleane contrarie
way to their deſires, as wee may ſee in the eleauenth
of Geneſis, they which built Babel,
ſaid they would build it to get them a name,
but they got ſhame, for they could not finiſh
it when they had begun it, but were cōfounded
in ſuch ſort, that they knewe not what
they did, ſo ſodainly they vnderſtoode not
what one another ſaid. So when Nabuchadnezzar
came to himſelfe againe, he ſhewed
that when hee ſought his owne honour, honour
departed from him, and hee was made
like a beaſt: but when hee ſought Gods honour,
honour came to him againe, and hee
was made a King.
            This would pull away many toyes from
womens backs, if they did cōſider how God
maketh them ridiculous by that they weare,
to make thēſelues amiable, if they did thinke
that the apparell which they clogge on to
pleaſe the world, by the ſecret iudgement of
God did not pleaſe but diſpleaſe, they would
be aſhamed of their attire, as Eue was of her
nakedneſſe: would they weare ſuch gardes
and paint their faces but to pleaſe? See now
how God doth mocke them, for they are not
liked but diſliked, and worſe thought of for it
than they which go in ruſſet coates, & ſeeke

no praiſe at all; they think, am I not braue, others
thinke, is ſhe not proud? they think, am
I not ſweete? others thinke, is ſhe not light?
yet they dreame that euerie man praiſeth
them for their brauery: as Nabuchadnezzar
thought that euery one would honor him for
his pallace. If their brauerie condemne them
before men, how will it condemne them before
God? Therefore when Nabuchadnezzar
ſaith, For the honor of my Maieſtie, he ſhould
haue ſaide, for the honour of Gods Maieſtie,
and then this had been recorded for his honour
indeed, and his houſe had bin the houſe
of God: for as we ſhould ſpeake, and ſtudie,
& labour to Gods glorie: ſo we ſhould build
alſo to Gods glorie, that our houſes may bee
like temples, as Obadiahs was. But few ſeeke
glorie that way, they had rather pull downe
than build in ſuch ſort.
            Thus you haue heard what Nabuchadnezzar
ſpake in ſecret, as though GOD would
diſplay the thoughts and pride of ſuch builders.
Theſe are the meditations of Princes &
noble men, whē they behold their buildings,
or open their coffers, or lookvpon their traine
ſwinging after them, they thinke as Nabuchadnezzar
thought, Is not this great Babel?
is not this great glorie? is not this the traine
that maketh me reuerenced in the ſtreets? are
not theſe the things which ſhall make my

children rich? is not this the houſe that ſhall
keepe my name, and cauſe me to be remembred,
and make them which are childrē now
ſpeake of me hereafter, when they ſhall paſſe
by and looke vp, and ſee theſe antikes and
knackes ouer their heads, they will ſay; oh
he which built this was a great man, he bare a
ſway both in court and countrie, who but he
while he liued?
            Although this king be dead & buried, yet
his pride is eſcaped & come to vs. Nabuchadnezzar
hath children yet aliue, which build as
high as he, looke as high as he, goe as braue as
he, ſpend as vainly as he, and are as proud as
he, although they bee not Kings nor Dukes,
nor Earles, nor Knights, nor yet good Squires:
looke vpon their pallaces, and think whether
they bee of Nabuchadnezzars brood; Is not
this great Babel? and is not Nabuchadnezzar
Lord of it? Oh if they might liue to walke in
theſe galleries ſtil, they would deſire no other
heauen, but Nabuchadnezzar hath ſhewed
the way before them, and they muſt all dance
after him, though they were as mightie,
though they were mightier thē he, death will
not take his kingdome for a raunſome. Now
what is Babel, and what is Nabuchadnezzar
the King thereof? Now Babel is deſtroyed,
and the King that built it laid in the duſt, had
it not been better to haue built an houſe in

heauen, which might haue receiued him,
when he dyed?
            The name of theſe pallaces may well bee
called Babel, that is confuſion, becauſe they
propheſie confuſion to them that build them,
becauſe their foundation is Pride, their wals
extortion, their roofe ambition, and all within
them vſurie, briberie, and crueltie. If this
bee the beſt that Nabuchadnezzar hath to
vaunt of, what is the worſt which he may bee
aſhamed of?
            When I ſee how earneſt this King was about
his dreame, and how looſe he ſate after
in his pallace, mee thinkes I ſee the image of
the world in one man: how liuely doth Nabuchadnezzar
reſemble the dreamers of our
time? He could not reſt till hee knew the interpretation
of his dream: ſuch inquirie, ſuch
diligence to knowe Gods will, that a man
would haue thought, now if the King meet
with a Prophet that can tell him the trueth,
and inſtruct him from God, that his dreame
warned him to amend his life, hee will then
reclayme himſelfe, and reforme his realme,
and become ſuch a King as was neuer in the
land before.
            But behold, no ſooner reſolued of his doubt,
but hee is readie to bee warned agayne, and
was not ſo attentiue to the Prophet, as hee
was to his dreame, although hee cared for

neither: for when hee vnderſtoode that his
dreame went about to chaunge the courſe of
his life, he went away like Naaman in a chafe,
and cared no more for his dreame after. Before
the dreame came, all would haue ſayd,
that ſuch a dreame would haue humbled his
heart for euer. Before the Prophet came, all
would haue ſaide, that ſuch a Prophet would
haue conuerted him with a word: but Nabuchadnezzar
is Nabuchadnezzar; and if another
dreame come more fearefull than this,
yet Nabuchadnezzar would be Nabuchadnezzar,
and loue his Pallace better than Paradice.
            So we thinke, if God would ſend a famine
vpon this land, that would make vs feare him:
but God hath ſent a famine, and yet wee doe
not feare him. If God would ſend an earthquake
vpon this lande, that would make vs
feare him: but God hath ſent an earthquake,
and yet we doe not feare him. If God would
ſend a peſtilence vpon this lande, that would
make vs feare him: but God hath ſent a peſtilence,
and yet we doe not feare him. If God
would ſend warre vpon this lande, that would
make vs feare him: but God hath ſent warre,
and yet we doe not feare him; therefore what
will make vs feare him?
            There be many which dreame vpon religion,
as Nabuchadnezzar dreamed vpon his

dreame; and as hee deſired onely to knowe
what it meant, ſo they deſire onely to knowe.
Master, (ſaith the yong man to Chriſt) what
ſhall I do to come into heauen? He would faine
knowe the way to heauen, but when Chriſt
ſhewed him the way, hee would not take it:
So they will goe from Preacher to Preacher,
as Nabuchadnezzar ſent from one wiſe man
to another to be reſolued in poynts of Religion:
ſuch a ſcrutinie, ſuch attention, ſuch
heed, as though they would runne out of the
world, and goe beyond all, that a man would
thinke they would do any thing, as the Iewes
came vnto Moſes, and this young man vnto
Chriſt: But when they haue heard what they
came for, they doe like Nabuchadnezzar, as
they did before; now they ſaye it was but a
dreame, becauſe the meaning doth not anſwere
according to their will. So Achab enquired
of the Prophet, to heare what hee
would ſay, but it appeares that he neuer ment
to follow him, except he would anſwer as he
would haue him.
            When it commeth to the act, which is euerie
mans triall, then you ſhall ſee who are
like Nabuchadnezzar, that is, which affect
onely to knowe; and who are like Zacheus,
that is, which practiſe as they knowe: for as
the truth is reuealed, ſo it muſt be witneſſed,
or els the fall of Nabuchadnezzar ſheweth,

what iudgement will follow vpon ſuch neglecting.
            Becauſe hee would not doe as his dreame
warned him, and as the Prophet counſailed
him, therefore GOD forſooke him, and his
Kingdome departed from him, and hee was
thruſt out of his Pallace, and 
                  •
               urned like an
Oxe into the wilderneſſe, there he liued like
a beaſt vntill ſeauen yeares were ended. A
warning to all to take warning by the word,
for it is the gentle warner, the next will bee
harder, the third and the fourth harder then
it, like to the nine plagues of Egypt, which
did exceede one another: for what is he can
weigh the wrath of GOD, or the grieuouſnes
of ſinne?
            Some men woulde thinke, that Nabuchadnezzar
might haue ſpoken all this without
any ſuch great offence as was taken at it:
for he ſayde no more, but that it was a fayre
houſe, and that he builded it: and that hee
erected it for his honour: ſeeing manie vnder
Princes delight in worſe vanities than
fayre buildings, and ſpeake vayner often in a
weeke.
            Therefore, when you ſee howe it diſpleaſeth
God, to vaunt of theſe earthly thinges,
or to impute any thing to our ſelues, thinke
what ſhall bee the doome of great ſinnes: if
Nabuchadnezzar became like a Beaſte, and

lodged in the wilderneſſe for his pride; they
which beare pride, and couetouſneſſe, and
luſt, and wrath, and malice in one breaſt, ſhal
lodge in hell, and become like Diuels, becauſe
they are like beaſts already. Therefore
let this bee in ſtead of Daniels warning, if
God did take ſuch a ſtraight account of Nabuchadnezzar
for his dreame, what hee had
profited by it: what account will hee take of
vs, what profit we haue made by Nabuchadnezzars
fall and puniſhment?
            Thus you haue heard what the voyce ſpake
from earth, now you ſhall heare what the
voyce ſpake from Heauen: for it followeth,
While the word was in the kings mouth, a voyce
came from heauen, and ſayd; O King to thee
be it ſpoken, thy kingdome ſhall be taken from
thee, &c. God will warne him no more by
dreames, nor by Prophets, as he did: but his
Iudgements ſhall ſpeake. Heere is fulfilled
that which Elihu ſayth to Iob, God ſpeaketh
once and twice by dreames and viſions in the
night, and man ſeeth it not: at the last God openeth
his eyes, by the corrections which he had
ſealed: ſo God ſpake vnto Nabuchadnezzar
firſt by dreames, and after by his Prophet; &
Nabuchadnezzar regarded it not: at laſt God
openeth his eyes by corrections, which hee
had ſealed vp, that they ſhould not touch him
if any other meſſenger could bring him.
            
               
As the holy Ghoſt doth note the time when
Nabuchadnezzar ſpake in his pallace: ſo he
noteth the time when God ſpake from heauen,
Euen while the words were in the Kings
mouth: as though he ſhould ſay, God anſwered
before he looked for it, when he thought
God had been as farre from him, as he was all
the yeare before. Thus God lay (as it were in
the skowte) to watch when he ſpake treaſon,
and to apprehend him vpon it: O Nabuchadnezzar,
thou haſt vanted this twelue months
ſince I warned thee: I made as though I heard
not, but ſuffered thee to doe and ſpeake thy
pleaſure: and vaunteſt thou ſtill? Surely thou
ſhalt ſcape me no longer, I will not heare one
word more againſt my honour. So he cutteth
him off while the words were in his mouth,
and pronounceth the word of iudgement againſt
him.
            The firſt note in this verſe, is the time when
God ſpake from Heauen. Pride (ſayth Salomon)
goeth before the fall: ſo when pride had
ſpoken, then Iudgement ſpake euen while
the proud word was in his mouth. See how
God ſhewes that theſe brags offended him,
and therefore he iudges while he ſpeaks. How
ſhort is the triumph of the wicked? When
they beginne to crowe, God ſtoppeth their
breath, and iudgement ſeaſeth vpon them,
when they thinke no danger neere them: So

when Baltazar was in his mirth with his Nobles,
the fearfull hand wrote his doome vpon
the wall, and preſently his mirth was changed
into ſadneſſe, that he became as one that was
ſtrooken with a palſie: ſo while Herod vanted
himſelfe, and the people honoured him like a
God, the Angell of God ſmote him vpon his
throane, and immediatly he was deuoured of
wormes in the face of them which honoured
him: while the Philiſtines were triumphing
and banquetting, Sampſon pulled the Temple
vpon their head; ſo while the men of Ziklag
were feaſting and dancing, Dauid came
vpon them and ſlew them: when the Iſraelites
were at their Manna and Quailes, euen
while the meat (ſaith Dauid) was yet in their
mouths, God tooke away their liues: when
Iobs children were making merrie one with
another, the winde came and blew down the
houſe: while the old world was marrying, &
giuing in mariage, the floud came and drowned
them: while the Steward was recounting
with himſelfe, and thinking that his Maſter
Knewe not what policie was in his heart,
ſuddenly his Lorde called him to account:
while the churle was muſing of his barnes full
of corne, and ſaying to himſelfe, be merrie my
ſoule, that night his ſoule was taken from
him: ſo while we ſinne & think nothing of it,
our ſinnes mount vp to heauen, and ſtand at

the barre, and call for vengeance againſt vs:
how ſoone Abels blood cryed for vengeance
of Cain? We cannot ſin ſo quickly, but God
ſeeth vs as quickly. Howe many haue beene
ſtrooken while the oath hath been in their
mouthes, as Ieroboam was ſtriken while he
ſtroke, that they might ſee why they were
ſtrooken? and yet al this wil not keep vs from
ſwearing. Though a man ſinne often, & ſteale
his ſins (as it were) without puniſhment, yet
at laſt he is taken napping, euen while the
wickednes is in his hand, and his day is ſette
when he ſhall pay for all, whether it be after
twelue moneths or twelue yeeres, when it
commeth, it will ſeeme too ſoone. Therefore
once agayne let this bee in ſtead of Daniels
warning, if God did take ſo ſtraight account
of Nabuchadnezzar how he had profited by
his dreame, what account will hee take
of vs how we haue profited by Nabuchadnezzars
puniſhment?
Here I ende.
         
         
            
            THE FALL OF KING
Nabuchadnezzar.
            
               DAN. 4. 28. &c.
               
                  28 While the worde was in his mouth, a voice
came from heauen ſaying, O King Nabuchadnezzar,
to thee be it ſpoken, thy Kingdome
is departed from thee.
                  29 And they ſhall driue thee from men, and thy
dwelling ſhall be with the b
                        •
                     astes of the field,
they ſhall make thee to eate graſſe with the
Oxen, and ſeuen times ſhall paſſe ouer thee,
vntill thou knowest that the most highest
God beareth rule ouer the kingdome of men,
and giueth it to whomſoeuer he will.
                  30 The very ſame houre was this thing fulfilled
vpon Nabuchadnezzar, and he was driuen
from men, and did eate graſſe as the Oxen,
and his body was wet with the deawe of

heauen, till his haires were growne as Egles
feathers, and his nailes as birds clawes.
               
            
            
               FRom the 26. verſe to the
ende of this Chapter, is
laid down the pride, fall,
and reſtitution of Nabuchadnezzar.
The two
firſt verſes are like a banner
of his Pride, which
ſhew him in his ruffling as it were in the ayre,
before he knew God, or himſelfe. The three
next verſes are the diſcouerie of his ſhame,
which ſhewe him in his miſerie, as it were
groueling on the ground after God had cooled
his courage. The foure laſt verſes are the
celebration of his recouerie, which ſhew him
in holines as it were rapt into heauen, & ſinging
with the Saints for ioye, that GOD had
brought him vnto his knowledge, though it
were through ſhame & trouble, & loſſe of all
that he had ſeuen yeres together. Of his pride
wee haue heard alreadie: yet becauſe we are
friends to vices as we are to mē, ſo lōg as they
proſper and flouriſh; but when they decay
and fall, then we ſhrinke away, and are aſhamed
of thē: ſo it may be, if ye could ſee pride
take a fall, though yee loue her well, yet yee
would forſake her, like a banquerout, when
ye ſee that ſhe can pleaſure you no longer.
            
               
Therfore ye ſhall ſee Nabuchadnezzar vpon
his feete againe: before you behelde him
vpon his knees, that when ye ſee what a king
he was in his galleries, & after find his ſeruāts
in his pallace, and his ſubiects in his throane,
and himſelfe like a beaſt in the wilderneſſe,
God may giue you hearts to thinke a little of
this ſinne, what it is which coſt ſo deare, and
is ſo common, now in euery houſe, as it was
then in the kings court.
            
               After twelue moneths (ſaith Daniel) that is,
twelue moneths after God had warned this
king by dreames and by Daniel, to repent his
ſinnes, he was ſtrouting in his galleries, and
thought what ſin ſhould be next, as though
he had neuer heard of dreame or Prophet.
            By this computation of ſin, wherein the
moneths are obſerued ſo exactly, how longe
Nabuchadnezzar rebelled after he was warned,
Daniel ſhewes what reckoning GOD
keepes of our moneths, and weeks, and daies,
which he giues vs to repent, as he did Nabuchadnezzar,
and what an account wee ſhall
make of thē, as Nabuchadnezzar did, though
we count no more of our age then the childe
dooth of his youth, and haue doone no
more of our taske at twentie, then when we
were but tenne, nor at thirty, then when we
were but twenty, nor at fortie, then when we
were thirtie, yet we ſhall giue account of mo

hours in the day of iudgement, and it ſhall be
heauier to the old then to the young, to you
which haue the worde, then to them which
want it: and there is great ods betweene Nabuchadnezzar
& vs for he which challenged
Nabuchadnezzar for twelue moneths ſince
he was warned, may challenge vs of twelue
yeeres ſince we were warned, & yet we looke
not for ſo great puniſhment as fell vpon Nabuchadnezzar
for twelue moneths. Daniel
names there twelue moneths, as though hee
would ſpeake of a great matter, and ſhewes
how worthie Nabuchadnezzar was to be puniſhed,
becauſe he might haue reformed his
life ſince he was warned: for there were 12.
moneths betweene his dreames and his puniſhment.
But that yeere wherein he had ſo
many warnings & teachings was as vaine as
the reſt, and vainer then the yeres before: for
now he ſhould haue been a mourner like the
King of Niniuie, when Ionas threatned deſtruction
vnto them. But like a victor of a
countrie returned from battell to ſolemnize
his triūph, firſt he decked his pallace as braue
as himſelfe, and then he walkes his ſtations in
it, and when he hath ſet al things before him,
which might make him forget God, and like
a ſerpent that would burſt, vnles he diſcharged
ſome of his poyſon, he breaketh out and
ſayde, Is not this great Babel, which I haue

built by the might of my power, for the honour of
my maieſtie? wherein obſerue firſt what a glorious
opinion this vaine King had of his vaine
buildings. Secondly, how that he names himſelfe
the founder of them, as though hee had
done all without an helpe. Thirdly, that in all
his works he ſought nothing but vain-glorie,
as hee witneſſeth againſt himſelfe, ſaying;
which I haue built for the honour of my maieſtie?
not for the honour of Gods maieſtie, but
for the honour of my maieſtie. So firſt that
which he ſhould haue contemned, as Chriſt
did the beautie of the Temple;Mat. 24. 2. he admired it,
& nothing ſeemed ſo glorious to him, as that
which made him ſhamefull to God. Secondly,
that citie which was built by Semiramis, he
arrogateth to himſelfe, and neuer ioyned the
chiefe workmaſter with him, but ſaith, which I
haue built by the might of my power, when he
ſhould haue ſaid, by the might of Gods power:
for vnles God build the houſe, the builder
(ſaith Dauid) buildeth but in vaine.Pſal. 127. 1 Laſtly,
that which hee ſhould haue built for the honour
of GOD,2. Kin. 4. 10 as the man built a chamber
for the Prophet, hee builded for his honour,
as our Nabuchadnezzars doe. Therefore
when all his pleaſures were prepared
like a feaſt, and he came to ſit downe at the
b
                  •
               ket, it hapned to him as to the churle in the
Goſpell, after he had filled his barnes, when

hee came to ſing in his heart, Be merrie my
ſoule; that night his ſoule was takē from him,
and the diuels made merrie with it in hell: ſo
he had fethered his neaſt, and began to crow
vpon his rooſt, Is not this great Babel, &c. As
if he ſhuld ſay, Now Nabuchadnezzar make
thee merie; that houre his honor was taken
from him, for a voyce came downe from heauen,
like the terrible hand which wrote vpon
the wall when Baltaſar ſate at his banquet, &
daſht his pride vpon ſuch a rocke, that within
an houre all his pomp, and pleaſures, and treaſures,
ſuffered ſuch a ſhipwracke, that his fall
was more admired of all, than his glorie and
buildings were admired of himſelfe. Thus all
the ioy, and pleaſures, and glory of pride are
ſpoken with a breath, and ſtopt with another.
            You haue heard what the voice ſpake from
earth, now ye ſhal heare what the voice ſoūds
from heauen. Theſe three verſes following
declare this Kings fall, when and howe, and
from whom it was. While the words were yet,
&c. there is the time. A voice, &c. there is the
Iudge O king, &c. there is the arraignement.
Thy kingdom, &c. there is the iudgement. He
was driuen from men, & liued with beaſts in che
wildernes, till his haires were grown like Eagles
fethers. There is the execution and maner of
his puniſhment. Firſt of the time, while, &c.
            
            
               
As Daniel obſerued the time when Nabuchadnezzar
ſinned, ſo he obſerueth the time
when Nabuchadnezzar is puniſhed: as if
God had lien in waite to catche him in his
words, and take him at the trippe, euen as he
watched Lots wife when ſhee looked backe,
and transformed her into a piller of oſ ſalte, ſo
ſoone as ſhe looked behind her: So now the
Lord lay as it were in the ſcout, to watch whē
Nabuchadnezzar ſpake treaſon, and to apprehend
him vpon it, O Nabuchadnezzar
thou haſt vanted theſe twelue moneths ſince
I warned thee, and I made as though I heard
not, but ſuffered thee to doe and ſpeake thy
pleaſure, and vaunteſt thou ſtill? Surely thou
ſhalt eſcape me no longer, I will not heare a
word more againſt mine honour. So hee cut
him off while the wordes were in his mouth,
and propoundeth the wordes of iudgement
againſt him. If you marke the time when the
voice ſpake from heauen, you may ſee three
wiſedomes of God. Firſt God takes him in his
fault,1 Kin 13. 4 that he might ſee his fault, as Ieroboam
was ſtriken when he ſtroke the Prophet, that
he might know why he was ſtriken. Then he
takes him ſodainly, becauſe hee contemneth
his warning,Gen. 19. 24. as the fire came vpon Sodome
while they contemned Lots warning. Thirdly,
God takes him where he is pleaſanteſt and
luſtieſt, and ſafeſt, in his pallace, which was

like a Caſtle,Act. 12. 23. as he took Herod when his gard
ſtood by him, that he might ſee that nothing
can garde him from God, but God muſt gard
him from danger, or elſe Princes bee no ſafer
than ſubiects: ſo though a man ſin often, and
ſteale his ſins as it were without puniſhment,
yet at the laſt he is tooke napping, while the
wickedneſſe is in his hand; as the Iewes were,
while the quailes were in their mouthes, and
his day is ſet when hee ſhall pay for all,Nū. 11. 33. whether
it bee after 12. moneths, or 12. yeeres,
whenſoeuer it commeth it wil ſeem too ſoon.
Vengeance doth ſtay till ſin be ripe, & watch
the time when they are moſt occupied, then
iudgement ſteps forth, like the Angel to ſtop
Balaam in his way,Nū. 22. 22. becauſe the puniſhment is
more grieuous & terrible whē they look not
for it (for the worſt that is, wiſh like Balaam,
to die the death of the righteous) therefore
God will croſſe them in that: though they
proſper alwayes before, yet their ends ſhall
be a kinde of iudgement vpon all their life, &
a propheſie of torment, for all men to ſee
what become of the wicked after death, that
they may feare to be like vnto them: As when
we ſee ſome fall down vnder the table while
they ſit ſwilling at the Wine: ſome ſtriken
dumbe in the pulpit, while they preach vntruths:Act. 12. 23.
euē as the Philiſtines were ſlain while
they feaſted,1. Kin. 13. 4 and as Herod was ſhamed while

he vanted, and as Ieroboam was ſtriken while
he ſtroke. What doth this teach vs, but that
our ſinnes depart from vs ſo ſoon as they are
done vnto the Iudge, & there they accuſe vs,
as Cains murther cried out againſt him, ſo
ſoon as he ſlew his brother.Gen 4. I know thy works
ſaith God:Reu. 3. 15. he may ſay I knowe thy works &
thy thoughts too:Mat. 26. 14 16, 1
                     •
                  . for Iudas could not goe ſo
cloſely about his trechery, but that Chriſt did
know when the thought entred into his hart,
and heard when he conferred alſo with the
Scribes, and ſaw likewiſe when he tooke the
bribe, though he kept a time to puniſh him, as
he ſaith Pſalm. 37. ver. 2. When I ſee a conuenient
time, then wil I execute iudgement.
            
            Now the time was come, when this King
ſhould bee made an example vnto all other
Kings after him, to amend their liues, and reforme
their Realmes, when as the Prophet
commeth from God vnto them, to tell them
what they ſhould doe. When Dreame and
Daniel had done what they could; now God
cals foorth his Iudgements, and bids them
ſee what they can do, and commaunds them
to chaſe Nabuchadnezzar, vntill he haue
loſt his kingdome, vntill he be driuen out of
his pallace, vntill he be fled into the wildernes,
vntill he be degenerate like a beaſt, vntill
his ſubiects, & ſeruants, & pages make their
ſport, & gaze and wonder at him, like a foole

which goeth vnto the ſtockes, or a treſpaſſer,
which is gazed at vpon the pillorie: ſo the
king was debaſed, when God heard him but
vaunt of his buildings.
            Therefore let vs take heede and be carefull,
after what ſort we ſpeake, and what wordes
ſlip from vs, leſt GOD take vs in our lies, or
oaths, or ſlanders, or ribauldrie, as hee tooke
Nabuchadnezzar, when his tongue walked
without a bit: for if he had ſuppoſed that God
had been ſo neare, and that he would haue anſwered
him as he did, he would haue held his
peace, and layd his hand vpon his mouth, rather
than pay ſo deare for a vain word, which
did him no good when it was ſpoken.
            The ſecond note is of the Iudge, A voyce
came downe from heauen: the controuling
voice came down from heauen, God is moſt
offended with our ſinne: for Nabuchadnezzar
might haue ſpoken more than this, before
any other man, and no man could controll
him becauſe he was king, and kings delight
in greater vanities than buildings, yet no man
ſaith, Why doeſt thou ſo? becauſe Salomon
ſaith, He which repeateth a matter ſeparateth
the Prince, that is, he which tels Princes their
faults, maketh them his enemies: therefore
ſince Iohn Baptiſt dyed, onely God is left to
reprooue almoſt all that ſinne by authoritie,
yet there is one in heauen hath an eare and a

tongue, and checketh the king as boldly as euer
the king checketh his ſubiects. When the
voice from earth ſpake vainly, the voice from
heauen ſpake iudgement. Here is the king
of heauen againſt the king of earth, the voice
of GOD againſt the voice of man: a diuine
wrath, warring with a humane pride: the fire
is kindled, woe to the ſtubble. The Lorde
of hoaſts is in armes againſt the Lord of Babel,
and beginnes to lay handes on him and
to thruſt him out of his throane. Firſt, he rattles
him like a thunder, O King Nabuchadnezzar:
as if he ſhould ſay, for all thou art
a king, thou ſhalt ſee whether another bee aboue
thee. Now gard thy perſon, now defend
thy honour, for he whom thou haſt deſpiſed,
threatneth to take thy kingdome from thee;
goe nowe and walke in thy galleries, fetch
one turne more before thou bee turned out
of doore, and walke with the beaſtes in the
forreſt.
            Now he comes to the arraignement, and
cals him to the barre, O king Nabuchadnezzar
to thee be it ſpoken. He was neuer called
king with leſſe reuerence, nor had ſuch paie
for ſinne in all his raigne. God giues him his
title, and he tels him his lot, he cals him king
but without a kingdom: as if he ſaid, late king
of Babel, holde vp thy hande. Here a king is

arraigned in his owne kingdome, and no euidence
giuen againſt him, but as though hee
had witneſſed againſt himſelfe, as all ſinners
doe, God condemneth him out of his owne
mouth, and to open his eares, he calleth him
by his owne name, O king Nabuchadnezzar,
as the priſoner is called when he holds vp his
hand at the barre. Then he pronounceth the
iudgement, To thee be it ſpoken, to thee which
aduanceſt thy ſelfe like God, to thee which
wouldſt not take heed by thy dreame, to thee
which wouldſt not bee warned by the Prophet,
to thee which diddeſt all for thine own
honor. Now hearken to thy iudgement, Thy
kingdome is departed from thee, thou ſhalt bee
driuen out of thy pallace, they which ſhould
honor thee ſhall expulſe thee, thou ſhalt
raigne with the beaſtes in the deſarte, there
ſhall be thy dwelling ſeuen yeares, goe now
and ſtalke in the woods as thou diddeſt in thy
pallaces, and when thou art among the Lyons
and Wolues, and Beares, looke vnto Babel
which thou haſt built.
            How dooth this ſpeech differ from Nabuchadnezzars
ſpeeche? his wordes were but
wordes, but Gods wordes were, He ſpake, and
it was done. For in the ſame houre that which
was ſpoken was done (ſaith Daniel) & whatſoeuer
the voyce threatneth vnto our ſinnes,

or vnto the ſinner, ſhal be done at firſt or laſt.
To Nabuchadnezzar it was ſaid, Thy kingdome
ſhall bee taken from thee. To vs it is ſaid,
Thy life ſhall bee taken from thee. To him it
was ſaid, Thou ſhalt be thruſt forth into the deſart.
To vs it is ſaid, Thou ſhalt bee throwne
forth into darkenes. To him it was ſaid, Thou
ſhalt be like beaſts. To vs it is ſaid, Thou ſhalt
be like the damned. Shall not the voice ſpoken
to vs be remembred with God, as well as
the threatning menaced to him?
            This voice came from heauen, and therefore
it ſpake home, not like them which glide
by the faultes of Princes, & whiſper behinde
their backes, as though they would reproue
them if they durſt, but for feare leſt the prince
or counſellor, or iudge, or magiſtrate, ſhould
take it as he meanes it, & think that he aimes
at them, which makes them ſpeake in parables,
as though they would caſt a vayle ouer
their reproofe, and eate their meſſage before
they haue ſpoken it. The holy Ghoſt teacheth
vs here to reproue, ſo that whoſoeuer ſinneth
may knowe that thou ſpeakeſt to him. Hee
which ſpeaketh from Heauen (as the voyce
did) muſt ſpeak like Iohn Baptiſt among the
Publicans & harlots, and ſouldiers, as though
he went from one to another, and ſaide, this
is ſpoken to thee, this is ſpoken to thee, this is

ſpoken to thee. For vnleſſe wee come neere
theſe mortall Gods and proud Nabuchadnezzars,
as neer as Elias came to Achab, whē
he ſaid, It is thou that troubleſt Iſrael, they wil
poaſt it ouer and thinke that thou ſpeakeſt
not to them vntill thou ſpeakeſt plainly, as
the voice ſpake from heauen, To thee be it ſpoken.
And they will reforme the matter, or elſe
God ſhew ſome iudgement vpon them, as he
did heere vpon this great king Nabuchadnezzar.
            Now the decree goeth foorth, that Nabuchadnezzar
ſhall be King no more, Thy
kingdome is departed from thee. This is ſuch a
ſaying, as if Nabuchadnezzar had thought of
it before, he would haue wept when he vanted,
to thinke that his honor was going from
him, when hee thought it was comming to
him: and yet his kingdom was departed from
him, and yet God ſaith, Thy kingdome is departed
from thee, becauſe the decree was paſt,
which ſhould as ſurely come to paſſe, as if it
were paſt already. Therefore becauſe we
care not ſo long as the Prophet ſayth, we ſhal
die, we ſhal ſuffer, we ſhal anſwere, he leaueth
Shall, and ſaith Now, as God ſaid to Abimelec:
Thou art a dead man, not thou ſhalt dye,
but thou art dead, which rouſed him more,
then if hee had threatned him an hundred

deaths, becauſe he thought that he ſhuld die
preſently: So the holy Ghoſt is forced as it
were to exceede, and ſpeake more then wee
thinke he ſhould ſpeake, for the hardneſſe of
our hearts, which heare like ſtones, and goe
like ſnayles. If we haue but a weeke to repent
we will deferre it to the laſt day, that we may
ſinne all the reſt.
            Therefore it was meet to ſay, Thy kingdome
is departed from thee. That ſeeing his iudgement
ſhould not ſtay, he ſhould not ſtay his
repentance. If this voyce had ſaide, Thy Babell
ſhall ſinke, as Nemrods Babel did, it ſeemeth
he would haue thought his honour buried,
but when he was ſtript, not onely of his
pallace, but alſo of his kingdome, what heauy
newes was this vnto him, which thought him
ſelfe equall with GOD, and nowe may not
be a King? But when hee was thruſt among
beaſts to eate graſſe with oxen, what a downfall
was this to be brought vnder all his ſubiectes,
which ſpake euen nowe as though
there were none but he: and now his ſeruants
ſeruant would not be like vnto him? So the
king of kings wil be honored of kings, as they
are of their ſubiects, or elſe he will tread vpon
their crownes, and they ſhal heare the ſame at
laſt, Thy kingdome ſhall depart from thee.
            
            Nowe followeth the execution of his

iudgement, for Daniell ſaith, The ſame houre
all this was fulfilled. So he ſheweth the order
of it: as a priſoner is brought to the barre, and
lead to a gybbet, ſo this King was drawne
from his throne, and turned into the wilderneſſe,
where he aboade among wilde beaſtes
ſo long, Till his haires were growne like Eagles
feathers, and his nailes like birds clawes.
            
            When God began, he made haſt, as it was
long before he ſpoke, but when he ſpoke, hee
did it, and effected in an houre all that the
dreame and the Prophet had foretolde.
            Then was fulfilled, The pride of man ſhall
bring him lowe: Euen in that houre that Nabuchadnezzar
aduanced himſelfe more than
before, in the ſame houre hee was brought
vnder all his ſubiectes, all his ſeruants and
pages; ſo he which ſetteth vp can pull down,
he which gaue can take, he which made can
deſtroy.
            Therefore let no man vaunt though hee
were a king of his houſe or land, or farme
or children, but know that hee ſhould haue
nothing, if GOD did not regarde him more
than other, and thinke when thou doeſt read
this ſtorie, whether thou be not as proude of
thy wealth, as Nabuchadnezzar was of his
pallace: whether thou be not as proud of thy
childrē, as Nabuchadnezzar was of his kingdome:

whether thou be not as proud of thy
parentage, as Nabuchadnezzar was of his
honour: whether thou be not ſo proud of thy
lerning, as Nabuchadnezzar was of his train.
If thou be not ſo proud, thē God doth ſay no
more, O King, to thee be it ſpoken, O ſubiect to
thee be it ſpoken, theſe bleſſings ſhalbe taken
from thee. For, hath God takē no mans kingdome
from him but Nabuchadnezzars? hath
he taken no mans office from him but Iudas?
hath he taken no mans riches from him but
Iobs? how did Antiochus, and Iulian, and Herod,
and Saul, and Athalia, and Iezabel, & Richard
the third goe from their thrones, as if
God had pulled thē out by the eares? he had
no reſpect vnto their perſons, but vſed them
like beaſts as hee did Nabuchadnezzar, and
fulfilled his threatning: The candle of the
wicked ſhall be put out. Therefore as Chriſt
ſaith vnto them which turne backe: Remember
Lots wife: ſo I may ſay to them which
beare high mindes, and proud lookes, & ſtout
wordes, remember King Nabuchadnezzar,
how God reſiſted the proud. Now if any man
long to be reſolued, how this king was changed
to a beaſt, he muſt not imagin any ſtrāge
metamorphoſis, or popiſh tranſubſtantiation,
as though his ſhape were altered, or his
manhood remoued, or that he put on hornes

and hoofe, as the Poets faine of Acteon, for
the voyce doth not ſaye that hee ſhould become
a beaſt, but that he ſhould dwell with
the beaſtes. Daniel dooth not ſaye that his
head or armes, or legges were transformed:
but that the haire of his head and the nayles
of his fingers did growe like Eagles feathers,
and like birds clawes, as euerie mans haire
and nayles will doe, if hee doe not pare
them.
            Laſtly, Nabuchadnezzar ſaith not, that his
ſhape was reſtored vnto him, but that his vnderſtanding
was reſtored vnto him: all which
declare, that he was not chaunged in bodie,
but in minde: not in ſhape, but in qualitie. A
ſauage minde came on him, like that which
droue Cain from the companie of men,Gen. 4. 12. and
he became like a Satyre or wilde man, which
differeth not frō a beaſt, but in ſhape: though
hee was not turned to a beaſt, yet this was a
ſtraunge alteration, to bee ſo chaunged in an
houre, that his Nobles abhorred him, his ſubiects
deſpiſed him, his ſeruants forſooke him,
none woulde companie with him but the
beaſts. Conſider this all that aduaunce themſelues
againſt GOD and deſpiſe his word, as
Nabuchadnezzar did. Take warning by a
King, which euen now walkt in his galleries,
& his Nobles ſerued him in his pallace, with

all diſhes that the ayre, or ſea, or land, could
afford: now he is turned to graſe & feede like
an oxe with the beaſts in the wilderneſſe. This
was to ſhewe that God maketh no more account
of the wicked then of beaſts, and therfore
the holy Ghoſt calleth them often by the
name of beaſts: ſhewing how that ſinne and
pleaſure make men like beaſts: when they
haue abuſed their wits often, and peruerted
their reaſon, at laſt God taketh their vnderſtanding
from them, and they become like
beaſts, lothſome to themſelues and others:
many ſuch beaſts wee haue ſtill like Nabuchadnezzar,
who were fitter to liue in the deſart
among lions, where they might not anoy
others, then in townes amongſt men, where
they infect more then the plague. Thus if you
haue not conſidered the beaſtlines of ſinne,
looke vpon Nabuchadnezzar like a beaſt. If
you would ſee the guilt of it,Gen. 4. 12. looke vpon
wandering Cain. If thou wouldeſt ſee the
frenſie of it,1. Sa. 16. 14 looke vpon frantike Saul. If thou
wouldeſt ſee the feare of it, looke vpon trembling
Baltazar.Dan. 5. 6. If thou wilt ſee the ſhame of
it,Heſt. 7. 10. look vpon Haman, hanging vpon his own
gallowes. If thou wilt ſee the end of it, looke
vpon the Glutton frying in hell.Luk. 16. 23. Theſe are
the pictures of ſinne, which GOD hath ſet
for a terror before vs:Gen. 19. 26. like the piller of ſalt,

or Achans Sepulchre to ſpeake to vs.Ioſua. 7. 26. Take
heed by thoſe, when I haue warned you, as I
warned them, I will puniſh you, as I puniſhed
them. This is the Epitaph, as it were, which
God ingraueth vpon Nabuchadnezzars Sepulchre:
            Be thou an example to Kings and Rulers,
for all the children of pride, to beware how
they ſet themſelues agaynst him who aduaunced
them.
            Thus hee which ſets vp, can pull downe.
Did not I ſende thee dreames to warne thee?
Did not I ſende a Prophet to warne thee? If
eyther of them woulde haue ſerued, thou
mighteſt haue ruled ſtill, and walked in thy
galleries, and feaſted in thy pallace, and iudged
vpon thy throane, and dyed a King: but
now thy kingdome is departed from thee.
Who would bee like Nabuchadnezzar, now
he is like a beaſt? If this heathen was thus
challenged for his warning, which had heard
but one Prophet, we may tremble to thinke
what wee ſhall anſwere for our warnings,
which haue been threatned as often as the
Iſraelites, and yet prouoked the Lord while
he ſerueth vs, like thoſe which curſe the ſunne
while it ſhineth vpon them.
            Thus haue you ſeene the fall of pride. Euen
now he ſayd, Is not this great Babel? Now he

may ſay: Is not this vnhappie Babel? euen
he ſayd, which I haue built by the might of my
power: and now hee may ſay, which I haue
built by the vanitie of my pride: euen now he
ſayd, for the honour of my maieſtie: now hee
may ſay, for the ruine of my kingdome: yet
after this he roſe againe, and came to himſelf,
and receiued his kingdome, and honoured
him which puniſhed him ſo: but
the time will preuent me to ſpeak
of his reſtitution, therefore
here I ende.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            THE RESTITVTION
OF NABVCHADNEZZAR.
            
               Dan. 4. 31. &c.
               
                  31 And at the ende of theſe dayes, I Nabuchadnezzar
lift vp mine eyes vnto heauen,
and mine vnderſtanding was reſtored vnto
me, and I gaue thankes vnto the moſt
high, and I praiſed and honoured him that
liueth for euer, whoſe power is an euerlaſting
power, and his kingdome is from generation
to generation.
                  32 And all the inhabitants are reputed as
nothing: and according to his will he worketh
in the armie of heauen, and in the inhabitants
of the earth, and none can ſtay
his hande, or ſay vnto him, Why doeſt thou
ſo?
                  33 At the ſame time I had my vnderstanding
restored vnto mee, and I returned to

the honour of my kingdome, my glorie, and
my beautie was restored vnto mee, and my
counſellors and my Princes ſought vnto
mee, and I was establiſhed in my kingdome,
and my glorie was augmented toward
me.
                  34 Now therefore I Nabuchadnezzar praiſe
and extoll and magnifie the king of heauen,
whoſe workes are all trueth, and his wayes
iudgement, and thoſe that walke in pride he
is able to abaſe.
               
            
            
               NOw wee are come
to his Reſtitution:
firſt Nabuchadnezzar
was humbled, as
God humbleth his
enemies, now he is
humbled as GOD
humbleth his children,
that although
he had more honour than he had before, yet
he is not proud of it as he was before, but cryeth
with the Prophet Dauid,Pſal 115. 1 
               Not vnto me O
Lord, not vnto me, but vnto thy name giue the
glorie. So he which ſayd, not only with heart,
but almoſt with mouth too,Pſal. 14 1. there is no God:
now with heart and mouth honoureth none
but God. His pride and his fall Daniel declared,
but when hee came to his reſtitution, hee

makes Nabuchadnezzar to ſpeake himſelfe,
and giue thankes in his owne perſon, like a
witneſſe brought in to teſtifie the trueth of
this wonderfull ſtorie.
            When the Prophet had ſhewed how this
King vaunted, and how he was debaſed for it,
preſently after he had ſpoken it, he calles in as
it were the King himſelfe, to witneſſe his report,
and declare how he was raiſed agayne,
like a man which hauing receiued grace from
a Prince or great perſon, is brought in before
him to giue thankes for his fauour receiued,
and then is diſmiſſed.
            In theſe verſes two things ſhewe themſelues
at the firſt view, that is, Nabuchadnezzars
Reſtitution, and his thankfulneſſe in his
Reſtitution. Firſt, he ſhewes the time when
he was reſtored in theſe words, At the end of
theſe daies, then hee ſhewes the manner how
hee was reſtored in theſe wordes, I Nabuchadnezzar
lift vp mine eyes to heauen, and
mine vnderstanding was restored to me. In his
thankfulnes, firſt he extolleth Gods power,
in ſetting him vp and pulling him downe,
and raiſing him agayne: then he commēdeth
Gods iuſtice and trueth, which deſerues to be
praiſed for his iudgements, as much as for his
mercie, as though he reioyced that God had
made him like a beaſt, that he might dye like
a man.
            
               
               At the end of theſe dayes. As Daniel noted
the time of his pride, when hee walked in his
pallace, to ſhewe how pride growes out of
buildings, and wealth, and apparell, and ſuch
rootes: ſo he noteth the time of his fall, while
the wordes were in his mouth, to ſhewe that
he was puniſhed for his pride and ignorance,
that he might knowe where to begin his conuerſion,
and abate his pride, and when he had
taken away the cauſe, then God would take
away the puniſhment: ſo likewiſe he noteth
the time of his Reſtitution, At the ende of
theſe dayes, that is, after ſeauen yeares were
expired; to ſhewe how long the ſickneſſe of
pride is in curing, and to ſhewe how euerie
thing was fulfilled which was propheſied, euen
to the poynt of time, for it was tolde him
by Daniel that he ſhould be like a beaſt ſeuē
yeares, therefore Nabuchadnezzar is prompt
as it were to confeſſe the trueth, and ſayth as
the Prophet ſayth, At the ende of theſe dayes,
that is, at the ende of ſeauen yeares, I Nabuchadnezzar
was reſtored to my kingdome,
as Daniel tolde me. Yet another note is ſet
vpon this beaſt, leaſt wee ſhould thinke that
God only regarded the ſeaſon, and thinke ſeuen
yeares puniſhment enough for ſuch a
ſinne: He ſaith not barely, that his vnderſtanding
and honour were reſtored vnto him,
when ſeuen yeares were ended: but that they

were reſtored vnto him when hee began to
lift vp his eyes vnto heauen: to ſhewe that
this bleſſing came from aboue, and that hee
which had humbled him, had reſtored him agayne,
as if hee ſhould ſaye to all that are caſt
down with ſickneſſe, or pouertie, or infamie,
or any trouble whatſoeuer in bodie or minde,
hee which hath humbled you will raiſe you,
as hee hath done mee, but you muſt looke
vp vnto heauen, and lift vp your hearts vnto
him, and then your vnderſtanding, and
comfort, and wealth, and pleaſure, & health,
and libertie, and good name, and all ſhall returne
vnto you agayne: like Iobs ſheepe, and
cammels, and oxen, in greater number than
he had before, as all the bleſſings of God returned
to Nabuchadnezzar when he looked
vp to heauen: ſo they ſhall come backe like
a riuer vpon you, when your eyes can goe by
theſe vanities, and looke vpon him which
lookes vpon you, or els ſeuen and ſeuen yeres
ſhall paſſe ouer you, and you ſhall be neuer
the better, but worſe and worſe; like Saul
which was vexed more and more, till he had
killed himſelfe.
            Therefore as the Iewes looked vp to the
braſen Serpent, which was a figure of Chriſt,
when they would bee healed, Numb. 21. 8:
ſo all that woulde recouer that which they
haue loſt, or obtaine that which they want,

Nabuchadnezzar doth teach them here to
lift vp their eyes to heauen, from whence
(sayth Chriſt) commeth euerie bleſſing of
man. At the end of theſe dayes, I Nabuchadnezzar
lifte vp mine eyes, &c. Like a man
which is wakened out of a long traunce, now
he began to ſtirre and lift vp his eyes: when
the heart is once lift vp, it wil lifte vp the eyes,
and the hand and voice, and all to heauen: he
which neuer looked vp to heauen ſo long as
his comfort was vpon the earth; nowe his
minde is changed, his lookes, and ieſtures, &
ſpeeches, and all are chaunged with it: As
though God would ſhew a viſible difference
betweene the ſpirituall and the carnall, euen
in their lookes and ieſtures: as there is betweene
a childe and an olde man. The ſpirituall
mindes are heauenly, and looke vp, becauſe
their ioy is aboue. The carnall mindes
are earthly, and looke downe like beaſts, becauſe
their treaſure is belowe.Gen. 3. 14. As the ſerpent
grouels vpon the ground, ſo doth the ſerpents
ſeede, and hath not ſo much as the countenance
of grace.
            Therefore by lifting vp his eyes to heauen,
is ſignified that the time was come, which
the Lord had ſet downe, that he ſhould bee
like a beaſt, vntill he had learned that leſſon,
That the moſt high beareth rule ouer the ſons
of men. Therfore Nabuchadnezzar ſheweth

that hee had learned his leſſon, for he looked
not vp to heauen to beholde the Sunne, the
moone or the ſtarres, like an Aſtronomer, but
thinking howe hee had ſet himſelfe againſt
Heauen, from whence came all his honour,
in a godly ſhame & holy anger, toward himſelfe,
he turnes his face from earth to heauen,
to magnifie him, which had humbled him;
that ſo contemneth him, which aduanced
him. Nowe hee talkes no more of his Pallace,
nor his power, nor his Maieſtie, though
it be greater then it was, but hee looked aboue
his owne pallace, to another Pallace,
from whence that terrible voyce came down
vnto him, Thy kingdome is departed from thee.
Which expreſſeth his contrite hearte, and
wounded ſpirit, howe many paſſions batled
within, as if hee ſhould chide himſelfe, and
ſaye: Vnthankefull man, my power euer
deſcended from aboue, and I euer looked
vpon the earth, and mine honour came
downe from heauen, and I neuer lifte vp
mine eyes before: But now ſayth he, goe vp
my voyce, and my handes, and my eyes, how
long will ye pore vpon the earth like a beaſt?
ſo he lifted vp his eyes vnto heauen. After hee
had lifted vp his eyes, he beginneth to pray, &
praiſe, and giue thanks to God, which ſheweth
that he did not onely lifte vp his eyes, but
his heart too: for vnleſſe we can ſay with Dauid,

               I lift vp my hart. Pſal. 25. 1. it is in vain to
lift vp eies, or hands, or voice, as the hypocrits
doe, becauſe he which is a ſpirite, will be worſhipped
in ſpirite. Iohn 4. Therefore Marie
ſayth, My heart doth magnifie the Lord. Luke
11. 46. As for the Infidels and Idolaters, they
haue no heartie ſeruice, but their religion is
like an occupation, which is done with the
body. For when we reade of the ſacrifice or
prayers of the Idolaters and Infidels, we doe
not find, that they lifte vp their hearts to their
Idols, but their hands, or their eyes, or their
voyce, as the Baalites roared to Baal, 1. King.
18. 28. and the Marriners cryed to their Seagods,
1. Ionas. 5. and the Epheſians ſhowted
to Diana, Act. 19. 28. But the lifting vp of the
heart is the holy ſeruice, and alway appropriate
vnto God, which ſaith, My ſonne, giue me
thy heart. Pro. 23. 26. Therefore now Nabuchadnezzar
lifts vp his heart to God, ſhewing
that he had learned that leſſon which GOD
gaue him 7. years to ſtudy, that The moſt high
beareth rule ouer the ſonnes of men, &c.
            
            Now God thinkes the time long enough:
& as he reformed the ground after the flood,
with fruit, and hearbes, and flowers agayne;
ſo hee reformeth Nabuchadnezzar with vnderſtanding,
and beauty, and honour againe.
As when he repented himſelfe, and ſayd, I wil
drown the earth no more, Gen. 8. 21. ſo I wil

chaſe Nabuchadnezzar no more: nowe he
knowes a king aboue him, he ſhall bee king
againe nowe he ſeekes my honour, I wil giue
him honour; now he magnifieth him which
debaſed him, I will returne to exalt him. So
the voyce which thundred from heauen, Thy
kingdome is departed from thee: ſounds again,
Thy kingdome is reſtored to thee. For it was
not tolde that he ſhould be like a beaſt vntill
he dyed, but vntill he knew that the moſt high
beareth rule ouer the ſonnes of men. Therefore
when he knew this, nothing could ſtay him
from his kingdome, no more then they could
ſtay him in it before. Thus the diſpleaſure of
God is but an interim, vntill we knowe ſome
thing that we ſhould know, and then Nabuchadnezzar
ſhalbe king againe, then the ſick
man ſhalbe whole againe, then the bondman
ſhall be free againe, then the poore man ſhall
be rich againe. His mercies are called euerlaſting,
becauſe they endure for euer. Pſal. 136.
1, 2. But his anger is compared to the clouds,
becauſe it laſteth but a ſeaſon, whome he loueth
hee loueth to the ende, but whome hee
ſcourgeth hee ſcourgeth to repent; as Hezekias
was ſicke vntill hee wepte, Nabuchadnezzar
was baniſhed but vntill hee repented.
Now the firſt cure of the Kings reſtitution
was of his mind, Mine vnderſtanding (ſaith
Nabuchadnezzar) was reſtored vnto me. To

ſhewe what an ineſtimable gift our vnderſtanding
and reaſon is, whereby wee differ
from beaſts, for which we cannot be thankful
enough, therefore he records it twiſe, as
though his heart did flowe with gladnes, and
his tongue could not chooſe but ſpeak often
of it, as a man thinketh and ſpeaketh of that
which he loueth.
            
               Mine vnderstanding was reſtored vnto me,
&c. That which was firſt taken away, was
firſt reſtored againe, which ſo ſoone as it was
gone, he was counted a man no more, but a
beaſt. As Dauid ſayth, Like Horſe and Mule
which haue no vnderſtanding. Pſalme 32. 9.
counting them which are voide of vnderſtanding
to better then horſe and mule. Therefore
they which haue loſt their vnderſtāding
at the Tauerns, as many here haue done ſomtimes,
& they which vnderſtād not yet what
is the booke of God, are but horſe and mule,
though they beare the viſors of men.
            After he had ſayd, Mine vnderſtanding was
restored to me, he annexeth, Mine honour was
restored to me, ſo he grew to a king againe: as
he was wont to put on one roabe after another
when hee was a King, ſo when GOD
would make him a king againe, firſt hee puts
vpon him the roabe of vnderſtanding as it
were the foundation of a king, like the principall
ſpirit which came vpon Saul, the firſt

of Samuel 10. 9. And when he had a princes
heart, then GOD gaue him a Princes power,
and proclaymed like a voyce from Heauen,
Nabuchadnezzar king of Babel: ſo gloriouſly
he roſe againe like the Sunne, with a triumph
of his reſtitution, & welcome of his ſubiects,
like the ſhoute which went before Salomon.
1. King. 1. 34. One would think when Nabuchadnezzar
was a King, GOD would neuer
haue made him like a beaſt, nor after made
him again a king: for who would ſuffer a beaſt
to rule ouer thē, ſeeing ſuch ſtomackes are in
men, that they will hardly endure any rulers.
Therefore it is ſtrange that theſe men would
ſuffer one to rule ouer them that had been 7.
yeeres like a beaſt; it is euen as if one had lien
7. yeres in the graue, and after come to challenge
his houſe and goods from them which
haue it in poſſeſſion, and count it their owne:
I think ſuch a one ſhould haue ſo cold a ſuite,
that vnles it were ſome fewe that loued him,
while hee liued hee might goe againe to his
graue for a houſe to dwel in: ſo no body looketh
now for Nabuchadnezzar to come out
of the wildernes, hee was the vnlikelyeſt man
in the world to bee King after ſuch a change:
but ſee what God can doe, though all bee againſt
it; he which made a king like a beaſt,
rayſed a king of a beaſt.
            
               Mine vnderſtanding (ſayth Nabuchadnezzar

               was restored to me, and more than that,
mine honour was augmented, more than it was
when I was ſo proud of it. As God turned his
heart, ſo hee turned the hearts of his Nobles
and people, that they receiued him for their
King againe, and ſought vnto him, and reuerenced
him, for all the diſgrace which they
had ſeene, which made them before to contemne
him like a beaſt.
            Here a wiſe man may ſtudie and wonder
like Eliſha when his maſter was rapt to heauen.
For as though a ſnuffe had beene taken
from the ground, and ſet in the candleſtick againe,
and ſhined brighter than it did before:
So Nabuchadnezzar was raiſed from the
duſt, and ſet in the throan: euen now no man
cared for him, and nowe no man dare diſpleaſe
him: that which Salomon ſayth in
Prou. 16. 17. When the wayes of a man pleaſe
the Lord, he will make all his enemies at peace
with him: ſo when Nabuchadnezzar pleaſed
the Lord God gaue him grace with men, &
his glorie was augmented. My glory was encreaſed,
&c. that is, he receiued not onely his
kingdome, and power, and honour agayne,
but hee receiued vſury of them. For his ſeauen
yeers baniſhment, they had been put out
ſeuen yeeres to the Banke, for him to receiue
more whē he came again, ſo when he ſought
his owne honour, honour departed from him,

his pallace could not holde it, his treaſures
could not redeeme it, his gard could not ſtay
it, but pride chaſed it away, whileſt he followed
after it. But when he ſought Gods honor,
and cared not for his owne, honour was increaſed,
according to that, I will honour them
that honour me.
            
            What would Nabuchadnezzar ſay to our
Nabuchadnezzars (if hee were liuing) which
thinke it agaynſt their honor to ſeeke Chriſts
honour, and that if his kingdome went vp,
their kingdome ſhould go down, like Herod
which thought hee coulde not bee King, if
Chriſt ſhould raigne; and the Phariſies, which
thought they ſhoulde bee deſpiſed if Chriſt
were regarded.
            If Nabuchadnezzars honour came vnto
him for the honour which he gaue to GOD:
how long will their honour laſt, which eate
and drinke, giue and take, ſet vp and pull
downe, and doe all that they doe to honour
themſelues? as Nabuchadnezzar built Babel
vntill that voyce came thundering from heauen,
Thy kingdome is departed from thee, thy
office is departed from thee, thy life is departed
from thee. Some haue exalted themſelues
like Nabuchadnezzar, and are not fallen yet:
ſome mounted vp haue fallen low, and lower,
like Balaam, but they are not yet at the
ground: they haue ruled like beaſts, longer

then Nabuchadnezzar, and yet looke not vp
to heauen, that they may bee changed. Thus
Nabuchadnezzar is welcome to his throne
againe.
            Now he hath receiued grace, let vs examine
his thankfulnes. If you marke how euery thing
comes in his order, you ſhall ſee a marueilous
conſequence obſerued both in his Fall & Reſtitution.
When he looked vpon his pallace,
then he waxed proud; when he waxed proud,
then God threatned him; whē he was threatned,
then God baniſhed him; when hee was
baniſhed, then he lift vp his eyes to heauen;
when he lift vp his eyes to heauen, his vnderſtanding
came vnto him; when his vnderſtanding
came vnto him, then he gaue thanks
to God: ſhewing vs the vſe of our vnderſtanding,
why God hath giuen reaſon vnto men,
viz. to ſerue him and praiſe him vpon earth: as
Nabuchadnezzar worſhipped God ſo ſoone
as he came to vnderſtanding; ſo, ſo ſoone as
we come to yeres of diſcretion, and begin to
vnderſtand, we ſhould begin a new life, and
ſerue him whom all creatures doe ſerue with
vs, or elſe our vnderſtanding is vaine, and wee
are beaſts ſtill: for by this Nabuchadnezzar
ſhewes that hee had vnderſtanding, and was
like a man, becauſe hee gaue praiſe to God,
& was moued in heart to worſhip him which
made him, according to that definition that

Dauid maketh of vnderſtanding, in the tenth
verſe of the one hundred and eleuenth Pſalm.
They which obſerue them haue a good vnderſtanding:
they which obſerue the Commaundements
haue a good vnderſtanding;
not they which ſpeake of the Commandements,
nor they which write of the Commandements,
nor they which preach of the
Commaundements, but they which keepe
the Commaundements, haue a good vnderſtanding.
The reſt haue a falſe vnderſtanding,
a vaine vnderſtanding, an vnderſtanding,
like that of the Scribes & Phariſies which
was enough to condemne them, but not to
ſaue them.
            By this euery man ſhould trie his wiſedome:
for ſo ſoone as vnderſtanding commeth
to him as it came to Nabuchadnezzar,
it will extort praier and obedience from him,
whether hee will or no: therefore our Nabuchadnezzars
are beaſts ſtill, for this is no part
of their vnderſtanding.
            But he which can go beyond all in ſhifts &
policie, is counted the wiſeſt man in Court &
Citie. Oh, if Machauil had liued in our countrey,
what a Monarch ſhould be be? to what
honour, and wealth, and power, and credite,
might he haue riſen vnto in ſhort time, whether
he had been a Lawyer, or a Courtier, or a
Prelate? me thinkes I ſee how many fingers

would poynt at him in the ſtreetes, as they
doe at his apes, and ſay, there goeth a deepe
fellowe, he hath more wit in his little finger
then the reſt in their whole bodie. You talke
of Sectaries how faſt they growe, and how
faſt they breed; I warrant you where any Sectary
hath one ſonne, Machauil hath a ſcore,
and thoſe not the brats, but the fatlings of the
Land, which if they had but a dram of religion
for an ounce of their policie, they might
goe like Saints among men. But wee ſpeake
to the belly that hath no eares.
            Now let vs ſee the parts of this kings confeſſion,
that we may ſee how his thankfulnes
did anſwere to his ſinne: before he had robbed
God of his honor: now, as though hee
came to make reſtitution, he brings praiſe, &
thankes and glorie in his mouth. Firſt, he aduanceth
Gods power, and ſaith, that his kingdome
is an euerlasting kingdome: in which
wordes he confeſſeth that God was aboue
him, becauſe that his kingdome was not an
euerlaſting Kingdome, but a momentanie
Kingdome, like a ſparke which riſeth from the
fire, and falleth to the fire againe. Therefore
he ſheweth what a foole he was to vaunt of
his Kingdome, as though it were like Gods
Kingdome, which laſteth for euer.
            Secondly, hee magnifieth the power of
God, and ſayth, that God doth what he listeth

both in heauen and in earth, and nothing can
hinder him, or ſay vnto him, what doest thou?
Vnder which words, he confeſieth againe,
that God was aboue him, becauſe hee could
not raigne as he liſted, for when hee thought
to liue at his pleaſure, hee was thruſt out at
doores, and God ſaid not to him, what doeſt
thou? but Thy kingdome ſhall depart from thee:
therefore he ſheweth what a foole he was to
vaunt of his power, as though it had beene
like Gods power, which cannot bee checked.
            Thirdly hee commendeth the iuſtice of
God, and ſaith, that his workes were all truth,
and his waies were all iudgement. Vnder
which words, he confeſſeth againe, that God
was aboue him: for his waies were all errors,
and his workes were all ſinnes, as the ende
prooued. Therefore he ſhewes what a foole
he was, to vaunt of his workes, as though they
had been like Gods workes, which cannot
be blamed: therefore hee concludes, I Nabuchadnezzar
praiſe, and extoll, and magnifie
the King of heauen. When hee lighted vpon
the right ſtring, marke how he harpes vpon
it, and doubles it, and trebles it, like a bonde
which is ratified with many wordes of like
ſenſe; ſo he ratifieth his bonde to God with
many words of like meaning, I will praiſe and
extoll and magnifie the King of Heauen: as if

hee would praiſe him, and more than prayſe
him. They which loue with the heart, and repent
from the bottome, praiſe & praiſe, praie
and pray, giue and giue, ſerue and ſerue, that
is, when they haue ſerued him, they are ready
to ſerue him againe.
            Here is a glaſſe for al the children of pride.
Firſt looke vpon Nabuchadnezzar, you that
are great men like Nabuchadnezzar. For thus
will GOD make his example of great men,
becauſe they ſhould bee examples to others.
Many wicked men died in Iurie, and ſcarſe a
man was by to ſee their ende; but Herode
was ſtriken before the people, that all might
ſee, becauſe hee was a wicked King. There
were many in Babel as proud as Nabuchadnezzar,
but none but Nabuchadnezzar was
made like a beaſt, becauſe hee was a proud
King: ſo God doth ſtomacke ſinne in thoſe
that beare his owne perſon. As Princes vſe to
picke thoſe that are principall and chiefe in
rebellion to make them examples of terrour
to others, which were ringleaders in the treaſon:
ſo God doth bend his ſhot againſt the
captaines of his enemies, like the King of Aram,
which charged his ſouldiers, that they
ſhoulde fight with none but againſt Achab
the King, as it is written in the ſecond Booke
of Chronicles, the eighteenth chapter and
thirtieth verſe. For as Salomon ſaith in the

nineteenth Chapter of his Prouerbes and fiue
and twentieth verſe, Strike the ſtrong, and
the rest will beware: ſo Iuſtice ſhewed vpon
a Ruler, or great perſonage, dooth terrifie
manie.
            If we could ſee but one of our Nabuchadnezzars
ſo degraded, it would make all the
reſt better in their office, & thinke when they
ſit in their maieſties, as Queene Heſter did,
that their power is giuen them for the
Church and not againſt the Church.
            Paul being before Feſtus and Agrippa, wiſheth
not vnto the King Agrippa, more
wealth, or more honor, or more riches, but
more religion, which is the greateſt want of
Princes and Magiſtrates. They ſitte in Gods
chayre, and are called Gods, but are not like
God, but like Mammon, except their names
and their crownes: peraduenture a Dauid, or
a Salomon, or a Ioſua, that is, a few that remember
whoſe perſon they beare: the reſt are
like Saul, and Herod, and Nabuchadnezzar,
which know not frō whome their kingdomes
come. Nabuchadnezzar built for his honour,
and they built for their honour: Nabuchadnezzar
gathered for his wealth, and they gather
for their welth: Nabuchadnezzar ſought
after his pleaſure, and they ſeeke after their
pleaſure: Nabuchadnezzar vaunted of his
power, and they vaunt of their power: what

did Nabuchadnezzar which they do not, but
repent which they doe not? I cannot wiſh
them beaſtes to doe them good, like Nabuchadnezzar,
becauſe it is a queſtion, whether
they are worſe than beaſts already, but if we
could driue them out of their pallaces to liue
like beaſts in the wilderneſſe, it were a good
riddance, for there they ſhoulde doe leſſe
harme: where now their proude hornes doe
gore others, & their hoof is vp to ſtrike euery
one that is better than themſelues, which
maketh many flie into the wilderneſſe, from
their houſe, and church, and calling, leſt they
ſhould fall into their clutches: The Lorde
which reſtored Nabuchadnezzar from the
likeneſſe of a beaſt, reſtore them to the likenes
of men, or els fright them like Nabuchadnezzar,
to runne from their roomes, that better
may haue their places.
            Thus you ſee Nabuchadnezzar was made
like a beaſt that he might die like a man, for
he could neuer learne from whence his kingdome
came, vntill he had beene apprentice
ſeuen yeares vnto the croſſe, and when hee
perceiued who took his kingdome from him,
then he perceiued alſo who gaue his Kingdome
to him, and learned his thankefulneſſe
in the wilderneſſe, when al the bleſſings were
gone, which he ſhould haue been thankfull
for, he thought that God was no body, vntill

he became like no body himſelfe, and then
who but God, no power but of him, no honor
but from him, his firſt honor came from
God, as well as his laſt: but when he was like
a beaſt which knew not his owner, like a babe
which knewe not his Father, like an Image
which knowes not his maker, but nowe hee
knoweth from whom Kings raigne, and hath
learned to ſay thy Kingdome, as well as my
Kingdome, and is like the elders in the Reuelation
which caſt downe their crownes before
the Lambe.
            Such a ſchoolemaſter is affliction, to teach
that, which Prophets and Angels cannot
teach. For the Prophet and his dreame had
tolde him as much before, yet he could neuer
ſay, the Lord hath giuen, before he did ſee
how the Lord had taken: they ſay a friend is
neuer knowne before hee bee loſt: ſo when
God fled, then Nabuchadnezzar followed:
but when God called, then Nabuchadnezzar
contemned; when he hath all things he is vnthankfull,
and when he hath nothing hee beginneth
to be thankefull.
            So wee muſt learne Gods loue out of his
wrath, and ſpel his goodnes out of his iuſtice:
therefore we preach iudgement vnto you, to
make you flie vnto mercie, wee denounce the
law againſt you, to make you loue the goſpel,
we ſhew you hell, to make you ſeeke heauen.

Becauſe we are all like Pharaoh his ſorcerers,
though we receiue neuer ſo much, yet we neuer
ſay, the finger of GOD hath done this:
but when he begins to plague vs, then we cry
the finger of God hath done this: therefore
if we will not be inuited, it is good to be compelled:
to conclude, he which made Nabuchadnezzar
a King when he was like a beaſt,
is hee which makes them rich which were
poore, and he which makes them free which
were bounden, and hee which makes them
beloued which were hated, and hee which
makes them wiſe, which were rude, and hee
which makes them whole which were ſicke:
they muſt ſtaie a time, ſeuen dayes, or ſeuen
weekes, or ſeuen moneths, or ſeuen yeares,
as Nabuchadnezzar did, and when they are
ready for it, it will come ſodainly, as the Angels
came to refresh Chriſt ſo ſoone as he was
hungry: yet a little while, a little longer, comfort
is on foote, and that goodneſſe which is
comming, will come, as the ſunne which was
riſing is riſen: for as Nabuchadnezzar ſaide,
mine honor was reſtored to mee, ſo I am ſure
many here may ſay, my right was reſtored to
mee, my libertie was reſtored to mee, my
health was reſtored to mee, my good
name was reſtored to me, in leſſe time than
Nabuchadnezzars honour was, and what
then? Therefore I Nabuchadnezzar, prayſe,

and extoll, and magnifie the King of heauen,
whoſe workes are all trueth, and his waies iudgement,
and thoſe that walke in pride, hee is able
to abaſe. This is the concluſion of all Gods
benefites, they which doe not prayſe and extoll
the King of heauen are worſe than Nabuchadnezzar.
            Therefore let all which ſayd in their harts,
like Nabuchadnezzar: is not this the houſe
which I haue built, is not this the land which
I haue purchaſed, is not this the monie which
I haue gathered, are not theſe the children
which I haue be gotten, ſay now with Nabuchadnezzar
for all, I praiſe, and extoll, and
magnifie the King of heauen, which can take
all againe, as hee did from Nabuchadnezzar.
            Thus you haue ſeen pride and humilitie,
one pulling Nabuchadnezzar out of his
throne, the other lifting him vnto his throne,
whereby they which ſtand may take heed leſt
they fall; and they which are fallen,
may learne to riſe
againe.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            A DISSWASION
FROM PRIDE, AND AN
exhortation to Humilitie.
            
               1. PET. 5. 5.
               God reſisteth the proud, and giueth grace to the
humble.
            
            
               SAint Peter teaching
euerie man his dutie,
how one ſhould behaue
himſelfe to another,
exhorteth al mē
to bee humble & abſtayne
from pride:
as though Humilitie
were the bond of all duties, like a liſt which
holdeth men in a compaſſe, & pride were the
makebate ouer all the world: to which Salomon
giueth witnes, Prou. 13. 10. ſaying, Onely
by pryde man maketh contention: becauſe pride
maketh euery one thinke better of himſelfe
then of others, whereby he ſcorneth to giue
place to the other, and therefore when neither

partie wil yeeld as Abraham did to Lot, how
ſhould there be any peace?Gen. 13. 9. Thus pride doth
breake the peace, and humilitie doth ſet it againe:
therefore to toll men from pride to
humilitie, as it were from the concubin to the
right wife, the Apoſtle ſheweth how God is
affected to pride, and what minde he beareth
to humilitie: God reſiſteth the proud, and giueth
grace to the humble: as if he ſhould whiſper
men in the eares & ſay, take heed how
you companie with pride, or giue entertainment
to her, for ſhe is not Caeſars friend, the
king counteth her his enemie, & all that take
her part: ſhe hath been ſuſpected euer ſince
the Angels rebelled in heauen,Gen. 3. and Adam
ſought to bee equal with God. therfore his
maieſtie hath a ſtich againſt her, as Salomon
had to Shemei, & would not haue her fauorites
come in his court,1. Kin. 2. 36 vnleſſe they hold
downe their mace, ſtoope when they enter.
But if you can get in with humilitie, and
weare the colours of lowlines, then you may
goe boldly, and ſtand in the Kings ſight, and
ſtep to his chamber of preſence, and put vp
your petitions, and come to honor. For humilitie
is very gracious with him, and ſo neere
of his counſell, that as Dauid and Salomon
ſay,Pro. 3. 32. he committeth all his ſecrets to her. This
is Peters meaning,Pſal. 25. that the humble ſhall
finde grace with God and men: as wee read

of Dauid and Iohn Baptiſt, according to that
in the firſt Pſal. verſ. 4. All things which hee
doth ſhall proſper:
               Pſal. 1. 4. but the proude ſhall bee
troubled and croſſed, and when they would
doe beſt they ſhall doe worſt, when they
would grace themſelues, they ſhall ſhame
themſelues: and God will be to them like the
ſpirit of Saul which tormented him whereſoeuer
hee went. This ſentence is repeated againe,Iames. 1. 6.
Iames 4. 6. the like ſentence to this is
in Prouerbes 3. 34.Pro. 3▪ 34. where he ſayth, with the
Scornefull he ſcorneth: but he giueth grace to
the humble: the like ſentence is againe in the
16. of Prouerbs 18. where he ſayth,Pro. 16. 18. Pryde
goeth before deſtruction:Pro. 15. 33. and in the 15. of
Prou. 33. before honour goeth humilitie.Pro. 29. 23. The
like ſentence is againe in the 29. of the Prou.
verſ. 23. where he ſaith, the pryde of man ſhall
bring him lowe, but the humble in ſpirit ſhall
enioy glorie.
            The like ſentence is againe in the firſt of
Luke. 46 where the Virgin ſings,Luk. 1. 46. He hath put
downe the mightie from their ſeate, and hath
exalted the humble and meeke; that as it
were by two or three witneſſes, pryde might
bee condemned, and humilitie acquited.
One is to GOD like Iacob,Rom. 4. 13. of whom hee
ſayth;Mal. 1. 3. Iacob haue I loued: the other is to
God like Eſau,Gen. 25. 8. of whom he ſayth, Eſau haue
I hated. Iacob loued Eſau becauſe hee loued

veniſon, but Rebecca loued Iacob becauſe
he was loued of God. So the proud are in the
Kings Court, becauſe they ſeeke honour, but
the humble are in Gods court, becauſe they
contemne honour: as he ſayth in the third of
the Prouer. ver. 34. with the froward he will
ſhew himſelfe froward: So he threatneth here
that with the proude, he will ſhewe himſelfe
proud; that is, if they chalenge, he wil defend:
if they will prouoke him, he will reſiſt them:
if they will clime higher then their compaſſe,
he will pull them lower then their will.
            Peter ſpeaks of the proud, as if they did chalenge
God, like champions, & prouoke him
like rebels, that vnles he did reſiſt them, they
would goe about to depriue him of his rule,Num. 16. 2
as Corah, Dathan, and Abiram vndermined
Moſes. For ſo the proud man ſayth, I will be
like the higheſt,Eſai. 14. and if he could, aboue the
higheſt too. This is the creature which was
taken out of the duſt,Gen. 2. 7. and ſo ſoone as he was
made, he oppoſeth himſelfe againſt that maieſtie,
which the Angels adore, the throanes
worſhip, the diuels feare, and the heauens obey.
How many ſins are in this ſinfull world,
and yet as Salomon ſayth of the good wife,
Prou. 31. 29. Many daughters haue done vertuouſly,Pro. 31. 29.
but thou ſurmounteſt them all. So I
may ſay of pryde, many ſinnes haue done
wickedly, but thou ſurmounteſt them all: for

the wrathfull man, the prodigall man, the laciuious
man, the ſurfeting man, the ſlothfull
man, is rather an enemy to himſelfe then to
God. The enuious man, the couetous man,
the deceiptful man, the vngrateful man, is rather
an enemy to men then to God. but the
proud man ſets himſelf againſt God, becauſe
he doth againſt his lawes, he maketh himſelfe
equall with God, becauſe he doth all without
God and craues no helpe of him: he exalteth
himſelfe aboue God, becauſe he will haue his
owne wil, though it be contrary to Gods wil.
As the humble man ſaith;Pſal. 115. 1 
               Not vnto vs Lord,
not vnto vs, but thy name giue the glorie.
Pſal. 115. 1. ſo the proud man ſaith, not vnto
him, not vnto him, but vnto vs giue the
glorie: like vnto Herod, which tooke the
name of God, and was honored of all but
the wormes, and they ſhewed that he was not
a God but a man,Acts 12. 21. Actes 12. 21. Therefore the
proud men may be called Gods enemies, becauſe
as the couetous pull riches from men,
ſo the proud pull honor from God. Beſide the
proud man hath no cauſe to be proud, as other
ſinners haue, the couetous for riches, the
ambitious for honor, the voluptuous for pleſure,
the enuious for wrong, the ſlothful for
eaſe; but the proud man hath no cauſe to
be proud, but pride it ſelfe, which ſaith like
Pharaoh, I will not obey, Exod. 5. 2. Therefore

God is ſpecially ſaid to reſiſt the proud, becauſe
the proud reſiſt him. Heere is heauen
againſt earth, the creator againſt the creature,
the father againſt the ſonne, the Lord
againſt the ſeruant, the Prince againſt the
ſubiect, who is like to winne the fielde? If the
Lord iustifie (ſaith Paul) who ſhall condemne?
ſo if the Lord reſiſt, who ſhall defend? If his
lawe come with thunder and lightning and
tempeſt, with what terrour will hee come
himſelfe? It was but a brag, when the king of
Iuda proclaimed warre againſt the king of Aram
& ſaid,2. Kin. 1. 9. 
               No man ſhall deliuer thē out of my
hands; but it is true when God ſaith, no man
ſhall deliuer them out of my hands:Heb. 10. therefore
the author to the Hebrews ſaith, It is a fearefull
thing to fall into the hands of God, for hee
euer ouercommeth. Therefore when the Egyptians
perceiued that God fought againſt
them,1. Kin. 14. 9 they cryed, Wee will fle, wee will flie,
for God ſighteth againſt vs, Exod. 14. 25. So
the proud may cry, I will flie, I will flie, for
God fighteth againſt vs. When the king of
Iuda proclaimed warre againſt the king of Iſrael;
the king of Iſrael returned anſwere, that
the thiſtle rebelled againſt the cedar, 2. King.
14. 9. & yet there was but king againſt king.
a man againſt a man; how much rather may
the king of heauen anſwer this proud earth,
the thiſtle rebelleth againſt the Cedar?1. Sa. 17. 2. The

giant durſt chalenge but one of the hoſt of
Iſrael, but the Lord chalengeth all the hoſt of
pride: euen as hee giueth grace to all that are
hūble, ſo he reſiſteth all that are proud. It had
been too heauie for them, if he had ſayde, the
Lord doth not care for them, for Gods care
preſerueth vs, and our owne care doth but
trouble vs: but to ſay that the Lord doth reſiſt
them,Reuel. 12. 7 is as if Michael ſhould denounce warre
with the dragon, till he hath caſt him into the
pit. This is a marſhall word, and comes with
armes and weapons vpon them: if a man
ſhould ſee a Lion come vpon him, would hee
not ſtart? if he ſhould ſee a Giant come agaynſt
him, would he not feare? But now the
Lorde of hoſts, the Lion of Iuda, which deſtroyed
the Giants, is vp in armes to reſiſt the
proud, and the proud feare not ſo much as the
humble. God reſiſteth the proud, and giueth
grace to the humble: but the world reſiſteth
the humble, and giueth grace to the proud, as
Dauid notes.Pſal. 49. 18. Men will praiſe thee, not when
thou reformeſt thy ſelfe to God, but whē thou
doeſt forme thy ſelfe to thy luſts: that is, they
which will be ſtrowters, ſhal not want flatterers,
which will praiſe euery thing that they
do, and euery thing that they ſpeake, & euery
thing that they weare, and ſay it becomes thē
well to weare long haire, that it becomes thē
well to weare bellied dublets, that it becomes

them well to iet in their going, that it becoms
thē wel to ſweare in their talking. Now, when
they heare men ſooth them in their follies,
then think they, we haue nothing els to commend
vs, if men will praiſe vs for our vanities,
we will haue friends enough: ſo the humour
ſwelleth and thinkes with it ſelfe, if they will
looke vpon mee when, I doe ſet but a ſtout
face vpon it, how would they behold mee if
I were in apparell? if they doe ſo admire me
in ſilkes, how would they cap me and curſie
me, and worſhip me, if I were in veluets? if
I be ſo braue in plaine veluet, what if my veluet
were pinct, or cut, or printed? So they ſtudie
for faſhions, as Lawyers do for delayes, &
count that part naked which is not as gaudie
as the reſt, till all their bodie be couered ouer
with pride, as their mind is with folly. Therefore
Dauid ſaith,Pſal. 37. 6. that pride is as a chaine vnto
them, that is, it goeth round about them like
a chaine, and makes them thinke that all men
loue them, and praiſe them, and admire them,
and worſhip them for their brauerie. Therefore
as Saul ſayd to Samuel, Honour me before
this people: ſo the proude man ſaith to his,
chaine and his ruffes, and his pinckes, and his
cuts, honour me before this people: all that,
he ſpeaketh, or doth, or weareth, is like Nabuchadnezzars
pallace,Dan. 4. which he built for his
honor. This is their work, ſo ſoone as they riſe,

to put a Pedlars ſhop vpon theyr backes, and
colour their faces, and pricke their ruffes, and
friſle theyr hayre, and then their daies worke
is done, as though their office were to paint a
fayre Image euery morning, and at night to
blot it out agayn: from that day that pride is
borne in the heart of man, as the falſe Prophets
were ſchooled to ſpeake as the King
would haue them,2. Kin. 21. 8. ſo their eyes, and feete, and
tongues are bound to ſpeake, and looke, and
walke, as the proud heart doth prompt them.
If GOD were in loue with faſhions, hee were
neuer better ſerued than in this age, for our
world is like a pageant, where euery mans apparell
is better then himſelf.Mat. 11. 6. Once Chriſt ſaid,
that ſoft clothing is in Kings courts: but now
it is crept into euerie houſe: then the rich
glutton ietted in purple euerie day,Luk. 16. but now
the poore vnthrift iets as braue as the glutton,
with ſo many circumſtances about him, that
if yee could ſee how pride would walke herſelfe,
if ſhe did weare apparell, ſhe would
euen goe like manie in the ſtreetes: for ſhe
could not goe brauer, nor looke ſtouter, nor
mince finer, nor ſet on moe laces, nor make
larger cuts, nor carrie more trappings about
her, then our ruffians and wantons doe at this
day. How far are theſe faſhions altered from
thoſe leather coates which God made in Paradiſe?Gen. 3. 21.
if their bodies did chaunge formes ſo

often as their apparell chaungeth faſhions,
they ſhould haue more ſnapes then they haue
fingers and toes.2. Kin. 14. 2. As Ieroboams wife diſguiſed
her ſelf that the Prophet might not know
her, ſo we may think that they diſguiſe themſelues
that God might not knowe them, nay
they diſguiſe their bodies ſo, till they knowe
not themſelues: for the ſeruant goeth like his
maſter, the handmaide like her Miſtreſſe, the
ſubiect like the Prince, as though he had forgotten
his calling, and miſtooke himſelfe:
like a man in the darke, which puts on another
mans coate for his owne, that is too
wide, or too ſide for his bodie: ſo their attires
are ſo vnfit for their bodies, ſo vnmeete
for their calling, ſo contrarie to nature, that I
cannot call them fitter, then the monſters of
apparell.Gen. 6. For the Giants were not ſo monſtrous
in nature, as their attires are in faſhion,
that if they could ſee their apparell but with
the glance of a ſpirituall eye, how monſtrous
it makes them like Apes and Puppets, and
Vices, they would fling away their attire, as
Dauid flung away Sauls armour:1. Sa. 17. 39 and bee as
much aſhamed of their clothes,Gen. 3. 9. as Adam was
of his nakedneſſe.
            Pride hath been the deuiſer of all theſe vanities,
which now neither ſhame nor lawes
nor preaching can take away: therefore had
we not need to ſhew you, how God reſiſteth

this vice, that careth not for any elſe? Who
can tell how this weede groweth, ſeeing wee
haue nothing to be proud of, but more cauſe
to be aſhamed of our ſelues, and flie from the
face of God and man too,Gen. 3. 13. then Adam our father
had? we were earth, we are fleſh, and we
ſhall bee wormes meate: what cauſe hath
earth, or fleſh, or wormes meate to be proud?
We are borne in ſinne, we liue in miſerie, we
ſhal die in corruption: what cauſe hath ſinne,
or miſerie, or corruption to puffe vs, but to
humble vs? there is nothing good which we
are proud of, but a wiſe man is aſhamed of
the ſame things whereof we boaſt. It is a wonder
to ſee, how a gay coate, or a gold ring, or
a wrought handkerchiefe can braue a mans
minde, that he thinkes better of himſelfe that
day when he weareth them, then any day els,
and ſpeakes and walkes, and lookes after another
faſhion then he did before?
            If ye could ſay as the diſciples ſaid, Luk. 10.
17. Lord the diuels are ſubiect vnto vs: Yet
(ſaith the Lord) glorie not in this: how manie
things doe we glorie in, which we ſhould
not, if wee may not glorie in the gift of miracles?
Euen as a couetous man is greedie of an
halfpenie, and an enuious man is angrie for a
word: ſo the proud man is proud of a fether.
Therefore ſhall not God reſiſt them which
glorie in all things but himſelfe, and ſhould

glorie in nothing but in him? as he did emulate
the loftie Babel,Gen. 11. ſo he dooth reſiſt theſe
loftie minds.
            But for Pride the angels which are in hell
ſhould be in heauen:Iud. 1. but for pride we which
are in earth ſhould bee in paradiſe:Gen. 3. but for
pride Nabuchadnezzar which is in the foreſt
ſhould be in his pallace:Dan. 4. but for pride Pharaoh
which lies with the fiſhes,Exod. 14. ſhould be with his
nobles: no ſinne hath pulled ſo many down,
as this which promiſed to ſet them vp. Of all
the children of pride, the Pope is the father,
which ſitteth in the temple of God, and is
worſhipped as God.2. Theſ. 2. 4. The Lords miniſters are
called ſeruants, and his miniſters are called
Lords: but for pride the Phariſies would haue
receiued Chriſt as gently as his diſciples:Matth. 2. but
for Pride Herod would haue worſhipped
Chriſt as humbly as the ſhepheardes: but
for pride our men would goe like Abraham,1. Pet. 1. 6.
and our women like Sara, as they would bee
called their children: but for pride Noble
men would come to Church, as well as the
people: but for pride Gentles would abide
reproofe, as well as ſeruants: but for pride
thou wouldeſt forgiue thy brother, and thy
brother would forgiue thee, and the Lawyers
ſhould haue no worke. But when thou
thinkeſt of theſe things, Pride comes in and
ſaith, Wilt thou goe like a hagler? wilt thou

follow Sermons? wilt thou take the checke?
wilt thou put vp wrong? what will men ſay?
that thou art a mome, and a cowarde, and a
foole, and no man will reuerence thee, but euerie
man will contemne & abuſe thee. Thus
men are faine to put on the liuerie of pride, as
they put on the liueries of Noble men, to
ſhrowd and defend them from the contempt
of the world. Who hath not felt theſe counſailes
in his heart, which would not beleeue
that any pride was in him? Yet as Abſolon
was a worſe ſonne then Adoniah, becauſe Adoniah
rebelled againſt his brother,1. King. 1. 5 but Abſolon
rebelled againſt his father: ſo pride hath
worſe children, than vanitie of apparell. Tyrannie
in Princes, ambition in Nobles, rebellion
in Subiects, diſobedience in Children,
ſtubbornneſſe in ſeruants: name Pride, and
thou haſt named their mother: therfore ſhall
not GOD reſiſt pride, which hath ſowed ſo
many tares in his grounde, that ſcarſe a man
can ſay like Dauid, I am not high minded. Pſal.
131. 1. Giue me the mindes of all men humbled,
and there is nothing left to raiſe ſtrife in
the worlde.Iam. 4. 5. But as Iames ſaith, The heart of
man lusteth after enuie: ſo the heart of man
luſteth after pride, though he haue many hart
breakes and pull downes, and many times no
countenance to ſhew it: yet if a little ſparke
be put to the tow, you ſhal ſee how ſoon this

flaxe will flame: therefore Salomon ſaith, Eccleſ.
3. 10. that all the troubles that God layeth
vpon a man, haue this purpoſe, to humble
him; as though al troubles were little inough
to humble pride, and that but for pride there
were no need almoſt of our troubles. For the
auoiding of this vice, GOD ſuffereth men to
fall into other vices, which men abhorre and
puniſh, as theft, and fornication, and drunkennes,
to make them aſhamed by theſe vices
which were not aſhamed of pride: this is an
argument, that of all ſinnes pride is the worſt,
becauſe God ſuffereth other ſinnes to come
and ſhame vs, leaſt we ſhould bee proude. Agayne,
Pride hath this propertie and ſleight
that it mixeth it ſelfe with our good workes,
and followeth vertue: As from the aſhes of a
Phoenix ariſeth another Phoenix, ſo of the aſhes
of our good workes ariſeth pride. When
the diuell cannot ſtay vs from a good worke,
then he laboureth by all meanes to make vs
proud of it, and ſo he ſtaineth our worke and
ſtealeth our reward. For though a man doe
neuer ſo much good, yet if he be proude of it
hee loſeth his reward, as the Phariſies did:
therefore the beſt and the wiſeſt, and the holieſt
men had need to watch this vice: for if
they take not great heed, it will make them
proud of their wiſedome, and of their zeale,
and of their goodnes.2. Cor. 12. Paul was almoſt puffed

vp with reuelations:Num. 12. Aron and Miriam
began to rebell, becauſe they thought themſelues
as good as Moſes; and all the fathers of
any hereſie, began their hereſie at this, a magnificate
opinion of themſelues, and an ouerweening
of their owne gifts. So pride ſetteth
vpon the beſt,Math. 4. euen as the temper ſet vpon
Chriſt. Agayne, a man had need to take heede
of pride, for ſhe will not keepe counſaile: but
if he be proud, ſhe will tell that he is proud,
and therefore is called an impudent ſinne, becauſe
ſhe deſcrieth her ſelfe in the eye, in the
ſpeech, in the ieſture, in the looke, in the ga
                  •
               e,
like the drunkard, ſo that a man cannot bee
proud, and ſeeme humble.
            Thus God hath tied a iuſt puniſhmēt to this
vice, that he which entertaineth the vice that
he loueth, ſhould not auoid the name which
he abhorreth, but he ſhall be eſteemed proud
and called proud of all that know him; and
many that know him not, ſhall point at him
with their fingers in the ſtreetes, & ſay, there
goes a proud fellow: which they pronounce
of no vice els, but the drunkard, becauſe theſe
two bewray themſelues.
            Thus you ſee howe the proud reſiſt God:
now you ſhall ſee how GOD reſiſteth the
proud. They are ſo heady, that almoſt none
dare reſiſt them but God: I will reſist them
(ſaith God.) Therefore when hee heard the

proud man ſay in the 14 of Eſaiah, I will aſcend
vp into heauen: hee anſwereth himſelfe,
Thou ſhalt be brought downe to the graue. This
is hee which reſiſteth the proud.Heſt. 6. 13. When Hamans
wife heard her husband ſay, that Mordecai
was againſt him; becauſe he was an Iſraelite,
ſhe ſayd that her husband ſhould take
the ſoile, and Mordecai ſhoulde preuayle.
What if ſhe had heard her husband ſay, that
the Lord of Mordecai was agaynſt him? If
the ſeruant bee ſo terrible, who dare encounter
with his maſter?Rom. 9. God hated Eſau, and how
did Eſau proſper? though hee was the elder
brother, yet he miſſed the birth-right; and
though his father loued him,Gen. 25. 28 yet hee could
not bleſſe him, becauſe God hated him. God
was wroth with the Angels, and droue them
out of heauen;Iud. 1. God was wroth with Adam,
and thruſt him out of Paradice;Gen. 3. GOD was
wroth with Nabucadnezzar,Dan. 4. and turned
him out of his Pallace; God was wroth with
Cain,Gen. 4. 12. and though hee were the firſt man that
was borne of a woman, yet God made him a
vagabond vpon his owne land; GOD was
wroth with Saul,1. Sa. 31. 4. and though he was the firſt
king that euer was annoynted, yet God made
his owne hand his executioner; GOD was
wroth with the olde world,Gen. 6. and though the
earth was naked when they were drowned,
yet hee regarded nothing, but deſtroyed a

world of men together. This is he which reſiſteth
the proude, what ſhall wee doe if the
world be againſt vs, and the fleſh againſt vs,
and the diuell againſt vs, and God againſt vs
too, which ſhould defend vs? In heauen, in
earth, and in the ſea he findes vs out. And as
the diſpleaſure of a king draweth many enemies
with it, ſo the diſpleaſure of God ſetteth
all his creatures againſt vs: therefore he is called
the Lord of hoaſts,Eſa. 1. 14. as though hee came
with an armie againſt vs. When hee fought
with the Aramites,Ioſh. 3. 10. the Sunne tooke his part:
when hee fought againſt the Sodomites,Gen. 16. the
fire tooke his parte: when hee fought againſt
the Egyptians,Exod. 14. the water tooke his parte;
when he fought againſt the Murmurers,Numb. 26. the
earth tooke his part; when he fought againſt
the Idolaters,Dan 3. the Lyons tooke his part; when
hee fought againſt the mockers,2. Kin. 2. 24 the Beares
tooke his part: this is hee which reſiſteth the
proud. What can hee hope, which remembreth
that God is ſet againſt him, and that the
Lord of heauen and of earth is his enemie?
This thought made the Philiſtines flie & ſay,
God is come into the hoast.
               1. Sa. 4. 7. No enemie is like
this enemie, he euer ouercommeth, and when
hee hath ouercomen, he can caſt into hell, &
make the diuels torment them againe: therefore
well might Salomon prophecie, Pro. 29.
23.Mat 4. 
               The pride of man ſhall bring him lowe: for

God hath ouercome him who brought pride
into the world; & as pride brought him low,
ſo Salomon ſaith, it ſhall bring men low too.
What a turne is this, that that which he tooke
like a chayne (as Dauid ſayth) to adorne him;Pſal. 73. 6.
doth hang him? that which he tooke to exalt
him, doth debaſe him; that which hee tooke
to winne loue, getteth hatred; that which he
tooke to obtaine glory, procureth ſhame: as
if God did take the ſworde out of his hand,1. Sa. 17. 51. as
Dauid tooke the ſworde of Goliah, and ſlewe
him with his owne weapon.
            When the Phariſie ſaid he was not like the
Publicane, Luk. 19. 11. he ſaid true: for then
he was not like the Publican indeede, becauſe
the Publican was better than he: So, when a
proude man thinkes beſt of himſelfe, then
God and men thinke worſt of him; all his
glorie is but like a vapour, which clymeth as
though it would goe vp to heauen, but when
it comes to a little height, it falles downe againe,
and neuer aſcends more. So Adam
thought that the faire apple ſhuld make him
like his maker, Gen. 3. but God reſiſted his
pride, and that apple made him like the Serpent
that tempted him with it. Abſolom
thought that rebellion would make him a
king, 2. Sam. 15. 2. but God reſiſted his pride,
and his rebellion hanged him on a tree.
            Nimrod thought that Babel ſhould get him

a name, Gen. 11. but God reſiſted his pride,
& the name of his building was called Cōfuſiō
euer ſince. Nabuchadnezzar built his pallace
for his honor, Dan. 4. but God reſiſted his
pride, and his pallace ſpued him out when his
ſeruants remayned in it. Shebna builded a ſepulcher
for his memoriall, Eſa. 22. but GOD
reſiſted his pride, and buried him in another
Countrey, where he had no ſepulcher prouided.
Herod hoped when the people cryed
at his words, It is the voyce of God, that hee
ſhould be worſhipped euer after as God, but
God reſiſted his pride, and before he deſcended
from his throane, the wormes ſo defaced
his pompe, that none which called him God
would be like vnto him: ſo whē women take
more paines to dreſſe themſelues, then they
doe all the day after, and pay deerer to maintaine
one vice, than they neede to learne all
vertues, they thinke to pleaſe men by it: but
God reſiſteth their pride, and al that ſee them
though they cap and curtſie to them, yet they
iudge worſe of them, and thinke that they
would not weare theſe ſignes of lightnes and
pride, vnleſſe they were light and proud indeede.
Thus if their apparell condemne them
before men, how will it condemne them before
GOD? If ſinne did not blinde them,
would they ſo deceiue themſelues to take the
contrary way, and thinke that ſhould honor

them which diſgraceth other?Numb. 22. But as Balaam
was ſtopped & knew not who ſtopped him:
ſo they are reſiſted, and know not who reſiſteth
them. Though they doe al to pleaſe, yet
they can pleaſe none: they pleaſe not God,
for God reſiſteth them; they pleaſe not the
humble, for the humble are contrarie to thē;
they pleaſe not the proud, for the proud doe
enuie them which ſtriue to bee as proude as
they: they pleaſe not themſelues, becauſe
they cannot bee ſo proud and braue as they
would bee: onely they pleaſe the diuell, becauſe
their pride doth intitle him to them.
            Thus much of Gods battailes againſt the
proud. Heere Peter leaueth the proud with
this brand in their forehead, This is the man
whom God reſisteth: then hee turneth to the
lowly, and comforteth them: But he giueth
grace to the humble; as if hee ſhould ſay, you
are like Iohn the beloued Diſciple, which leaned
on Chriſts boſome: Iohn 13. 23. though
God reſiſt the proud, yet hee will not frowne
vpon you: but when he reſiſteth them, he wil
giue grace vnto you, as if hee ſhould ſay, the
proud are without grace, for God giueth not
grace vnto the proud, but to the humble, according
to that to Eſay 66. 2. To him will I
looke, euen to him that is poore & of a contrite
heart, and trembleth at my wordes: therefore
Learne of me (ſaith Chriſt) to be hūble & meek:
               Mat. 11.
               
as though the humble and meeke were his
ſchollers. Therefore God muſt needes loue
the humble, becauſe they are like his ſonne:
they ſhall haue his beſt giftes, of which hee
ſayth, 2. Cor. 12. 9. My grace is ſufficient: as if
hee ſhould ſay, hee which hath giuen you his
grace, can he denie you any thing? as Chriſt
ſaith, Hee which hath giuen vs his Sonne, will
he not giue vs all things with him? Therefore
grace may be called the gift of gifts, becauſe
all gifts come with grace, as the Court goeth
with the Queene. Therefore feare not to bee
humble, leaſt you be contemned: for all the
promiſes of God are made to humilitie, and
yet men feare to be humble, leſt they ſhuld be
contemned. Humilitie did not make Iohn
contemptible, but when he refuſed the name
of a Prophet, Chriſt ſaith, that hee was more
then a Prophet, Mat. 11. 2. Humilitie did not
make Moſes contemptible, but as he was the
mildeſt man vpon earth; ſo he was the greateſt
vpon the earth, Numb. 12. Humilitie did
not make Dauid contemptible, but when he
humbled himſelfe, hee ſaid vnto Micol, I will
be more humble yet, and lowly in my owne
ſight, yet thou and thy maides ſhall honour
me, 2. Sam. 6. 22. As Chriſt ceaſed not to be a
king becauſe he was like a ſeruant, nor to bee
a Lion becauſe he was like a Lamb, nor to be

God becauſe he was made man, nor to bee a
Iudge, becauſe he was iudged: ſo man dooth
not looſe his honour by humilitie: but he ſhal
be honored for his humilitie, as the Son was
honoured when he was humbled, Luk. 15. 8.
Thus humilitie hath found that which pride
ſought, like little Dauid, which was leaſt accompted
of, and yet gotte the victorie; yea,
when no man durſt encounter with the Gyant,
1. Sam. 17. 28. This is the ladder whereby
we muſt aſcend, Gen. 28. 12. pride did caſt
vs downe, and humilitie muſt raiſe vs vp. As
the way to heauen is narrowe, Mat. 12. 13. ſo
the gate is lowe; and he had neede to ſtoope
which entreth in at it: therefore be not proud,
leaſt God oppoſe himſelfe againſt you; but
be humble, and the grace of God belongeth
to you. So long as thou art proude, and readeſt
this ſentence, GOD giueth grace to the
humble: thou mayſt ſay to thy ſoule: Soule
thou haſt no part herein; for grace is the portion
of the humble, and the dowrie of the
meeke, and the treaſure of the lowlie; but to
thee it, is ſaide, The Lord reſisteth the proude:
as if he ſhould ſay, Auoide Sathan, Math. 4.
or Departe from mee ye wicked, Math 25. 45.
Thus you ſee howe you may haue GOD
your friende or your enemie, Hee reſisteth
the proud, and giueth grace to the humble:
               
if thou diſdaine to learne humilitie of man,
learne it of GOD, who humbled himſelfe
from heauen to earth, to exalte thee from
earth to heauen; to which Kingdome
(when the proud ſhall
be ſhut out) the Lord
Ieſus bring vs, for
his mercies
ſake.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            THE YOVNG MANS
TASKE.
            
               Eccleſiaſtes. 12. 1.
               Remember thy Creator in the dayes of thy
youth.
            
            
               IF it be ſo, as they ſay, that
none but young men do
heare our doctrine; then
this Text is well choſen
for the auditory, to teach
young men that which if
they learne, they may ſay
with Dauid, I haue more vnderstanding then
the auncient. Pſalm. 119. 100. All Scripture
is mans duetie, and anſweres like Iohn Baptiſt
to, What ſhall wee doe? In the firſt of
Iohn the ſecond and the twelfth, Iohn ſayth,
I write vnto you babes, I write vnto you children,
I write vnto you fathers, I write vnto
you youngmen, I write vnto you old men. So
the word which is called aflying booke, flyeth

from one age to another, from one ſexe to another,
from one calling to another, till like a
Iudge it hath giuen euery man his charge. Among
the reſt, I may call this Scripture, The
young mans taske. Wherein the Wiſe man ſheweth,
when is the beſt time to ſow the ſeede
of vertue, that it may bring foorth the fruite
of life, and make a man alway readie to die.
Let him remember his Creator in the daies
of his youth, and all his life ſhall runne in a
line, the middle like the beginning, and the
ende like the middle; as the Sunne ſetteth againſt
the place where it roſe.
            After Salomon had deſcribed man (like
Martha) troubling and toyling himſelfe about
many things; at laſt hee bringeth him
to that one thing neceſſarie, which Chriſt
taught Marie: and ſhewes him, that if he had
begun there at firſt, he had found that which
he ſought without trouble, and been happier
many yeares ſince, than he is now. Therefore
to them which are young Salomon ſhewes,
what a vantage they haue aboue the aged
like a ſhip, which ſeeing another ſhip ſinke
before her, lookes about her, pulles downe
her ſayle, turneth her courſe, and eſcapes the
ſands, which would ſwallow her, as they had
done the other.
            So they which are young, neede not trie the
ſnares and allurements of the worlde, or the

iſſues and effectes of ſinne, which olde men
haue tried before them, but take the tryall
and experience of others, and goe a neerer
way to obtaine their wiſhed deſires. That is
this (ſayth Salomon) If thou wouldeſt haue
any ſetled peace or heartie ioye in this vaine
or tranſitorie worlde, which thou haſt beene
ſeeking all the time ſince thou wert borne,
thou muſt Remember thy Creator, which did
make thee, which hath elected thee, which
hath redeemed thee, which daylie preſerueth
thee, which will for euer glorifie thee: and as
the kinde remembrance of a friende doth recreate
the minde, ſo to thinke and meditate
vpon GOD, will ſupply thy thoughts, diſpell
thy griefes, and make thee cheerefull, as
the ſight of the Arke comforted Dauid: for
ioye, and comfort, and pleaſure is whereas
God is, as light, and cheerefulnes, and beautie
is whereas the Sunne is. Nowe, if thou
wouldeſt haue this ioy, and comfort, & pleaſure
to bee long, and wouldeſt eſcape thoſe
thouſand miſeries, vexations, and vanities,
which Salomon by many weary and tedious
tryals ſought to make naked before thee, &
yet held all but vanitie when hee had founde
the way, thou muſt Remember thy Creator in
the daies of thy youth, at the firſt ſpring time,
and then thy happyneſſe ſhall bee as long as
thy life; and all thy thoughts while thou remaineſt

on earth, a foretaſte of the glorie of
Heauen. This is the ſumme of Salomons
counſaile.
            Salomon findes man ſeeking happineſſe
out of the way, as Eſau hunted long for a
bleſſing, and yet went without it: he pities to
ſee him ſeeke and not finde, to runne and not
obtaine: therefore he ſetteth him in the way
like a guide ſent from heauen, which often
had ſtrayed himſelfe before, and being now
recouered to his right way, ſtands like a mark
of knowledge in the turnings that leade vnto
blinde by-waies, to direct all thoſe that paſſe
by, that they may followe the readie path that
leadeth to eternall happineſſe.
            And becauſe the Trauailour marcheth
cheerefully, which knoweth his way before
he ſetteth foorth: therefore from the firſt ſetting
forth, euen from the time of youth, when
a man beginneth to runne his pilgrimage, Salomon
tels him how he ſhall therein prepare
himſelfe to walke, and ſets him in a faire high
way, wherein is no turning either to the right
hand or the left, which he calleth, the remembrance
of GOD. As if he ſhould ſay, Walke
with God as Enoch did, and remember well,
that he which ſhall be thy Iudge, doth ſee all
that thou doeſt, and heareth thee at euerie
worde: and this thought ſhall keepe thee in
the way at all times, like the clowde and piller

of fire which went before the Children of
Iſrael aſwell by day as night, when they trauailed
in the wildernes.
            In the next chapter before, and the ninth
verſe, Salomon ſayd, Reioyce O young man in
thy youth: now he hath chaunged his note to
Remember O young man in thy youth. No
more Reioyce, but Remember. Salomon
mocked before, and ſhewed what they did
remember: here he ſhewes what they ſhould
remember, leaſt anie Libertine ſhould miſconſter
him and ſay, Salomon taught vs to reioyce,
Salomon gaue vs leaue to ſinne, Salomon
ſaid, doe as ye liſt, for you are yong men,
and haue a priuiledge to bee laſciuious and
vaine: he recants with a breath, and denyes
forthwith his word, euen where he ſpake it.
            What ſayd I? Reioyce O young man in thy
youth? I would ſay, Remember O young man
in thy youth. So God mockes vs while wee
ſinne, like Michaiah, which bad Achab fight
agaynſt Aram, and then forbad him againe:
ſo hee bids them reioyce, and forbids them
agayne. Reioyce not in thy youth, but repent
in thy youth. One would thinke that Salomon
ſhould haue giuen this Memorandum
rather to olde men then to young men, let
them repent which looke to dye. Oh ſaith Ieremie,Lam. 3▪ 27.
it is good for a man to beare the yoake
in his youth: if it be good to ſuffer in youth,

it is better to learne in youth. Therefore if
Dauid wiſht that his tongue might cleaue to
the roofe of his mouth,Pſal 137. 6 if hee forgot Ieruſalem:
what are they worthie which forget
GOD the King of Ieruſalem? Can a childe
forget his father? Is not GOD our Father?
therefore who is too young to remember
him, ſeeing the childe doth knowe his father?
As the deepeſt wounds had neede to be firſt
tented: ſo the vnſtableſt mindes haue neede
to bee firſt confirmed. In this extremitie is
youth, as Salomon ſhewes them before hee
teacheth them. For in the laſt verſe of the former
chapter, he calleth youth vanitie, as if he
would ſpeake all euill in a word, and ſay that
youth is euen the age of ſinne. Therfore when
he had ſhewed young men their ſollie vnder
the name of vanitie, like a good Tutor he taketh
them to ſchoole, and teacheth them
their dutie: Remember thy Creator, as though
all ſinne were the forgetfulneſſe of God, and
all our obedience came from this remembrance,
that God created vs after his owne image,
in righteouſneſſe and holineſſe, to
ſerue him here for a while, and after to inherit
the ioyes which he hath himſelfe. Which
if we did remember, doubles it would make
vs aſhamed to thinke and ſpeake, and doe as
wee are woont. For what man dooth remember
his Creator, or why he was created,

while he ſweareth and forſweareth, and maketh
his trade of ſinne, as though there were
no God to iudge, nor hell to puniſh.
            This is becauſe the remembrance of God
which would wake ſinners, is ſo chaſed from
men, for feare it ſhould curbe them of their
pleaſures, that they dare not thinke of him,
but ſtriue to forget him, that they may ſinne
without feare. Therefore he becommeth a
Schoolemaſter for God, and calleth children
vnto him before they be corrupted, to teach
them this one leſſon for the guide of their life,
Remember thy Creator. To which he draweth
them as it were with two cordes: the ſhort
ſlight of their youth, and the infinite infirmities
of age. To ſhew how ſoone our youth is
gone, which we thinke will neuer haue ende:
Salomon doth not reckon it by yeares, but by
dayes, in the dayes of thy youth: ſo the Scripture
numbers our life, by dayes and houres,
and minutes, to teach vs to make vſe of al our
time, and euery day to thinke vpon the ende.
Yet leaſt they ſhould poſt ouer this remembrance
vnto age, which is the generall daye
that all ſet to repent, after this verſe Salomon
brings in the old man deafe, and blinde, and
lame, and ſtammering, for the young man to
behold, as if he ſhould ſay: looke my ſonne, is
this man fit to learne? which cannot heare,
nor ſee, nor ſpeake, nor goe? Therefore remember

thou thy creatour in the dayes of
thy youth before this dotage come. This then
is the leuell of our meſſage, to haſten them
forward which trauell towards heauen, becauſe
there is a great ſpace betweene God
and vs, and much a doe to aſpire the toppe of
mount Sion, but more a doe to aſpire the top
of the mount of heauen.
            Therefore as Abraham roſe early to ſacrifice
his ſonne in the morning,Gen. 22. 3 ſo in the
morning of thy life ſacrifice thy ſelfe to God,
and let him which is Alpha in euery thing, be
Alpha in thy conuerſion, that is, the beginning
as well as the ende. Becauſe wee are giuen
to ſet the beſt laſt, that wee may haue a
longer time for our ſinnes and pleaſures, like
the Iewes in the 1. of Agge & 2. which ſaid alway,
the time was not yet come when they
ſhould build the temple. Therefore the holy
Ghoſt crieth ſo often:2. Cor. 6. 2. This is the acceptable
time, this is the day of ſaluation, to day heare
his voyce, like Rebeccah which taught her
ſonne the neareſt waie to get the bleſſing.Gen. 27. 9.
When Chriſt went about to caſt out diuels,
they ſaid,Mat. 8. 29. that he tormented them before the
time: ſo whenſoeuer thou goeſt about to diſmiſſe
thy ſinnes and pleaſures, though thou
ſtay till thou bee an olde man, yet they will
ſay ſtill that thou diſmiſſeſt them before the
time. But then is the time, when the diuell

ſaith, the time is not yet, for the diuell is a lier,
& knoweth that with what liquor our veſſels
be ſeaſoned at firſt, they will taſt of the ſame
euer after, whether it be good or bad. Therefore
as God ſueth to haue vs begin at goodneſſe,
ſo the diuell wooes vs to begin at wickedneſſe:
alledging either that wee are not
reſolued yet to leaue our pleaſures, or els that
God is exceeding mercifull to ſinners, or elſe
that we ſhall haue ſpace enough to ſerue him
hereafter. So he ſtands as it were at the ladder
foote, and keepes vs off with theſe weapons,
that wee cannot get vpon the firſt ſtaffe, but
one thought or other pulleth vs backe, when
the foote is in the ſtirrop, ready to ride away
from all our ſinnes at once. Thus wee haue
long purpoſed to ſerue God, and euery man
thinketh that hee ſhould be ſerued, but wee
cannot accord of the time when to beginne:
One ſaith when I am rich, an other ſaith
when I am free, another ſaith, when I am
ſetled, an other ſaith when I am olde, then my
pleaſure will leaue me, and I ſhall be fitter to
faſt and pray, and ſequeſter my ſelfe, but now
I ſhal be mocked if I be not like others. Thus
like bad borrowers, when our day is paſt alreadie,
we craue a longer and a longer, and
yet a longer, til we be arreſted with death: ſo
the prince of creatures dieth, before he conſidered
why hee liued, for as no diſcipline is

vſed where Chriſts diſcipline is neglected,
ſo no time is obſerued, where Gods time is
omitted.
            It is an olde ſaying; Repentance is neuer
too late, but it is a true ſaying; Repentance
is neuer too ſoone.1. Cor. 9. 24. Therefore we are commaunded
to runne, that wee may obtaine,
which is the ſwifteſt pace of man.Exo. 25. 20. The Cherubines
were portraited with wings before the
place where the Iſraelites praied, to ſhew how
quickly they went about the Lords buſineſſe.
The Hound which runnes but for the Hare,
girdes foorth, ſo ſoone as he ſees the Hare
ſtart: the Hawke which flyeth but for the
Partridge, taketh her flight ſo ſoone as ſhe
ſpyes the Patridge ſpring: ſo we ſhould
followe the woord ſo ſoone as it ſpeaketh,
and come to our Maſter ſo ſoone as hee calleth.
For God requiring the firſt borne for his
offering, and the firſt fruites for his ſeruice,
requireth the firſt labours of his ſeruants, and
as I may ſay, the maidenhead of euery man.
Therefore ſo ſoone as man was created, a law
was giuen him,Ge. 2. 15. 16 to ſhew that hee ſhould liue
vnder obedience from the day that hee is
borne. So ſoone as he is borne, hee is baptized
in the name of God, to ſhew that when
we cannot runne to Chriſt, we ſhould creepe
vnto him, and ſerue him as we can in youth
and age: ſo ſoone as hee beginneth to praye,

hee ſaith, Thy name be hallowed, thy kingdome
come, thy will be doone, before hee
aske his dayly bread, to ſhew that wee ſhould
ſeeke the will of God, before the food which
we liue by, much more before the ſinnes and
pleaſures which we periſh by: ſo ſoone as
the Lord diſtributed the Talents, he enioyned
his ſeruants to vſe them. Who is ſo young
which hath not receiued ſome talēt or other:
therefore youth cannot excuſe him, becauſe
the talent requires to be asked of euery one
which hath it. So ſoone as God had created
the man and the woman, hee commanded
them to increaſe and multiplie: ſhall we increaſe
and multiplie in the fleſh, before we
encreaſe and multiplie in the ſpirit: the firſt
thing which God did after hee had created
heauen and earth, he did ſeparate light from
darkenes,Gen. 1. 14. to ſhew vs how we ſhould ſeparate
good from euill, before our good become
euill.
            The firſt leſſon that Iohn taught, was:
Repent, for the kingdome of heauen is at hand.
Math. 3. 2. The firſt leſſon that the Diſciples
taught, was, Repent too, for the kingdome of
heauen is at hand, Matth. 10. And the firſt
leſſon that Chriſt taught, was repent, for the
kingdome of heauen is at hand, Matth. 4. 10. to
teach vs what we ſhould do firſt. Repent was
the firſt leſſon to yong and old: For what can

we owe God to morrow, which wee are not
indebted to day? Therefore Dauid prayed,
Teach mee O Lord to number my dayes:
               Pſal. 90. 12. not
yeares, nor my moneths, nor my weekes.
but my dayes, ſhewing that we ſhall anſwere
for daies as well as yeares, for to day as well as
to morrow: and for our youth as ſtraightly as
our age, which made him cry, Remember not
the ſinnes of my youth: which hee would not
haue ſpoken, if God did not marke the ſinnes
of youth as well as age. Therefore he calleth
children vnto him as Salomon dooth, and
ſaith, that hee will teach them the feare of
the Lord. For ſhould children honor their
father and not honour God. It was a ſweete
comfort, when the children went before
Chriſt to his temple, and ſang there Hoſanna,
to make their fathers aſhamed, which did
not know the Meſſias when he came, when
their little children knew him. It is written
that when Chriſt heard a young man anſwer,
that hee had kept the commaundementes
from his youth, Chriſt beganne to loue him,
which ſhewes how Chriſt loueth theſe timelie
beginnings, when wee make him our
nurſe, and drawe our firſt milke from his
breſts. There is not one confeſſion for olde
men, and another for young men, the old man
ſaith not, I did beleeue in God: the young

man ſaith not, I will beleeue in God, but both
ſay, I doe beleeue in God, for hee which is
called I am, in the third of Exodus, loueth, I
am, and careth not for, I was, nor I will be.
When Chriſt aſketh Peter, Loueſt thou me?
he looketh that Peter ſhould anſwere him,
Yea Lord I loue thee: and not driue him off
as Felix did Paule, I will heare thee, I will
loue thee, when I haue a conuenient time.
For he which will not come when God cals,
whatſoeuer he ſay, it is impoſſible that hee
ſhould reſolue to come heereafter: for hee
which is euill, how ſhould hee reſolue to bee
good? therefore now or neuer, now and euer,
the tree which buddeth not in ſpring, is dead
all the yeare. when a man is firſt maried, he
may vſe the matter ſo, to winne his wife vnto
him, or to eſtrange her hart for euer. when a
Paſtor commeth firſt to a place, with a ſmall
matter he may make the ſimple people like
him or diſlike him, ſo long as he ſtaieth: when
the heire comes to his lands, lightly all his tenants
beginne to ſpeake well of him, or euill
of him. when a Prince commeth to the
crowne, by the lawes which hee maketh, firſt
the people geſſe how he will rule euer after:
and eyther diſpoſe theyr hearts to loue him,
or wiſh his death.
            Therefore the ſage and beaten counſaylers

aduiſed Rehoboam when he beganne to
raigne:1. Chro. 10. 
               Shew thy ſelfe louing to the people this
day, and they will be thy ſeruants for euer. As
though all the dayes after could not doo ſo
much as the firſt: Such a victorie it is to beginne
well, as our Prouerbe ſaith: hee which
hath begunne well, is halfe his waye, eſpeciallie
it is good for a man to beginne his repentance,
before he learne to be euill: For
herein our minds do follow our bodyes. If
our children bee deformed in their youth,
we neuer looke to ſee them well ſauored: ſo
if the minde be planted in ſinne, ſildome any
goodneſſe buddeth out of that ſtocke. For
vertue muſt haue a time to growe, the ſeede
is ſowne in youth, which commeth vp in
age.
            And if we can ſay of others, when we ſee a
graceleſſe boye, thou wilt prooue a wagſtring,
if thou liue to bee elder, why ſhould
wee, if we begin as ill as hee, thinke that wee
ſhall bee better and better, which iudge that
he will be worſe and worſe; as the arrowe is
directed at the firſt, ſo it flyeth all the waye,
ouer, or vnder, or beſide, but it neuer findeth
the marke, vnleſſe it bee leuelled right in the
hand; ſo they which make an euill beginning
foreſpeake themſelues as it were at the firſt,
and wander out all their race, becauſe when

they ſhould haue leuied their life, they tooke
their aime amiſſe. Therefore happie are they
which haue the arrowe in theyr hande, and
day before them, for they neede not wiſhe to
bee yong againe. Now kill the ſerpent in the
egge, for when he is a ſerpent he wil kil thee,
if thou cannot ouercome ſinne in the infancie,
before the roote faſten, and the fence bee
made about it: how wilt thou ſtruggle with
the Lion, when he ſeeth his pawes? and
ſinne is become like an olde man, ſo tough
and froward, that he will not heare. As harde
as it is to reclaime one of theſe olde ſinners,
or graunde Papiſts, which are incorporate
into poperie, and as poyſon is ſetled in a
ſerpent; ſo harde it will bee to reclaime
thee, when thou wilt beginne to ſaye, it hath
beene my cuſtome, and I cannot leaue it.
            Trie thy ſtrength but with one of thy ſins:
and ſee what ſhifts, what excuſes, what delayes
it will find, and how it will importune
thee to let it alone, as the diuell tormented
the Childe before hee went out: if thou
canſt not diſcharge one vice that thou haſt
accuſtomed thy ſelfe vnto, when all thy
vices are become cuſtomes, how wilt thou
wraſtle with them?
            Therefore wee bende the Tree while it is
a twigge, and breake the Horſe while hee

is a Colte, and teach the Dogge while hee
is a whelpe: and tame the Eagle while hee
is young.
            Youthe is like the daye, to doo all our
woorkes in. For when the night of age
commeth, then euerie man ſayeth, I might
haue beene learned, I might haue beene a
teacher, I might haue beene like him or
him, but the harueſt was paſt, before I beganne
to ſowe; And Winter is come, now
my fruite ſhould rype. Thus euerie man
that is olde ſaith, he cannot doe that which
hee thought to doe, and crieth with Salomon:
Catechiſe the Childe in his youth, and
he will remember it when he is olde: ſo corrupt
him in his youth, and he will remember
that too.Dan. 1. This Nabuchadnezzar perceiued,
and therefore hee choſe the towardlieſt children
of the Iſraelites to traine them vp in
idolatrie, like the popiſh Seminaries, that
they might be his inſtruments another day:
If he had let them alone till they had learned
the truth firſt, hee thought that they would
not take his way: therefore hee tooke them
before they had any religion, to frame them
to his religion. If idolatours and Papiſts be
ſo cunning in their generation, to poyſon
their Children betime, leaſt they ſhould
prooue Chriſtians after, what care appertaineth
to Chriſtians to ſeaſon their children in

the ſpring, like the vertuous Ladie which
Iohn commendeth, leaſt they prooue papiſts
and traytours, and reprobates, when they
looke for comfort of them. There was nothing
which made Rehoboam to chooſe ſuch
young counſailers, when hee beganne to
raigne, but becauſe they were his companions
before: therefore they became his counſailers
after. This is the preferment of our
ſinnes, if they haue been our companions in
youth, in age they will looke to be our counſailers
and maſters too. Therefore the beſt
ſeaſon to ſeeke GOD, is to ſeeke him early
before the floudes of wrath ariſe, and the
heape of ſinnes ſtand vp like a rampired wall
betweene GOD and vs. They which ſeeke
mee earlie, ſhall finde mee, ſaith Wiſdome,
in the 8. of Prouerbes: but to them which
deferre (ſhee ſaith) they ſhall ſeeke mee, but
they ſhall not finde me; 1. Prouerbes: becauſe
they did not chooſe the feare of the Lorde:
that is, when good and euill were ſet before
them, they did preferre euill before good, as
a man chooſeth that which hee liketh. Therefore
when they ſeeke mee (ſaith GOD)
they ſhall not finde mee. How doe yee
ſay then that yee will ſeeke GOD, when
God himſelfe ſaieth that yee ſhall not finde
him? Therefore in the 4. of Prouerbes and
the 7. Wiſedome is called the beginning, to

teach vs to ſeeke Wiſedome in the beginning.Mat. 6. 33.
For ſaith Chriſt, If yee ſeeke the kingdome
of heauen firſt, all the rest ſhall bee cast
vpon you: hee ſaith not, if you ſeeke the
world firſt, heauen ſhall bee caſt vpon you,
but if you ſeeke heauen firſt, worldly things
ſhall be caſt vpon you. Hee which dooth beleeue
this, would firſt ſeeke the kingdome of
heauen, for that which followeth; that all the
reſt might bee caſt vpon him, as when Salomon
deſired wiſdome before honour, God
gaue him wiſdome and honour too,Ioh. 5. 2. becauſe
he ſought the beſt firſt.
            There was a poole in Iurie, where the ſicke
and Leprous laye, for at one time of the daye,
the Angell came and ſtirred the water, and
then he which ſtept in firſt was healed of his
diſeaſe: hee which ſtept in firſt was healed
ſaith Iohn, none but hee which ſtept in firſt;
ſo he which taketh time is ſure, but he which
foreſloweth time oftener faileth then ſpeedeth.
For when golden opportunitie is paſt,
no time will fit for her. If Elias would bee
ſerued before the widdow, when ſhee had
but a little cruſe of Oyle, which was not enough
to ſerue her ſelfe; will God be ſerued
after Elias, will God bee ſerued after thee?
Nay after the fleſh and after the diuell? Thou
maiſt reade in the 19. of Leuit. and the 13.

that GOD would not haue the labourers
hire ſtaie in thy hands all night, but would
haue thee pay him before thou ſleepe. If God
would not haue the labourers due ſtay in thy
hands one night; how dareſt thou keepe his
due from him day and night? ſo many dayes
and nights, and weekes, and moneths and
yeares together? where is the morning ſacrifice
which God requireth: nay where is the
euening ſacrifice which God requireth: the
glomy morning hath ouercaſt the whole day,
doeſt thou thinke it enough if thou do not ſit
in the chaire of ſcorners, or if thou do not ſtād
in the waie of ſinners? hee which ſtandeth
ſtayeth not, he which ſitteth taketh his eaſe,
but he which walketh goeth his way. Yet he
which walketh in the way of ſinners, though
hee neither ſit nor ſtand, is not of the bleſſed
number. But hee which neither ſitteth, nor
ſtandeth, nor walketh, is bleſſed ſaith Dauid,
Pſalm. 1. ver. 1. Alas then why doe we ſit, if
they which ſtande are accurſſed, and they
which walke are not bleſſed?Math 6. 33. Chriſt ſaieth,
First ſeeke the kingdome of God, and wee ſay
firſt, let mee burie my father, firſt let me bid
my friendes farewell, and ſo many things
firſt. So long in burying our Father, and bidding
our friends farewell: that is the riches,
and honours, and pleaſures of this worlde,

that there is no time left to ſeeke the kingdome:
but followe mee, is turned to, followe
vs, Chriſt muſt followe our ſinnes, and come
after our pleaſures, or elſe he ſhall not be ſerued
at al. When we were Children, we deferred
tyll we were men: when we are men, we
deferre tyll wee bee olde men, when wee
are olde men, wee deferre tyll death: in all
our lyfe wee finde no leaſure to liue well, but
flit from ſinne to ſin, from wicked thoughts
to wicked ſpeeches, from wicked ſpeeches
to wicked deedes, as the flie skippeth
from ſcab to ſcab, vntill wee bee caſt ſo farre
behinde, that we haue no courage to goe forward,
or elſe ſtraied ſo far out of our way, that
wee care not to ſeeke it againe. Therefore I
cannot ſay to you as Chriſt ſaide: First ſeeke
the kingdome of heauen, for then you ſhould
haue ſought it long agoe, but now I muſt ſay
with the Apoſtle, Redeeme the time, and at
laſt, Seeke the kingdome of heauen. For it is to
be feared, that as little flies when many came
together, plagued and deſtroyed the Egyptians:
ſo ſhort houres, but many in ſinne and
ſecuritie will ſteale away our whole life, and
deceiue our repentance, while wee liue like
beaſts longer then Nabuchadnezzar. There
be not many Lots, but many linger like Lot,
loth to depart, vntill they ſee the fire burne.

If the Angell had not ſnatched him awaie,
Lot had periſhed with Sodome for his delaye.
            There be not fiue fooliſh Virgins, and fiue
wiſe, but fiue for one knock when the doore
is ſhut. There bee not many Simeons, but
many as old as Simeon, which neuer yet imbraced
Chriſt in their hearts. They thought
to repent before they were ſo olde, yet
now they doate for age, they are not olde
enough to repent yet. Naye I anſwere, many
Maſters of Iſraell, Maiors, Aldermen,
Sheriffes, Iuſtices, Ba
                  •
               liffes, Conſtables, Gentlemen,
know no more what it is to be borne
againe; than Nicodemus which came by
night: line after line, ſermon after ſermon, and
the Black more like himſelfe. All their tearms
are vacations, all their religion, promiſes; and
all their promiſes hypocriſes. In ſtead of catechiſing
their children, as Salomon teacheth
them, they catechiſe them to hunt & hawke,
to ride and vaute, to ruffle & ſweare, to game
and daunce, as they were catechiſed themſelues;
leaſt the childe ſhould prooue better
than his father, and then he is qualified like a
Gentleman. Is this to ſeeke the kingdome of
heauen firſt, or laſt, or not at all? Woe to the
ſecuritie, woe to the ſtubbornneſſe, woe to
the drouſineſſe of this age. The theefe commeth

at midnight, and we ſleep till the dawning
of the day; we let in ſathan, before wee
bid him auoyd; we ſell our birthright, before
it come to our hands; we ſeek for oyle, when
our lampes ſhould burne: this daye paſſeth
like yeſterday, and to morrowe we will ſpend
like this day. So hee which ſhould haue the
firſt fruites, can get no fruites, becauſe we mar
the ground before we ſowe it.
            Conſider this, ye which might haue known
a thouſand things more than yee doo, if yee
had begun when Salomon taught you.
            God will not alway knocke at the doore,
Chriſt will not alway clocke like an Henne,
Iohn will not alway crie in the wilderneſſe;
but mercy is in the foreward, and iudgement
in the rereward. They which can ſaye now,
We haue a prophet; ſhall ſay, We had a prophet,
but wee entertained him like the Gergeſites:
ſo God ſent him awaie from vs like
Ionah to the Niniuites, when the Iſraelites
deſpiſed him. Yet Wiſedome cryeth in the
ſtreetes, Let euerie Ioſeph ſtore vp before the
famine come: for he which promiſeth thee
pardon when thou dooſt returne, dooth not
promiſe that to morrowe thou ſhalt returne.
Repentance is a gift, and a gift muſt be taken
when it is offered. The time paſt is gone, and
thou canſt not recall that to repent in; the

time to com is vncertaine, & thou canſt not
aſſure that to repent in; the preſent time is
onely thine, and thou maieſt repent in that:
but anone that will be gone too. Therefore,
as Samuell began to ſerue God in his minoritie,
as Timothie read the Scriptures in his
childhood, and Iohn grewe in ſpirit as hee rypened
in yeares; ſo whether thou be olde or
yong thy repentance cānot come too ſoone,
becauſe thy ſinne is gone before. If thou lackeſt
a ſpurre to make thee runne, ſee how euerie
day runneth awaye with thy life, youth
commeth vpon childhood, age commeth
vpon youth, death commeth vpon age, with
ſuch a ſwift ſaile; that if all our minutes were
ſpent in mortifying our ſelues, yet our glaſſe
would bee runne out, before wee had purged
halfe our corruptions. All theſe examples &
ſentences, and Prouerbs, and reaſons do cry
with Salomon, Remember thy Creator in
the dayes of thy youth. This is the Kings commendation
or greeting to the Colledge of
youth. But how ſhould young men remember
God, when olde men forget him? If Noah
be drunke, who ſhall rebuke Cham? It is
time to remember GOD in age, or to forget
him for euer. Therefore as the Iſralites gathered
twice ſo much Manna the day before
the Sabboath as they gathered any day before

that, becauſe they might not gather vpō the
Sabbaoth; ſo the gray head which looketh euerie
day for the laſt Sabbaoth when he ſhall
reſt in the graue, ſhould pray twice as much,
heare twice as much, doo twice as much, to
prepare the ſacrifice of his bodie & ſoule readie
and acceptable vnto GOD; becauſe the
night is at hand, when he cannot heare, nor
pray, nor repent any more. It is ſaid, the Diuel
is very buſie becauſe his time is ſhort, but
an old mans is ſhorter. What haſte ſhould he
make, that muſt goe farther than the Mores,
than the Sunne in a yeare, or a mouth, or a
weeke, which the Saintes were going all their
life. Therefore, if youth had neede of legges,
age had neede of wings to flie vnto God. But
as Chriſt ſaide, The poore receiue the Goſpell,
though the rich be more bound; ſo we may
ſay, the yong men receiue the Goſpel, though
the olde men haue more cauſe.
            The yong men follow Chriſt, the yong
men heare the word, the yong men ſanctifie
themſelues, the young men ſtande for the
church, the yong men beare the heate of this
day: olde Noah is drunke, old Lot is ſleepie
olde Sampſon hath loſt his ſtrength. Once
the yonger brother did ſteale the bleſſing
from the elder, & now he hath got it againe, as
the malice of Eſau ſhewes, which perſecutes

him for it. I ſpeake it to their ſhame, they that
weare the furres and ſcarlets, as though they
were all wiſedome, and grauitie, and holines
euen to the skirtes, may ſay as Zedechias ſaid
to Micaiah, When did the ſpirit depart from
me and goe to thee? When did zeale depart
from vs, and goe to you? They are ſo nouſeled
to the world, and acquainted with ſinne,
that it is too late now for the world to ſpeake
vnto them; they may looke vpon the ſignes
of wiſdome, and grauitie, and holines, when
they ſee their long beards, and gray heads, &
ſide gownes, and aske why is this buſh hanged
out, and no wine within? What meruaile
then if they be not reuerenced, but mockt and
pointed at, when Sem and Iaphet had need to
come againe, and couer their nakedneſſe?
What a ſhame was it to the Iſraelites, when
Chriſt ſaide by a Canaanite, I haue not found
ſo great faith in Iſrael? So what a ſhame is it
to the elders, that Chriſt may ſaye againe, I
haue not found ſo great faith nor knowledge
nor zeale in Maſters, and Fathers, and Rulers,
as in ſeruants, and children, and prentiſes?
Which made an olde Father of this Citie ſay,
which now is with God, that if there were any
good to bee done in theſe dayes, it is the
yong men that muſt doe it, for the olde men
are out of date, their courage ſtoopes like

their ſhoulders, their zeale is withered, like
their browes; their faith ſtaggereth like their
feete, and their religion is dead before them.
Bee aſſured of this that yee are come to that
time which your ſelues ſet to repent: and yet
as though there were another age to repent
after olde age: for you ſpende olde age like
youth, as if you were appointed to die in your
ſinnes. God hath choſen the weake things ſaith
Paul, 1. Cor. 1. ſo I may ſay, God hath choſen
the young things to doe his woorke: as if the
Lord had ſpoken to you in his wrath, Fathers
I will prouoke you by your children, Maſters
I will prouoke you by your ſeruants, as once
hee threatned to prouoake the Iewes by the
Gentiles. Therefore be of good cheere yong
Daniel, yong Samuel, yong Timothie, though
our aduerſaries be as the Aramites, yet there
be mo with vs, than againſt vs. Fleſh & blood
could not ouercome fleſh and blood: but if
you be ſanctified, it is the ſpirite which hath
ſanctified you; for the diuell would not goe
out, vnles a ſtronger than the diuell had entred
the houſe; when you come to be richer,
and elder like Demas, then take heed that ye
doo not embrace the world as Demas did, &
turne to that which ye condemne. The vine
would not leaue her grapes, nor the oliue her
fatnes, nor the fig-tree her ſweetnes to bee a

King, but the bramble did; hee is not a vine,
nor an oliue, nor a fig-tree, but a bramble,
made for the fire, which leaueth his righteouſnes
to become worſe. He which is of the
Church, will ſay with the Church, I haue waſhed
my feete, how ſhould I defile them again? Let
the dogge turne to his vomite, and the ſwine
to their walloing, but hold thou on thy ſacrifice
like Abraham to the euening of thy life,
and a full meaſure ſhalbe meaſured vnto
thee, as thou haſt meaſured thy
ſelfe. Vnto the which meaſure
without meaſure,
the Lord Ieſus
bring vs.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            THE TRIAL OF THE
RIGHTEOVS.
            
               PSALM. 34. 19.
               Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the
Lord deliuereth him out of all.
            
            
               THe ſumme of this verſe
is, as if he ſhould ſay, Let
the Righteous looke for
mo troubles than other,
& likewiſe let thē hope
for greter comforts than
other: for when they are
well, they ſhall bee eclipſed againe, to ſhewe
that their light was but borrowed; and when
they are eclipſed, their light ſhall returne, to
ſhew their difference from them whom God
hateth, which fall from plague to plague, as
they runne from ſinne to ſinne.
            This verſe hath three partes, for heere the
righteous are the agents, their condition troubles,
and the Lord their deliuerer: ſo manie
things fall out contrarie vnto our mindes,
euery day, that hee which wanteth patience

in this worlde, is like a man which ſtandeth
trembling in the field without his armor, becauſe
euerie one can ſtrike him, and hee can
ſtrike none: ſo the leaſt puſh of pain, or loſſe,
or diſgrace, dooth trouble that man more,
which hath not the skill to ſuffer, than twentie
tryals can moue him which is armed with
patience, like a golden ſhield in his hand, to
breake the ſtroke of euerie croſſe, and ſaue
the heart though the bodie ſuffer: for while
the heart is whole, all is well. A ſound ſpirit
(ſaith Salomon) will beare his infirmitie: but
a wounded ſpirit, what can ſuſtaine? Pro. 19.
14. Therefore as the lid is made to open and
ſhut, to ſaue the eie: ſo patience is ſet to keepe
the ſoule, and ſaue the heart whole, to cheare
the bodie againe. Therefore if you marke,
when you can goe by an offence, and take a
little wrong, and ſuffer a trouble quietly, you
haue a kinde of peace and ioy in your heart,
as if you had gotten a victorie; and the more
your patience is, ſtill the leſſe your paine is.
For as a light burthen borne at the armes end,
weigheth heuier by much, than a burthen of
treble weight, if it be borne vpon the ſhoulders,
which are made to beare: ſo, if a man
ſet impatience to beare his croſſe, which is
not fit to beare; it will grumble, and murmur
and ſtart, and ſhrinke, and let the burthen fall
vpon his head like a broken ſtaffe, which promiſeth

to helpe him ouer the waters, and leaueth
him in the ditch. But if you put it to patience,
& ſet her to beare it which is appointed
to beare, ſhe is like the heartie Spies that
came from Canaan,Ioſh. 2. and ſayd, It is nothing to
ouercome them: ſo patience ſaith, it is nothing
to beare, it is nothing to faſt, it is nothing to
watch, it is nothing to labour, it is nothing to
be enuied, it is nothing to be backbited, it is
nothing to bee impriſoned:Rom. 8. 37. 
               In all theſe things
(ſaith Paul) we are more then Conquerours. As
though all theſe things came not to make vs
mourners, but to make vs Conquerours, nay
more than Conquerours, becauſe a Conquerour
conquereth his enemie but once: but we
conquere theſe as often as Chriſt did the
tempter. Thus all is in the maner of bearing,
which maketh perſecution ſeeme ioyfull to
ſome, and irkeſome to others, which maketh
pouertie welcome to one, and bitter to another;
which maketh him ſing in his ſicknes, as
if he were whole, and thee raue and whine, &
curſe, as if thou were not ſicke but franticke:
Therefore Chriſtes yoake is called an eaſie
yoake,Matth. 11. becauſe it is eaſie to ſome, that is, to
them which haue skill to beare it, as Chriſt
did bea
                  •
               e it; by his infinite patience, hee ſuffered
infinite paines for infinite ſinnes. Patience
was like a priuie coate vpon his ſoule,
that when the Diuell ſtroake at him, he was

ſtriken himſelfe: when death came to kil him
hee was killed himſelfe; and all their ſhotte
could not hurt him, becauſe of his preſeruatiue
which he had about him,Iud. 16. 17. like Sampſons
haire, which ſaued him from all his enemies. If
the Maſter carried patience about him for to
guard him through theſe pykes of troubles,Gen. 3.
which ſtand like the fierie ſword betweene
vs and paradice: how can the ſeruant eſcape
then, vnles hee bee armed as his Maſter was?
For what hath the poore man to beare his
wants? what hath the bondman to beare his
griefes? what hath the ſicke man to beare his
paines? but to lay all vppon the ſhoulders of
patience, and to ſay with Ieremie, This is my
ſorrow,
               Iere. 10. 19. 
               and I will beare it. As the tree which
Moſes caſt into the Spring, ſeaſoned the bitterneſſe
of the Waters;Exod. 25. 25 ſo patience caſt into
our troubles, ſeaſoneth the bitternes of the
Croſſe, and is in ſtead of an aſſiſtaunt to euerie
man, to ouercome his troubles, like the
Armour-bearer,1. Sam. 14. which holpe Ionathan to
vanquish his enemies.
            She hath a deuice to draw ſuch a skinne ouer
our ſoares, that ſhall make our pouertie
ſeeme riches, our reproaches ſeeme honour,
our bondage ſeeme libertie, our labour ſeem
reſt, our ſorrowe ſeeme ioye, our paine ſeeme
eaſe, our ſickneſſe ſeeme health, and all that
hurts vs, reioyce vs; vntill wee ſay with Dauid.

               Thy iudgements are pleaſant; ſhewing,
that Gods iuſtice is as pleaſant to the patient,
as his mercies to others. Therefore what a
peace-maker were this in the Commonwealth,
if the Magiſtrate had patiēce to beare
his enuie, if the Preacher had patiēce to beare
his ſtudie, if the creditor had patience to
beare his loſſes, if the bond-man had patience
to beare his ſeruice, if the husbandman had
patience to beare his labour, if the ſicke man
had patience to beare his paine, if the poore
man had patience to beare his wants: for
want whereof, many think themſelues in hel,
and ſay, that no mans paine is like their paine,
no mans wants like their wants, no mansfoes
like their foes, no mans wrongs like theyr
wrongs, when they can ſcarſe tell where their
paine holds them.
            Therefore, albeit fewe can brooke of Humilitie,
and Charitie, and Meekeneſſe, and
Thankfulnes, and Temperance, and thoſe ſeuere
vertues, which pull from pleaſure; yet
euery man doth wiſh for patience, like a Phiſition
to eaſe his griefe, by all meanes that he
can: ſo they which are wicked, although they
cannot ſee the goodneſſe of other vertues,
yet can ſee the goodnes of patience, and perceiue
when they ſee a patient man, and an
impatient man both ſicke of one diſeaſe, yet
both are not troubled alike; but that he which

hath moſt patience, hath moſt eaſe: and hee
which is moſt impatient, is moſt tormented,
like a fiſh which ſtriues with the hooke. Therfore
euen thoſe which cannot ſuffer, that they
might haue reſt, yet ſing the patiē Prouerb,
In ſufferance is reſt. This is a leſſon which I
know you would gladly learne, euen as Pharaoh
longed to knowe his dreame,Gen. 41. 15. though ye
care not for vertue, as the cruell Iudge cared
not for charitie. Yet if you could gaine ſuch
a bargaine by any vertue to eaſe you of your
paines, it would make you looke vnto vertue,
as Pharaoh vſed Moſes,Exo. 9. 28. but to remooue the
plagues.
            This power God hath giuen to patience,
the medicinable vertue, that it ſhould be like
an wholeſome hearbe in the world, or a generall
Phiſition for all perſons and all diſeaſes.
Therefore when the Angell had recorded
all the troubles which ſhould come in the latter
dayes: at laſt hee concludeth, Here is the
patience of Saints:
               Apo. 13. 10. as though patience ſhould
beare all. Therefore ſo many ſcriptures goe
like preachers about the Bible, to exhort vnto
patience, like a Beacon which is ſet vp to call
men together, ſhewing vs, that by patience we
poſſeſſe our ſoules:
               Luk. 8. as though a man without
patience had no rule of himſelfe: that a mans
wiſedome is knowne by his patience,
               Prou. 9. as though
that he which is not patient, cannot be wiſe:

that by patience wee receiue the promiſes,
               Heb. 10.
though the promiſes did not belong vnto vs,
vnleſſe we haue patience:Rom. 5. 4. that patience breedeth
experience, and experience hope, as though
hee which wanteth patience, had no experience
of GOD, to knowe the ſcope of his doings,
nor anie hope to comfort him about the
life to come:Rom. 8. beſides many reaſons moe, That
the afflictions of this worlde are not worthie of
the ioyes that ſucceed them: that all things (euen
our afflictions) turne to the beſt, if we loue
God:
               Matth. 5. that they are bleſſed which weepe heere,
becauſe they ſhall laugh heereafter:
               2. Tim. 2. that if wee
ſuffer with Chriſt, wee ſhall raigne with Chriſt:
that the Lord doth loue thoſe whom he chasteneth:
               Prou. 3.
that by ſuffering we are made like the
Sonne of GOD, whoſe life was a perſecution,
as though the holie Ghoſt by often calling
vpon vs, like the importunate woman, would
compell vs to bee patient,Luk. 18. whether our fleſh
will or no.
            Beſides theſe honourable prayſes of patience,
the Prophets, Euangeliſts, and Apoſtles,
haue a ſet number of examples before
our eyes, like banners of ſuch cures as haue
been healed by her: that as the Author of the
Hebrewes ſaith,Heb. 11. 
               By faith Abel offered a better
Sacrifice than Caine: by faith Enoch was
tranſlated before he ſawe death: by faith Noah
prepared the Arke and was preſerued from the

Floud: by faith Abraham was content to ſacrifice
his Sonne, and yet beleeued that in his ſeede
all the world ſhould be bleſſed: by faith Sara receiued
ſtrength to bring foorth a child, when ſhe
was ſtrooken in yeres, and paſt the ſtrength of the
wombe. So I may ſay of patience: by patience
Iob did beare all the torments that the diuell
could heape vpon him:Iob. 1. by patience Iacob
put vp a thouſand wrongs from Laban and
his children,Gen. 29. 50. 31 and neuer complained in one &
twentie yeares before he departed: by patience
Ioſeph forgaue his brethren,Gen. 45. 15. when hee
might haue put them to death, and gaue thē
food when they feared reuenge: by patience
Chriſt ſuffered baniſhment, and reproaches,
and ſcourges, vntill he went to his death, like
a Lambe to the ſlaughter.
            Among the ſtrange cures of patience, Dauid
may report of his experience, what this
plaiſter hath done for him: for being a figure
of Chriſt, he was alwaies hedged about with
the croſſe, which prooued his patience like a
Touchſtone euery day. As Chriſt was contemned
of his Countreymen, ſo Dauid was
contemned of his brethren:1. Sam. 26. 2▪ 28. 2. as Chriſt fled to
Egypt, ſo Dauid fled vnto Gath: as Chriſt receiued
foode of women,Luk. 8. 2. ſo Dauid receiued
food of Abigail:1. Sa. 25. 18▪ 19. 2. 16. 13. as Herod perſecuted Chriſt,
ſo Saul perſecuted Dauid: and the wrath of
the King brought many enemies with it, that

when hee was annointed, yet hee coulde not
reigne: and when he reigned, yet his reigne
was but a warfare:2. Sam. 8. 2. 6, 5, 6, 15, 4, 18, 33. the Philiſtines agaynſt
him, the Ammonites agaynſt him, the Edomites
agaynſt him, the Moabites agaynſt
him, and Abſolon his owne bowels agaynſt
him, for whom he cryed, Would God I had died
for thee. This ſonne which was his dearling,
was his traytor, and ſought his death that
brought him to life, as though Saul had been
riſen from the graue againe. In all theſe troubles
Samuel ſhewes what was this pilgrimes
comfort:1. Sam. 30. 6 
               But Dauid comforted himſelfe in the
Lord his God, as though hee had no comfort
but in GOD alone. This was the ſtone vpon
which he leaned his head, Be patient, for Manie
are the troubles of the righteous, but the
Lord deliuereth him out of all. When hee did
behold his trouble,2. Kin. 6. 10 like the hoaſt of the Aramites,
he looked backe vnto God like Eliſha,
and ſpied one with him ſtronger then all againſt
him. Therfore reſpecting his afflictiōs,
he crieth, Many are the troubles of the righteous:
reſpecting the promiſe, he ſingeth, The
Lord deliuereth them out of all. Thus (by his
owne foote) Dauid meaſureth the condition
of the righteous, and ſaith, Many are the troubles
of the righteous: and then by his owne
cure hee ſheweth how they ſhall bee healed,
ſaying, The Lord will deliuer him out of all. If

ye marke, the ſpirite hath directed Dauid to
thoſe two things, which make vs take our
troubles grieouſly: one becauſe we doe not
looke for them before they come. Therefore,Iohn. 21. 28
as Chriſt told Peter before he ſuffered, to
ſtrengthen him when he ſuffered: ſo the holy
Ghoſt doth run vpon the Croſſe, to keep vs in
expectation of troubles, that wee might prepare
faith, and patience, and conſtancie for
thē, as Noah prepared an Arke for the floud.
The ſecond thing which makes vs to ſtart ſo
at the Croſſe, is, becauſe we are like the Prophets
ſeruant,2. King. 6. which did ſee his foes, but not
his friēds: ſo we ſee our ſore, but not our ſalue.
Comfort ſeemes a far off,Luk. 16. like Abraham in the
heauens, as though it would neuer come ſo
low: therefore wee goe about to deliuer our
ſelues,Pſal. 2. as it is ſaid, Let vs breake his bands, as
though we could deliuer our ſelues. But, Hold
your peace (ſaith Moſes) the Lord ſhall fight for
you.
               Exo. 14. 14. So Dauid comes in like a pacifier, and
ſaith: Vexe not your ſelues, for the Lord will deliuer
you. Beare both theſe ſentences in mind,
that you muſt go through a ſea of troubles, &
then that you ſhall come to a hauen of reſt,
and no affliction ſhall take you, before you be
armed for it, and in euery trouble you ſhall
know where to haue your remedie. Many are
the troubles of the righteous, but the Lorde deliuereth
him out of all. Here bee the two hands

of God like a wound and a plaiſter: one caſteth
downe, & the other raiſeth vp. It is good
for a man to knowe his troubles before they
come, becauſe afflictions are lightned in the
expectation. Therefore GOD ſayth of Paul,
I will ſhewe him how many things he ſhall ſuffer
for me.
               Act. 9. 16. God dealeth plainlie, and tels vs the
woorſt at the firſt, what wee ſhall truſt to, as
Chriſt told his Diſciples at the firſt:Math. 16. 8 
               If ye will
bee my Diſciples, yee muſt take vp the Croſſe:
cold entertainment to breake their faſt with
the rod.Luk. 9. Other feaſtmakers (ſayth Chriſt)
broach the beſt wine firſt,Ioh. 2. 10. but Chriſt himſelfe
keepeth the beſt till the laſt. This is the manner
of Gods proceedings, to ſend good after
euill,Gen. 1. 3. as hee made light after darkneſſe: to
turne iuſtice into mercie,Ioh. 2. as he turned water
into wine: for as the beaſts muſt be killed before
they could be ſacrificed, ſo men muſt be
killed before they can bee ſacrificed, that is,
the knife of correction muſt prune them, and
dreſſe them, and lop off their rotten twigs before
they can bring forth fruite, theſe are the
cordes which binde the ram vnto the Altar,
leaſt when he is brought thither hee ſhould
runne from thence agayne, this is the chariot
which carrieth our thoughts to heauen, as it
did Nabuchadnezzars, and our aſſumption
before our aſſumption. This is the hammer
which ſquareth the rough ſtones, till they be

plaine and ſmooth, and fit for the Temple.
This is the fierce meſſenger, which is ſent to
compell them to the banquet, which will not
come when they are inuited. Becauſe we are
naturally giuen to loue the world, more then
is good for vs, therefore God hath ſet an edge
of bitterneſſe vpon it, to make vs to loath it,
like a Nurſe which layeth Muſtard vpon her
breaſts to weane the childe from the dug: ſo
Many are the troubles of the righteous,
               Ioh. 8. 2. to
weane vs from the dugge of the world. The
croſſe is one of our Schoolemaſters in this
life, and the beſt wiſdome is deereſt bought:
proſperitie ſeeketh for nothing, but neceſſitie
ſeeketh, and ſtudieth, and laboureth, and
prayeth for her wants. As the rodde maketh
the Scholler to applye his booke, ſo all our
knowledge is beaten into vs: ſome learne
theyr goodneſſe of pouertie, ſome of ſickneſſe,
ſome of troubles: aduerſitie is the fit
time to learne the iuſtice, mercie, power, and
prouidence of GOD, a fit time to learne the
patience, wiſedome, faith, and obedience of
man, a fit time to learne the ſubtiltie, frailtie,
and miſerie of this worlde. All this thou
buyeſt for troubles, yet they are but troubles,
not plagues, nor curſſes, nor torments,
but like the trauels of a woman, when the
birth is ripe, ſhee is deliuered, and ſtraight
ſhee forgetteth all her paynes, for ioye that a

man child is borne into the world. So the ſeruants
of God trauell but till the fruits be ripe.
When the new man is borne, their trauels are
ended, and they forget all their troubles, becauſe
one is borne into the worlde, like the
ſonne of God. This is the difference between
the afflictions of the righteous and the vngodly.
            When GOD doth viſite the wicked,Exod. 8. 6. his
puniſhments are called plagues and curſes,
and deſtructions;Iohn. 4. the plagues of Egypt, the
curſe of Cain, the deſtruction of Sodome.
But when he doth viſite the righteous, his puniſhments
are called corrections,Iohn. 19. & chaſtiſements,
and rods, which proceed frō a father,
not to deſtroy vs,Gen. 36. but to trie vs, and purge vs,
& inſtruct vs: therefore when we are afflicted,
one ſayth, that God letteth vs blood to ſaue
our liues, for our liues are rancke, and muſt be
lopped. As Iacob was bleſſed, and halted
both at one time; ſo a man may bee bleſſed
and afflicted together. Afflictions do not hinder
our happineſſe, but our happineſſe commeth
by affliction, as Iacobs bleſſing came
with halting, and as peace is procured by
warre.Mat. 5. Therefore bleſſed are ye (ſayth Chriſt)
when men perſecute you: as though they
were bleſſed euen while they were perſecuted.
Therefore this muſt not diſmay vs, that
the ſcripture ſayth,1. Tim 3. 
               Many are the troubles of

the righteous; but rather reioyce vs, hecauſe
we beare the markes of the righteous. Daniel
complayneth not of his ſickneſſe, but of his
ſinnes. Who ſhall fight the Lords battailes
but the Lordes ſeruaunts? Therefore when
Dauid ſpake of many troubles, he pointed to
the righteous, as if he ſhould ſay; this is your
ſhare, the rodde is made for the Childe.
Chriſt called the Croſſe his cup. The ſeruant
is beloued that drinkes of his Maiſters cup:Mat. 20.
Therefore Chriſt teacheth it to the righteous,
and bids none but his diſciples take the
Croſſe:Mat 11. euerie man which hath his heauen
here,Gen. 3. dooth labour and ſweate for his liuing,
and ſhal not they which haue their hell heere,
ſuffer more then they which haue their heauen
heere? All men are ſubiect to dangers and
loſſes, and ſickneſſe: But all that beleeue in
Chriſt (ſayth Paul) ſhall ſuff
                     ••
                   perſecution.
               2. Tim. 4.
That is, more then dangers, or loſſes, or ſickneſſe
which the wicked ſuffer, for the worlde
will not perſecute her children, but ſhee will
perſecute Gods Children: therefore this
church is called the militant church, becauſe
it is alwayes in warfare. Therefore the Goſpell
is called the worde of the Croſſe, as
though it came to croſſe vs: Therefore Paul
deſcribing the way to heauen,Acts. 14. 22 draweth by
this line, by many tribulations: the Croſſe
way is the way to heauen and the righteous

walke in it.Mat. 21. Therefore the Children of God
are not only called labourers, to ſhew what
they ſhould doe for God,2. Tim. 2. 3. but they are called
Souldiers, to ſhew what they ſhould ſuffer for
GOD.Ioh. 15. 20. 
               The ſeruant is not aboue his master:
but if Chriſt ſhould ſuffer, and we ſhould reſt
the ſeruant were aboue his Maſter. The propheſie
muſt be fulfilled. I will put enmitie betweene
the ſeede of the woman and the ſeede of
the Serpent:
               Gen. 3. but if there be no war betweene
the children of God and the children of the
world, the propheſie is not fulfilled. Therefore
Eſau and Iacob had no ſooner life, but
they began to ſtruggle one with another, before
they came out of their mothers wombe.
Therfore Abraham was baniſhed ſo ſoone
as he receiued the promiſe. Therefore Abell
was enuied of his brother,Gen. 25. 22. 4. 14. ſo ſoone as he was
accepted of God. The righteous man was
alwayes like Lot among the Sodomites, and
like Sampſon among the Philiſtines, ſette a
worke by his enemies. As Chriſt was no ſooner
borne, but Herod ſought his life; ſo the
new man is no ſooner borne of the ſpirit,Matth. 2. but
the ſerpent is ready to deuour him, his brethren
to baniſh him, and hell to ſwallow him.
In all the worlde hee hath no friend, but hee
which made the world. This is the ſtate of the
church militant: ſhe is like the Arke floating
vpon the waters, like a Lilly growing among

thornes,Exod. 3. 2. like the buſh which burned with fire
and was not conſumed, ſo the citie of God is
alwayes beſieged, but neuer ruined. Chriſtians
and perſecutions cloſe together, like
Chriſt and his Croſſe. As Chriſt was made to
beare his owne croſſe: ſo they are made to
holde their cheekes to the nippers,Luke 23. 33 their faces
to be buffeted,Iohn 19. 17 their backes to bee ſcourged,
their eyes to be pulled out, their peace is perſecution,
their reſt labour, their riches pouertie,
their glorie reproches, their libertie impriſonment;
although they bee the ſonnes of
God, the brethren of Chriſt, the onely heires
of heauen; yet becauſe they ſuffer their hell
heere, they muſt bee contented to be ſubiect
to their enemies, to bee abiects to their kinſmen,Pſalm 69. 8, 7, 1, 7.
to be hated of moſt, to bee contemned
of all, to be perſecuted ouer the earth, a very
hauen and receptacle of all troubles. Yet as
Chriſt was the ſonne of God, though his life
was nothing but perſecution;Luk 10. 35. ſo the righteous
are the ſonnes of God, for all theſe troubles:
This is like a bayte in their iourney, to
thinke as the Samaritan told his hoaſt, if thou
ſpend any more I wil recompence thee whē
I come. So Chriſt will mende their wages,
when he commeth. Why ſhuld not God trie
his friends, as well as wee trie our friends, the
ſame afflictions (ſaith Peter) are accompliſhed
in others, naye, greater afflictions are

borne of other, which woulde make vs diſpayre
like Caine, Chriſt was conſecrated by
afflictions, therefore we cannot be conſecrated
without afflictions, who would not go to
heauen with Eliah, though it were in a whirlewind?
if our troubles be light and few, it is becauſe
we are weake & tender:1. Cor. 10. 13 therefore God
doth reſpect our feeblenes, & layeth no more
vpon vs, becauſe wee are not able to beare
more. It is not a ſigne that we are righteous,
becauſe our troubles are few; but becauſe our
troubles are few, it is rather a ſigne that wee
are not righteous, becauſe Many are the
troubles of the righteous. For they muſt bee
made examples of patience, they muſt ſuffer
their hell here, they muſt be ſquared for the
temple, therefore they muſt haue manye
ſtrokes to make them fitte: God is not like a
Waſpe, which when ſhee hath ſtoong once,
cannot ſting againe: but there is a generation
of croſſes, and a pluralitie of troubles.
When Dauid ſpake of trouble, hee ſpake of
troopes and heapes, and ſtars, and ſands, and
therefore he ſaith, Many, as though hee were
faine to lay them downe in the groſſe ſum becauſe
he could not reckon them. By many tribulations
(ſaith Paul) but how many he could
not number:Act. 14. For except our ſinnes, there is
not ſuch plenty of any thing in the world, as
there is of troubles, which come from ſinne:

as one heauy meſſenger came to Iob one after
another:Iob. 1. 14. 16. ſo now we are not in Paradice,
but in the wilderneſſe,Pſal. 42. 7. 18. 19. we muſt looke for one
trouble after another; therefore afflictions
are called waters, becauſe as one waue falleth
vpon another, ſo one trouble falleth vpon the
head of another.
            As a Beare came to Dauid after a Lyon,1. Sa. 17. 34
and a Giant after a Beare, and a King after a
Giant, and Philiſtines after the King: ſo when
they haue fought with pouertie, they ſhall
fight with enuie: when they haue fought
with enuie, they ſhall fight with infamie:
when they haue fought with infamie, they
ſhal fight with ſicknes, like a labourer which
is neuer out of worke. This you ſee the righteous
in troubles, like the Iſraelites in exile:
Now the Lord commeth like Moſes to deliuer
them:Exod. 3. 10. aduerſitie ſeeketh out the promiſe;
the promiſe ſeeketh out fayth; fayth ſeeketh
out prayer; then God heareth, and mercie anſwereth.
All this while Chriſt ſeemed to
ſleepe, as he did in the ſhippe: nowe hee rebukes
the windes and waues,Math. 8. 26 and troubles
flie before him, like a troupe of Woolues before
the Shepheard. As he asked the adultreſſe,
where are thy accuſers? and ſhe ſayd
they are gone: ſo he may aske his patients,
where are your troubles? and they may ſay,
they are gone: the ſunne roſe, and the miſts

vaniſhed: yet (ſaith Dauid) God is good to
all that are pure in heart: that is, he remembreth
them while he afflicteth them, and is
preparing an iſſue while the croſſe prepareth
them. When Chriſt heard them ſay, he whom
thou loueſt is ſicke, he anſwered, this ſicknes
is not to death. Ioh. 11. 3. So when it may be
ſayd, he whom God loueth is ſicke: then it
may be ſayd, this ſicknes is not vnto death, &
though it be to the firſt death, yet not to
the ſecond.Ion. 3. Who would thinke when Ionas
was in the ſea, that he ſhould preach at Niniuie?Dan. 4.
who would think whē Nabuchadnezzar
was in the forreſt, that he ſhould raigne again
in Babel? who would think whē Ioſeph was
baniſhed of his brethrē, that his brethrē ſhuld
ſeeke vnto him, like his ſeruants: who would
thinke when Iob ſcraped his ſores vpon the
dunghill,Iob 1. 42. 10 all his houſes were burned, all his

                  •
               attell ſtolne, & all his Children dead, that he
ſhould be richer then euer he was?Exo. 15. 21. theſe are
the acts of mercy which make the righteous
ſing: The Lord hath triumphed valiantly. This
is the priuiledge of the righteous,Mal. 3. 6. as God ſaith
Ye ſons of Iacob are not conſumed. So they anſwere
againe.1. Cor. 4. 6. 
               We are not conſumed. Therefore
(Paul ſaith) we are in diſtreſſe, but we are not
forſaken:Luk. 24. 6. as Chriſt roſe out of his graue, ſo we
ſhall riſe out of trouble; and when the gold is
fined, the fire ſhal hold it no longer. Whē Ieſus

was in baniſhment with Mary & Ioſeph,
at laſt the Angel came and ſaid,Iohn. 2. 3 
               They are dead
which ſought the childes life: ſo when the daies
of our baniſhment and ſcarſitie, & bondage,
and ſickneſſe are ended,Mat. 2. 20. at laſt tidings ſhall
come that our troubles are dead, and then
the righteous ſhall looke vp like Moſes,
when hee was paſt the ſea, and ſee all their
enemies, all their troubles drowned behinde
them; then the heart ſhall daunce like Miriam,
and ſing the ſong which ſounded before
Moſes:Exod. 30. 15 20. 34. 
               The Lorde, the Lord is ſtrong, mercifull
and gratious, ſlow to anger, but aboundant
in goodneſſe and truth. And if Dauid had ſtaied
at troubles, and ſpoken of nothing but
rods, the wicked might ſay as they doe in the
115. Pſalme.Pſalm. 115. 
               Where is their God? and the
righteous might cōplaine with Dauid,Pſalm. 3. 
               I haue
clenſed my heart in vaine: but as the waters of
the ſea flow & ebbe againe, ſo the waters of
afflictiō flow & ebbe again, one caſteth Moſes
into the water, and another draweth him
out of the water. There lieth Lazarus at the
gate, there lieth Ioſeph in priſon, there lyes
Ieremie in the dungeon, there lies Iob in the
Aſhes, there lyes Iacob in the fields, there lies
Dauid in the wilderneſſe, there lies Abraham
in exile, there lies Daniel among the Lions,
there lies the children in the Furnace:Gen. 25. 20. at laſt
comes the yeare of Iubile, and al the priſoners

of the Lorde are ſet at libertie, therefore they
are called the priſoners of hope, becauſe they
may hope to be deliuered, &c. Therfore God
tranſlateth his Croſſe from the head to the
heart, from the heart to the foot, from pouertie
to ſickneſſe, from ſickneſſe to labour: that
whereſoeuer he placeth it, we might haue patience,Zach. 9. 1.
knowing that he can remoue it as hee
placeth it.
            Then are fulfilled all theſe ſweet ſcriptures:
The Lord retaineth not his wrath for euer, becauſe
mercie pleaſeth him. Mich. 7. 8. After
two dayes he will reuiue vs, and the third day he
will raiſe vs vp. Oſe. 6. 2. Surely there is an end,
and thy hope ſhall not be cut off. Prouer. 23. 18.
Heauineſſe may endure for a night, but ioye will
come in the morning. Pſal. 30. 5. He which hath
ouercome death, and Sathan, and the world,
can eaſilie ouercome all the troubles in the
world:1. Kin. 17. 6 rather then Eliah ſhall ſtarue, the Rauens
ſhall feede him:Ionah. 1. rather then Ionah ſhall
drowne,Luk. 16. the fiſh ſhall ſaue him: as when the
Glutton did not pitie, the Dogs tooke compaſſion.
Vntill Dauid ſaith, The Lord will deliuer,
the righteous and the wicked goe together,Luk. 17.
but now they part, one is taken and the
other is refuſed, one is deliuered, the other is
left in priſon. As Abraham came not to deliuer
the Sodomits,Gen 14 16. but to deliuer his brethren:
ſo Chriſt came not to deliuer his enemies, but

to deliuer his ſeruants: not to deliuer them
from troubles, but to deliuer thē out of troubles,Iob. 1. 21.
that they may ſay as well, The Lord hath
taken, as the Lord hath giuen. As Dauid gaue
charge to his Souldiers, that they ſhould not
kill Abſolon his ſonne,2. Sa. 18. 5. though he ſent them
againſt Abſolon, to ſtay his rebellion: ſo God
forbids his croſſes to deſtroye his children,
though he ſend them againſt his children to
purge their corruptions. As the Angel paſſed
by the houſes of the Iſraelits, when he ſaw the
bloud of the lambe vpon their doores:Exo. 12. 13. ſo God
hath his markes, whereby he knoweth whom
he ſhould deliuer out of trouble, & whom he
ſhould leaue in trouble: to one he ſaith, Take
my croſſe: to another he ſaith, Be thou healed:
to another he ſaith, Stay till thy time cōmeth:
euerie hard word may be ſpoken to the godly
as wel as the wicked, but that deadly word,
Depart into euerlasting fire.
               Matth. 25. Although they
ſeeme to depart here, yet then it ſhall be ſaid,
come and not depart. As Iohn after the voice
of thunder heard the voice of harpers:Reuel. 14. 2. ſo whē
they haue bin beaten, they ſhal be cheriſhed:
therefore the trials of the righteous, though
they be called many troubles, yet they are not
called euerlaſting troubles.
            As Dauid ſaith here,Pſal 32. 10 
               Many are the troubles
of the righteous: ſo in Pſalm. 32. 10. he ſayth.
Many are the ſorowes of the righteous: but it

followeth, the Lord will deliuer them out of
all:Prou. 11. 8. nay (ſaith Salomon) when the righteous
eſcape out of trouble, the wicked ſhall come in his
ſtead, that is, the troubles of the righteous ſhal
ſhift to the vngodly,1 Kin. 3. 27. as the leproſie of Naaman
went to Gehezi:Prou. 21. 18 and therefore the wicked
are called the ranſome of the iuſt, becauſe
they lye in baile for them. As one bird chirpeth
to another, ſo one plague ſhal whiſtle to
another, and ſay, come and helpe mee to tormēt
this ſinner,Exo 8. 9. (for one plague will not ſerue
the Egyptians) vntill he be ſo loden with torments,Gen 4.
that he crie like Caine, My puniſhment
is greater then I can beare. The righteous
neuer ſaid, that their troubles were more,
or greater, or longer, then they could beare.
For God hath promiſed, he will not lay more
vpon them then they are able to beare:1. Cor 10. 13. but
when they begin to ſinke like Peter vpon the
Sea, then the hande is readie to catch them,
and ſtraight GOD maketh an iſſue for theyr
troubles.Acts. 27. As the Viper lept vpon Paul, & lept
off againe, ſo troubles leape vpon the righteous,
and leape off againe; as though they had
miſtaken the partie, and rapt at the wrong
doore.Pſal. 37 37. Therefore, Mark the vpright man (ſaith
Dauid) and beholde the iuſt, for the end of that
man is peace. Though his beginning be trouble,55 23.
yet his end is peace: He will not ſuffer the
righteous to fall for euer: he ſayth not that he

will not ſuffer him to fall, but that he ſhall not
fall for euer: that is, at laſt his ſhackel falleth
from him, the net breakes, the priſon openeth,
and he goes foorth like Lazarus out of
his graue, to ſhewe what wonderfull things
the Lord hath done for him: So Paul after he
had ſpoken of his troubles, (as thought hee
thought vpon this ſentence of Dauid) repeateth
the ſame of himſelfe, ſaying: But the Lord
deliuered me out of all.
               2. Tim. 3. Therefore one calleth
affliction the trance of the righteous, becauſe
they ſeeme dead for a while, but they wake againe:
therefore they chalenge their enemies
(and ſay) Reioyce not againſt me O mine enemie:
               Mich. 7. 8.
               for though I fall, yet I ſhall riſe.
            
            This ſhould content the righteous, to bee
deliuered at laſt, as Dauid quieteth himſelfe,
ſaying: By this I know the Lord fauoureth me,
becauſe mine enemies doe not triumph ouer me:
               Pſal. 41. 11
not becauſe I haue no enemies, or becauſe I
haue no troubles which would ouercome
me. Therefore when he wrote downe. Many
troubles, hee blotteth it (as it were) with his
pen againe, as a Merchant raceth his booke
when the debt is diſcharged: and in ſtead of
many troubles, he putteth in, The Lord deliuereth.
Becauſe he forgiueth all ſinnes, he is
ſayd to deliuer from all troubles, to ſhew that
wee haue neede of no Sauiour, no helper, no
comforter but him.
            
               
The Lawyer can deliuer his client but from
ſtrife, the Phiſition can deliuer his patient but
from ſickneſſe, the Maſter can deliuer his ſeruant
but from bondage, but The Lord (ſayth
Dauid) deliuereth out of all. As when Moſes
came to deliuer the Iſraelites, hee would not
leaue an hoofe behind him, ſo when the Lord
commeth to deliuer the righteous, he wil not
leaue a trouble behind him, but euen as they
pray in 25. Pſal.Pſal. 25. 
               Deliuer Iſrael O Lord out of
all her troubles: ſo he will anſwere them, B
                     •
                  
thou deliuered out of al thy troubles, that is, this,
& this, and this, that trouble that thou thinkeſt
intollerable, that trouble which thou
thinkeſt incurable, the almightie hath might
againſt all.Iob. 24. When Iob is tryed, not a ſore ſhall
ſticke vpon him.2. King. 6. Therefore as Eliſha feared
not when he ſaw as many angels as enemies,
ſo now you ſee as many mercies as troubles:
let the comfort ſatisfie you which ſatisfied
Paul,Act. 27. 24. 
               Feare not, for I am with thee, thy pardon
is comming,Gen. 22. like the Angell which ſtaid
the ſword ouer Iſaacks head. Reade on but a
little further, and thou ſhalt heare the voyce
which proclaymed warre, proclayme peace:
many troubles in the beginning of the verſe,
and no troubles in the ende. What Phiſition
hath been here? The Lord (ſayth Dauid) the
Lord was in this place (ſaith Iacob) & I knew
it not: So the Lord is in affliction and men

know it not, he which ſayth, I put away thine
iniquities,Gen. 28 16. muſt ſay, I put away thy infirmitie.
For there is no Sauiour but one,Eſa 43 25. which ſaith
to death,Math. 9. 29 I will be thy death. As the woman
was ſicke vntill Chriſt came: ſo vntill the
Lorde come, there is nothing but trouble.
Manie troubles of the righteous, but one deliuerer
of the righteous: manie tortours, but
one Comforter. Troubles come in an hundred
wayes, like waters through a grate: but
mercie entreth alwayes at one doore like a
pardon which cōmeth only from the Prince:
therefore ſayth GOD, In mee is thy helpe.
Hoſ. 11. 6. I create comfort, Eſay. 65. Marke,
that he calleth himſelfe a creator of comfort:
that is, as there is but one Creator, ſo there is
but one Comforter, and as hee created all
things of nothing, ſo hee createth comfort of
nothing: that is, when all comfort is worne
out, and no ſeede of ioy left to raiſe vp comfort
againe: then he bringeth comfort out of
ſorrow, as he brought water out of the rocke,
that wee may ſay,Exod. 17. 6. 8. 14. 
               The finger of the Lord hath
done this.
            
            This is the anchor of the righteous. As he
lookes vpon his troubles, the promiſe commeth
in like a meſſenger from Chriſt, while
he is praying, and weeping, and ſayth, The
Lord will deliuer thee out of all. Then hee reſolueth
like Nehemiah,Nehe. 6. 11. and ſaith, Shall ſuch a

man as I flye? Shall ſuch a man as I recant?
If I be faint in the day of aduerſitie,Pro. 24. 10. Salomon
ſaith, my ſtrength is ſmall: as if hee ſhoulde
ſay, I was neuer ſtrong, but did counterfeite
like Demas: if I want comfort in trouble,
Salomon ſayth,Pro. 15. 15. 
               A good conſcience is a continuall
feaſt. As if he ſhould ſay, that I haue not
a good conſcience, if I haue not comfort in
the Croſſe. Therefore I will wayte the Lords
leiſure,Pſalm. 2. becauſe Eſay ſayth, Faith maketh no
haſt. I will not breake his bands, becauſe then
I am like the Heathen. I will not flatter the
Iudge,Pro. 29. 26. becauſe Salomon ſaith it is vaine. I will
not betray the cauſe, becauſe GOD hath appoynted
it to trye mee.Rom. 14. I will not offend my
brethren,1. Cor. 8. 10. becauſe Paul had rather dye than
doe ſo. I will not charge my conſcience, becauſe
it can vexe mee more than their bands.
I will not turne from my profeſſion, becauſe
I learned it of GOD, and vowed to leaue all
for it, in the daye that I was baptized a Chriſtian.
Though my friends tempt me, like Iobs
wife: though my fleſh flatter mee, like Eue:
though my perſecutors would bribe me, like
Balaac: though they which ſuffer with me,
ſhould reuolt for feare:Ioſh. 24. 15. yet I will be as Ioſhua
which ſtoode alone:1 Sam. 1. and as Elkanah was in
ſtead of children to Annah, ſo Chriſt ſhall be
in ſtead of comfort, in ſtead of wealth, and
health, and libertie to mee. For manie were

the troubles of Ioſeph, and the Lord deliuered
him out of all: many were the troubles
of Abraham, and the Lord deliuered him out
of all: many were the troubles of Dauid, and
the Lorde deliuered him out of all: manie
were the troubles of Iob, and the Lorde deliuered
him out of all: therefore he can deliuer
me out of all. But if he doe not (ſay Sidrach,
Miſaac, and Abednego) yet wee will not doe
euill to eſcape daunger, becauſe Chriſt hath
ſuffered more for vs.Heſt. 4. 16. Therefore, if I periſh, I
periſh, ſaith Heſter. She was content that her
life ſhould periſh: but if my purſe ſuffer, my
money doth but periſh: if my bodie bee impriſoned,
my pleaſures doe but periſh: and
who can tell whē he hath ſuffered that which
is appoynted?Pſal. 75. Therefore God ſayth, When I
ſee conuenient time, will I execute iudgement.
Not when thou doeſt thinke it a conuenient
time, but when he doth think it a conuenient
time.25. 5. Therefore ſaith Dauid to the Lord, In
thee doe I truſt al the day: that is, if he come not
in the morning, he will come at noone: if he
come not at noone, he will come at night: at
one houre of the day he will deliuer me: and
then as the calme was greater after the tempeſt,Mat. 28. 6.
than it was before, ſo my ioye ſhall bee
ſweeter after teares than it was before:Pſalm. 137. the remembrance
of Babylon will make vs ſing
more ioyfull in Sion.
            
               
Thus Dauid deſcribeth the iourney of the
righteous,Exo. 13. 17. as if they ſhould goe through the
ſea, and the wilderneſſe, as the Iſraelites went
to Canaan. Looke not for eaſe nor pleaſure
in your way, but for beaſts and ſerpents, and
theeues: vntill ye be paſt the wilderneſſe all
is ſtraight, and darke, and feareful but ſo ſoon
as you are through the narrowe gate, all is
large and goodly, and pleaſant: as if you were
in Paradiſe. Seeing then your kingdome is
not here, looke not for a golden life in an iron
world: but remember that Lazarus doth not
mourne in heauen,Luk. 16. though he ſuffered paines
vpon earth: but the glutton mourneth in hell,
that ſtaied not for the pleaſures of heauen. To
which pleaſures the Lord Ieſus bring
vs, when this cloud of trouble
is blowen ouer vs,
Amen.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            THE CHRISTIANS
Practiſe.
            
               Rom. 12. 2.
               Be yee changed by the renuing of your mindes,
that yee may prooue what is the good will of
God, acceptable and perfect.
            
            
               WHen Chriſt ſent foorth
his Diſciples, he ſaid vnto
them, Goe preach and
baptize,
               Mat 21. 29 ioyning theſe
two together, Preaching
and Baptizing. This being
the occaſion of our
exerciſe, becauſe I am to ſpeake of Baptiſme,
which is the Sacrament of Regeneration, I
could not chooſe a fitter Scripture then this
which I handled laſt, which ſpeakes of the
renu
                  •
               ng of our mindes: for when our mindes
are renued, then the vow which we made in
Baptiſme is performed.
            
               
When Paul had forbidden the Romanes
to faſhion themſelues vnto the world, he ſheweth
them another faſhion, which hee calles
The renuing of the minde.
               Pſal. 103. 5. As the Eagle renueth
her youth, ſo men muſt renue their
mindes. This faſhion is called the Wedding
garment,Mat. 22. 12 which euery man muſt weare that
comes to the banquet of the King. As when
men haue gone ouer one faſhion after another,
at laſt they come to the olde faſhion againe:
ſo here Paul calles them to the olde faſhion
again,Gen. 1. 26. which was vſed in Adams time,
that is, the Image and faſhion wherein
they were created. Nowe the reaſon followeth,
            
               That they might proue what the wil of God is,
as if hee ſhould ſay, This ſhall be the fruit of
your regeneration, when your mindes are renued,
you ſhall know many thinges, which
are hid from you; you ſhall bee able to iudge
doctrines, who preach truth, and who preach
error; and you ſhall vnderſtand the will of
God, what he would haue you doe, and what
hee would haue you flie, as if you were in his
boſome. As new wine will not abide but in
new veſſels; ſo this new knowledge will not
abide but in new mindes.Mat. 9. 17. The minde renued
knoweth God; ſo that this Scripture may be
called the path to knowledge, or the waie to
ſound the minde of God, which is a ſecret

that euery man longs to know, but the moſt
turne a wrong leafe to finde it, as Paul ſayth
of Peter,Gal. 2. 14. 
               He lookes a wrong way to the Goſpel.
When the ſerpent taught knowledge, he ſaid
If ye eate the forbidden fruite, your eyes ſhalbe
opened, and you ſhall knowe good and euill: but
Paul ſayth,Gen. 3. 5. If ye will not eate the forbidden
fruite, your eyes ſhal be opened and you ſhall
know good and euill. This is one reaſon why
Paul would haue them renue their mindes,
That they might know the will of God Why?
doth not the word of God teach vs the wil of
God? Yes, but no man doth vnderſtand this
word, but hee which hath a new minde: becauſe
as the Sunne is not diſcerned by any
light, but by his owne light: ſo no ſpirite can
interpret the Scripture, but the ſame ſpirite
which wrote it,1. Cor. 12. 3. which is called the holy ſpirite,
becauſe it is holy, and becauſe it makes holy.
Sinne was the firſt vaile which obſcured
mans vnderſtanding,Gen. 3. 7. and till the cauſe of this
eclipſe be taken away, the Apoſtle ſayth, that
we ſhall ſee but in part:1. Cor. 13. 9. that is, as the Sunne
may be ſeene in his eclipſe, but he ſeemes liker
to darkneſſe then to light: ſo vnderſtanding
may be ſeene in the wicked, but it is liker
ignorance then knowledge: therefore
Paul makes knowledge one of the fruites
which bud out of righteouſnes.
            They which haue renued their mindes,

ſaith he, ſhall proue what the will of God is:
that is, they ſhall trie all that they doe heare,
and learne by all that they ſee, vntill they tract
out the will and meaning of GOD. As the
water ingendreth Ice, and the Ice againe ingendreth
water, ſo knowledge begets righteouſnes,
and righteouſnes againe begetteth
knowledge, according to that in Eccleſ. 2. 26
To a man that is good in his ſight, God giueth
wiſedome and knowledge; therefore though ye
haue ſeene cunning Lawyers by much reading;
and expert Phiſitians by long ſtudy; yet
you could neuer ſee a perfect and ſound, and
iudiciall Diuine without holyneſſe. I cannot
tel how, this knowledge is rather feeling than
learning in the aboundance of the heart, or an
extreame ſtudy ſent by God vnto good men,
like the Ramme which was brought vnto Abraham,Gen. 22. 13
when he would ſacrifice his Sonne.
            As Salomon ſayth, The knowledge of good
things,
               Pro. 9. 10. 
               is vnderſtanding: ſo none but they
which are holy haue this vnderſtanding. He
which can ſay with Dauid,Pſal. 119. 117. 
               I loue thy lawe, and
I keepe thy precepts, may follow with Dauid,
I haue more vnderſtanding than my teachers,
and know more then the auncient.
               Pſal. 45. 1. Hee which
cannot ſay with Dauid, My heart meditateth
a good matter, cannot follow with Dauid, My
tongue is the penne of a ready Writer. This is,
the equitie of God; they which are vnwilling

to obey, are not thought worthy to knowe:
for what ſhould he doe with his talent,Mat. 25. which
will not vſe it? He which forbiddes vs to caſt
pearles before ſwine, doth ſtay his own hand
from caſting knowledge to the vngodly, they
may know ſo much as ſhall condemne them,
but they neuer knowe what will ſaue them.
When Chriſt heard Peter ſaie,Mat. 16. 16 
               Thou art the
Sonne of the liuing God: Chriſt anſwered;
Fleſh and blood hath not taught thee this;
               17. ſhewing,
that carnall men haue not this knowledge.Mat. 19. 17
This is the word of which Chriſt ſaith,
All men doe not receiue it, It is true, that the
Spirite breatheth where it will:
               Iohn. 3. 8. but it will
breath vpon none but her louers. Wiſedome
is like the daughter of God, which hee marrieth
to none but to him which loues her, and
ſues for her.Pſal. 73. 17 As Dauid could not vnderſtand
why the wicked proſpered vntill he entered
into the ſanctuary of GOD; and as Aaron
might not enter the Sanctuary where GOD
did anſwere, vntill he had ſanctified himſelfe;
ſo if we will vnderſtand myſteries, and heare
God himſelfe ſpeake; wee muſt put off our
ſinnes,Exo. 3. 5. as Moſes put off his ſhooes, or elſe we
ſhall be like images which haue eares,Pſal. 115. 6. & can
not heare. When Paul heard myſteries, hee
was rapt into the third heauen,1. Cor. 12. 2. when GOD
would talke with his Church, hee ſaith, I will
take her aſide into the wildernes,
               Oſe. 2. 14. 
               and then I will

ſpeake friendly vnto her: ſo when wee will
learne Diuinitie, we muſt goe aſide from the
world, and ſequeſter our ſinnes, & lift vp our
mindes aboue the earth, or els it will not ſtay
with vs. As the ſpirit went from Saul when
he ſinned; ſo when knowledge hath ſaluted
the wicked, ſhe bids them farewell; like vnto
a Martin, which will not builde but in faire
houſes. It is ſaid in Iohn 14. 15. When Ieſus
went to eate the Paſſeouer, hee came to a
chamber which was trimmed: ſo the chamber
that receiued God, the hart which ſhould
lodge knowledge muſt bee trimmed, and all
the ſinfull corners ſwept;1. Sa. 15. 26 or elſe, as Samuell
would not come to Saul, ſo Wiſedome will
not come to that hoſte. There is an harbinger
which goeth alway before the knowledge
of God, to prepare the houſe, & this is loue,
the bond of perfection.1. Ioh. 4. 7. 
               They which haue loue
(ſaith Iohn) knowe GOD, but they which haue
not loue know not God, though they haue neuer
ſo much knowledge beſide. Vnto good Nathaniell,
Chriſt ſaide, Thou ſhalt ſee greater
things than theſe: but vnto the obſtinat Iewes
he ſaide,Mat. 13. 14 
               Seeing,
               Gen. 21. 19. 
               you ſhall not ſee; like Hagar,
which had the wel before her, and did not ſee
the water. He which cannot ſaie with Paul,
We haue the ſpirit of Chriſt,
               1. Cor. 2. 12. cannot ſay with
Paul,1. Cor. 8. 1. 
               We haue knowledge.
            
            Holie men were alwayes interpreters of

Gods word, becauſe a godly minde eaſelieſt
pearceth into Gods meaning, according to
that, The pure in heart ſhall ſee God: and that
in Iohn 7. 17.Mat. 5. 8. 
               If any man will doe Gods will, he
ſhall vnderſtand the Doctrine whether it bee of
God, or no: and that in Pſalm. 111. 19. They
which keepe thy precepts, haue a good vnderſtanding;
& that in 1. Cor. 2. 15. The ſpirituall man
vnderſtandeth al things.
               Pro. 1. 7 And therfore the feare
of the Lord is not onely called the beginning of
wiſedome; but in Pro. 2. 5. it is taken for wiſdome
it ſelfe. As when Chriſt taught in the
Temple they asked, Howe knoweth this man
the Scriptures,
               Iohn 7, 15 
               ſeeing hee neuer learned them.
So it is a wonder what learning ſome men
haue, which haue no learning, like Priſcilla
and Aquilla poore tent-makers,Act. 11. 15. which were
able to ſchoole Apollos that great Clerke, a
man renowmed for his learning. What can
we ſay to this but as Chriſt ſaide,Luk. 10. 21. 
               Father ſo it
pleaſed thee: as when Iacob came ſo ſoone
with the veniſon, and his Father asked him,
how he came by it ſo ſodainly?Gen. 27. 20 Iacob anſwered,
becauſe the Lord thy God brought it
ſodaynly to mine hand, ſo the holy & righteous
men cannot giue any reaſon, why they
conceaue the words of God ſo eaſily, and the
wicked doe conceaue them ſo hardly, but
that GOD brings the meaning ſodainly to
their hearts as we read in Luk. 24. 45. When

the Diſciples were ſetled in the profeſſion of
Chriſt, it is ſaid, that Chriſt opened their vnderſtanding,
and made them vnderſtand the
Scriptures; ſo ſodainly came their knowledge.
So we read in Prouerbs 1. 23. Wiſedome
promiſeth to the righteous, If you will
turne at my correction, I will powre out my hart
vnto you, and make you vnderſtand my words.
A Schoolemaſter might ſay to his ſchollers,
I will powre out mine hart vnto you: but he
cannot ſay as God ſaith, I will make you vnderſtand
mine heart.1. Kin. 10. 8 Therefore if the Queene
of Sheba thought the ſeruants of Salomon
happie, becauſe they heard his wiſdome: how
happie was Salomon himſelfe, that ſerued
God which gaue him wiſdome. Come vnto
me (ſaith Chriſt) all ye which are wearie,
               Mat. 11. 28 
               and
I will refreſh you. As Chriſt hath no comfort
but for the wearie, ſo hee hath no wiſedome
but for the righteous.Mar 3. 35. They are his brethren,
and ſiſters, and father, and mother. There is
a kinde of familiaritie betweene GOD and
the righteous, that hee makes them of his
counſaile, as Salomon ſaith, Prouerbes. 3. 32.
His ſecrets is with the righteous, and Pſalme
25. 14. His ſecrets are reuealed vnto them that
feare the Lord.
            
            They are like Iohn the beloued Diſciple
which leaned in his boſome;Iohn 13▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                like Moſes,Exod. 3. to
whom he ſhewed himſelfe,Luk. 25 like Simeon, that

embraced him in his armes;Luk. 9. 28. like the three
diſciples, which went vp to the Mount to ſee
his glorie. So we reade of Abraham, Gen. 18.
17. Shall I hide it from Abraham, ſaith God?
As though this were an offence in God, if he
ſhould tel the righteous no more then he tels
the wicked: therefore becauſe Abraham was
a good man he told him more than he ſhewed
all the reſt. As Adams knowledge was
perfect, ſo long as his righteouſnes was vntainted;
ſo the neerer we come to that righteouſnes
againe, the more things come to our
knowledge; according to that, Prouerbes 28.
They that ſeeke the Lord, vnderstand al things.
Such an heart God hath giuen to his ſeruants
like a touchſtone, or a lampe to goe before
them, to examine all thinges, as they goe in
this darke wilderneſſe, leaſt they ſhould take
error for trueth, euill for good, or their owne
wil for the wil of God; that they which hate
euill might be preſerued from euill, as Dauid
was from the bloud of Nabal.1. Sam. 25. Nowe, becauſe
none but the righteous haue this lamp before
them, you ſee what a difference there is betweene
the knowledge of the godly, and the
knowledge of the wicked.
            As the windowes of the Temple were
large within, but narrowe without; ſo they
which are within the Church, haue greater
light than they which are without. They ſit

like Pharaoh in the darkenes of Egypt, when
the other dwell like Iſrael in the light of
Goſhen. Knowledge is eaſie to him which
loueth knowledge, ſayth Salomon: but the
ſcorner ſeeketh knowledge, and findeth it
not, ſaith Salomon, Pro. 14. The ſpiritual man
(ſaith Paul) ſearcheth the deepe things of God:
               1. Cor. 2. 14
but The naturall man (ſaith Paul) perceiueth
not the things of GOD. Thou haſt reuealed
theſe things to babes (ſaith Chriſt) but thou haſt
hid them from the wiſe of the world If any man
will doe Gods will,
               Luk. 10. 21
                     •
                  
                
               he (ſaith Chriſt) ſhall vnderſtand
the doctrine: but to the obſtinate Iewes
Chriſt ſaith, you cannot vnderſtand my talke.
My ſheepe heare my voice ſaith Chriſt: but to
the wicked Chriſt ſaith, you cannot heare my
words. Beleeuest thou for this? ſaith he to Nathaniel,
thou ſhalt ſee greater things than theſe:
but If ye beleeue not ſayth Eſay,Eſay. 7. 8. 
               ye ſhall not vnderſtand.
            
            That theſe Scriptures might bee fulfilled,
you ſee that as ſin is called blindnes. 2. Chro.
6. 18. ſo ſinners are called blind, Eſay. 56. 10.
and may be called Strangers in Iſrael. Vntill
we be borne again, we are like Nichodemus
which knew not what it was to bee borne againe.
Iohn 3.
            Vntill we become zealous our ſelues, we
are like Feſtus, which thought zeale madnes,
Act. 26. Vntill we be humble our ſelues,

we are like Michol, which mocked Dauid
for his humilitie, 1. Sam. 6. 16. It was true
then, and it is true now, and it will bee true alwayes
which Paul obſerueth, 1 Corin. 1. 18.
that to ſome religion ſhall ſeem fooliſhneſſe.
The reaſon of all this Paul layeth downe in a
word. If ye aske why the wicked cannot vnderſtand
heauenly things, he ſayth, Becauſe
they are ſpiritually diſcerned, 1 Corin 2. 14.
therefore, how ſhould he diſcerne them, that
hath not the ſpirite?
            For this cauſe, wiſedome is not ſaid to bee
iuſtified of any, but of her owne Children,
Mat. 11. 19. neither doth Chriſt ſay, that any
ſheepe heare his voyce, but his owne ſheepe.
My ſheepe (ſayth hee, Iohn 12. 27) heare my
voyce: they followe their ſhepheard, they
heare his voyce, they vnderſtand his Lawe,
they iudge of his iudgements, they haue the
meaſure of his Wordes, all is open, and
plaine, and manifeſt and cleare vnto them:
they ſearch deeper, and iudge righter, and
know ſooner, and though they haue no learning,
yet they haue better iudgements, than
the learned: wheras the other that labour and
ſtudy without God, walke in a labyrinth, &
fall into doubts, while they ſeeke reſolutions.
When a wicked man reads the Scriptures, he
ſeeth no difference betweene the worde of
God,Luk 24. 16. and the wordes of men, like Cleopas

which talked with Chriſt, & knew not Chriſt.
When he ſpeakes of Religion, he flutters like
a young bird which cannot flye becauſe her
wings are not growen: when he prayeth, his
prayer is like a childes grace, that vnderſtandeth
not one word that he ſaith: hee which
hath but a ſhew of holines, hath but a ſhewe
of wiſedome: a little knowledge is in his
head, but there is no knowledge in his heart.
An euill man may knowe ſome thing, and
ſpeake ſomething of his reading & hearing,
as Iob ſaith,Iob. 32. 8. 
               There is a ſpirit in man, that is euery
man hath a kind of knowledge, but the
inſpiration of the Lord giueth vnderstanding:
as though the ſinners vnderſtanding did not
deſerue to be called vnderſtanding.
            If the wicked man ſpeake any thing that is
good, hee ſpeakes by roate, but hee which
ſpeakes not out of the abundance of his hart,Luk. 6. 45.
is ſoone drawne drie. The preaching of the
Word doth not become him: it is harſh and
vnkind in his mouth as though it came out of
a wrong bowe: or like vnto a ſhittle, which
flittereth from the hand of a child, he is in the
pulpit as the gueſt at the banquet,Mat. 22. 11 which wā
               ted
his wedding garment, he ſpeakes not like
one which hath authoritie,Mat. 7 29. but as one that
hath no authoritie, and alwaies his conscience
ſounds vnto him,Pſal. 50. 16. 
               What haſt thou to do to take
my word in thy mouth, ſeeing thou hateſt to be

reformed? Therefore bee renued, that ye may
knowe what the will of GOD is: this is the
Abce, and Primmer, and Grammar, the firſt
leſſon and laſt leſſon of a Chriſtian, to knowe
the good and perfect and acceptable will of
God, which muſt make vs good and perfect,
and acceptable our ſelues: the will of God is
alwaies good and acceptable, & perfect, howſoeuer
it ſeeme to vs: though it condemne vs
of euill, yet it is good: though we ſee not how
it is perfect, yet it is perfect: nay, it is ſo perfect,
that we cannot ſee the perfection of it,
as the Sunne is ſo bright that wee cannot behold
the brightnes of it: firſt it ſeemes good
vnto a man before it bee acceptable, when it
is acceptable, then it ſeemes perfect and as
Gods will doth ſeeme to vs, ſo we doe ſeeme
to him: if his will cannot ſeeme good and
acceptable, and perfect to vs, much leſſe may
our will ſeeme good, or acceptable, or perfect
vnto him, for this is our goodneſſe, to acknowledge
his goodneſſe. If it be ſuch a contentment,
to knowe the will of GOD, what
ſhall keepe vs from the knowledge of it, ſhall
ſinne, which is the worſt thing in the world?
Becauſe we will not renue our mindes, therefore
we are ignorant of ſo many things which
we would knowe, and vntill we be willing to
followe the word, wee ſhall neuer throughly
vnderſtand it, but buzze and grope at it like

Owles which prie at the ſunne out of a barne.
Oh!1. Kin. 3. 12 what a benefite had Salomon loſt, if he
had loſt his wiſedome which God gaue him:
as great a benefite doeſt thou looſe, if thou
looſe the knowledge of Gods will, for from
the day that a man cannot diſcerne the will
of Sathan from the will of Chriſt, euerie Hereſie
ſeemeth trueth, euery euill ſeemes good,
and this hath been the beginning of al errors
in the Church, becauſe men did not loue the
trueth, therefore God would not reueale his
trueth vnto them: therefore I conclude as I
began, Be ye chaunged by the renuing of your
mindes, that ye may proue what is the good will
of God, and acceptable and perfect.
            
            Now a word of the Sacrament, there is an
infant to be receiued into the Church, which
putteth vs in minde of the promiſe which we
made vnto God, when we were receiued into
the Church our ſelues. This Sacrament
was inſtituted by Chriſt, when he was baptized
of Iohn in the riuer of Iordan, and it
ſucceedeth Circumciſion as the Communiō
was ordained in ſtead of the Paſſeouer,Matth. 3. 14. ſo
ſoone as we are borne we are baptized,Mat. 28. 19 
               In the
name of the Father, the Sonne, and the holie
Ghoſt, to ſignifie that we owe a duetie vnto
God, from the day that wee come into the
world. In this Baptiſme our bodies are waſhed
with water, to ſignifie how our ſinnes

are waſhed with Chriſtes bloud: when our
bodies are waſhed, they are taken out of the
water againe, to ſignifie how we ſhall be raiſed
from death to life, by the reſurrection of
Chriſt, and how we ſhould riſe from ſinne to
righteouſneſſe: thus we begin our life with a
ſolemne promiſe to God before the Church,
to ſerue him with our bodies and ſoules till
death vs depart.
            Now let vs remember how we haue kept
this promiſe with the Lord, or rather how we
haue broken promiſe with him: then we gaue
our ſelues to GOD, but ſince we haue giuen
our ſelues to ſinne: then wee promiſed to renounce
the world, but euer ſince we haue embraced
the world: therefore now let vs begin
to pay that which we ought ſo long, and pray
the Lord which hath inſtituted this Sacrament
as a ſeale of his mercie, to receiue this
child into his fauour, as we receiue it into his
Church:Ioh. 3. 11. to baptize it with his ſpirit, as wee
baptize it with water: and powre vpon it his
grace, as we giue it the ſigne of grace.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            THE PILGRIMS
WISH.
            PHILIP. 1. 23.
            I deſire to bee diſſolued and to bee with Christ.
            
               HEere is Pauls deſire to be diſſolued,
and the cauſe, that he might
be with Chriſt: wherein firſt you
ſhal ſee the difference betweene
the faithfull and the wicked,
how one loatheth this life, and the other longeth
after it. Secondly, becauſe the Apoſtle
ſeemes to deſire death, you ſhall ſee whether
any man may wiſh to die. Thirdly, becauſe
after his diſſolution hee hopes to bee with
Chriſt; you ſhall ſee the diuerſitie of iudgements
betweene Paul and the Papiſts, which
think when they are dead, that they ſhall goe
on to Purgatorie. Laſtlie, becauſe the ſoules
which are with Chriſt cannot walke as they
did when they liued vpon the earth, you ſhall
heare a little of walking ſpirits, which haue

beene ſo much talked of in the time of poperie,
and were taken for the ſoules of them
which were dead: after wee will ſpeake a
little of the Sacrament which yee come to receiue,
and ſo commit you to God. I deſire to
be diſſolued.
               1. King. 2. 10. Before Chriſtes comming, when
the Kings or Patriarches died, it is ſaid, that
they went to their fathers,2. Chr. 9. 37 as we read of Dauid
and Salomon,2. Chr. 21. 1. &c. but after Chriſts comming,
when the faithfull die, they are ſaid to
go to Chriſt,Actes 7. as we read of the penitent thief,
Luke 23. 43. Not becauſe the Patriarches
went not to Chriſt as well as they, but becauſe
yet Chriſt was not aſcended to heauen:
therefore they are not to go to Chriſt,
although if they went to heauen they muſt
needes go to Chriſt, becauſe Chriſt touching
his Godhead, was alwaies in heauen. I deſire
to be diſſolued: As the wordly long for Chriſt
to come to them, ſo the faithful long to go to
Chriſt, for vnleſſe we aſcend to him as he deſcended
to vs, his deſcending is in vaine, becauſe
he came downe that we might go vp,
he deſcended to take our fleſh, we aſcende
to take his kingdom, he deſcended to be crucified,
we aſcende to be glorified, he deſcended
to hell, we aſcend to heauen, that is, to
ioy, to glory, to bliſſe, to our father, to our Sauiour,
to our comforter, to Angels, to Saints,
to eternall life: therefore good cauſe had Paul

to deſire to be with Chriſt, that he might be
at reſt: for no doubt it was the ſweeteſt voice
that euer the theefe heard in this life, when
Chriſt ſaid vnto him, This day ſhalt thou bee
with me in Paradiſe. Luke 23. chapt. verſ. 45.
Beſides, as Paul perſecu
                  •
               ed before, ſo he was
after perſecuted himſelfe, as he tels the Corinthians,
2. Cor. 11. 24. I was thriſe beaten with
rods, I was once ſtoned, I ſuffered thriſe ſhipwrake,
&c. Therefore good cauſe had Paul to
deſire to be with Chriſt, that he might be out
of trouble. Yet he wil not diſſolue himſelf, but
deſireth to be diſſolued: that is, that he which
brought him into this world, would take him
out of the world: neither doth he wiſh or pray,
or make any petitiō to God to take away his
life, but tels him his deſire, deſiring to be diſſolued:
to deſire is not to pray, but ſhewes
what we approue: neither doth he deſire ſo to
be diſſolued, as though he were weary of his
labors, & would ſuffer no more for Chriſt, but
he is content to liue as he ſaith in the 24. verſ.
Neuertheles for me to abide in the fleſh were better
for you, as if he ſhould ſay, to do you good
I am content to ſuffer euil, and ſtay ſtill from
Chriſt, whom I long to be with. Seeing then
that he wil not diſſolue himſelf, nor pray to be
diſſolued, but is content to liue ſtil: why doth
he ſay, I deſire to be diſſolued? Onelie to ſhew
what he preferreth in his deſire, if hee might

chooſe life or death for his owne reſpect, he
could be content to leaue friends and riches,
and pleaſures, and life, and all, onely to bee
with Chriſt. This ſeemes to be a good leſſon
for ſickemen, when they can liue no longer,
then to be with Chriſt were better then to be
with the glutton, which neuer thought of heauen
til he was in hell:Luk. 16. but Paul was not ſicke
nor ſore when he deſired to be diſſolued:
therefore this is not onely for the ſicke, but for
the whole. If he had wiſhed to liue & ſtay ſtill
in the world, no man need to be taught to ſay
after him, for yong & old deſire not to be diſſolued,
but few are content to bee diſſolued.
To a naturall man in this life, nothing is ſo
ſweete as life it ſelfe, and he which is in loue
with this world, ſeldome dyeth quietly vpon
his bed: but to a minde which miſliketh this
worlde, nothing can come ſo welcome as
death, becauſe it takes him out of the world.
This it is which Paul would haue vs learne,
that nothing in this world is ſo pretious or
pleaſant, that for it we ſhould deſire to liue
or ſtay from God one hower: though all may
not wiſh to die, yet all muſt ſubſcribe to this,
that death is better then life, becauſe it leads
to Chriſt, which when Paul had throughlie
taſted, he was ſatiſfied for all things elſe, and
deſired to liue no longer that he might bee
with Chriſt; heerein appeareth the end of

mans life, which when he hath obtayned, he
deſireth to liue no longer, how great riches,
and honours, and friends ſoeuer he leaue behind
him. From the time he knoweth Chriſt
crucified,Gen. 5. 22. and begins like Enoch to walke
with God, he cryeth euer after with the Apoſtle,Rom. 7. 24.
               I deſire to be diſſolued and to be with Chriſt:
who ſhall deliuer mee from this bodie of ſinne?
death weare to me aduantage. Euen as Simeon
reioiced that Chriſt came to him,Luk. 2. 28. ſo the faithfull
reioice that they ſhall go to Chriſt.
            The neceſſitie of ſinne is ſo irkſome to him
which knoweth the vileneſſe of ſinne, that
the faithfull man, but to doe good, would not
liue out of heauen, no not one hower. This
made the Martyres ſo willing to abide any
kinde of death that tyrannie could deuiſe, to
be rid of their ſinfull bands, and this corruptible
burthen, which preſſeth downe the
ſoule, that looks after Chriſt like his diſciples
when he aſcended to heauen.Acts 1. 10. All is trouble
and wearines, and vanitie to the godly mind,
whether he eate or drinke, or ſleepe, he counteth
it a ſeruitude vnto the fleſh, and wiſheth
with Dauid to be rid from theſe neceſſities:
ſo the knowledge and loue of God maketh a
man forget his owne fleſh, maketh him deſpice
the whole world, taketh away the difference
from life and death, changeth his
nature which hee could neuer ouercome,

and teacheth him to renounce his deere ſelfe,
and ſay, though he ſhould die, Not my will
but thy will bee done. All this appeareth in
this example, what operation is in the knowledge
and loue of Chriſt: it made the world
irkſome vnto Paul, which all men naturally
deſire: it made death pleaſant vnto him,
which all men naturally abhorre: although
they bee wearie of their life, and haue no
pleaſure from morning to night; yet it will
not pleaſe them to change, which they
needes muſt, they neuer loath but loue
their miſeries, I will not dye one houre to
liue for euer. Doe not the wicked themſelues
prophecie by their feare of death a
worſe condition of ſome dreadfull iudgement
after this life prepared for ſinners, and
all that contemne GOD, when none but
they ſtande in ſuch feare of death? Why
dooth one wiſh for it, and another tremble
to heare of it? If it were but a ſleepe, no man
would feare it at all: for who feareth to take
his reſt when the night approacheth? If it
did take away ſence and feeling, and make
men trees or ſtones, no man would feare it
at all, for who would feare ſtrokes if hee
could feele no more then a ſtone? or who
would care for any thing if he had no ſence
of anything? would any man tremble ſo to
bee as the dead creatures which haue no

ſence of euill? They muſt needes be in better
caſe than the happieſt man in this life,
which is not without the ſence of euill.
Therefore this feare of death which you ſee
in all but the faithfull, dooth preſage ſome
ſtrange torment, ſome heauie change and
ſharpe puniſhment to thoſe men: which
they begin to taſt alreadie before they dye,
like the ſpirite which perſecuted Saul before
his end.1. Sa. 16. 14. They deſire not to be diſſolued, but
they feare to bee diſſolued, they goe not to
Chriſt, but their departure is an euerlaſting
departure from Chriſt to the damned, to the
diuels, to hell without either end or eaſe, or
patience to endure it.
            Thus you ſee that no man is willing to die,
before his conſcience bee quieted towarde
God, and that he can catch ſome hope of a
better life after this life. He which knowes
that he ſhall go to Chriſt, it is impoſſible that
he ſhould die vnwillingly: but he which can
not hope for a better world, muſt needs leaue
this world grudginglie, and feare death more
then all the terrors of life. He had rather to
be ſicke and cold, and hungry, and want and
beg, then go with death, becauſe he knoweth
what he ſuffereth here, but hee knoweth not
what he ſhall ſuffer hereafter. Therefore he
which is not willing to be diſſolued, hath not

                  •
               earned Chriſt yet as Paul did, for no man

eſteeme this life when he begins to taſte of
the next,2. King. 2. 14. but then the loue of the world doth
fall from him like the mantle of Elias when
he was rapt into heauen.
            The Apoſtle had ſeene many good things
in his daies, and was neuer ſatiſfied, willing
to be diſſolued, but thirſted ſtill, and no water
could quench his thirſt, vntill hee dranke
of the water of life, and then hee thirſted no
more: ſo nothing can fill the ſoule which
was made for God, but God alone. Riches
and honors,Luk. 2. 29. & pleaſures, did not make Simeon
willing to die, but the ſight of Chriſt: happie
are the eyes which ſee him; for they are as
willing to die as Simeon was.Ioh. 1. 2
                     •
                  . So ſoone as Iohn
Baptiſt did ſee our Sauiour,Math 3. 11. and knew that it
was hee, hee debaſed himſelfe, as if hee had
beene nobodie, and would not bee accounted
of, but ſought to looſe the opinion of the
people that Chriſt might haue all; although
he was a Prophet, and more than a Prophet,
and not a greater amongſt the ſonnes of women.
So when Paul had ſeene his Sauiour,
hee forgot all that he loued, all that hee deſired,
and all that hee poſſeſſed: no ioye, no
glorie, no life now but to die. All thinges
muſt yeelde to the Sonne, and bee content
with Iohn, that hee increaſe, and wee decreaſe.
This is our glorie and life, that hee
liueth in glorie.Gen. 45. 28. 
               It is enough (ſaith Iacob) for

me that Ioſeph my ſonne liueth: it is enough for
vs that Ieſus our Sauiour reigneth. If the head
be crowned, all the bodie is more honoured:
therefore let vs glorie that Chriſt is glorified,
and reioyce as much that hee is aſcended, as
our fathers reioyced that he deſcended: for
where the head is, there the body muſt needes
be.
            
               I deſire to be diſſolued: he calleth his death
not a deſtruction but a diſſolution, for three
cauſes. Firſt he departeth from this life, and
hath no more ſocietie with them that liue
vpon the earth. Secondly, his ſoule departeth
from the bodie vntill the day of resurrection,
then ſhe findeth her owne bodie agayne, and
they reioyce like friends which are met together.
Thirdly, he departeth from this vale of
miſerie, into the paradiſe of ioy and all felicitie,
to liue and reigne with God for euer: in
aſſurance whereof he ſaith, that he ſhall bee
with Chriſt, ſo that death is the way to Chriſt.
As the Doue found no reſt vntill ſhe came to
the Arke:Gen. 8. 9. ſo the faithfull find no reſt till they
come to Chriſt, they goe through the wilderneſſe
like other men. Vntill the Iewes arriued
at Canaan,Ioſh. 13. 17. all their life was ſpent in ſinfull
Egypt, or in the dreadfull deſert, during the
time of their iourney they had no ſetled reſt
or continuing pleaſure. Peace beginneth
when the battell endeth, there is the prerogatiue

of the dead, leaſt death ſhould bee too
fearefull to vs. The beſt of Gods bleſſings are
behind, that is, euerlaſting life, and the way
to it is death, thou art going to ioye, therefore
looke not for it vntill thou come to thy iourneys
ende.Reuel. 2. 10. If Canaan the land of peace, the
land of plentie, the land of pleaſure, bee in
the wilderneſſe: ſtay heere, march no further,
whither doe you goe like the Pilgrims
of Iſrael if Canaan be in the wilderneſſe? But
Paul lookes for the crowne at the gole: he is
not with Chriſt, but truſts to bee with Chriſt:
he is not in heauen, but he hopes to come to
heauen, and this hope led him through the
wilderneſſe, that he murmured not like the
Iſraelities, but only longed for that day, when
Chriſt ſhall ſay vnto him as he ſaid to the penitent
theefe: This day ſhalt thou be with me in
Paradiſe. Thus you haue heard the difference
betweene the faithfull and the wicked, how
the one lotheth this life, and the other longeth
after it.
            Now wee come to our queſtions. Simeon
ſaid,Luk. 2. 29. 
               Lord now letteſt thou thy ſeruant depart in
peace▪
                ſo Paul ſaith, I deſire to be diſſolued and
to be with Chriſt: they doubted not as the Papiſts
doe, what ſhould become of them after
death: for one ſaith that he goes to Chriſt, &
the other ſaith that he goes to peace: therefore
it ſeemes that Purgatorie was not yet

found, when the iuſt men went to peace. This
is one of the fruits of a godly life, it hath hope
(ſaith Salomon) in the end:Pro. 14. 36. in death it warranteth
a man of life,Prou. 11. 7. & when the fleſh ſaith,
feare, and the ſerpent, deſpaire, it makes the
fleſh crouch, and the ſerpent flye, & the ſoule
reioyce while death is opening the priſon
doore, that ſhe may flie to her countrey from
whence ſhe came. Therefore what ſhall I ſay
to Purgatorie, if Paul go to Chriſt, & Simeon
goe to peace? Some ſay that it is in the ayre:
ſome ſay that it is in the earth, ſome vnder the
earth:Dan. 4. 1. ſome a little aboue hell. Thus Nabuchadnezzar
cannot aſſoile his owne dreame.
You muſt vnderſtand that Purgatorie is like
your paynted Sepulchers, which are framed
more for the liuing then for the dead: for you
know that the locuſts of Rome liue by Trentals,
and Dirges, and Maſſes for the dead, as
the Siluerſmiths in Epheſus liued by Images:Act. 10. 25.
and therefore as they were loth that Images
ſhould goe downe: ſo they are loth that their
Purgatorie ſhould bee quenched: for it is the
gainfulleſt lye in all Poperie, for out of this
lake iſſue their Maſſes and Dirges, and Trentals
for the dead. They are ſayd for the dead,
but they make for the liuing: For the dead
haue no portion of al that is done vnder the ſun.
doe what you will, ſay what you can, Maſſes,
Dirges, or Trentals, they haue no portion in

it, for they haue receiued their reward alreadie,
and the tree lieth where it fell: yet theſe
fooliſh virgins hope for oyle of the wiſe virgins,
and thinke they ſhall be paied for other
mens labours, and almes, and trentals, & pilgrimages
and Maſſes: as though they neuer
read that the iuſt ſhall liue by his owne faith,
               Gal. 3. 11.
that he which beleeueth ſhal not go to iudgement,Ioh. 5. 24.
but paſſe from death to life, that they
that die in the Lord reſt from their labours: how
doe they goe preſently into Paradiſe,Reu. 14. 15. if they
ſtay at Purgatorie, and fire & torments? Hath
Chriſt ſatisfied for vs, & muſt wee now make
ſatisfaction for our ſelues?Luk. 16. Whither the glutton
and the beggar are gone, thither muſt we
all, that is to Abrahams boſome, or hell fire:
there are but two kindes of men, and therefore
but two waies, and where then is Purgatorie,
which the beſt of the fathers confeſſeth
that he could neuer finde in Scripture? Therefore
take heed of hell, for Purgatorie is but a
ſcarre babe. Furthermore, when Paul ſayth,
that he ſhall goe to Chriſt, this ſeemes to reſolue
the old queſtion often debated among
the ſimple people, once deluded, whether the
ſoules of men departed, walke after death,
and appeare vnto men, exhorting them to
this or that, as Gregorie or ſome counterfeit
reporteth in his Dialogues.
            The Apoſtles before their full groweth,

might ſeeme to bee incumbred with this errour,
becauſe when they ſaw Chriſt walking
vpon the waters, they ſayd, It is a ſpirite: and
when Peter knocked at the doore in the
night, they ſayd to Rhode a Damſell, It is his
Angel: Act. 12. 15. Which errour was drawen
from the eluſion of Sathan, and vulgar
opinion receiued from Pythagoras, which
taught that the ſoules of men departed, did
returne into the bodies of other men after
death, either for correction, or for reward: if
they were good ſoules, then they were preferred
to better men: if they had been badde
ſoules, then they were caſt into worſe bodies
then they had before: a fine Philoſophicall
dreame.
            This deluded Herod: when hee heard of
Chriſt, he ſuppoſed that Iohn Baptiſt was riſen
againe, whom he had beheaded: and the
better ſort of the people, as we reade in Mat.
16. 14. dreamed that Chriſt was Elias, or Iohn
Baptiſt, or Ieremie, or ſome of the Prophets
riſen againe. But touching the ſoule once departed
from the body, that it returnes not nor
can returne into the world: many examples
and teſtimonies, and reaſons, & the order of
our reſurrection declareth.Iohn. 10. 28 The ſoules of the
righteous are in the hands of the Lord, & no
man or diuell can take them out of his hands:
the ſoules of the wicked are in the hands of

the diuell, and God will not take them out of
his hands: and therefore Abraham ſayth. He
which is here,Luk. 16. cannot come from hence, and
they which be there, cannot come frō thence:
for then the paines of hell were not euerlaſting
paynes, not the ioyes of heauen euerlaſting
ioyes, but temporal, like the paynes and
ioyes of this world. Therefore it is no ſoule
which walks about. How then? What is this
which I ſee in the night like ſuch a man, and
ſuch a man? The Diuell (which chaungeth
himſelfe into an Angell of light to deceiue)
can change himſelf into the likenes of a man
much more: that is it which thou ſeeſt, as Saul
ſawe Samuel, 1. Sam. 28. 8. not Samuel himſelfe.
For could the Witch raiſe Samuel out
of the graue, which could not keepe her ſelfe
out of the graue? or could the diuell diſturbe
the Prophet after death? Then he ſhould neuer
be quiet, if the diuell could diſturbe him,
becauſe hee diſquieteth the godlie ſo much
while they liue. If this apparation bee called
Samuel, how doth he call it Samuell, if it be
not Samuel? As the Bookes of Caluine are
called Caluine: as the picture of Beza is called
Beza: as he which playeth the King vpon
a ſtage, is called a King: as the golden Myce
and Hemerodes which the Philiſtines layd
in the Arke, were called Myce and Hemerodes,
although they were but meere ſhapes

and figures of them: ſo this likeneſſe of Samuel,
is called Samuell, though it was not
Samuel in deede, but a counterfeit ſhape of
Samuel. For GOD would not anſwere Saul
before by Oracle, nor by Prieſt, nor by Prophet:
and would hee aunſwere him by the
dead, which dooth forbid to aske counſell
of the dead? No (ſayth Abraham) they haue
Moſes and the Prophets, Luke 16. As if hee
ſhould ſay: let them learne of the bookes of
the dead, for the dead ſhall not returne vnto
them. Againe, if it had been Samuel himſelfe
which had taught Saul to worſhip GOD,
woulde that holie Prophet haue receiued
worſhip himſelfe, as this ſpirit did? Againe,
If it had been Samuel Sauls Schoolemaſter,
which taught him alwayes to repent while
hee liued: hee would rather haue exhorted
him to repentance now then before, ſeeing
the daye of his death was ſo neere. But you
will ſay, Whatſoeuer it was, it ſeemes that he
could prophecie of things to come: for hee
foretold Sauls death. Can the diuell prophecie?
This was an eaſie matter for the diuell to
prophecie, becauſe he knew that Dauid was
annoynted before, and therefore Saul muſt
be remooued, that he might reigne as he was
annoynted. Secondly, he knew that Samuel
had prophecied his confuſion, and therefore
hee muſt bee degraded, that the Prophecie

might bee fulfilled. Thirdly, hee did ſee the
Philiſtins comming againſt him, and therefore
no meruaile if he did aime that his death
was neere at hand, ſeeing a man might prophecie
the ſame.
            If any man bee not ſatisfied with this, to
beleeue that the ſoules of the dead doe not
walke after their diſſolution, let mee reaſon
with him thus. Is it a ſoule which thou ſeeſt?
Why a ſoule is a ſpirit, and cannot bee ſcene
no more then a voyce, or an Eccho: diddeſt
thou euer ſee thine own ſoule, though it hath
been euer with thee ſince thou was borne?
Doeſt thou thinke it is a bodie? Why a bodie
cannot walke without a ſoule: for the ſoule
is the life which mooueth the bodie. If thou
ſay it is a bodie and ſoule too, then why doth
Paul call death a diſſolution? It is a ſeparation
of the ſoule from the bodie: if the bodie and
ſoule bee not diſſolued, then the man is not
dead but liuing ſtill. If thou ſay the ſoule is
come to the bodie, and the bodie is riſen to
the ſoule for that time: then I can ſay no more
to thee, but beleeue thine owne eyes. If thou
thinkeſt that it is ſuch a mans bodie which
thou ſeeſt, looke in the graue, and open the
ground, and there thou ſhalt ſee the bodie
where it was laide, euen while this vizard
walkes in thy ſight: therefore apparitions are
no other, then that which appeared to Saul.

Thus the Diuel hath many wayes to deceiue;
and this is one & a dangerous one, to draw vs
from the word of God, to viſions, & dreames,
and apparitions, vpon which many of the
doctrines of the Papiſts are grounded.
            They had neuer heard of Purgatorie, but
for theſe ſpirites which walked in the night,
and tolde them they were the ſoules of
ſuch and ſuch, which ſuffered in fire till their
maſſes, and almes, and pilgrimages did raunſome
them out: So theſe night ſpirits begate
Purgatorie, and Purgatorie begate trentalles,
as one Serpent hatcheth another.
            Yet a third queſtion riſeth out of theſe
wordes, and that is this; Whether a Chriſtian
may wiſh for death? As Paul deſired, ſo may
wee deſire,Luk. 9. 54. if wee haue Pauls ſpirit. As Chriſt
told his Diſciples when they asked him, whether
they ſhould pray for fire from heauen, as
Elias did? Chriſt anſwered, that they knewe
not of what ſpirit they were: as if he ſhould
ſay, If you were of Elias ſpirit, and did praye
with the ſame mind, and to the ſame end that
he did, then you might pray as he prayed. The
wicked wiſh to die, becauſe they would bee
rid of the croſſe, and ſuffer no more for God:
as Cain,Gen. 4. ſo ſoone as he was curſed, and knew
that his life ſhould be a torment, he ſought to
dye, to preuent the iuſt iudgement of God▪
& ſpight him (as it were) which ſhuld puniſh

ſinnes. So doe the people oftentimes, which
haue not to ſatiſfie hunger, & the ſicke which
ſaint of an incurable diſeaſe, and the wearie
captiues in priſon, galleis, and bonds. As for
the faithfull, if they at any time wiſh to die,
they pray for death, as the laſt remedy againſt
ſinne and Sathan: euen as they pray in the
Reuelation, for the haſtening of Chriſts comming
to iudgement,Reu. 22. 20. 
               Come Lord Ieſus, come
quickly, for the ſhortening of the daies of
ſinne, leaſt all fleſh ſhould periſh. But they
which wiſh for death in this ſorte, would dye
as the will of God hath ordained, and mortifie
their fleſh to abide theſe troubles, and ſtill
by fayth ſuppreſſe the doloruos griefe of ſin,
by frequent meditation of inward ioy, receiued
by grace in Chriſt, and therein reuiue
themſelues, as with the earneſt pennie of their
inheritance, which they ſhall receiue at the
fit time, when it ſhall comfort them much to
haue ſuffered ſo long. Much therefore haue
they to anſwere, which are not contented to
die in peace, and ſtay till they bee diſſolued,
but as though themſelues were the authors
of life & death, from cruell heart giue wrongfull
commiſſion to the bloodie hand, to cut
aſunder that which God hath ioyned, the
louing ſoule and their body; as Iudas, Achitophel,2. Macc. 14 37.
Saul, and Pilate did: not one of theſe
was good in life or death. Yet the Author of

the Macchabees commendeth Raz is moſt of
all, for that which was the greateſt ſinne that
euer he did, for killing himſelfe. Man was not
borne of his owne pleaſure, neither muſt hee
die at his owne luſt; or elſe it had been good
for Iob,Iob. 2. which ſuffered more than any Saint,
except Chriſt, to make away himſelfe, as Iudas
did.Exod. 20. 1
                     •
                  
                But why is it commanded then, thou
ſhall nor kill? If thou maiſt not kill another,
much leſſe maiſt thou kill thy ſelfe. As for the
example of Sampſon, Iud. 16. 30. which may
ſeeme to oppoſe againſt this, in that he killed
himſelfe, when as he pulled the houſe vpon
his owne head, and all that were with him:
vnderſtand, that hee was a figure of Chriſt,
which vanquiſhed moe in his death than in
all his life; and it appeareth that he had warrant
from God, in that his ſtrength being taken
from him, was (for the acte) in a moment
reſtored to him vpon his prayer. And
the Epiſtle to the Hebr. 11. 13. to cleere that
fact, ſaith, that he did it of faith; that is, knowing
that he had deſerued to die, and that by
theſe meanes the enemies of God ſhould bee
deſtroyed, he ſubmitted himſelfe to the good
will of GGD, like a good Captaine which
ventured his life to kill his enemies: therefore
we muſt not looke to particultr examples,
but to the generall law. Wherfore let no man
doe this euill, that any good may come of

it, but rather follow the aduiſe of the holy Apoſtle,
as it becommeth vs, with patience let
vs runne out the race which is ſet before vs.
            Here I might ſhew you that they are guiltie
of their owne death, that kill themſelues with
ſurfetting, intemperance, drunkenneſſe, &c.
although they loue their life too deare, yet
they take all meanes to haſten their deaths.
Thus much of Purgatorie, & night ſpirits, and
praying for death.
            Nowe it remaneth, that as the Leuites ſanctified
their brethren before they did eate the
Paſſeouer, ſo I would prepare you, before yee
eate this holy Sacrament, of which the paſſeouer
was but a ſigne, The Iewes were taught
of God before they did eate the Paſſeouer to
put away leauen out of their houſes the daie
before, Exod. 12. 15. Hath God care of leauen?
No: this is it which the Apoſtle teacheth,
1. Corinth. 5. before ye come to the Lords
Supper, Purge the olde leauen of maliciouſnes
and wickedneſſe out of your hearts: that is the
leauen which you ſhould purge out of your
houſes. Therefore marke what the Apoſtle
writeth to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 11. I beleeue
it is a matter which you did neuer conſider,
For this cauſe many are weake and ſicke
among you, and many ſleepe or die. For what
cauſe? Becauſe they receiued this holy Sacrament
vnworthily, and vnreuerently, before

they were prepared with faith, and hope,
and repentance: for this cauſe many are weak,
and ſicke among you, and many die. Who did euer
thinke that his ſicknes, or his wants, or his
infirmities did grow, for that he receiued the
Lords ſupper vnworthilie? Many cauſes haue
bin ſuppoſed, but this cauſe was neuer thoght
of. Haue any of you ſaid in diſtreſſes of bodie
or minde, This is come vnto me, becauſe I
did receiue the bleſſed Sacrament of Chriſt
vnworthilie, becauſe I came not prepared
with that minde, as they which beleeue and
know God? Yet the Apoſtle, which by his
diuine ſpirit knewe the cauſe of theſe calamities
among the Corinthians, dooth depute
their ſtrange diſeaſes & ſodain death, to none
other cauſe but to their vnworthie and vnreuerent
receiuing of this holy Sacrament. Nay
hee ſaith further, That hee which eateth and
drinketh this Sacrament vnworthilie, eateth
and drinketh his owne damnation; that is, he
taketh poſſeſſion of death,1. Co. 11. 29 hell, and damnation,
euen while he eates, as the diuell entred
into Iudas while he receiued. Nowe, if your
Phiſitian ſhould warne you of ſuch a thing,
that you take it in ſeaſon & in meaſure, or els
it is poiſon, & wil kil you; I ſuppoſe you wold
obſerue the ſeaſon and meaſure, and take it in
ſuch order as he preſcribeth, as neere as you

could, if you beleeue him: ſo, if yee beleeue
the Apoſtle, that you receiue the Sacrament
to your damnation, if you receiue it vnworthilie,
I am ſure you will not take it vnreuerently
or raſhly for all the world. If I had the
words of motion to ſpeak that which might
be ſpoken of this matter,Mat. 22. it would fright Iudas
himſelfe, that no man would come to this
holy banquet without his wedding garment.
Conſider but this, how you would come into
the preſence of God, how would you prepare
your ſelues to come before the maker of heauen
and earth, which ſearcheth the reynes, &
knoweth euery corner of the heart? If euer
ye did approach vnto God, if euer yee came
neere vnto the Lord, you neuer came ſo neere
as now, when you come to receiue his bodie
and blood, and are vnited vnto him in one
ſpirituall body; and yet (peraduenture) many
come not ſo prepared, ſo clenſed, ſo dreſſed,
ſo trimmed into the preſence of God, as Heſter
did into the preſence of Aſſuerus.Heſt. 5. What
doe you thinke of theſe elements? what doe
you imagine of this bread and wine? They
are ſeales. What ſeales? Seales of his word,
ſeales of Gods promiſe, ſeales of your adoption.
If euer you were inſtructed or comforted
out of this book, that inſtruction & comfort
is confirmed and ratified vnto you now

by Chriſts ſeale. Chriſt hath not ordained Sacraments
in his church for a faſhion or dumb
ſhew, that you ſhould feele, or ſee, or taſt, but
as the woman which had a bloodie flix, when
ſhe touched the hem of Chriſts garment, hee
ſaid, that vertue was gone out of him: that is,
all the graces which theſe ſignes repreſent,
that is, all the bleſſings that Chriſt Ieſus hath
purchaſed vnto man by his death. Now becauſe
if you receiue this Sacrament rightly,
you are vnited vnto Chriſt, as the members
with the head: if euer you did beleeue, or
loue, or repent before; this requireth you to
beleeue, and loue, and repent more, becauſe
now you are Chriſts body, which ſhewes that
ye muſt obey Chriſt the head like members
of the bodie, for the bodie is ruled by the
head. What haue you now to receiue al theſe
bleſſings? If ye haue not faith, how can you
lay hold of any promiſes or merits of Chriſt,
to ſay this is mine? If you had a hand to take
and a fayth to apprehend, now you might eat
of that bread which is better then Manna,
which he that taſteth, doth not hunger again
after any pleaſure in the worlde. Heere is
enough for Abraham, and Abrahams ſeede,
Come vnto it all that thirſt, and it will refreſh
you. Happi
                  •
               r is that man nowe that hath his
wedding garment,Luk. 16. than the rich glutton, that

fareth deliciouſly, and goeth in purple euerie
day. Now you are the Lords gueſts, and the
Lord himſelfe is your feaſt, and this feaſte is
before you, the holieſt meat that euer you did
eate, and the comfortableſt meate that euer ye
did eate, and yet the dangerouſt meate that euer
you did eate: you ſtand vpon life or death,
you eate to ſaluation or damnation; there is
nothing in this world which you can receiue
with greater benefite, or with greater perill.
Adam did not eate the forbidden fruite with
greater danger,Gene. 3. Adam could not taſt the tree
of life with greater fruite, than you may taſte
and receiue this Sacrament. The Arke was
a ſigne of mercie,2. Sam. 6. yet Vzziah was ſlaine for
touching the Arke vnreuerentlie: Circumciſion
was a good thing, yet Circumciſion did
not profite the Sichemites,Gen. 34. but was away to
make their enemies ſlaie them, becauſe they
were not circumciſed for Religion, but for
lucre: ſo if ye receiue for cuſtome, and not
for deuotion, this Sacrament ſhall bee to you
as Circumciſion was to them. Therefore take
heede how you receiue as they receiued, leaſt
you meere with a curſe, when you looke for a
bleſſing. If thou remembreſt any ſin againſt
God or againſt thy neighbour, leaue thine
offering at the Altar, and be reconciled before
thou come into his preſence, for if ſtubble

come to fire, there is no waie but burne: now
beloued, let faith, and loue, and repentance
haue their perfect worke, that you may receiue
this Sacrament as Chriſt would haue
you rceiue it: & God grant you as much profit
by it, as is offered in it, & ſo much comfort
of it, as it hath brought to any, whoſoeuer
haue receiued it faithfully, reuerently,
and worthily
before you.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            THE GODLIE MANS
REQVEST.
            
               PSALM. 90. 12.
               Teach vs, O Lord, to number our daies, that wee
may applie our hearts to wiſedome.
            
            
               THis Pſalme was compyled
by Moſes, as ye may ſee by
the title, at what time the
Spies returned from the land
of Canaan, and God for the
murmuring of the people,
pronounced, that al which were aboue twentie
yeares old, ſhould die in the wildernes, except
Caleb and Ioſua, that encouraged their
brethren to goe to Canaan.Nu. 14. 29. Now when Moſes
heard the ſentence of death pronounced
againſt himſelfe, and all the Iewes which
came out of Egypt, except only two Caleb
and Ioſua, that all ſhould die before they
came to the land which they ſought, he prayeth
thus for himſelfe, and the reſt. Teach

vs, O Lord, to number our daies, that we may
apply our hearts to wiſdome: that is, ſeeing we
muſt needes die, teach vs to thinke of our
death, that wee may die in thy feare to liue againe:
ſhewing vs how the conſideration of
our mortalitie will make vs applie our hearts
to godlines. He which is tottering himſelfe,
had need to leane vnto a ſtable thing; therefore
a wauering man is commended here to
conſtant wiſedome. Man is mortall, wiſdome
is immortall, yet by wiſdome man becomes
immortall too: therefore Moſes thinking of
his death, runneth to wiſdome as a remedie
againſt death. I haue choſen a text fit for the
time,For it was preached at the beginning of the yeere. which warneth vs how our yeres paſſe
that when we think of the old yere how ſoone
it is gone, yee may ſee vpon what a whirling
wheele we are ſet: which putteth vs in minde
euery day of that laſt day, which is comming
for vs, when we ſhall giue account how euerie
day was ſpent before it. So many yeares as
are paſt; ſo many yeares we are neerer to the
laſt: and though the old yeare be gone, and
a new yeare come; yet whether another ſhall
come after this, as this came after the former,
no man (I thinke) hath any promiſe of him

                  •
               hat made time: for euen theſe two dayes
ſince the old yeare went out, manie haue gon

                  •
               he way which we all ſhall follow. Now why

                  •
               re daies, or weeks, or yeeres, but for vs? But

for man there ſhould be no winter, noſummer,
no ſpring, no autumne; that wee ſeeing
how the ſeasons are renued, at laſt with them
wee may learne to renue our ſelues: for to
celebrate new yeares with old ſinnes, is to let
euery thing goe before our ſelues; and ſuffer
the time to condemne vs which was giuen to
ſaue vs, God hath ſhewed vs new yeares, but
he would haue vs ſhew him new men. This is
Gods new yeares gift,Heb. 10. 1. not ſheepe, nor doues,
nor fruites which the Iewes offered; neither
myrth, frankincenſe & gold, which the Gentiles
offered, Mat. 2. but a new creature, Gal.
6. 15. Therefore wee muſt come to ſome
ſchoolemaſter,Luk. 3. 10. which teacheth vs like Iohn
Baptiſt, what wee ſhould doo, that we may
growe in knowledge, as we growe in yeares.
Teach mee to number my dayes (ſaith Moſes)
that I may apply my heart to wiſdome. Whereby
Moſes telleth vs, that this was one of his
helps, which made him profite in the knowledge
of God, to number his daies: as a man
that hath a ſet time for his taske liſtens to the
clock,Iohn, 9. 4. and countes his houres, ſo we haue a ſet
time to ſerue God, Worke while it is daye, ſaith
Chriſt. What hee dooth meane by this day,
The Apoſtle ſheweth you, This is the daye of
ſaluation; that is, this life is the daye wherein
you ſhould worke. What worke haue you to
doo? The Apoſtle tels you, Woorke out your

ſaluation. This is a long taske, therefore we
had neede to number our dayes, and not looſe
a minute, leaſt wee be benighted before our
worke be done. Teach mee, O Lord to number
my daies. Hee which in the Lande of Midian
learned to number ſheep, now he is come into
the wildernes, lerneth to number his daies.
Teach vs, O Lord, to number our daies. Not
teach vs the number of our daies, for we ſhall
forget it againe, and the knowledge of times,
is Gods knowledge; but Teach vs to number
our daies; that is, that wee may bee ſtill numbring
and counting our daies, & houres, and
minuts, to ſee how faſt we die, that euery day
and houre we may learn ſome thing. As God
hath numbred our daies, ſo we muſt learne to
number our daies, or elſe it ſeemes that wee
cannot apply our harts to wiſdome: that is, vnles
we think vpon death, we cannot faſhion our
ſelues to a godly life, though we were as well
inſtructed as Moſes. This we find daily in our
ſelues, that the forgetfulnes of death, makes vs
to apply our harts vnto folly, & pleaſure, & all
voluptuouſnes; that contrarie to his aduice:
Work your ſaluation, we work our damnation.
We are ſo far from numbring our daies, that
wee doe not number our weekes, nor our
monethes, nor our yeares, but as the Apoſtle
ſaith,2. Pet. 2. 8. 
               A thouſand yeares with God are as one
day: ſo one day with vs is a thouſand yeares:

that is, our time ſeemes ſo long that we think
we ſhall neuer die: but he which made this
praier is now dead, & the number of his daies
is ended, & nothing is left, but his holy books
which bring this praier vnto vs, that we may
learne to pray ſo too. Now I muſt pray, Teach
me, O Lord to number my daies, and thou muſt
pray: Teach me, O Lord, to number my daies,
that we may apply our hearts to wiſdome: that is
ſo to pray, & faſt, and watch, and heare, & do,
as becommeth him which ſhall ſhortly giue
account of his Stewardſhip.
               Luk. 16. 2. This is the fruite
which comes to a man by nūbring his daies.
God teacheth a man to applie his hart to wiſdom:
and this is his leſſon which he giues for
that purpoſe, number thy daies, that is, thinke
that wiſdome is a long ſtudie, and that thou
haſt but aſhort time to get it, & this wil make
thee get ground of vertue: for there is no ſuch
enemie to repentance, as to thinke that wee
haue time inough to repent hereafter, which
makes a man ſay, when any good motion cō
               meth,
nay I may ſtay yet, yet I may ſtay, like
the ſluggard,Pro. 6. 10. which turnes vpon his bed like
a doore vpon the hinges, and ſaith, yet a little
more, a little more ſleepe, a little more ſlumber,
I may lie ſtil a while: this is not to number our
daies, but to ſtretch our daies & make them
ſeeme more then they are, and they that do
ſo, neuer applie their harts vnto Wiſdom: ſo you

ſee what a preſeruatiue Moſes vſed againſt
ſin and pleaſure, he kept a calendar as it were
of his daies which called vpon him, Be diligent,
for thou haſt but a ſhort time. Fiue things
I note in theſe words: firſt that death is the
hauen of euerie man, whether hee ſit in the
throne, or keepe in a cottage, at laſt he muſt
knock at deaths doore, as all his fathers haue
done before him. Secondly, that mans time is
ſet, and his bounds appointed, which he cannot
paſſe, no more then the Egyptians could
paſſe the ſea: and therfore Moſes ſaith, Teach
vs to number our daies, as though there were a
number of our daies. Thirdly, that our daies
are few: as though we were ſent into this
world but to ſee it, and therfore Moſes ſpeaking
of our life, ſpeaks of daies, not of yeeres,
nor of moneths, nor of weekes: but teach vs
to number our daies, ſhewing that it is an eaſie
thing euer for a man to number his daies they
be ſo few. Fourthly, the aptnes of man to forget
death rather then any thing els, and therfore
Moſes praieth the Lord to teach him to
number his daies, as though they were ſtill
ſlipping out of his minde. Laſtly, that to remember
how ſhort a time we haue to liue, wil
make vs applie our harts to that which is
good. The firſt point is, that as euery one had
a day to come into this world: ſo he ſhal haue
a day to goe out of this world. When Moſes

had ſpoken of ſome which liued 700. yeeres,
and other which liued 800. yeeres, and other
which liued 900. yeeres, ſhewing that
ſome had a longer time, and ſome a ſhortet,
yet he ſpeakes this of all, mortuus eſt, at
laſt comes in mortuus eſt, that is, he died,
which is the Epitaph of euery man. We are
not lodged in a caſtell, but in an Inne, where
wee are but gueſts, and therefore Peter cals
vs ſtrangers.
               1. Pet. 2. 11. We are not Citizens of the
earth, but Citizens of Heauen, and therefore
the Apoſtle ſaith,Heb. 13. 19. 
               we haue here no abiding
City, but we look for one to come. As Chriſt
ſaith,Iohn 8. 36. 
               my kingdom is not of this world: ſo we may
ſay, My dwelling is not in this world, but the
ſoule ſoareth vpward whence ſhe came, & the
body ſtoopeth downward whence it came:Gen. 3. 19. as
the tabernacles of the Iews were made to remoue,Exod 33. 7.
ſo our tabernacles are made to remoue.Exod. 26. 1.
Euery man is a tenant at wil, & ther is nothing
ſure in life, but deth: as he which wrote this is
gone, ſo I which preach it, & you which heare
it, one comming in, & one going out is to all.
Although this is daily ſeene, yet it had need be
prooued, nay euery man had need to die, to
make him beleeue that he ſhall die. When Adam
& Eue became ſubiect to death becauſe
of their ſin to teach them to think on death, ſo
ſoon as they were thruſt out of paradiſe, God
clothed them with the skins of dead beaſtes,

which ſhewed them that now they were
cloathed with death, and that as the beaſtes
were dead whoſe skins they wore: ſo they
ſhould die alſo: therefore Dauid ſaith, Man
being in honour became like the beasts which periſh:
when he ſaith, that hee did become like
the beaſts which periſh, he implieth that man
ſhould not periſh like the beaſts, but when he
did like a beaſt, hee died like a beaſt. From
that day euery man might ſay with Iob,Iob. 17. 14. 
               Corruption
was my father, and the worme was my
mother.
               Luk. 16. 22. For the rich glutton is lockt in his
graue as faſt as poore Lazarus. Therfore God
ſpeaking of kings,Pſal. 82. 6. ſaith, I ſaid ye are Gods, but
ye ſhal die like men. If kings muſt die like men,
then the expectation of men is death: therefore
when this king was readie to die, he ſaid
to Salomon,1. Reg. 2 2. 
               that he ſhould go the way of all the
earth, calling death the way of all the earth: to
which Eſay be ares witneſſe,Eſa. 40. 6. crying, all fleſh is
graſſe, that is, it falleth, and is cut downe like
graſſe.Gen. 1. 27. In paradiſe we might liue or die: in the
world we liue & muſt die:Gen. 3. 21. in heauen ſhe ſhall
liue and not die. Before ſinne nothing could
change vs: now euery thing doth change vs.
For when winter comes wee are cold, when
age comes wee are withered, when ſickneſſe
comes we are weak, to ſhew that when death
comes we ſhal die. The clothes which were
vpon our backs, the ſun which ſets ouer our

heads, the graues which lie vnder our feete,
the meate which goes into our mouthes, c
                  •
               ie
vnto vs that we ſhall we are, and ſade, and die,
like the fiſhes, and foules, and beaſts which
euen now were liuing in their elements, and
now are dead in our diſhes. Euery thing
euerie day ſuffers ſome eclipſe, and nothing
ſtands at a ſtay, but one creature calles to
another, let vs leaue this world. Our fathers
ſummoned vs, and we ſhall ſummon our
children to the graue: firſt wee wax olde,
then wee wax drie, then wee wax weake,
then wee wax ſicke, ſo wee melt away by
drops; at laſt as we caried other: ſo other cary
vs vnto the graue: this is the laſt bed which
euery man ſhal ſleep in: we muſt returne to
our mothers wombe.Gen. 47. 9. Therefore Iacob called
his life but a pilgrimage,2. Tim. 4. 7. therfore Paul called
his life but a race; therfore Dauid calleth him
ſelfe but a worme;Pſal 22. 6. a pilgrimage hath an end, a
race hath a ſtop, a worme is but troden vnder
foote and dead ſtraight: ſo in a houre we are,
and are not: heere we are now, and anon we
are ſeparated, & to morrow one ſickneth, and
the next day another ſickneth, and all that be
here neuer meet againe,2. Cor. 4. 7. we may well be called
earthen veſſels, for we are ſoone broken, a
ſpider is able to choake vs, a pin is able to kill
vs: all of vs are borne one way, and die a hundred
waies.1. Kin. 19. 9 As Eliah ſtood in the doore of the

ca
                  •
               e when God paſſed by, ſo wee ſtand in the
paſſages of this world readie to go out whenſoeuer
God ſhall cal. We looſe firſt our infancie.
& then our childhood, & then our youth,
at laſt as we came in the roomes of other, ſo
other come into our roomes. If all our daies
were as long as the day of Ioſua,Ioſh. 10. 12. when the ſun
ſtood ſtill in the midſt of heauen, yet it will
be night at laſt, & our ſun ſhal ſet like other.
It is not long that we grow, but when we begin
to fall, we are like the ice which thaweth
ſooner then it froze: ſo theſe little worlds are
deſtroied firſt, and at laſt the great world ſhal
be deſtroied too, for all which was made for
vs, ſhall periſh with vs. What do you learne
when you thinke of this, but that which Moſes
ſaith, to applie your hearts to wiſdome?
death commeth after life, and yet it guides
the whole life like the ſterne of a ſhip: but
for death there would be no rule, but euery
mans luſt ſhould be his law: he is like a King
which frighteth a far oft, though he defer his
ſeſſions, and ſtay the execution, yet the verie
feare that he will come, makes the proudeſt
peacock lay downe his feathers, and is like a
dampe which puts out all the lights of pleaſure.
The ſecond note is, that the time of man
is ſet & his bounds appointed, which he cannot
paſſe, & therfore Moſes praieth the Lord
that he would teach him to number his daies,

as though there were a number of our daies:
Therefore God is called Palmoni, which ſignifieth
a ſecret number, becauſe he knoweth
the number of our daies, which is ſecret to vs.
As it was ſaid to Balthaſar, God hath numbred
thy kingdome, ſo it may be ſaid to all, God hath
numbred thy life. To this Job beareth witnes,
ſaying,Iob. 14. 5. 
               Are not his daies determined? thou haſt
appoynted his bounds, which he cannot paſſe. Again
Ieremie ſaith,Ier. 46. 21. 
               they could not ſtand becauſe
the day of their destruction was come. As there
is a day of deſtruction, and a day of death, ſo
there is a day of birth, a day of marriage, a day
of honour, a day of deliuerance, according to
that,Dan. 11. 36 
               the determinatiō is made, that is, God hath
determined all things. As God appointed a
time when his Sonne ſhould come into the
world,Dan. 9. 26. & he came at the ſame time,Gal. 4. 4. as the Prophets
and the Euangeliſts accord: ſo he hath
appointed a time when all his bleſſings ſhall
come vnto vs, & they come at the ſame time.
As we reade of Ioſeph, when his appointed
time came, ſhewing that God appointed a
time when to exalt him,Pſa. 105. 19 and before that time
came, hee could not bee exalted: therefore
Chriſt ſaith ſo often,Iohn. 7. 8. 
               My time is not yet come,
ſhewing that he knew the time of his baptizing,
the time of his preaching, the time of his
working, the time of his riſing, and the time of
his aſcending.2 King. 20. 1 As for that which is obiected of

Ezechias, becauſe Eſaie ſhewed him that hee
ſhould die, and after tolde him that fifteene
yeres were added to his life: it is like the preaching
of Ionas to the Niniuits,Ionath. 3. 3. 
               Fortie daies and
Niniue ſhall be destroyed, and yet Niniuie was
not deſtroied, becauſe they repented: ſo Ezechias
was not abridged, becauſe he repented.
Therefore you muſt vnderſtand the phraſe of
God, as when we ſay that wee will iourney to
morrow, we vnderſtand If God will: ſo when
God ſaith, I will destroie, he vnderſtands, if we
perſiſt. As al the promiſes of God are cōditional
to take place if we repent, ſo all the threatnings
of God are conditionall to take place if
we repent not: and therefore ſome time this
woord if, is put in, as where there is no bleſſing
nor curſing without an if.
               Den. 28. I may anſwere
againe, that God is a iudge, and ſpake like a
iudge to Ezechias: a iudge dooth not condemne
all whom he ſaith he will condemne,
nor a Schoolemaſter beate euerie one whom
he ſaith he will beat, to make him learne, yet
the iudge and ſchoolemaſter doe not diſſemble
but menace: this is not lying but threatning.
But you will ſay, if any time be ſet, thus
long I ſhal liue, and I cannot paſ
                  •
               e, then I will
take no phiſicke. You may as well ſay, I will
take no meat. God hath not ordained the end
without meanes, but the meanes as well as
the end. If he haue appointed one to die in his

youth, he hath appointed ſome meanes to
ſhorten his life,2 Sa. 18. 6. as he did Abſolons: if he haue
appointed one to liue long, he hath appointed
alſo ſome meanes to preſerue his life, as
Ioſeph cheriſhed Iacob in his age. Therefore
though God had promiſed Paul that his company
ſhould not be drowned,Acts 27. 21. yet he told the
marriners, that vnleſſe they kept in the ſhip
they ſhould bee drowned: as if their ſafety
ſhould not bee without meanes: but a good
minde dooth neuer quarrell about theſe
things.
            The third point is, that our life is but a ſhort
life: as many little skuls are in Golga
                  •
               ha, as
great skuls: for one apple that falleth from
the tree, ten are pulled before they bee ripe,
and the parents mourne for the death of their
children, as often as the children for the deceaſe
of their parents. This is our Aprill and
May wherein we floriſh, our Iune and Iuly are
next when wee ſhall bee cut downe. What a
change is this, that within foureſcore yeares
not one of this aſſemblie ſhall bee left aliue:
but another preacher, and other hearers ſhall
fill theſe roomes, and tread vpon vs where our
feete tread now?
            The Rauen and the Phoenix, and the Elephant,
and the Lyon, and the Hart fulfill
their hundreds, but man dieth when he thinks
yet his ſunne riſeth, before his eye bee ſatisfied

with ſeeing, or his eare with hearing
or his heart with luſting, death knockes at
his doore, and will not giue him leaue to meditate
an excuſe before hee come to iudgement.
To ſhew the ſhortneſſe of mans life,
Moſes vſed the ſhorteſt diuiſion in nature to
expreſſe it by, he might haue ſaid, Teach me, O
Lord, to number my moneths, or my yeares, but
he ſpeakes of dayes: ſo the Scripture is woont
to number our life by dayes, and houres, and
minutes, to ſhewe vs that wee ſhall giue account
for houres, as well as for daies, for daies
as well as for weekes, for weekes as well as for
moneths, for moneths as well as for yeares,
which warneth vs to make vſe of all our time,
and euerie daie to thinke vpon the laſt.
            This was the Arithmeticke of holie men in
former times to reckon their dayes, ſo that
their time might ſeeme ſhort, to make them
applie their hearts to wiſdome: The Hebrewes
did number their dayes thus: firſt they did
deduct the time of ſleepe, ſo that if our yeeres
bee threeſcore and tenne,Pſal. 90. 10 as the Prophet
ſaith, fiue and thirtie of theſe yeares are ſtriken
off at one blow, becauſe wee ſpend halfe
our time in ſleepe: then they did deduct the
time of youth,Eccle. 11. 10 which Salomon calleth vanity,
as though it were not worthy to be called life
but vanitie: Then they did deduct the daies
of ſorrow, becauſe in ſorrow a man had

rather dye then liue: ſo when the houres of
ſleepe, & the houres of youth, and the houres
of ſorrowe are taken away, what an Epitomie
is mans life come to? The Fathers vſed an
other account: Firſt they did deduct all the
time which is paſt, for the time which is paſt
is nothing: then they did deduct the time to
come, becauſe the time to come is vncertain,
and no man can ſay that he ſhall liue. Now,
when the time paſt, and the time to come is
ſet aſide, there is nothing left but the time
preſent, that is, a moment, which is not ſo
much in reſpect of eternitie, as a little mote to
the whole earth.
            Dauid numbered his daies by a meaſure,
My life (ſaith he) is like a ſpan long, Pſal. 39. 5.
when he meaſured his life, he took not a pole,
nor an ell, nor a yard to meaſure it by, but a
ſhort meaſure, his ſhort ſpan, My life is like
a ſpan long. Thus you haue learned to number
your daies, or rather the houres of your
daies: as ſome came into the Vineyard in the
morning, and ſome at noone, and ſome at
night: ſo ſome goe out of this Vineyard in
the morning, ſome at noone, & ſome at night:
ſome mans life hath nothing but a morning,
ſome haue a morning and noone, he which
liueth longeſt, liueth all the day; and therefore
the yongeſt of all pray, but for this day: &
if he liue till to morrow, then he prayeth for

that day, ſaying ſtill, Giue vs this day our daylie
bread: So that a pleaſant life may bee compared
but to a glorious day, and a ſorrowfull
life to a clowdie day, and a long life to a ſummers
day, and a ſhort life to a winters day.
How comes it to paſſe, that when a man dies,
all his yeares ſeeme but ſo many dayes, and
before hee dyes, all his daies ſeeme ſo many
yeares?Iob. 14. 1. Iob ſpeaketh of all a like, Man which
is borne of a womā hath but a ſhort time to liue,
Iacob was 130. yeares old, and yet when hee
came before Pharaoh, he ſayd, Fewe and euill
haue my daies been. Though Pharaoh did not
ſpeake of daies, but asked him how old he was,
yet he anſwered of daies, to ſhew that not only
his yeares but his daies were fewe. Our fathers
marueiling to ſee how ſodainlie men
are, and are not, compared life to a dreame in
the night, to a bubble in the water, to a ſhip in
the ſea, to an arrow which neuer reſteth till it
fall, to a player which ſpeaketh his part vpon
the ſtage, and ſtraight he giueth place to another,
to a man which commeth to the market
to buy one thing, and ſell another, and then is
gone home againe: ſo the figure of this world
paſſeth away. This is our life, while we enioy
it we looſe it:Gen. 47 9. as Iacob ſayd, that his daies had
been fewe: ſo wee may ſay, that our daies ſhall
be few.
            Now, why hath GOD appoynted ſuch a

ſhort time to man in this world? Surely, leaſt
he ſhould deferre to doe good, as his manner
is: for though his life is ſo ſhort, yet he thinks
it too long to repent.Pſal. 90. 10. The Prophet ſaith, that
our yeares are but threeſcore and ten, as though
this were but a little time to liue. But why
ſhould we liue ſo long? for if our life were but
a yeare, yet a yeare is more then we vſe, al the
reſt is loſt: for wee deferre till that weeke
which we thinke will be laſt. It is ſayd of the
diuell,Reu. 12. 12. 
               that he is buſie becauſe his time is ſhort:
but the time of man is ſhorter: and therefore
Chriſt ſaith,Luk. 19. 42. 
               In this thy day: as though no day
could bee called thy daye, but this daye: and
therefore all that thou haſt to doe, thou muſt
doe this day. Conſider this, all which trauell
toward heauen: had wee not neede to make
haſt, which muſt goe ſuch a long iourney in
ſuch a ſhort time? How can he chooſe but
run, which remembreth that euery day runneth
away with his life?
            The fourth poynt is our aptneſſe to forget
death rather then any thing els, and therefore
Moſes praieth the Lord to teach him to number
his daies, as though they were ſtill ſlipping
out of his minde. He which hath numbred
our daies, muſt teach vs to number our
daies: for when Moſes prayeth the Lorde to
teach him to number his daies, he ſignifieth
that he would very faine remember them, but

ſtill his minde did turne from them, and that
he could not thinke vpon them longer then
he thought on the Lord, which taught him to
number them: ſuch is the rebellion of our nature,
wee cannot remember that which wee
ſhould, becauſe we remēber ſo many things
which we ſhould forget. How often doth the
Scripture cal death to our minds? Yet we read
how they put the day of death from them,Amos. 6. 3. &
would not remember it. Salomon bids vs remember
that we ſhal come to iudgement, &
yet we reade how they pleade againſt the day
of iudgement, and ſyllogize to their ſinnes,
That all things ſhall continue as they be,
               Eccle. 11. 9. 
               becauſe
there hath been no chaunge yet:
               2. Pet. 3. 4. euen ſo it is
with vs,Pſal. 14. 1. 
               as the foole ſaith in his hart, there is no
God: ſo we ſay in our hearts there is no death,
or at leaſt death will not come before we bee
old. Of al numbers we cannot skill to number
our daies: we can number our ſheepe & our
oxen, & our coyn: but we think that our daies
are infinite, & therfore we neuer go about to
number thē. We can number other mēs daies
and yeres, & think they wil die ere it be long,
if we ſee them ſick, or ſore, or old, but we can
not nūber our own. When two ſhips meet on
the ſea, they which are in one ſhip thinke that
the other ſhip doth ſaile exceeding faſt: but
that their ſhip goeth faire and ſoftly, or rather
ſtādeth ſtil, although in truth one ſhip ſaileth

as faſt as the other: ſo euery man thinkes that
other poſt, and run, and flye to the graue, but
that himſelfe ſtandeth ſtocke ſtill, although
indeede a yeare with him is no longer then it
is with other: beſide that, we are giuen to forget
death, wee ſtriue to forget it, like them
which ſay, we may not remember. Teach me to
number my daies:
               Amos. 6. 10. nay, teach me to multiplie
my daies, teach me to remember death, nay,
teach me to prolong death: or if I cannot prolong
death, teach me to forget death, that I
may ſinne without feare: for the remembrāce
of death maketh a man to ſinne fearefully, &
takes away the pleaſure of ſinne. Therefore if
ye mark, there is a kind of men which cannot
abide to heare of death, they are ſick with the
name of it: the reaſon is, Achab cannot abide
Michaiah,1. King. 22. 
               becauſe hee neuer prophecied good
vnto him but euill: ſo death neuer prophecied
good to the wicked but euill, for which they
cannot abide it. Therefore as Pharaoh bad
Moſes goe out of his ſight: ſo they bid death
goe out of their ſight, and ſay when he comes
as Achab ſaid to Eliah, Art thou here my enemie,
whē they ſhould ſay, welcome my frend?
For as the diuels thought Chriſt was come to
tormēt them: ſo the vngodly think that death
comes to tormēt them. Is it peace, when they
ſee death, they doubt it is not peace, becauſe
they neuer loued the God of peace. O that I

could bring you into their hearts, that yee
might ſee more then tongue can expreſſe: for
I doe not thinke that any Epicure, or worldling,
or Nonreſident, haue any ioy to thinke
of death, or deſire to be diſſolued, but rather
that hee might neuer bee diſſolued, becauſe
death coms to the wicked like a iayler, which
comes alwaies to hale vnto priſon: therefore
their care is not to remember death, that they
might apply their hearts to wiſedome: but to
forget death, leſt they ſhould apply their harts
to wiſedome, and looſe their pleaſures before
the time: for he which is not purpoſed yet to
leaue his ſinnes, would not be troubled with
any thought that might make him take his
pleaſure fearefully, leaſt he ſhould leaue ſinne
before ſinne leaue him. Therefore the diuell
doth neuer teach a man to number his daies,
becauſe he gains by the forgetfulnes of death:
but the Lord which would haue a man to applie
his heart to wiſedome, it is he which teacheth
vs to number our daies: and therfore Moſes
praieth vnto him, & becauſe we pray not
vnto him as he did, to teach vs to number our
daies, therefore we die like wormes before we
be aware. So farre we are from that which he
ſhooteth at, to apply his heart to wiſedome, that
we are not in the way vnto it, that is, to remē
               ber
that wee ſhall die. The laſt poynt is the
cauſe why Moſes would learne to number

his daies, that he might apply his heart to wiſedome
as if he ſhould ſay, vntill men think vpon
death, they neuer applie their hearts to wiſedom,
but buſie themſelues with worldly matters,
as though they were fethering a neſt that
ſhould neuer be pulled down. Wiſedom hath
alwaies carried that ſhew of excellencie, that
the very wicked haue laboured to put on this
vizard: as we reade of Pharao, who to couer
his fooliſhnes,Exod. 1. 10. ſaith, Come let vs do wiſely. And
again, it is ſaid, that the Grecians ſought after
wiſedom,1. Cor. 1. 22. euē the Nation which God cals the
fooliſh nation,Deu. 
                     •
                  2. 21. did ſeek after wiſedom: that is,
they would haue the name of wiſedome: but
this wiſedome which Moſes cals wiſdome, is
coūted fooliſhnes,1. Cor. 1. 21 
               the fooliſhnes of preaching,
ſaith Paul, meaning how the fooliſh count
preaching fooliſhnes.
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . Againe, fooliſhnes to the
Gentiles, meaning that the word of God ſeemeth
like a fooliſh thing vnto many. For that
which Chriſt ſaid vnto Peter, he may ſay almoſt
to al,Mat. 16. 23 
               They do not ſauor the things of God.
As Anah deuiſed a new creature:Gen 36 24. ſo they haue
found out another wiſedome which is called
the wiſdom of the fleſh.
               Rom. 8. 7 They remember, Be wiſe
as ſerpents:
               Mat. 10. 1
                     •
                  
                but they forget, Be ſimple as doues.
He which is like Achitophel is coūted a deep
counſ
                  ••
               ler,2. Sam. 17. 7 he which is like Machiuel, is counted
a wiſe fellow. Alas, how eaſie a matter is it
to deceiue & counterfeit, and play the ſubtile

ſerpent, if a man would ſet his head vnto it?
Could not Dauid goe as farre as Achitophel?
Could not Paul ſhew as much cūning as Tertullus?Acts. 24 2.
Yes, yes, if they were not taught to be
ſimple as doues.Matt. 10. 6. But this wiſdome comes not
by the remembrance of death, but by the forgetfulnes
of death. Men do not vſe to think of
death when they goe about ſuch matters, but
ſay like the ſerpēt,Gen 3. 3. 
               We ſhall not die. Two things
I note in theſe words: Firſt, that if we will find
wiſedome, we muſt applie our hearts to ſeeke
her: thē, that the remēbrance of death makes
vs applie our harts vnto it. Touching the firſt,
Moſes found ſome fault with himſelfe, that
for al he had heard & ſeene, and obſerued, and
was counted wiſe: yet he was new to begin,
and had not applied his heart to learne wiſedom,Pro. 30. 2.
like the wiſe man which ſaith, I am more
fooliſh then any man, I haue not the wiſedome of
a man in me. So vnſatiable and couetous (as I
may ſay) are the ſeruants of GOD, the more
wiſedome, and faith, and zeale they haue, the
more they deſire. Moſes ſpeaketh of wiſedome,
as if it were Phiſicke, which doth no
good before it be applied, and the part to applie
it too is the heart, where all mans affections
are to loue it and cheriſh it like a kind
hoſteſſe: when the heart ſeeketh, it findethas
though it were brought vnto her like Abrahams
Ramme. Therefore GOD ſaith,

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               They ſhall ſeeke me,
               Ier. 20. 13. 
               & find me, becauſe they ſhal

                     〈◊〉
                   me with their 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                as though they ſhuld
not find him with all their ſeeking, vnles they
did ſeeke him with their heart. Therefore the
way to get wiſedome, is to applie our hearts
vnto it, as if it were your calling and liuing to
which you are bound prentiſes. A man may
applie his eares, & his eyes, as many trewants
doe to their bookes, & yet neuer proue ſchollers:
but from that day which a man begins
to applie his heart vnto wiſedom, he learneth
more in a moneth after, then he did in a yeare
before, nay, then euer he did in his life. Euen
as you ſee the wicked, becauſe they applie
their hearts to wickednes, how faſt they proceede,
how eaſily and how quickly they become
perfect ſwearers, expert drunkards,
cunning deceiuers: ſo if ye could applie your
hearts as throughly to knowledge and goodneſſe,
you might become like the Apoſtle
which teacheth you. Therefore when Salomon
ſheweth men the way how to come by
wiſedome, he ſpeakes often of the heart, as
Giue thine heart to wiſedome,
               Pro. 22. 10. 
               Let wiſedome enter
into thine heart, Get wiſedome, Keepe wiſedome,
               Pro. 45. 13. 8.
               Embrace wiſedome: as though a man
went a wooing for wiſedome. Wiſedome is
like Gods daughter, that he giueth to the mā
that loueth her, and ſueth for her, and meaneth
to ſet her at his heart.
            
               
Thus we haue learned how to apply knowledge,
that it may do vs good, not to our eares
like them which heare Sermons onely; nor
to our tongues, like them which make table
talke of religion; but to our hearts, that wee
may ſay like the virgin,Luk. 1. 
               My heart doth magnifie
the Lord: and the heart will applie it to the
eare,Mar. 12. 14 and to the tongue, as Chriſt ſaith, Out of
the abundance of the heart the mouth ſpeaketh.
The laſt poynt is, that the remembrance of
death makes vs to applie our hearts to wiſedome.
Moſes commended not many bookes
to make a wiſe man learned, but as Dauid
commends one booke in ſtead of many:Pſalm. 1. 2. 
               Meditate
in the Law of God day and night: for, the
reading of many bookes (ſayth Salomon) is
but wearineſſe to the fleſh.
               Eccl. 12. 12. Therefore as though
Moſes had marked what did moue him moſt
to ſeeke after GOD, hee prayeth that that
thought may run in his mind ſtill, the remembrance
of death. As many benefits come vnto
vs by death: ſo many benefites come vnto vs
by the remembrance of death, and this is one,
It maketh a man to applie his heart to wiſedome:
For when he conſidereth that he hath
but a ſhort time to liue, he is carefull to ſpend
it wel,Heb. 12. 26. like Moſes, of whom it is ſaid, that whē
he cōſidered how he had but a ſeaſon to liue,
he choſe rather to ſuffer afflictions with the
ſeruants of God, than to enioy the pleaſures

of ſinne for a ſeaſon. This is that which makes
the olde men faſt, and watch, and prepare
themſelues more than young, becauſe they
thinke themſelues neerer the doore, like olde
Iſaac, which when he was blinde for age, ſaid
vnto Eſau,Gen. 27. 2. 
               Behold, I am now old, and know not
the day of my death; that is, becauſe I am old,
I looke to die ſhortly. And therfore as Eſay
taught Ezechias,2. Kin. 20. 1 to ſet all things in order before
he died: ſo he called his eldeſt ſonne, to
whom hee thought that the inheritance belonged,
that he might bleſſe him before he
died. This wiſdome the Fathers called, the
wiſdome of the croſſe, which wee call the beſt,
becauſe it was deereſt bought. It is hard for a
man to think of a ſhort life, and think euil; or
to think of a long life, and thinke wel. Therefore
whē Ieremie had numbred al the calamities
& ſins of the Iewes; at laſt he imputed all
to this,Lam. 1▪ 9. 
               She remembred not her end: ſo if I may
iudge why natural men care for nothing but
their pomp, why great men care for nothing
but their honour and dignitie, why couetous
worldlings care for nothing but their gaine,
why voluptuous Epicures care for nothing
but their pleaſure? I may ſay with Ieremie,
They rememember not their end. We neuer couet
the ſame things liuing and dying: therefore
when Salomon had ſpokē of all the vanities
of men, at laſt he oppoſeth this Memorā
               dum,

as a counterpoyſe againſt them all;Eccl. 11. 9. 
               Remember,
that for al thoſe things thou ſhalt come
to iudgement: as if he ſhould ſay, Men would
neuer ſpeake as they ſpeake, nor doe as they
doe, if they did but thinke that theſe ſpeeches
and deeds ſhould come to iudgement. As the
bird guideth her flight with her traine: ſo the
life of man is beſt directed by a continuall recourſe
vnto his end. The thoght of death hath
made many ſinnes auoid like the diuel, when
Chriſt alleaged Scripture:Math. 4. it is like a ſtrainer,
all the thoughts, and ſpeeches, and actions
which come through it are clenſed and purified
like a cloth, which commeth out of the
water. Seeing then that ſo much fruit growes
of one ſtalk, which is the numbring of our
daies, let vs conſider what an harueſt we haue
loſt, which happily before this day neuer
prayed with Moſes, that the Lord wold teach
vs to number our dayes. What if we had died
in the dayes of our ignoraunce, like Iudas
which hanged himſelfe before he could ſee
the Paſſion or Reſurrection,Mat 27. 5. or aſcenſion of
Chriſt? But God hath cared for vs more then
we haue cared for our ſelues. We ſhould haue
numbred our dayes and ſinnes too, but
alas, howe many dayes haue wee ſpent, and
yet neuer thought why any day was giuen
vs? But as the olde yeere went, and a newe
yeere came, ſo we thought that a new would

follow that, and ſo we think that another will
come after this, and ſo they thought, which
are dead already. This is not to number our
dayes, but to prouoke GOD to ſhorten our
daies: there are few here which haue not ſeen
twentie years; now if we had but euery yeare
learned one vertue ſince we were borne, we
might by this time haue been like Saints among
men: but the time is yet to come when
we muſt applie our hearts to wiſdome. To riches
& pleaſures we haue applyed our harts,
and our eyes, and our eares, and our handes
too, but to wiſdome we haue not applyed our
hearts.
            There may be many cauſes, but there ſhuld
be no cauſe if wee had numbred our dayes.
For ſurely if a man could perſwade himſelfe
that this is his laſt day, as it may be, he would
not deferre his repentance vntill to morrow.
If he could think that this is his laſt meale that
euer he ſhall eate, hee would not ſurfet: if he
could beleeue that the words which he doth
ſpeake to day, ſhould be the laſt that euer he
ſhould ſpeake, he would not offend with his
tongue: if hee could be perſwaded that this
ſermon ſhould be the laſt ſermon that euer he
ſhould heare, he would heare it better then euer
he heard any yet. Yet breath is in the bodie
and the heart may applie it ſelfe, and the
eye may applie it ſelfe, and the eare may applie

it ſelfe, and the hand may applie it ſelfe.
Worke while it is light. I can but teach you
with words, as Iohn Baptized with water. As
Moſes prayed the Lord to teach him to number
his dayes: ſo you muſt pray the Lord to
teach you to number your dayes. And now I
lead you to number your dayes. It may bee
that thou haſt but twenty years to ſerue God,
wilt thou not liue twenty yeares like a Chriſtian,
that thou maieſt liue a thouſand yeares
like an Angel? It may bee that thou haſt but
tenne yeeres to ſerue him, wilt thou not ſerue
tenne yeares for heauen, which wouldſt ſerue
twenty yeares for a farme?
            It may be, that thou haſt but fiue yeares to
ſerue God, wilt thou ſpend fiue yeares wel to
redeeme all thy yeares for fiue? Yet GOD
doth knowe whether many here haue ſo long
to repent for all the yeares which they haue
ſpent in ſinne? If thou were borne but to day,
thy iourney is not an hundred yeares? If thou
be a man, halfe thy time is ſpent already: if
thou be an olde man, then thou art drawing
to thy Inne, and thy race is but a breath: therfore
as Chriſt ſaid vnto his Diſciples when he
found them ſleeping,Mat. 26. 40 
               Could ye not watch one
houre? So I ſay to my ſelfe, and to you, can we
not pray? can we not ſuffer a little while? He
which is tyred can crawle a little way, a little
farther, one ſteppe more for a kingdome. For

this cauſe God wold not haue men know whē
they ſhall die, becauſe they ſhould make readie
at all times, hauing no more certaintie of
one houre than another. Therefore our Sauiour
ſaith, watch becauſe you know not
when the Lord will come to take you, or to
iudge you, Happy are they which hear the word
and keepe it. Thus you ſee that death is the laſt
vpon earth, that the time of man is ſet, that
his race is ſhort, that he thinkes not of it, that
if he did remember it, it would make him
applie his minde to good, as he doth to euill:
and nowe I ende as I began. The Lord
teach vs to number our dayes, that
wee may applie our hearts
to wiſedome, Amen.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            A LOOKING-GLASSE
for Drunkards.
            
               Gen. 9. 20. 21.
               
                  20 Noah alſo began to be an husbandman, and
planted a vineyard.
                  21 And he drunke of the Wine and was drunken,
and was vncouered in the midſt of his
Tent.
               
            
            
               FIrſt we are to ſpeake of
Noah, then of Cham his
wicked ſonne, & after of
Shem and Iapheth his
good ſons. In Noah, firſt
of that which he did wel,
& thē of his ſin. In Cham
firſt of his ſinne, and then of his curſe. In his
brethren, firſt of their reuerence, and then
of their bleſſing. Nowe wee will ſpeake
of the Father, and after of his Children.
Then (ſayth Moſes) Noah began to bee an
huſbandman. This is the firſt name which

is giuen to Noah after the flood, hee is called
an Husband-man, and the firſt worke which
is mentioned, was the planting of a Vineyard.
One would thinke, when all men were
drowned with the flood and none left aliue to
poſſeſſe the earth but Noah and his ſonnes,
that he ſhould haue found him ſelfe ſomething
els to doe, than to plant Vineyards: and
that the holy Ghoſt ſhould haue intituled
him king of the world, and not an husband-man
of the earth, ſeeing there bee no ſuch,
men as Noah was, which had more in his
hand than any king hath in the world or ſhall
haue to the worlds end: but hereby the holy
Ghoſt would ſhew that God doth not reſpect
kings for their titles, nor men for their riches
as we doe, and therefore he nameth Noah after
the worke which he did, not after the poſſeſſions
which he had, an husbandman. It ſeemeth
that there was great diuerſitie between
their age and ours. For if we ſhould ſee nowe
a King goe to plough, a Noble man driue the
teame, a Gentleman keepe ſheepe, he ſhould
be ſcorned for his labour, more than Noah
was for his drunkennes: yet when we reade
how this Monarch of the world thought no
ſcorne to play the husband-man, wee conſider
nor his Princely calling, nor his auncient
yeares, nor his large poſſeſſions, to commend
his induſtrie, or modeſtie, or lowlie minde

therein; which may teach vs humilitie,
though we learne to diſdaine husbandrie: of
whom will we learne to be humble, if Kings
giue examples, and the ſonne of GOD
humbleth himſelfe from heauen to earth, and
yet we contemne the example of Kings of
the earth, and the example of the King of
heauen?
            The time was when Adam digged and
delued, when Dauid kept ſheepe, and all the
houſe of Iacob were called men occupied about
cattell: but as they for this were abhominable
to the Egyptians (as Moſes ſaith in
the ſame verſe) ſo they which doe like them,
are abhorred of their brethren: & they which
liue by them, ſcorne them for their worke,
which would be chaſtened themſelues, becauſe
they worke not: There was no Arte
nor Science, which was ſo much ſet by in former
times, and is now profitable to the common-wealth,
bringing leſſe profit vnto it ſelf,
that may ſo iuſtly complaine of her fall without
cauſe, and her deſpight from them which
liue by her, as this painfull Science of huſbandrie:
that it is marueil that any man will
take paine for the reſt, to be contemned for
his labour, and be a ſcorne for the reſt, which
might hunger and ſtarue, if he did not labour
for them more then they do themſelues. No
maruel then though many in the poore countries,

murmure & complaine that other cannot
liue by them, and they cannot liue themſelues:
but it is maruell if their complaint doe
not growe in time of rebell on, and pull other
as lowe as themſelues: for why ſhould the
greateſt payne yeeld the leaſt profit? yet this
is their eaſe, for if you marke, you ſhal ſee that
the husband-man doth bate the price of his
fruits ſo ſoon as the dearth is paſt, though he
rayſeth it a little, while the dearth laſteth:
but they which raiſe the price of their wares
with him, ſeldome fall againe, but make men
pay as deere when the dearth is paſt, as if it
were a dearth ſtil. Thus a plentiful yeere doth
damage him, and a hard yeere dooth vantage
them. So this painefull man, is fai
                  •
               e to
liue poorely, fare meanely, goe barely, houſe
homely, riſe early, labour dayly, ſell cheape
and buy deere, that I may truely ſay, that no
man deſerueth his liuing better, no man fulfilleth
the law neerer: that is, thou ſhalt gette
thy liuing in the ſweate of thy browes; then
this poore ſonne of Adam, which pickes his
crums out of the earth: therfore he ſhould not
be mocked for his labor, which hath vexation
enough, though all men ſpake well of him, &
in my opinion, if any deſerue to be loued for
his innocencie, or for his trueth, or his paine,
or the good which he brings to the common
wealth: this Realme is not ſo much beholding

to any ſorte of men (but thoſe that feede
the ſoule) as thoſe which feede the body, that
is, thoſe that labour the earth: yet you ſee how
they liue like drudges, as though they were
your ſeruants to prouide foode for you, and
after to bring it to your doores: as the beaſts
ſerue them, ſo they ſerue you; as though
you were another kinde of men. I cannot
thinke vpon their miſerie, but my thoughts
tels me, that it is a great part of our vnthankfulneſſe,
that we neuer conſider what an eaſie
life and liuing God hath giuen vnto vs in reſpect
of them. If the Apoſtles rule were kept,
they which doe not worke ſhould not eate:
but now they which do not work eate moſt:
and the husband-men which worke eate not,
but are like Bees, which prepare foode for
other and pyne themſelues. Let vs conſider
this, for they had not one lawe and wee another,
but the ſame curſe which was denounced
vpon Adam, was denounced vpon all
his children, that euery man ſhould get his
liuing in the ſweat of his browes. Although I
knowe there bee diuers workes, and diuers
gifts, and diuers callings to worke in; yet alwayes
prouided, they which doe not worke
ſhould not eat, for in the ſweat of thy browes,
that is, in labor and trauel, thou king, and thou
Iudge, and thou Prelate, and thou Land-lord,
and thou Gentleman, ſhalt gette thy liuing

as Adam thy Father did: or elſe thou doeſt auoyde
the curſe, and a greater curſe ſhall follow;
that is, they which wil not ſweat in earth,
ſhall ſweate in hell.
            Adam had foode as wel as thou, and ſo had
Noah, and more then thou, vnleſſe thou hadſt
all, for they had all, and yet they might not be
idle, becauſe their handes were not giuen
them for nothing. Some worke with their
penne, ſome with their tongues, ſome with
their fingers: as nature hath made nothing
idle, ſo God would haue no man idle, but that
he which is a Magiſtrate, ſhould do the work
of a Magiſtrate: hee which is a Iudge, ſhould
doe the worke of a Iudge: he which is a Captaine,
ſhould doe the worke of a Captaine:
he which is a Miniſter, ſhould doe the worke
of a Miniſter: as when Noah was called an
husband-man, he did the worke of an huſband-man.
This contempt of the Countrey,
doth threaten danger to the land as much as
any thing els in our daies, vnles their burthen
bee eaſed, and their eſtimation qualified in
ſome part to their paines. Thinking that you
haue not heard of this theame before, ſeeing
the wordes of my Texte did lie for it, thus
much haue I ſpoken to put you in mind how
eaſily you liue in reſpect of them, & to certifie
your mindes towards our poore brethren,
which in deede ſeeme too baſe in our eyes

and are ſcorned for their labours, as much as
we ſhould be for our idlenes.
            
               Then (ſaith Moſes) Noah began to bee an
huſbandman. In that it is here ſayd that Noah
began, it doth not diſproue that he gaue not
himſelfe to husbandrie before, but it importeth
that Noah began to ſet vp husbandrie againe
after the floud, before any other: ſo this
good man recomforted with the experience
of Gods fauour, (which had exempted him &
his ſeede out of all the world) and reioycing
to ſee the face of the earth againe after the
waters were gone, though then an olde man,
and weake he was, yet he returneth to his labour
afreſh, and ſcorned not to till and plant
for all his poſſeſſions, as though hee were an
husbandman: ſuch a lowlines is alwaies ioyned
with the feare of GOD, that they that
are humbled with Religion, doe not thinke
themſelues too good to doe any good thing.
Heere note by the way, that none of Noahs
ſonnes are ſayde to begin this worke: but
Noah himſelfe, the olde man, the hoary head
and carefull Father begins to teach the reſt,
and ſhewes his ſonnes the waye how they
ſhould prouide for their ſonnes: and how all
the world after ſhould liue by labour and
trauell, till they returne to duſt: ſo the olde
man whom age diſpenſeth withall, to take
his eaſe, is more willing to prouide for the

wants of his children, then they are which are
bound to labour for themſelues and their parents
to: as the Storke doth feede the damme
when ſhe is olde, becauſe the damme fed her
when ſhe was young: what a ſhame is this
to Shem and Iapheth, that is, to vs which
are yong & ſtrong, that the father ſhould be
called a labourer, when the ſonnes ſtand by.
            Now, the grounde was barren becauſe of
the floud, and could not bring forth fruite of
it ſelfe, becauſe of the curſe: therefore it pitied
Noah to ſee deſolation and barrenneſſe,
and ſlime vpon the face of the earth, which he
had ſeene ſo glorious and ſweete, and fertill,
with all manner of hearbes, and fruites, and
flowers before. Therefore he ſetteth himſelfe
to manure it, which wanted for nothing now
but a painful labourer to till and dreſſe it, that
it might bring forth delights and profites for
ſinfull man, as it did before.
            By this wee may learne to vſe all meanes
for the obtayning of Gods bleſſings, and not
to looſe any thing which wee might haue or
ſaue for want of paines, for that is ſinne, as
Salomon noteth in the foure and twentith of
the Prouerbes, when he reproueth the ſlouthfull
husbandman, becauſe his fielde brought
forth Nettles and Thiſ
                  •
               les in ſtead of grapes:
not becauſe the grounde would not beare
grapes, but becauſe the ſlouthfull man would

not ſet them. Shall God commaund the earth
and all his creatures to encreaſe for vs, and
ſhall not wee further their encreaſe for our
ſelues? As we encreaſe and multiplie our
ſelues, ſo wee are bound to ioyne hand and
helpe, that all creatures may increaſe and
multiplie too, or els the Fathers ſhould eate
the childrens portion, and in time there
ſhould bee nothing left for them that come
after: this regard Noah ſeemeth to haue vnto
his poſteritie, and therefore he gaue himſelfe
vnto husbandrie, which is commended
in him vnto this day, and ſhall be recorded of
him, ſo long as this booke is read: whereby
we are warned, that he which liueth onely to
himſelfe, is not to bee remembred of them
which liue after.
            But as Dauid cared how the Realm ſhould
bee gouerned after his death, as well as he did
during his life: ſo though we dye and depart
this world, yet we ſhould leaue that example,
or thoſe bookes or thoſe workes behinde vs,
which may profite the Church and Common-wealth,
when wee are dead and buried,
as much as we did when we liued among
them: euen as Noah planted a Vineyarde,
not for himſelfe, but for the ages to
come after.
            Some doe thinke that Noah planted the
firſt Vineyard, and drunke the firſt wine, and

that there was no vſe of grapes before: which
opinion they are led vnto, that they might excuſe
Noah and mittigate his fault, if hee did
ſippe too deepe of that cup, the ſtrength and
operation whereof was not knowne vnto
him, nor vnto any man before: but it is not
like, that the excellent licour and wholeſome
iuice of the Grape, did lye hidde from the
world ſo many hundreth yeres, and no doubt
but there were Vines from the beginning,
created with other trees: for how coulde
Noah plant a Vineyard, vnles he had ſlippes
of other Vines, or Grapes that grew before,
ſeeing hee did not create fruites, but plant
fruites as we doe? For this is principally to be
noted, that ſo ſoone as he had opportunitie
to doe good, he omitted no time, but preſently
after the floud was gone, and the earth beganne
to drie, hee plied it with ſeedes, and
wrought it, till hee ſawe the fruites of his labour.
By this we learne to omit no occaſion
to doe good, but whenſoeuer wee may doe
good, to count it ſinne if we doe it not. But
if we be ſo exerciſed, then all our workes ſhall
proſper like the Vineyard of Noah, becauſe
the fruite of the Vine dooth cheere the countenaunce
and glad the heart of man. Therefore
ſome haue gathered vpon the planting
of this Vineyard, a ſignification of gladneſſe
and thankefulneſſe in Noah for his late

deliuerance, as the Iewes by their ſolemne
feaſtes did celebrate the memoriall of ſome
great benefite: but I rather iudge, that God
would haue vs ſee in this example, what men
did in thoſe daies, and how we are degenerate
from our parents, that wee may prepare againſt
the fire, as Noah prepared againſt the
water. This is worthie to bee noted too, that
God did not ſo regarde his husbandrie, but
that hee had an eye to his drunkennes, and
ſpeakes of his fault as wel as his vertue: wherby
we are warned, that though God bleſſe vs
now while wee remember him, yet hee will
chaſten vs ſo ſoone as we forget him: though
we be in good name now, infamie will ariſe
in an houre: though we be rich at this preſent,
pouertie may come ſuddainely: though
we be well while wee are here, yet we may
fall ſicke before night, euen as Noah is prayſed
in one verſe, and diſprayſed in another:
euen now God commends him for his lowlines,
and now diſcommends him for his
drunkenneſſe: as though he had forgot all his
righteouſnes ſo ſoone as he ſinned, & would
cal in his praiſe againe. This was to ſhew, that
Noah was not ſaued from the floud, becauſe
hee deſerued to be ſaued; but becauſe God
had a fauour vnto him: for he which was
not drowned with water, was drowned
after with Wine. As the Phariſies when

they had doone well, were proud of it, and
loſt their reward: ſo when Noah had done a
good worke hee ſpotted it with ſinne, and
was diſpraiſed where hee was praiſed, as
though God repented him that he commended
him. He planted well, but he drunke not
well: therefore that which was good did
him hurt: then ſeeing hee was trapped with
a good worke, whatſoeuer we doo, we may
remember how eaſie it is to ſinne, if wee
miſſe in the matter, or in the manner, or time,
or the place, or the meaſure, as Noah did. He
which planteth the vineyard, is worthy to
taſte of the grape, but if thou haue found honnie
(ſaith Salomon) eate not too much leaſt
thou ſurfet. So if thou haue found Wine,
drinke not too much, leaſt thou ſurfet. A little
Wine is better than a great deale, and if
thou wilt follow the Apoſtles counſell, thou
muſt drinke it but for thy ſtomacks ſake, leaſt
that happen to thee, which thou ſhalt heare
of this noble Patriarch. Though he was neuer
ſo righteous before GOD and men,
though hee eſcaped the deſtruction, which
lighted vppon all the worlde, though hee
had all the foules of the ayre, and beaſtes
of the land at his commaund, though hee
paſſed the pilgrimage of man nine hundreth
yeares, yet Noah was but a man, ſo auncient,
ſo righteous, ſo mightie, ſo happie: Noah

ſhewed himſelfe but a man for drinking the
Wine which himſelfe had planted: hee was
drunken. This is Noahs fault, he was drunken
with his owne Wine, as Lot was defiled
with his owne daughters. If Cham his ſonne
had taken too much, and ſtript himſelfe as
his father did, the holy Ghoſt would ſcarce
haue ſpoken of it, becauſe hee was a man of
no note: but when the father forgat himſelfe
and gaue this offence, marke the manner
of the holy Ghoſt, as though he would ſhew
you a wonder: hee diſplayeth Noahs drunkenneſſe,
as Cham diſplayed his nakedneſſe:
as if he would ſay, come and ſee the ſtrength
of man. Hee which was counted ſo righteous,
hee which beleeued the threatning, like
Lot when the reſt mocked, he to whom al the
foules of the ayre and the beaſtes of the earth
flocked in couples, as they came to Adam He
which was reſerued to declare the iudgemēts
of God, and to begin the world againe. Noah
the example of ſobrietie, the example of moderation,
is ouercome with drinke, as if hee
had neuer been the man. How eaſily, how
quic
                  •
               ly, the iuſt, the wiſe, the prudent, hath
loſt his ſence, his memorie, his reaſon, as
though he had neuer been the man. And how
hard it is to auoyd ſinne, when occaſion is at
hand, and pleaſant opportunitie tempteth to
ſinne? It is eaſier for the bird to go by the net,

than to breake the net: ſo it is eaſier for a man
to auoyde temptations, then to ouercome
temptations. Therefore God forbad Balaam,
not only to curſe the people, as Balaac would
haue him, but he forbad him to goe with Balaacs
ſeruants, knowing that if he went with
them, and ſawe the pompe of the court, and
heard the King himſelfe ſpeake vnto him, and
felt the tickling reward, it would ſtraine his
conſcience, and make him doubt whether
he ſhould curſe or bleſſe. Peter but warming
himſelfe at Caiphas fire, was ouercome by a
ſilly damſell to doo that which hee neuer
thought, euen to forſweare his Lord God:
therefore Daniel would not eate of the Kings
meate, leaſt hee ſhould bee tempted to the
Kings will, ſhewing vs that there is no way
to eſcape ſinne, but to auoyd occaſion. Therefore
Dauid prayeth, Turne away mine eyes
from vanitie: as though his eyes would draw
his heart, as the baite tilleth on the hooke.
Noah thought to drink, he thought not to be
drunke: but as hee which commeth to the
fielde to ſound the Trumpet, is ſlaine as ſoone
as he which commeth to fight: ſo the ſame
wine diſtempereth Noah, which hath diſtempered
ſo many ſince. Where he thought to
take his reward, & taſte the fruite of his owne
hands, God ſet an euerlaſting blot vpon him,
which ſticks faſt till this day, like a bar in his

armes, ſo long as the name of Noath is ſpoken
of, that we cannot reade of his vertue, but
wee muſt reade of his ſinne, whereby euerie
man is warned, to receiue the gifts of God reuerently,
to vſe them ſoberly, and to ſanctifie
himſelfe, before he reach forth his hand vnto
them that they may comfort and profite vs,
with that ſecret bleſſing, that God hath hid in
them, or elſe euery thing the beſt gifts of God
may hurt vs: as this pleaſant wine ſtayned
and confounded the great Patriarch, when
hee delighted too much in it, which hee
might haue drunke as Chriſt did at the laſt
Supper, and this diſgrace had neuer beene
written in his ſtorie; but God would haue a
fearefull example, like the piller of Salt, to
ſtand before thoſe beaſts, whoſe onely ſtrife is
to make triall who can quaffe deepeſt, and
ſhew all their valiantneſſe in wine. Becauſe
there is ſuch warning before vs, now we haue
the drunkard in ſchooling, I will ſpend the
time that is left, to ſhew you the deformity of
this ſin, if any heare me which haue bin ouertaken
with it, let him not maruel why he cannot
loue his enemies, which loueth ſuch an enemy
as this, which leadeth til he reeleth, duls
him till hee bee a foole, and ſtealeth away his
ſence & wit, his memory, his health, his credit,
his friends, and when ſhee hath ſtripped him
as bare as Noah, then ſhee expoſeth him like

Noah to Cham, & all that ſee him do mocke
him: it is wonder almoſt that any man ſhould
be drunke that hath ſeene a drunkard before,
ſwelling, and puſſing, and foming, and ſpuing,
and groueling like a beaſt for who would
be like a beaſt, for all the world? Looke vpon
the drunkard when his eies ſtare; his mouth
driuels, his tongue faulters, his face flames,
his handes tremble, hys feete reele? how vglie,
how monſtrous, how loathſome doth he
ſeeme to thee, ſo loathſome doſt thou ſeeme
to others when thou art in like taking. And
how loathſome then dooſt thou ſeeme to
God? Therfore the firſt law which Adam receiued
of God, was abſtinence, which if hee
had kept, he had kept all vertues beſide, but
intemperancie loſt all. In abſtinence the law
came to Moſes, & he faſted when he receiued
it, to ſhew that they which receiue the word
of God, receiue it ſoberly.
            A temperate man ſeldome ſinneth, becauſe
the fleſh which dooth tempt is mortified,
leaſt it ſhould tempt: but when the handmaid
is aboue the miſtres, and a man hath loſt
the Image of God and ſcarce retayneth the
image of man, all his thoughts and ſpeeches,
and actions muſt needs be ſinne, and nothing
but ſinne, becauſe ſobrietie the bond of vertue
is broken; which kept all together. When
didſt thou want diſcretion to conſider?

When didſt thou want patience to forgiue?
When didſt thou wāt cōtinencie to refraine?
When didſt thou want hart to pray, but when
ſobrietie is fled away, and intemperancie
filled her roome? If ſhame let to ſinne, it caſteth
out ſinne: if feare let to ſinne, it caſteth out
feare: if loue let to ſinne, it expulſeth loue: if
knowledge let to ſinne, it expulſeth knowledge:
like a couetous Land-lord, which
would haue all to himſelfe and dwell alone.
            There is no ſinne but hath ſome ſhew of
vertue, onely the ſinne of drunkennes is like
nothing but ſinne: there is no ſin, but although
it hurt the ſoule, it beautifieth the body,
or promiſeth profite, or pleaſure, or glory,
or ſomething to his ſeruants, onely drunkenneſſe
is ſo impudent, that it deſcryeth it ſelfe:
ſo vnthankful that it maketh no recompence:
ſo noyſome, that it conſumeth the body,
which many ſinnes ſpare, leaſt they ſhould
appeare to bee ſinnes. Euery ſinne defileth a
man, but drunkenneſſe makes him like a
beaſt: euery ſinne defaceth a man, but drunkenneſſe
taketh away the image of a man:
euery ſinne robbeth a man of ſome vertue,
but drunkenneſſe ſtealeth away all vertues at
once: euery ſinne deſerueth puniſhment, but
drunkenneſſe vpbraids a man while the wine

                  〈◊〉
                in his ſtomacke; and though hee would

diſſemble his drunkenneſſe, yet hee is not able
to ſet a countenance of it, but the childe
deſcryeth him, the foole knowes that he is
drunke, becauſe his face bewraieth him, like
the leproſie which burſt out of the forehead:
ſo worthily hath he loſt the opinion of ſobrietie,
which hath loſt it ſelfe. His ſonne
thinkes himſelfe more maiſter now than his
father: his ſeruant makes him a foole, his children
leades him like a childe; his wife vſeth
him like a ſeruant, and although his drunkennes
leaueth him when he hath ſlept, yet no
man ſeckes to him for counſell after, no man
regards his word, no man reckons of his iudgment,
no man is perſwaded by his counſell,
no man accounts of his learning, no man hath
any glorie to accompany with him, but ſo
ſoone as drunkenes hath made him like a
beaſt euery man abhorreth him like a beaſt,
as they did Nabuchadnezzar: the ſpirit flyeth
from him leaſt he ſhould greiue it, his friends
goe awaie leaſt he ſhould ſhame them, and
no vertues dare come neere, leaſt he ſhould
defile them. How many things flie out when
wine goes in? How is it then, that hee
which loueth himſelfe, can be ſo cruell to
himſelfe? that he ſhould loue his life, and ſhorten
his life? that he ſhould loue his health, and
deſtroy his health? that hee ſhould loue his
ſtrength, and weaken his ſtrength? that hee

ſhoulde loue his wealth, and conſume his
wealth? that he ſhould loue his credite, and
cracke his credite? that hee ſhould loue his
vnderſtanding, and ouerturne his vnderſtanding?
that he ſhould loue his beautie, and deforme
his beautie? The Poets neede fayne no
more, that men are transformed into beaſts,
for if they were liuing now, they ſhould ſee
men like beaſts: ſome like Lyons, ſome like
Wolues, ſome like Foxes, ſome like Beares,
ſome like Swine: who is the beaſt, when the
beaſts ſatisfie nature, and man ſatisfieth appetite?
when the beaſts keepe meaſure, and
man exceedes meaſure? when the beaſts are
ſound labouring, and man found ſurfetting?
who is the beaſt? I haue read of a bird which
hath the face of a man, but is ſo cruell of nature,
that ſometime for hunger ſhee will ſet
vpon a man and ſlaye him: after, when ſhee
comes for thirſt vnto the water to drinke ſeeing
the face in the water, like the face of him
whom ſhee deuoured, for griefe that ſhee
hath killed one like her ſelfe, takes ſuch ſorrowe,
that ſhee neuer eateth nor drinketh after,
but beates and frets and pines her ſelfe
to death. What wilt thou doe then which
haſt not ſlaine one like thy ſelfe, but thy ſelfe,
thy verie ſelfe, with a cup of wine, and murthereſt
ſo many graces & vertues in an houre?
            As Eſau ſolde his lande and liuing for a

meſſe of pottage, ſo the drunkard ſelleth his
ſenſe, and wit, and memorie, and credite, for a
cuppe of wine. Thou haſt not murthered thy
brother like Caine, but thou haſt murthered
thy ſelfe, like Iudas: as the Rechabites abſtained
from wine, as Ionadab bad them, obtayned
the bleſſing which God had appoynted
to the Iſraelites: ſo let vs take heed leaſt they
which we account Idolaters; whileſt they faſt
and watch, and obtayne the bleſſing that
GOD hath appoynted for vs, get away the
bleſſing, while wee ſit downe to eare and 
                  〈◊〉
               
to play. Therefore as Chriſt ſayd, Remember
Lots wiſe: ſo I ſay, remember Lot: one houre
of drunkenneſſe did him more hurt, the 
                  •
               all
his enemies in Sodome. Remember Noah,
one houre of drunkenneſſe diſcouered that
which was hid ſixe hundred yeares.
            Ten times more might bee ſayd agaynſt
this vice, but if I haue ſayd enough to make
you abhorre it, I haue ſayde as much as I
would. Some goe about to excuſe Noah, becauſe
hee was an olde man, and therefore
might ſoone bee taken cup-ſhot: ſome, becauſe
the Wines were hotter in thoſe Countries
then they are with vs: ſome, becauſe of
his change of drinkes, which had not wonted
himſelfe to wine before: ſome, becauſe as
moſt men delight in that which by great labour
they haue brought to paſſe of themfelues,

ſo no maruel though Noah had a longing
to his owne grapes? following herein the
example of a curious Cooke, which dooth ſip
and ſip his broth, to taſte whether it bee well
ſeaſoned, that he may amend it if he can, or
amend the next: but as the flye by often
dallying with the candle, at laſt ſcorcheth her
wings with the flame: ſo taking, he was taken,
and at laſt was drunke: yet this is imputed
to him for his fault, that he was drunke, as
the puniſhment which followes doth witnes.
Such is the prouidence of God, that his mercie
might bee glorified in all, he hath concluded
all vnder ſinne, and ſuffered the beſt to
fall, that no man might truſt in his owne
ſtrength, and that we ſeeing their repētance,
may learne to riſe againe, how grieuous ſo
euer our ſinnes bee. If we haue been Idolaters,
if adulterers, if perſecutors, if murmurers,
if murtherers, if blaſphemers, if drunkards: Aron,
and Moſes, and Lot, and Abraham, & Dauid,
and Salomon, and Peter, and Paul, and
Noah haue been the like, who raigne now in
the kingdome of Chriſt with his Angels, and
ſo may we if we repent like them. Theſe examples
(ſaith Paul) are not written for our imitation,
but for our admonition. Thus you
haue ſeene Noah ſober, and Noah drunken:
whereby wee may ſee, that a man may bee
drunk with his own wine, he may ſurfet with

his owne meates, he may luſt with his owne
wife, he may offend with his owne gifts, his
owne honor may make him proud, his owne
riches may make him couetous, his owne
ſtrength may make him venturous, his owne
wit may make him contentious: therefore as
the childe pluckes out the ſting before hee
takes the honey; ſo let euery man before hee
receiue the gifts of God, ſit downe and looke
what baites, what ſnares, what temptations
ſathan hath hid in them, and when hee
hath taken out the ſting, then eate
the honey, and he ſhall vſe the
bleſſings of Chriſt, as Chriſt
did himſelfe.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            A GLASSE FOR
DRVNKARDS.
            
               22 And when Cham the father of Canaan ſaw
the nakedneſſe of his father, he told his two
brethren without.
               23 Then tooke Shem and Iaphet a garment,
and put it vpon both their ſhoulders, and
went backward, and couered the nakedneſſe
of their father with their faces backward:
ſo they ſawe not their fathers nakedneſſe.
               24 Then Noah awoke from his wine, and
knewe what his younger ſonne had done vnto
him:
               25 And ſayd, Curſed be Canaan, a ſeruant of
ſeruants ſhall he be vnto his brethren.
               26 He ſayd moreouer, Bleſſed be the Lord God
of Shem, and let Canaan be his ſeruant.
               27 God perſwade Iaphet, that he may dwell in
the tents of Shem, and let Canaan be his
ſeruant, &c.
            
            
               
               YOu haue here the Storie of Noah
and his ſonnes. As Noah did
well and euill, ſo he had good
ſonnes and euill: but as his vertues
were more notorious then
his vices, ſo GOD bleſſed him more then he
croſſed him: for he had two good ſonnes, and
but one euill ſonne: his good ſonnes were
Shem and Iaphet, his wicked ſonne was Chā:
his good ſonnes were bleſſed, his wicked ſon
was curſed. Firſt of the father, and then of
his ſonnes. In Noah firſt you ſee his husbandrie,
and then his drunkenneſſe, and after his
nakedneſſe. In Cham firſt you ſee his mockerie,
and after his curſe: in Shem and Iaphet
firſt you ſee their reuerence, and after their
bleſſing.
            Of Noahs drunkenneſſe and his husbandrie
we haue ſpoken: now a word of his nakedneſſe.
Drinking of the wine he was drunke,
and was vncouered in the midſt of his tent, &c.
It is ſayd that drunken porters keepe open
gates, ſo when Noah was drunken, he ſet all
open: as wine went in, ſo wit went out: as
wit went out, ſo his cloathes went off. Thus
Adam which began the world at firſt,Gen. 3. was
made naked with ſinne: and Noah which
began the world agayne is made naked with
ſinne, to ſhewe that ſinne is no ſhrowder
but a ſtripper. This is one fruite of the Vine

more then Noah looked for: in ſtead of being
refreſhed and comforted, he was ſtripped
and ſcorned.
            There is a thing which followeth ſinne,
which Iob calleth a rod,Iob. 9. 34. & 21. 9. 6 which the ſinner neuer
thinketh of, before he haue done. When
the childe hath faulted, then he is beaten: ſo
now Noah hath ſinned, he muſt bee beaten:
firſt he is ſtript naked, after he is ſcourged;
wine putteth off his cloathes, and then Cham
commeth & laſheth him: to ſhew, that wine
can both cheere the hart, and grieue the hart.
As the forbidden tree when it promiſed our
parents knowledge,Gen. 3. 6. tooke their knowledge
from them: ſo euery ſinne giueth other wages
then it promiſeth. Little thought Noah
that wine would make him naked: but now
hee is naked and ſtripped too, as though hee
were firſt ſtripped and then whipped. Hee
which beleeued the threatning (like Lot)
when others mocked,Gen. 19. he which eſcaped the
floud when others were drowned, he to whō
all the fowles of the ayre, and the beaſts of
the earth flocked in couples, as they did to Adam,
hee which was reſerued to declare the
iudgements of GOD,Gen. 2. and begin the world
agayne; Noah, the example of temperance,
the example of moderation, the example
of ſobrietie, lyeth naked in his Tent for
drinking the wine which hee himſelfe hath

planted: the operation of wine was drunkenneſſe,
the ſequell of drunkenneſſe was nakedneſſe,
the effect of nakedneſſe was deriſion.
As the Serpents ſting is in his taile, ſo the end
of ſinne is bitterneſſe, leaſt he ſhould loue
the vice wherewith hee was once defiled, as
they which are once drunke, hardly get out
of the ſellar. God giueth him a Memorandum
like Iacobs limping, that he was neuer
drunken after, but learned temperancie of
intemperancie: therefore it is good a little to
feele the ſting of ſinne, that we may handle it
like a hornet.
            Now when Noah the father was drunken,
Cham the ſonne becommeth a ſcorner: the
father deſerued to bee deſpiſed of his ſonne,
becauſe he had diſfigured the image of a father.
Therefore it followeth, When Cham the
father of Canaan ſawe the nakedneſſe of his
father, he tolde his two brethren without, &c.
Drunkennes was his fault, and ſhame muſt be
his puniſhment. Wherby you may note, how
God doth proportionate & match ſins and
puniſhments together, that a man may looke
vpon his puniſhment like a glaſſe, and ſee his
ſinne. Againe, by this you may ſee, how God
doth bring forth the faults of the iuſt aſwel as
the vniuſt, or els other would ſay as Chriſt
ſaith, Ioh. 8. Who can accuſe me of ſinne? What
a griefe was this to Dauid, that his ſon ſhould

bee his traytor? So to increaſe the griefe of
Noah, his ſonne was his ſcorner. He may ſay
as the Pſalmiſt ſaith, Pſal. 54. 12. It is thou O
man, euen my companion and familiar, which
delighted together. If mine enemie had defamed
me, I could haue borne it, or I woulde
haue fled from him: but he whom I haue loued,
nay he whom I brought into the world,
made me a ſhame to the world, like the Viper
which killeth the damme that beareth it.
So, oftentimes the prophecie of Michaiah
proueth true, A mans enemies are they of his
owne houſe, Chap. 7. 6. As Iudas betrayed his
Maſter. Who can reclaime a wicked diſpoſition?
how deepe was the roote of euill hid in
his heart, that Noah could neuer know it before
he ſhewed it. Vntill now Cham ſeemed
as good as Shem, and if Iaphet had ſaid, thou
ſhalt be curſed, he would haue ſaid, thou ſhalt
be curſed. Hipocriſie is ſpun with ſuch a fine
thred, that we may liue as long with a man,
as Noah did with Cham, and ſcarce diſcerne
him.
            Heere are two ſinnes, which goe before
Chams curſe; one that he did ſee his fathers
nakednes, the other, that he did reueale it vnto
his Brethren.
            When he ſayth, that Cham ſaw his fathers
nakednes: he meaneth that he looked vpon it
with a pleaſure,2 Sam. 11. as Dauid vpon the nakednes

of Bethſheba, for he might haue ſeene it by
chaunce, and not offended, as a man ſeeth an
Image and deteſteth it.
            The Edomites are reproued for looking
vpon the affliction of their brethren,Obad. 11. becauſe
they reioyced to ſee it. But the friends of Iob
looked vpon his afflictions, and are not reprooued
becauſe they ſorrowed to ſee his
ſorrowes. Therefore Cham did not ſinne in
ſeeing, but in gazing, and reioycing, like the
Edomites.
            There is a wiſe eye,Eccl. 2. 14. and there is a fooliſh
eye,Pro. 17. 24. the wiſe eye is like the Bee, which gathereth
honie of euerie weede: the fooliſh
eye is like the ſpider which gathereth poyſon
of euery flower. Therefore God licenſed Abraham
to ſee the flames of Sodome, which
he forbad Lot, becauſe that which teacheth
one, tempteth another: it is a true Prouerbe,
the eye is a ſhrew; although it ſhewe light,
yet it leadeth many into darkeneſſe. If Eue
had not ſeene, ſhe had not luſted, for it is ſaid,
Seeing that the tree was pleaſant to the eyes,
               Gen. 3. 6. 
               ſhe
tooke and eate.
               Ioſu. 7. 21. If Achan had not ſeene, he had
not ſtolne. For he ſaith, firſt I ſaw, and then I
coueted. If Dauid had not ſeene, hee had not
luſted, for it is ſayd firſt, That he did ſee her,
and then hee ſent for her.2. Sam. 11. 2 So when Cham
had ſeene the temptation, he was ſnared with
the ſin: therefore it followeth, He told his brethrē
                  
which were without, &c. Thus ſin groweth
of ſin from the eye to the heart, and from the
heart to the tongue, a man may goe into a labyrinth
eaſilie, but when he is in hee cannot
get out: ſo Cham did ſee a temptation eaſily,
but when he had ſeene it, he could not looke
from it. Therefore when Eſayah ſpeaketh of
vanitie,Eſa. 5. 18. he named Cart-ropes of vanitie, to
ſhew how one ſinne draweth on another, as
it were with Cart-ropes,Gen. 3. and one ſinner maketh
another,1. Pet. 5. as Eue did Adam. When Sathan
was caſt out himſelfe, hee ſought euer
after whome hee might deuoure, ſo when
Cham had ſtrained reuerence himſelfe, hee
laboured to bring his brethren into the ſame
diſobedience. All men ſeeke after fellowes,
and we thinke it euill to be euill alone, therefore
the theeues before they goe to ſteale, call
their mates, and ſay, Come with vs, Prou. 1.
10.1. Pet. 4. 3. 
               It is enough (ſaith Peter) that we haue ſpent
our former time in luſts: ſo it was enough that
Cham had faulted himſelf, but when hee had
ſeene, he would haue his brethren ſee too:
When he was become a ſcorner, he would
haue his brethren ſcorners too: therefore as
Andrew called Simon, and Philip called Nathaniel,Iohn. 1.
to ſee the Son of God: ſo Cham called
his brethren to ſee the nakednes of his father.
The ſins of men are like a plume of feathers,
for itching eares, and an euil diſpoſition

breedeth an euill ſuſpition: therefore Cham
thinking that his brethrē had bin as ſhameles
as himſelfe, thought this a merrie may-game
to make them ſporte. Come with me ſaith he,
and I will ſhew you my Father naked: they
ſay it is an euill bird which will defile his own
neſt: ſo it is an euill ſonne that will ſhame his
owne father, he ſhould haue couered his fathers
nakedneſſe ſo ſoone as he ſaw it, leſt his
brethren ſhould ſee it too, but he was readie
to make it worſe, like them which heare a
ſuſpition and make it a report, he ſhould haue
taken the beame out of his owne eye, when
he ſpied a moate in his fathers eye: but as the
eye ſeeth all things, and cannot ſee it ſelfe, ſo
wee can ſee others mens faults but not our
owne.Pro. 30. 1. When Agur had conſidered the follies
of others, he conſidered his owne follies, and
ſaid, I am more fooliſh then any man: When
Iudah had conſidered Thamars ſinnes,Gen. 38. he cō
               ſidered
his owne and ſaid, She is more righteous
then I. But when Cham did ſee a fault in
his father, al his owne faultes were hid vnder
a buſhel, he cared not that he was his father,
nor that hee was ſaued for his righteouſneſſe,
nor that he had planted a Vineyarde for him
and his brethren, nor that he was neuer drunken
before, nor that he had committed greater
ſinnes himſelfe, but like them which make
their ſport, that which ſhould be their ſorrow,

ſo he laughed at that which might make him
weepe. Often did I well might Noah ſay, and
thou didſt neuer honour me for that: but once
did I euill, and for that thou wouldeſt ſhame
me.
            There is a kinde of men which are aſhamed
of other mens faults, but not of their
owne: they are like flies which alwayes light
vpon the ſore, if they finde any ſinne, there
they talke, that is their ſporte, like a Tennis
ball, when they come to their ordinaries, and
though they did neuer well in all their life, yet
that fault ſeemeth greater to them then all
their owne, theſe men are ſo like the diuell,
that in Reuelat. 12. 10. The diuel is called by
their name, An accuſer of the brethren, and
that you may knowe that ſuch tongues ſhall
burne in the fire of hell, Saint Iames ſayth,
That their tongues are kindled with the fire of
hell already. Iames 3. 6. This was euer the propertie
of bad men, to ſeek faults in good men,
to obiect againe, that they may ſinne without
reproofe of them.Tit
                     ••
                  . 2. 8. Therefore ſaith Paul,
So behaue your ſelues, that they which would
ſlaunder you, may be aſhamed, hauing nothing
to ſpeake euill of you: If Noah had not been
drunken, Cham had loſt his ſporte.
            Now becauſe this fact of Cham was ſo
hainous, when he is accuſed of it, he is called
the Father of Canaan, as if he ſhould ſay, think

what he deſerueth, which being a father himſelfe,
would ſo diſhonour his father. It was
meete that hee which had Children ſhould
knowe the duetie of a Childe, and euer think,
that as he behaued himſelfe toward his Father,
ſo his ſonnes would behaue themſelues
to him againe, but all this did nothing moue
him, therefore the greater was his ſinne.
            To conclude then, as Cham was worſe then
Noah whom hee derided, ſo if you marke▪
they which are wōt to ſpeake hardly of others
haue greater faults thēſelues▪ which they cannot
tell how to couer, but by diſgracing others.
Thus much of the wicked ſonne, now
of the good ſonnes it followeth.
            
               Then tooke Shem and Iaphet a garment, and
put it vpon both their ſhoulders, and went backward,
               Pro. 1. 10.
               and couered the nakedneſſe of their father,
&c. Salomon ſaith, If ſinners tempt thee, yet
conſent thou not: So though Cham tempted
them, they conſented not, but when he ſaid,
Come and ſee, they went and hid: Noah ſtripped
himſelfe, but hee could not couer himſelfe,
ſo we can corrupt our ſelues, but wee
cannot amend our ſelues. As Cham is accuſed
of two faults, for beholding his fathers nakedneſſe,
and for reuealing it: ſo Shem and
Iaphet are commended for two things, that
they would not ſee their fathers nakedneſſe
and that they couered it. All came of one

roote, and all had one duetie, & yet ſee what
difference was between thē, one was glad of
his fathers ſhame, and the other were ſorye
for it: one publiſhed it, and the other ſmothered
it. Theſe two, ſaith Moſes, ſawe not their
Fathers nakedneſſe. Once it was no ſhame
to be naked: for it is ſayd, that Adam and
Eue were both naked,Gen. 2. 25. and were not aſhamed.
But as ſinne made labour irkeſome,
which was not irkeſome before, and made
heate offenſiue which was not offenſiue before,
and made colde hurteful, which was
not hurtfull before, ſo it made nakedneſſe
ſhamefull which was not ſhamefull before,
that rather then a man would be naked now,
he wil couer himſelfe, as Adam did with fig
leaues. Therefore we neuer read that Noah
was naked before he was drunken, ſhewing
that a ſober man wil neuer open that which
nature hath hid▪
            
            This is a difference between men & beaſts;
men are not only aſhamed to be ſeen naked
themſelues, but vnles it be ſome Cham, they
are aſhamed to ſee another naked. Shem and
Iaphet ſaw not their fathers nakedneſſe, who
is ſo blind as he which will not ſee? Nay who
is ſo blinde as he which will ſee? the light of
the eyes oftentimes draweth the ſoule out
of light into darkeneſſe, knowing therfore
that it was hard to ſee like Cham, and not

to ſinne like Cham, they would not ſee leaſt
they ſhould offende. As they would not ſee
it themſelues, ſo they were carefull that none
other ſhould ſee it, and therefore they couered
it with their cloakes. For we muſt not only
refraine ſinne, but reſtraine ſinne, according
to that, Leuit. 19. 17. Suffer not thy brother
to ſinne, ſo Shem and Iaphet ſeeing how
their brother had ſinned, ſtopped the cauſe
that no more might ſinne, they were loath
that he ſhould ſee that which he would haue
them to ſee, their griefe and modeſtie it was
ſuch, that they did not ſtay to make him any
anuſwere, or aske him any queſtion, but
ſtraight they thought what was beſt to bee
done, and as a Nurſe taketh the milke out of
her own mouth to giue to the Childe, ſo they
tooke off their cloakes from their backes to
couer their fathers. Such a reuerence is in
childrē toward their parents, if they haue but
nature, that they will not ſuffer the maieſtie
of their Father to waxe vile, but rather they
will heare any reproch againſt themſelues,
then abide a word againſt their Father. Now
if wee doe ſuch reuerence to earthly Fathers
which bring vs into miſerie, that we had rather
ſhame our ſelues then they ſhould beare
any ſhame, why are wee ſo aſhamed and afraide
to ſpeake for our father which calleth
vs out of miſerie into happineſſe: if Cham b
                  •
               
               
curſed for diſhonouring a man, let them feare
which diſhonour God.
            You knowe that the Papiſts doe couer the
ſpottes of their Biſhoppes with this cloake
of Shem and Iaphet, and not onely they
but others too, for if any ſpeake of corruption
in Rulers, or briberie in Iudges, or Simonie
in Biſhops, or non-reſidencie in Paſtors,
he is ſaid to diſcouer his fathers nakedneſſe
like Cham, but as we may not reueale
all ſinnes, leaſt the vncircumciſed reioyce,
ſo wee may not couer ſome ſinnes, leaſt the
vncircumciſed encreaſe: For if ſome mens
drunkenneſſe were not reprooued, they
would bee drunken ſtill, and make a common
weale of drunkards: therefore they
which will bee conuerted, firſt let them
prooue themſelues fathers, as Noah was,
and after let them amend as Noah did, and
they which couer them, let them diſtinguiſh
betweene Noah and Cham, and betweene
errour and obſtinacie. For ſome, Chriſt appointeth
admonition, for others reprehenſion,
for others Excommunication, and for
others correction: therefore euerie mans
nakedneſſe muſt not bee couered as Noahs
was: wee will couer the firſt drunkenneſſe,
as Shem and Iaphet did, if they will repent
as Noah did, and bee drunken no more.
But ſhall wee followe them like a blinde

mans Boye, to ſtay them ſo often as they
fall, when they ſay that they ſtumble not,
though they lye on the ground? This is not
the cloake of reuerence, but the cloake of
flatterie. Therefore as Chriſt ſaid, Let the
dead burie the dead: So I may ſay, let the wicked
couer the wicked; the Wolues are not
the Lambes fathers, but the Lambes Butchers,
therfore if they would bee couered,
let them ſpeake to their Children to couer
them, for this is our rule, They which ſin
openly, reprooue openly, that the reſt may
feare, 1. Tim. 5. 20.
            
               Thus you haue heard what the badde
Sonne did, and what the good ſonnes did:
now wee come to Noah againe: Then Noah
awoake and knew what his yonger ſonne had
done vnto him, and ſaid vnto him, Curſed be
Canaan, a ſeruant of ſeruants ſhall he be vnto
his brethren. He ſaid moreouer, Bleſſed be
the Lord God of Shem, and let Canaan bee
his ſeruant, &c.
            Firſt he ſheweth, how Noah commeth
to himſelfe, then how he knew what his
ſonnes had done vnto him; then how he
curſeth one and bleſſeth another. As his
ſonnes were aſhamed of his nakednes when
he was drunken, ſo now he is ſober, he is
aſhamed of it himſelfe, therefore he is ſaid
to awake from his wine, as though hee had

beene a ſleepe; for The drunkard (ſaith Salomon)
is as one that ſleepeth, Prouerbs 23.
34. When the belly is full, the boanes are
at reſt, ſo when Noah was full, his thoughts
were at reſt: therefore beeing as it were lulled
a ſheepe, with ouermuch wine, hee may
be ſaid to awake. Here Moſes would exhort
all them that ſleepe with Noah, to awake
with Noah. Noah was once intemperate,
and many follow him in that, Noah was
but once intemperate, and few follow him in
that: Dauid was once incontinent, and many
follow him in that; Dauid was but once
incontinent, and few follow him in that:
Peter was once vnfaithfull, and many follow
him in that; Peter was but once vnfaithfull,
and few follow him in that. This the difference
betweene the faithfull and the wicked,
both fall, and but one riſeth againe. It followeth.
He knew what his yonger ſonne had
done vnto him: either by the ſpirit of God,
which ſuggeſted him, or els by ſome other
that tould him; for a drunken man dooth
not remember what is ſaid or done: and
therefore the drunkard ſaith, I was beaten, but
when I awaked, I knew it not, Pro. 23. 35. Therfore
when Lot was drunken, his daughters
laye with him, and it is ſaid, Gen. 19. 33. that
he perceiued not when they lay downe, nor when
they roſe vp: therefore Noah knew either by the

ſpirit which informed him, or by others which
told him.
            Now, as Moſes (declaring Chams ſinne)
called him the father of Canaan: ſo Noah
repeating his ſinne againe, called him his
younger ſonne. He diſdaineth to name him,
but calleth him a younger ſonne; to aggrauate
his fault, becauſe we will ſuffer our elder
ſonnes to bee more familiar with vs, but of
the younger wee looke for more reuerence;
or elſe becauſe parents are woont to make
more of the youngeſt, and dandle them, as
Iacob did Beniamin, and ſo hee might ſay,
My yonger ſonne, which for his yeares ſhould
haue ſhewed mee moſt duetie, and for my
affection ſhould haue borne mee moſt loue;
my younger ſonne hath ſought my diſhonour;
and not content to ſcorne mee himſelfe,
hath publiſhed my ſhame, and as much
as in him lay, prouoked his brethren to ſcorne
me too.
            Of whome is a man ſo often deceaued, as
of his neereſt friend? Lightly the younger
ſonne is better than the elder, as Ioſeph was
better than his elder brethren, Dauid was better
than his elder brethren, Abell was better
than his elder brother, Iſaac was better than
his elder brother, Iacob was better than his
elder brother; but here the youngeſt is worſt:
ſo neither vertue nor vice goeth by age.

Now, as Chriſt when he awoke, rebuked the
windes, and comforted his Diſciples: ſo Noah
when he awoke, curſed the ſcorner, and
bleſſed the other. Moſes doth not ſet downe
his wordes of choller, but bringeth him in,
ſpeaking by the ſpirite of prophecie, what
ſhould come vpon all his ſonnes. It is like
that the good Patriarch had bewailed his
owne ſinne before, and now hauing repented,
and got pardon for it, he commeth forth
like a proclaymer of Gods iudgement, and
thundreth againſt this mocker. What a griefe
was this to the father, to bee conſtrained to
condemne his owne ſonne, and with his own
mouth to pronounce him baniſhed from the
Church of God: for though Cham had not
the nature of a ſonne, yet Noah had not loſt
the nature of a father, and he ſaw what a ſmall
number was left vpon earth, like Adams children
for to repleniſh the whole world againe:
therefore it grieued him to curſe his ſonne,
as much as it reioyced his ſonne to ſcorne
him. Yet as Abraham would ſacrifice his
ſonne, rather then diſpleaſe GOD; ſo Noah
did curſe his ſonne, rather then he would diſpleaſe
GOD: ſhewing that wee ſhould not
ſpare our owne bowels, when God would
haue them puniſhed, but doe as the fathers
and mothers of Idolaters and blaſphemers
did in the law,Dan. 13. who brought the firſt ſtone to

preſſe their ſonnes to death, ſhewing that
as the ſonne of God died for them, ſo their
ſonnes ſhould die for God, if they would
not ſerue him. Now the curſe goeth foorth:
Curſed be Canaan, that is, curſed be ſcorners,
curſed be all they wich diſhonour their father
and mother, A ſeruant of ſeruants ſhall
hee be: this is the firſt mention of ſeruants
in all the ſcripture, man was not made to
ſerue but to rule, but ſinne maketh them
ſerue which ſhould rule: therefore as you
ſaw ſinne bring in the firſt nakednes, ſo you
ſee ſinne bringing in the firſt ſeruant, A ſeruant
of ſeruants ſhall he bee. This curſe is denounced
with great vehemencie: for he ſaith
not ſimplie, A ſeruant ſhall he be, but A ſeruant
of ſeruants ſhall he be: as if he ſhould ſay,
a ſeruant, and more than a ſeruant, that is of
a ſeruile condition, and ſeruile minde. As the
Sabbaoth of Sabbaoths ſignifieth a high Sabbaoth;
and as the Song of Songs, ſignifieth
an excellent Song; and as the Holie of holieſt
ſignifieth the holieſt place, and as the Lord of
Lords ſignifieth the chiefeſt Lord: ſo Vanitie
of Vanities ſignifieth the greteſt Vanitie, and
ſeruant of ſeruants, ſignifieth the vileſt ſeruant.
Seeing then that the Pope taketh this
name vnto him, and writeth himſelfe The ſeruant
of ſeruants, in all his Indulgences, as
thogh he did ground vpō this curſe of Cham

it ſeemeth that the Lord would ſhew thereby,
who is like Cham, and who is curſed:
therefore let not vs denie him that which
the holy Ghoſt dooth giue him, but as hee taketh
Chams name, ſo let him take his curſe
too, Curſed be Canaan, &c. It was not Canaan
which tempted Shem and Iaphet, to
gaze vpon their fathers nakedneſſe, but it
was Cham. How commeth it then that Noah
dooth curſe Canaan, and not Cham? In
the 22. verſe Cham is called the father of
Canaan, ſo that Canaan was Chams ſonne,
therefore God not content with the puniſhment
of Cham alone, ſaith, Curſed be Canaan
alſo; ſhewing, that both Cham and Canaan,
the father and the children, ſhall bee curſed
for this impietie: becauſe Cham had ſhewed
himſelfe a rebellious childe to Noah, God
ſheweth that his children ſhall doo the like
by him. Heere is to bee noted, that whereas
Cham had elder ſonnes then Canaan, and
Canaan was his yongeſt, yet God for a purpoſe
nameth the yongeſt in the curſe, ſhewing
that his wrath ſhould laſt, euen to the
yongeſt, and be a great while before it were
forgotten. Here is to be noted againe, that
whereas the countrey of Canaan was ſo fruitfull,
& ſo bleſſed a countrey, that it was called
the land that floweth with milk & honny, yet
vnder the name of Canaan, Chams youngeſt

ſonne (of whome the countrey of Canaan
tooke the name) God ſheweth that the Canaanites
ſhall be curſed in this bleſſed land,
as Cain was a vagabond vppon his owne
ground:Gen. 4. to ſhew, that the ioye of heart, and
peace of conſcience commeth from God, and
nothing elſe. Now the iſſues which followed
vpon this curſe, doe ſhew that Noah ſpake
not from the ſpleen, but from the ſpirite of
God: For firſt you read how the Canaanites,
who came of Canaan, were ſlaine of the Iſraelites;
then you reade how the Gibeonites
which came of Canaan were made ſlaues to
the Iſraelites; then you reade how the Egyptians
and Ethiopians which came of Canaan,
were taken captiue by the king of Aſhur:Eſay 20. 4. then
you reade, how Nemrod and his complices,
that came of Canaan, were confounded at
Babel, when they went about to exalt themſelues.
Beſide, where as length of daies, is a
bleſſing to them which honour their father,
Cham which diſhonoured his father,Gen. 27. had not
one ſonne of his line which liued aboue an
hundreth yeares: ſo, as Iſaac ſaid, Iacob haue
I bleſſed,
               Gen. 28. 1. 
               and hee ſhallbee bleſſed, ſo Noah may
ſay, Cham haue I curſed, and he ſhall be curſed,
for he was curſed indeede; curſed in himſelfe,
and curſed in his children, curſed in heauen,
and curſed in earth, curſed with God,
and curſed with men: for after this he began

to bee abhorred, and they that came of him.
Therefore Abraham commaunded his ſeruant,
that hee ſhould not chooſe a wife for
his ſonne, of the Canaanites, Iſaac giueth
the like commaundement to his ſonne Iacob,
becauſe they were a curſed nation, and
hated of God euer ſince Noah ſaide, Curſed
bee Canaan. Thus when Cham ſaide vnto
his brethren, Come and I will ſhew you my father
naked: he might haue ſaide; Come and
I will ſhew you my ſelfe accurſed. If GOD
haue ſuch wrath againſt a ſcorner, think whether
thou followeſt not ſome ſinne worſe
then ſcorning.
            Now after Noah had curſed Cham, hee
bleſſed his brethren, Bleſſed bee the Lord God
of Shem, &c. Of Shem came the Iewes
which had the firſt bleſſing, and therefore
Shem is bleſſed firſt: of Iaphet came the
Gentiles, which had the latter bleſſing, and
therefore Iaphet is bleſſed after: the forme
of Shems bleſſing is; Bleſſed be the Lord God of
Shem, &c. One which heareth this bleſſing
would thinke that Noah did not bleſſe Shem,
but that hee bleſſed God, for he ſaith not, bleſſed
be Shem, but bleſſed bee the Lord God of
Shem. This is to ſignifie that as curſed Canaan
came of Cham, ſo the bleſſed Meſſias
ſhould come of Shem, which though he were
Shems ſonne, yet heere hee is called Shems

Lord, as hee was called Dauids ſonne, and
Dauids Lord. Then to ſhew that Noah dooth
not bleſſe Shem, but God dooth bleſſe him,
and Noah prayed that hee might bee bleſſed,
as Chriſt gaue the ſpirite, and Iohn miniſtred
but the water. Thirdly, to ſhew that
God for bleſſing vs, ſhould be bleſſed of vs;
and therefore Noah ſaid, Bleſſed bee the Lord
God of Shem, &c. as if hee ſhould ſay, bleſſed
bee the Lord which bleſſeth Shem. Further
this ſheweth the difference betweene Shems
bleſſing, and Iaphets bleſſing, that is the Iews
and the Gentiles, for he ſaith, God perſwade
Iaphet to dwell in the tents of Shem, as though
Iaphet were not bleſſed yet, but ſhould bee
bleſſed; but he ſaith of Shem, Bleſſed bee the
Lord Gods of Shem: as if hee ſhould giue him
poſſeſſion, and ſay, take thy bleſſing: for to
aſſure him of Gods bleſſing, he calleth God
Shems God: As were ſay, my landes, or my
goods, ſo hee might ſay, my God, and my
Lorde: ſuch a propertie the faithfull haue in
God. As Paul ſaith, God is not the God of the
dead, but of the liuing: ſo I may ſay, God is
not the God of the wicked, but of the righteous,
and therefore he is called, The God of
Abraham, the God of Iſaak, and the God of Iacob,
which were all good and righteous and
holy men. The next bleſſing is Iaphets, the
forme of his bleſſing is, God perſwade Iaphet

to dwell in the tents of Shem, that is, God perſwade
the Gentiles which come of Iaphet, to
imbrace the Religion of the Iewes, which
come of Shem. See how God counteth it
for a bleſſing, to be in the true Religion, and
how men ſhould bee perſwaded vnto it, becauſe
it is loue which cannot bee forced: this
is the firſt prophecie in ſcripture of the calling
of the Gentiles, that is of our calling to
Chriſt. And to put vs in minde that we were
once out of the couenant, and but added to
the couenant, the name of Iaphet, which was
the father of the Gentiles, dooth ſignifie, perſwaded
or inlarged, as it were added to the
Church, as though the time were when
wee were out of the Church: therefore firſt
wee are indebted to our good mediatour,
which added vs to the kingdome, when we
were out of the kingdome; and then that
hee did it by perſſwaſion, not by compulſion.
As Noah prayed God to perſwade Iapheth,
ſo he hath perſwaded vs by his word, and not
forced vs by his roddes: ſhewing how wee
ſhould perſwade one another to the truth,
in the ſpirite of mildnes, remembring that
wee come of Iapeth, which ſignifieth, perſwaded.
Nowe after Shems bleſſing, and
after Iaphets bleſſing likewiſe, hee ſaith,
Let Canaan bee his ſeruant; this is thrice repeated
in three verſes together, as if God

had ratified it, & ſworne it with a treble verelie.
For when Ioſeph told Pharaoh why his
dreame was doubled, he gaue this reaſon, becauſe
it ſhould ſurely come to paſſe,Gen▪ 41. 22. ſo Cham
might be ſure his curſe would come to paſſe.
Heere is a ſweete obſeruation beſide, how
Shem and Iaphet are bleſſed in Chams curſe,
and how Cham is curſed in their bleſſing: for
when he ſaith, Let Canaan be Shem and Iaphets
ſeruant; he implieth this, that beſide
they were bleſſed in their owne children,
becauſe they were obedient to them, they
ſhould be bleſſed in Chams children, becauſe
they were ſeruants to them: ſo Shem and
Iaphet were bleſſed in Chams curſe. Againe
beſide that Cham was curſed in his owne
children, becauſe they were rebellious to him,
he is curſed alſo in Shems & Iaphets children,
becauſe they were Lordes ouer hym, according
to this ſaying, Let Canaan be their ſeruant;
ſo Cham is curſed in Shem and Iaphets
bleſſing, as the Egyptians were drowned in
the waters which ſaued the Iſralites. Theſe
are the notes which I could picke out of this
ſtorie: heere you ſee how Cham was curſed
but for dooing euill, and how Shem and
Iaphet were bleſſed but for dooing well;
therefore as the Angell ſayd to them which
ſought Chriſt at the ſepulcher; Feare not
you, ſo I may ſay to all which ſeeke Chriſt,

feare not you, for when Cham is curſed
Shem and Iaphet are bleſſed; ſo when the
wicked are curſed, the godly ſhall bee bleſſed,
as the ſheepe went to the right hand,
when the goates went to the left hand. This
is enough to ſhew what wee are, that when
God ſaued but eight perſons in the flood,
yet you ſee one of them drinke vntill he bee
drunken; and another ſcorne vntill he be
curſed. If two among ſo few did ſo, when
the flood was by them, what meruaile though
ſo many do ſo now the flood is gone, and the
weather calme: As there was a Cham in the
Arke, ſo looke alwaies to haue Cham in the
church. Shem did not go out of the Arke,
becauſe Cham was in the Arke, neither let
the faithfull go out of the church, becauſe
wicked are in the church. As Cham ſcorned,
and Noah was ſcorned: ſo there ſhall be alwaies
one that perſecuteth, and one which is
perſecuted: if the ſonne perſecute the father,
thinke it not ſtrange to be perſecuted of any,
for they which are not perſecuted, lightlie are
perſecutours themſelues. Thus you haue ſeen
Noah drunken and ſcorned, Cham ſcorning
and curſed, Shem and Iaphet reuerencing
and bleſſed. In this ſtorie is the firſt
mention of planting of Vineyardes, the firſt
ſpeech of drinking of wine, the firſt example
of drunkennes, the firſt bleſſing and curſing

of parents, the firſt name of ſeruant, and the
firſt prophecie of the calling of the Gentiles.
Noah is a warning to all drunkards, Cham is
a warning to all ſcorners, Shem and Iaphet
are an example for all ſubiects to reuerence
their rulers, and for all children to reuerence
their parents. Now as Noah prayed,
God perſwade Iaphet to dwell with
Shem, ſo God perſwade
vs to dwell with
Chriſt.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            The Arte of Hearing, in
two Sermons:
            Teaching a way to remember Sermons or
counſell afterward as wel as preſently, and
how euery Sermon ſhall take away ſome
corruption from the hearer.
            
               TO THE READER.
               
                  BY the eare commeth knowledge,
and therefore it is likelie that
many would profit by Sermons,
if they were taught to heare.
But before they can tell how to
heare, that is, what things to obſerue, and the
way to remember them, it is not poſſible that they
ſhould learne much, though they heare often: for
this I knowe by tryall, euen of thoſe which are
counted amongſt the beſt and auncienteſt bearers
in Londō, that they might learne more in a
moneth, thā they haue gathered in twenty yeres,
for they vnderſtand neither the Lordes Praier,
nor the Creede, nor the ten Commādements, but

haue a fewe notes in their heades of ſome Sermons
that they haue heard, and that is all their
knowledge, except ſome fewe, which haue kept
the order laide downe in this booke. Therefore
that euery man may bee able not onely to make
a confeſſion of his faith, but to giue a reaſon of
his faith too, that which I haue preached, here
I haue written, as a Catechiſme for hearers to
begin at: Deſiring all my brethren, that they
would tell their flockes at the first, that they ſhall
neuer profite much, vnleſſe they record their
Sermons ſo ſoone as they are gone, and that
they as Teachers would ſtudie to
deliuer that which is
worthy to be recorded.
            
         
         
            
            The firſt Sermon.
            Take heed how you heare.
Luke. 8. 18.
            
            
               THis is the warning of Chriſt to
his Diſciples, after they had
heard the Parable of the ſeede,
how it fell in foure grounds, &
but one of the foure brought
foorth fruit. Here Chriſt exhorteth his Diſciples
to bee that ground, and wee exhort
you. As GOD ſent his Prophets and Teachers
to Ieruſalem that was the chiefe Citie
of the Iewes, where the Temple was built,
and where the Prieſtes, and the Leuites and
the Doctors dwelt, like an Vniuerſitie, that
from it all the Townes and Villages about
might receiue inſtruction & light, like a Beacon
which ſtandeth vpon a hill, and is ſeene
ouer all the Countrie: ſo GOD hath done to
this Ieruſalem of yours. The citie of Ieruſalem
had neuer ſo many Prophets crying at

once in her ſtreetes, as this citie wherein wee
dwell, though the Oxe, which treadeth out
the Corne, hath often been attempted to bee
muzle
                  •
                euen of thoſe which tread not at all.
Yet as the Lambes breede in the winter, and
Quailes came with the winde: ſo Preachers
ſpring in the time of diſcouragement more
then when nothing hindereth them: & whether
it bee our ambition (as the kindred of
Chriſt ſayd) they which will bee famous goe to
great places, or whether GOD would make
this citie a ſpring and fountaine to water the
Land, as hee did Ieruſalem: heere is the Colledge
of the Prophets, here is the voyce of a
Cryer, here dwels the Seer, though he be hated,
and ſcorned, & contemned for his pains.
When I conſider how many labourers God
hath ſent to this Vineyard, and yet how little
fruite it yeeldeth to the Sower, I cannot impute
it to the want of teaching, but to the
want of hearing, neither ſo much to the want
of hearing, as to a kinde of negligent hearing,
like the high way which receiued the ſeede
but did not couer it. Therefore when this
ſentence came to my minde, me thought I
ſhould goe no farther vntill I had taught you
how to heare. I ſtood in doubt a while whether
I ſhoulde take ſuch a ſhort text: but
when I looked into longer thē it, me thought
this ſeemed longer then they, and as I iudge

a text which ſhould bee preached before all
texts, which becauſe it was not taught and
learned at the firſt, a thouſand Sermons haue
been loſt and forgotten, as though they had
neuer been preached at all: therefore let mee
ſay as my text ſaith, before I expound it: Take
heede how you heare, while I teach you how to
heare.
            
            There is no ſentence in Scripture which
the diuell had rather you ſhould not regarde
then this leſſon of hearing: for if you take
heede how you heare, you ſhall not onely profite
by this Sermon, but euery Sermon after
this ſhall leaue ſuch inſtruction, and peace,
and comfort with you, as you neuer thought
the Word contayned for you: therefore no
maruaile if the Tempter doe trouble you
when you ſhould heare, as the fowles combred
Abraham when he ſhould offer Sacrifice.
For bee yee well aſſured that this is an
infallible ſigne, that ſome excellent and notable
good is towarde you, when the diuell
is ſo buſie to hinder your hearing of the
Worde, which of all other things he dooth
moſt enuie vnto you: therefore as hee appoynted
Adam to another tree, leſt he ſhould
goe to the Tree of life:Gen. 3. ſo, knowing the
Word to be like vnto the Tree of life, he appoynteth
you to other buſineſſe, to other exerciſes,
to other workes, and to other ſtudies,

leaſt you ſhould heare it, and be conuerted to
GOD, whereby the tribute and reuenew of
his kingdome ſhould bee impayred: therefore
marke how many forces he hath bent againſt
one little ſcripture to fruſtrate this
counſell of Chriſt, Take heed how you heare.
            
            Firſt,The diuels ſleights againſt hearing. hee labours all that hee can to ſtay vs
from hearing: to effect this, hee keepes vs at
Tauernes, at Playes, in our ſhoppes, and appoynts
vs ſome other buſineſſe at the ſame
time, that when the bell cals to the Sermon,
wee ſay like the churliſh gueſts, wee cannot
come. If hee cannot ſtay vs away with any
buſineſſe or exerciſe,Math. 22. then he caſts fancies into
our minds, and drowſineſſe into our heads,
and ſounds into our eares, and temptations
before our eyes, that though we heare, yet we
ſhould not marke, like the birds which flye
about the Church. If hee cannot ſtaye our
eares, nor ſlacke our attention as he would,
then hee tickleth vs to miſlike ſome thing
which was ſayd, and by that makes vs reiect
all the reſt. If wee cannot miſlike anie
thing which is ſayd, then hee infecteth vs
with ſome preiudice of the Preacher, hee
doth not as hee teacheth, and therefore we
leſſe regarde what hee ſaith. If there bee
no fault in the man, nor in the doctrine, then
leaſt it would conuert vs and reclaime vs, he
courſeth all meanes to keepe vs from the

conſideration of it, vntill we haue forgot it.
To compaſſe this, ſo ſoone as we haue heard,
he takes vs to dinner, or to company, or to
paſtime, to remooue our mindes that wee
ſhould thinke no more of it. If it ſtay in our
thoughts, and like vs well, then he hath this
trick in ſtead of applying the doctrine which
we ſhould follow, he turnes vs to praiſe and
extoll the preacher, he made an excellent
Sermon, he hath a notable gift, I neuer heard
any like him. He which can ſay ſo hath heard
enough: this is the repetitiō which you make
of our ſermons when you come home, and ſo
to your buſineſſe againe, till the next ſermon
come, a breath goeth from vs, and a ſounde
commeth to you, and ſo the matter is ended.
If all theſe commers heare in vaine, and the
tempter be ſo buſie to hinder this work more
than any other, Chriſts warning may ſerue
for you, aſ well as his Diſciples, Take heede
how you heare.
            
            There is a hearing,Mar. 4. 24. and a preparatiue before
hearing, there is a praying, and a preparatiue
before praying,Eccl. 2. 17. there is a receiuing, and
a preparatiue before receiuing.1. Cor. 11. 28. As I called
examination the forerunner, which prepareth
the way to the receluer: ſo I may call attention
the forerunner, which prepareth the way
to the Preacher, like the plough which cutteth
vp the ground, that it may receiue the

ſeede. As there is a foundation vpon which
the ſtones, and lime, and timber are laide,
which holdeth the buildings together▪ ſo
where this foundation of hearing is laid, there
the inſtructions and leſſons, and comforts do
ſtay and are remembred, but hee which leaneth
his eares in his pillowe, goeth home againe
like the childe which he leadeth in his
hand, and ſcarſe remembreth the preachers
texte. A diuine tongue and a holy eare make
ſweete muſicke, but a deafe eare makes a
dumb tongue. There is nothing ſo eaſie as to
heare, and yet there is nothing ſo hard as to
heare well. You come not hitherto learne
how to heare, but you come hitherto heare as
you were wont: for there is none but thinkes
before he come to heare, that he knowes how
to heare already. But when I haue ſhewed you
Chriſt meaning in this caueat, you ſhall
iudge whether you haue heard or not heard,
before you learned how to heare.
            
            In the ſeuenteenth Chapter and the fifth
verſe of Saint Mathewes Goſpell, the Father
teacheth you how to heare, nowe the Sonne
teacheth you how to heare: ſhewing (as
Iames ſaith) that hearers only are not bleſſed,
for many ſhall ſay vnto Chriſt, Haue not wee
heard thee in our Synagogues? whom hee will
anſwere, with I know you not: and therefore it
is not inough to heare, but you muſt care how

hou heare, it is not enough to pray, but you
muſt care how you pray, it is not enough to
receiue, but you muſt care how you receiue, it
is not enough to ſuffer, but you muſt care
how you ſuffer, it is not enough to giue, but
you muſt care how you giue, it is not enough
to beleeue, but you muſt care how you beleeue:
for God hath appointed the way as wel as the
ende. Becauſe Cain regarded not the manner,Gen. 4.
God regarded not his Sacrifice. It is better
to doe well than to doe good: for a man
cannot offend in doing well, but he may offend
in doing good, if hee doe not well.
Therfore Chriſt (whom the Father bade vs
heare) teacheth vs not only to heare,
               Math. 17. 5 but how
to heare: in the fourteenth chapter of Marke
and the foure and twentieth verſe, teacheth vs
not onely to reade, but how to reade: in the
foure and twentieth of Saint Mathew, and the
fifteenth verſe, teacheth vs not onely to ſuffer,
but how to ſuffer: in the fifth of Mathew,
and the tenth verſe, teacheth vs not onely to
receiue, but how to receiue: Luke 22. 19. teacheth
vs not only to pray, but how to pray:
Luk. 11. 1. ſignifiyng, that more ſinne in hearing,
and reading, and praying, and ſuffering, &
receiuing, amiſſe, than in not hearing, reading,
praying, ſuffering, or receiuing at all. Therfore
Paul takes the Chriſtian before his race, and
giues him this watch-word. So run that thou

mayſt obtaine. 1. Cor. 9. 24. that is, ſo ſeek that
thou mayſt finde, ſo aske that thou mayſt obtaine,
ſo knocke that it may bee opened, ſo
giue that thou maiſt doe good, ſo ſuffer that
thou maiſt haue comfort, ſo heare that thou
mayſt profite. How many haue faſted, and
watched and prayed more than we, and yet
loſt al their deuotion? becauſe they thought
not of this rule, to doe good in a good ſort. The
Papiſts ſo they pray, care not how they pray,
for they thinke it enough to pray: and therefore
when they haue gone ouer their beads,
their prayer is done, although they neuer
thought what they asked. But Ieremie ſaith,
Curſed be he that doth the buſines of the Lorde
negligently, whether hee heare negligently, or
pray negligently, or receiue negligently, or
preach negligently. The Scribes, and Phariſies
did faſt, and watch, and pray, and heare, and
reade, and giue, and doe all that we can doe,
and yet Chriſt rewardeth al their works with
a woe; Woe be vnto you Scribes and Phariſies.
The Diſciple which betraied Chriſt, heard ſo
much as the Diſciples that loued Chriſt, yet
he had no feeling, nor comfort, nor profite of
all his companie with Chriſt, becauſe he did
not vſe it as the reſt did. The Iewes did heare
more then all the world beſide, yet becauſe
they tooke no heed to that which they heard,
therefore they crucified him which came to

ſaue them, and became the curſedſt people
vppon the earth, which were the bleſſedſt
Nation before: therefore the A b c. of a Chriſtian
is to learne the Arte of hearing. We care
how wee ſow, leſt our ſeed ſhould be loſt:
ſo let vs care how we heare, leaſt Gods ſeede
bee loſt. There is no ſeede which groweth
ſo faſt as Gods ſeede if it bee ſowne well:
therefore that I may ſhewe you that methode
of hearing, which Chriſt commendeth
heere to his diſciples, it is neceſſarie to
obſerue fiue things.Fiue partes of this treatiſe. Firſt, the neceſsitie of
hearing: ſecondly, the fruite which commeth
by hearing: thirdly, the kindes of hearers:
fourthly, the danger of hearing amiſſe: fiftly,
that manner of hearing, which will make
you remember that which is ſaid, and teache
you more in a yeare than you haue learned all
your life.
            Touching the neceſſitie of hearing: When
Chriſt ſaith. Take heede how you heare, hee
implieth that all his Diſciples ſhould heare,
nay they which were excommunicate from
the prayers, and from the councels, and from
the Sacraments for their ſinnes, yet were not
excommunicate from hearing, becauſe they
ſhould learne to repent.
            Here that large commaundement of our
Sauiour Chriſt ſtandeth,Luk. 8. 8. 
               That which I ſay
vnto you, I ſay vnto all, therefore it is a general

Proclamation, Whoſoeuer hath an eare to
heare let him heare. The place implyeth that al
ſhould heare, though it importeth that al can
not heare. When the voyce ſpake from heauen
it ſaid nothing,Mat. 17. 5. but This is my beloued ſon,
heare him: as thongh all the duties of man
were compriſed in hearing. Whē Chriſt ſpake
but of one thing which is neceſſarie, he ſpake
of hearing, Luke 10. 22. As though it were ſo
neceſſarie to heare, that all neceſſities ſhould
giue place vnto it. When men would not
heare, God ſpake to the ground; Oh earth,
earth, earth heare the word of the Lord: Iere▪
22. 29. ſhewing that GOD ſo contemneth
them which will not heare, that he regardes
the earth and the trees, and the ſtones being
ſenſeleſſe creatures aboue them.
            When GOD ſtroke Zacharias hee made
him dumbe,Luk 1. 5. but not deafe; When GOD
ſtroke Saul, hee made him blinde, but not
deafe;Act. 9. 3. 4. When GOD ſtroke Mephiboſheth,
hee made him lame,2. Sam. 4. 4. but not deafe. Thus
GOD would haue them heare which cannot
ſee, nor ſpeake, nor goe. But there is
a diuell which is called the deaffe diuell,
Marke 9. 25. ſhewing that the diuell would
haue vs deaffe, becauſe hee that heareth
inſtruction is in the way to life, but Hee
which heares not inſtruction goeth out of the
way. Prouerbs tenne-ſeauenteenth. To ſhew

the neceſſitie of hearing the worde which we
ſhould heare is called meate in the fifth
Chapter and the eleuenth verſe of the Epiſtle
to the Hebrues, and the want of the
Worde is called a famine in the eight chapter
of Amos Prophecie and the eleuenth verſe,
as though it were as neceſſarie for vs to
heare, as it is to eate.
            Although our heartes are contrarie to the
Worde more than to any thing beſide, yet
no man can thinke that this is the Word of
GOD, but hee thinkes it neceſſarie to bee
heard. Beſides, if Chriſt bee the Word (as
Saint Iohn calleth him in the firſt chapter
and fourteenth verſe) and the Worde is receiued
by no other meanes, but by hearing
onely can anie man then receiue Chriſt without
hearing? Let not anie bee thus fonde
ſo vainely to dreame: for that were to receiue
the Worde without the Worde.
            
            Therefore, as Iohn wept vntill the Booke
was opened, and ſo ſoone as it was opened,
all the Elders ſung: ſo wee ſhoulde
coumpt it the greateſt cauſe of weeping
when the worde is taken from vs that wee
cannot heare it, and the greateſt cauſe of reioycing
when it is open to vs that wee may
heare without let. Thus much of the neceſſitie
of hearing.
            
            Secondly, touching the fruite that commeth

by hearing: Of all our ſences, hearing
is the ſence of learning, and therefore Salomon
begins his Wiſedome, with Hearken
my ſonne, Prouer. 1. 8. opening as it were the
doore where Wiſedome muſt enter. Therefore
except in praying, temptations neuer
trouble a man ſo much as in hearing, which
ſheweth that theſe two are the deſtroyers of
the deſtroyer: therefore as the tempter himſelfe
could not abide to heare the Word when
Chriſt ſpake, ſo hee cannot abide that wee
ſhould heare the Word.
               Matth. 4. It muſt needes bee
good for vs which our enemies would keepe
from vs.
            Many hearing the Worde haue met with
knowledge, haue met with comfort, haue
met with ſaluation, but without the Worde
neuer any was conuerted to GOD. Therefore
whenſoeuer the Worde is preached, euery
one may ſay to himſelfe, as the Diſciples
ſaide to the blinde man, Bee of good
comfort,
               Mar. 10. 49. 
               hee calleth thee: bee of good comfort,
the Lorde calleth thee. When Chriſt
heard a woman ſay,Luk. 11. 28. 
               Bleſſed are the breastes
which gaue thee ſucke, Chriſt replied, Bleſſed
are they which heare the Worde of God: ſhewing,
that his Diſciples were more bleſſed for
hearing him, than his Mother for bearing
him. As Iſaac gaue Iacob a double bleſſing,
ſo Chriſt bleſſeth them againe: fo
                  •
               
               
in Matthew. 16. 17. hee ſaith,Mat. 16. 17. 
               Bleſſed are the
eares which heare the things which you heare:
ſhewing that the Iewes were more bleſſed
than all the worlde, becauſe they had this
one bleſſing to heare the trueth. If they be
bleſſed which heare, then you come hither
for a bleſſing, and hee which is bleſſed,
wanteth nothing. Euery priuiledge dooth
importe ſome ſpeciall good to him which
hath it: but it is the priuiledge of man to
heare the Worde, and therefore the Worde
became man, becauſe it belongeth onely to
man.Iohn 1. 14. God hath giuen life and light and food
to fowles, and fiſhes, and beaſtes, but his
Word is the prerogatiue of man. As to ſpeake
is the propertie of man, ſo to heare is the propertie
of man. To ſhewe the fruite which
commeth by hearing, Chriſt calleth the Word
which wee ſhould heare,
               Mat. 13. 14. 
               Verbum Regni, The
Word of the Kingdome, as though it brought
a Kingdome with it: to ſhewe the fruite
which commeth by hearing. The Diſciples
call the word which we ſhould heare, Verbum
vitae,
               Iohn. 6. 18. 
               the Word of life, as though it brought
life with it: to ſhewe the fruite that commeth
by hearing,
               Verſ. 15. Chriſt compareth the good
bearers to the fruitfull grounde: to ſhewe
the fruite that commeth by hearing, Paule

                  •
               aieth, Faith commeth by hearing, in the

                  •
               enth to the Romanes, there is one fruite:

               Knowledge commeth by hearing, Matthew
the fifteenth and tenth verſe, there is another
fruite: Comforte commeth by hearing,
Pſalme one hundred and nineteene, there
is another fruite: the ſenſe of ſinne commeth
by hearing,
               Act. 2. there is another fruite.
As Chriſt with fiue loaues and two fiſhes fed
fiue thouſand men: ſo Peter with one Sermon
conuerted three thouſand foules.Act. 2. 41. Agrippa
hearing Paul but once,Act. 26. 27. almoſt became a
Chriſtian,Act. 8. 38. the Eunuch hearing Philip but
once ſtraight receiued the faith: Zacheus hearing
Chriſt but once, gaue halfe his goods to
the poore: ſo I doubt not but ſome goe from
our Sermons almoſt Chriſtians like Agrippa,
ſome whole Chriſtians like the Eunuch, expreſſing
their faith like Zacheus. Now a
little and then a little the ſoule groweth
like the bodie. If you heare well, our voyce
is like the ſounde of the Rammes hornes that
made the Walles of Iericho to reele,Ioſh. 6. nay it
will make the walles of hell to reele, for the
ſame Worde made the Prince of hell giue
backe, Matthew 4. 7. Although at all other
times we are as plaine and ſimple as Iaacob,
yet at this time wee haue a promiſe, and it is
giuen to vs (for your ſake) to ſpeake ſometime
that which we conceiue not our ſelues,
becauſe the houre is come wherein GOD
hath appointed to call ſome of you as hee

hath done ſome of you before. Therefore as
the princelie ſpirite came vpon Saul when
hee ſhould raigne,1. Sa. 11. 6. to teach him how hee
ſhould rule: ſo the Propheticall ſpirit commeth
vppon Preachers when they ſhould
teach, to teach them how they ſhould ſpeake.
Therefore, as Chriſt was contented to be baptized
of Iohn,Mat. 3. 15. ſo be you content to be inſtructed
of vs, that if we be more ſimple than you,
the glorie of God may appeare more in
conuerting you by vs.
            Thirdly, touching the kinde of hearers:
If all which come to heare, did heare as
they ſhould, Chriſt neede not warne vs,
Take heede how yee heare. But as we pray, ſo
wee heare, the one is a lip-labour, and the other
is an eare-labour. As children play the
trewantes in the ſchoole, ſo men play the trewantes
in the Church: how many come to
heare mee, and yet (peraduenture) ſome doe
not heare, while I ſpeake of hearing? One
hath no pitcher, another hath left his pitcher
behinde him, another hath brought a
broken pitcher which will holde no water,
therefore Chriſt calleth vs Fiſhers: for as a
Fiſher taketh but a few in reſpect of thoſe
which goe by, ſo we reforme but a few in reſpect
of them which goe as the came. Firſt of
Pauls hearers, and then of Chriſts hearers, and
after our hearers.
               Acts 17. 32. When the Athenians heard

               Paul preach of the reſurrection, it is ſaid,
that ſome mocked; there is one ſort, the chaire
of ſcorners:
               Pſal. 1. ſome ſaid, we will heare thee of
this againe; there is another ſort, which are
not yet reſolued, but deſire to bee better
inſtructed: ſome did aſſent vnto him and receiued
his doctrine, as Dioniſius Areopagita,
and Damaris a woman; there is the beſt ſort:
wee neuer preach but wee haue all theſe
hearers, ſome mocke, ſome wauer, and
ſome beleeue. Now of Chriſts hearers: Wee
finde in the Goſpell that Chriſt had foure
ſorts of hearers: while I count them to you,
thinke of what ſort you are, for I doubt not
but that there bee here of all ſortes. Some
heard him to wonder at him, like Herode,
which was mooued with the fame that went
of him: ſome came to heare, becauſe they
would know all things, that they might be
able to talke of them. It ſeemes that Iudas
was ſuch a ſcholler, for he had learned to
preach but not to follow: ſome came to cauill
and to trip him in his ſpeeches, of theſe
hearers were the Scribes and Phariſies which
would make him an enemie to Caeſar: ſome
were like to the good ground, which came
to know what they might doo, and how they
ſhoulde beleeue, like the humble Scribe
which inquired the way to heauen. Now to
our hearers. As there were wiſe Virgins and

fooliſh Virgins: ſo there are wiſe hearers, and
fooliſh hearers. Some are ſo nice that they
had rather pine then take their foode of any
which is licenſed by a Biſhop, as if Helias
ſhould refuſe his food becauſe a rauē brought
it to him and not an Angel: ſome come vnto
the ſeruice to ſaue forfeiture, and then they
ſtay the Sermon for ſhame: ſome come becauſe
they would not bee counted Atheiſts:
ſome come becauſe they would auoyde the
name of Papiſts: ſome come to pleaſe their
friends, one hath a good man to his friend, &
leaſt he ſhould offend him he frequents the
Preachers, that his friend may thinke well of
him: ſome come with their maſters and miſtreſſes
for attendāce: ſome come with a fame,
they haue heard great ſpeech of the man, and
therefore they will ſpend one houre to heare
him once, but to ſee whether it be ſo as they
ſay: ſome come becauſe they be idle, to paſſe
the time they go to a Sermon, leſt they ſhould
bee wearie of doing nothing: ſome come
with their fellowes, one ſaith, let vs goe to the
Sermon: content ſaith he, and hee goeth for
companie: ſome heare the ſound of a voyce,
as they paſſe by the Church, and ſtep in before
they be aware: another hath ſome occaſion
of buſines, and he appoynts his friend to
meete him at ſuch a Sermon, as they doe at

Pauls: all theſe are accidentall hearers, like
children which ſit in the market, and neither
buy nor ſell. But as many foxes haue been taken
when they came to take: ſo they which
came to ſpye, or wonder, or gaze, or ſcoffe,
haue changed their minds before they went
home, like one which findes when he doth
not ſeeke.
            As ye come with diuers motiōs, ſo ye heare
in diuers manners: One is like an Athenian,
and he hearkeneth after newes: if the Preacher
ſay any thing of our Armies beyond ſea,
or counſell at home, or matters of Court, that
is his lure: another is like the Phariſie, and he
watcheth if any thing bee ſayd that may bee
wreſted to be ſpoken againſt perſons in high
place, that he may play the diuell in accuſing
of his brethren, let him write that in his tables
too: another ſmackes of eloquence, and hee
gapes for a phraſe, that when he commeth to
his ordinarie, he may haue one figure more
to grace and worſhip his tale: another is
male-content, and he neuer pricketh vp his
eares till the Preacher come to gird agaynſt
ſome whom he ſpiteth, and when the Sermon
is done, hee remembreth nothing which was
ſayd to him, but that which was ſpoken agaynſt
other: another commeth to gaze about
the Church, he hath an euill eye, which

is ſtill looking vpon that from which Iob did
auert his eye: another commeth to muze, ſo
ſoone as hee is ſet, hee falleth into a browne
ſtudie, ſometimes his minde runnes on his
market, ſometimes of his iourney, ſometimes
of his ſuite, ſometimes of his dinner, ſometimes
of his ſport after dinner, and the Sermon
is done before the man thinke where he
is: another commeth to heare, but ſo ſoone
as the Preacher hath ſayd his prayer, he falles
faſt a ſleepe, as though he had been brought
in for a corps, & the Preacher ſhould preach
at his funerall.
            This is the generation of hearers: is not the
ſaying of Chriſt fulfilled now, Hearing you
heare not? becauſe wee heare and heare not,
like a couetous churle, which goeth by a begger
when he cryeth in Chriſtes name for reliefe,
and heareth him crye, but will not heare
him, becauſe he craueth that which he will
not part with.
            May we not ſay againe with Chriſt, What
went ye out to ſee, rather then What went ye out
to heare, ſeeing ye remember that which ye
ſee, and forget all which ye heare? So you depart
from our ſermons like a ſlidethrifts purſe
which will hold no money, and as you goe
home one ſaith he doth not edifie: another
ſaith, I cannot profit by him: another ſaith, he

keeps not to his text: another ſaith, he ſpeaks
not to the heart: as if the ground ſhould cō
               plaine
of the ſeede which will not receiue the
ſeede. Is not this the cauſe why your Preachers
about the Citie care not how they
preach, becauſe their flockes haue no care to
heare? Is not this the cauſe why God doth not
heare vs, becauſe we wil not heare him? Is not
this the cauſe why ye are ſuch Doctors in the
world, and ſuch Infants in the Church? Yee
learned your trade in ſeauen yeares, but you
haue not learned religion in all your yeares.
Can you giue any reaſon for it but this? you
marked when your maſter taught you your
trade, becauſe you ſhould liue by it: but you
marked not when the Preacher taught you
religion, becauſe you do not liue by it. Come
now to the daunger by hearing amiſſe. Chriſt
ſaith, Take heed how you heare: In Deut. 4. it is
ſaid, Take heede how ye forget that which yee
heare. This Take heede awaies goeth before
ſome daunger: therefore as Paul ſaith, that
men receiue the Sacrament to their ſaluation,
or to their damnation, 1. Cor. 11. ſo Chriſt
ſaith, that men heare the Word to their ſaluation,
or to their damnation, The word which I
haue ſpoken ſhall iudge you in the latter day.
Ioh. 12.2. Cor. 2. 16. It is called the ſauour of life, becauſe
it ſaueth, and it is called the ſauour of death,
               
becauſe it condemneth. An euill eye ingendreth
luſt, & an euil tongue ingendreth ſtrife:
but an euil eare makes an heretike, and a ſciſmatike,
and an Idolater. This careleſſe hearing,
made GOD take away his worde from
the Iewes: therefore you may heare the word
ſo, as it may bee taken from you, as the talent
was from him that hid it,Math. 25. for GOD will not
leaue his pearles with ſwine: but as he ſaith,
What haſt thou to doe to take my words in thy
mouth ſeeing thou hateſt to bee reformed? So
he will ſay, what haſt thou to doe to take my
word in thy eare, ſeeing thou hateſt to be reformed?
If any of you goe away no better
then you came, you are not like hearers, but
like cyphers, which ſupplie a place, but ſignifie
nothing, ſo you take a roume but learne
nothing: and they which are cyphers in the
houſe of GOD, ſhall bee cyphers in the
kingdome of GOD. Therefore, if thou haue
an euill eye, and an euill tongue, and an euill
hand, and an euill foote, yet haue not an euill
eare too: for then all is euill, becauſe the eare
muſt teach all. If the eare hearken to euill,
then the heart muſt learne euill. Therefore
an euill eare is compared vnto a bad Porter,
which lets in euery one in a gay coat, though
hee bee neuer ſo bad; and keepes out him
that goes bare, though he be neuer ſo good:

ſo an euil eare lets al that is euil enter into the
hair, but al that is good ſhuts the dore againſt
it, leſt it ſhould ſet the ſpirit & the fleſh at variance.
Oh, if the Adder had not ſtopped his
eare, how lōg ſince had he bin charmed? But
the ſhorteſt time in Gods ſeruice is the lōgeſt
time in al the day. The beaſt came to the Arke
to ſaue thēſelues, & men wil not come to the
Church to ſaue thēſelues. It is too far, ſaith Ieroboā,
but it were not too far if Ieroboā were
not vnwilling.Luk. 10. One thing is neceſſary, and all
vnneceſſaries are preferred before it. The greteſt
treaſure in the world is moſt deſpiſed, the
Star which ſhould lead vs to Chriſt, the Laddder
which ſhuld moūt vs to heauē, the Water
that ſhuld clenſe our leproſie, the Māna that
ſhould refreſh our hūger, & the booke that we
ſhould meditate on day & night lieth in our
windows, no mā readeth it, no man regardeth
it:Pſal. 1. 2. the loue of God, & the loue of knowledge,
& the loue of ſaluation is ſo cold, that we will
not reade ouer one book for it, for al we ſpēd
ſo many idle times while we liue. If Samuel
had thought that God had ſpoken to him; he
would not haue ſlept, but becauſe he thought
it was not God but Eli, therefore he ſlept: ſo,
becauſe, you remēber not yt
                it is God which
ſpeaks, therefore you mark not: but if you remēbred
Chriſts ſaying, He which heareth you
heareth me, & he which deſpiſeth you deſpiſeth

me, you would heare the voyce of yt
                Preacher
as you would heare the voyce of God. Surely
(beloued) we know no other way to ſaue you
nor our ſelues: if we did, how wretched were
we to keepe it frō you, which haue no other
calling, but to ſhew you the way of ſaluatiō?
If this be the way & no other, if this be ſhewē
you & no other, & yet you will not take it but
chuſe another, then are you not condēned by
any other, but you condemne your ſelues. He
which wil not heare is worſe then Herod: for
as bad as he was, yet it is ſaid of him, that he
heard Iohn. Nay, euen thoſe whō our Sauiour
Chriſt in the Parable before this text compareth
to the barren, the ſtonie, and the thornie
ground, were al hearers, & therfore he which
wil not heare, is worſe thē any groūd. It is ſaid
of Saul, that though he were haunted with an
euil ſpirit, yet when he heard Dauid play vpō
the Harpe, the euill ſpirit departed frō him: ſo
they which heare, haue ſome eaſe of their ſins;
ſome peace of conſcience, ſome intermiſſion
of their feare, as Saul had when he heard the
Harpe, but they which wil not heare, haue no
intermiſſion of their feare, nor of their griefe,
nor of their ſinnes, becauſe the euill ſpirit neuer
departeth from them. Therefore as all the
beaſts tremble when the Lyon roareth, ſo let
all men hearken when God teacheth.
            The end of the firſt Sermon.
         
         
            
            The ſecond Sermon.
            
               IN the ende hereof is prooued,
that none ſhould preach without
due meditation: which is a
common preſumption in theſe
daies, and makes the Word and
Miniſterie deſpiſed.
            Now it remaineth that I ſhould teach you
ſo to heare, that you may remember that
which is ſayd, and learne more by one Sermon,
then you reape by tenne. Chriſt calleth
none vnto him but them which hunger and
thirſt, as if none were fit to heare the Word,
but they which hunger after it, & bring a ſtomacke
with thē. It is written of the Hart, that
when he lifteth vp his eares, hee is quicke of
hearing, & heareth euery noiſe: but when he
laieth down his eares, he is deafe and heareth
nothing: So it is, when you marke and when
you mark not. They which are quicke of hearing,
are ſure of remembrāce: but they which
are dull of hearing, are ſhort in keeping:

therefore before I teach you howe to heare,
giue me leaue againe to ſay as my Text ſayth,
Take heede how ye heare, that both our labors
be not loſt.
            As there be two ſpirites, ſo there be two
doctrines, two wiſdomes, and two counſels.
In 1. Timothie 4. 1. There is a doctrine of diuels:
if you heare that doctrine, you hearken
to the Diuell, as Saul did to a Witch. In the
fifteenth of Math.Mar. 10. there is a doctrine of men,
which Chriſt calles Leauen: if you hearken to
that, you ſhal erre like men, becauſe the blind
lead the blinde. In Gen. 3. there is a counſell
of the ſerpent: if you hearken to that, you ſhal
periſh like Eue. In the 2. Sam. 18. there is a
wiſdom of Achitophel: if you hearkē to that,
you ſhall ſpeed like Abſolon. Of all theſe Salomon
ſaith, Hearken no more to the wordes
which make thee to erre.
               Pro. 16. 27. But there is another
doctrine, Act. 13. 12. which is called, The doctrine
of the Lord of this it is ſayd. Luk. 8. Whoſoeuer
hath an eare to heare let him heare.
            
            Now to ſhew you how you ſhould heare,
When Peter & Iohn would make the cripple
attentiue,Act. 3. they ſaid vnto him, Looke vpon vs:
ſo, many to ſharpen their attention, deſire to
ſtand before the preacher, that they may look
him in the face. by this little help Peter ſheweth,
that we had need to vſe many helpes to
make vs heare well. In the thirteenth chapter,

& fifteenth verſe of the Propheſie of Ieremie
when the Lord ſpeaketh, it is ſaide: Heare
and giue eare, as though we ſhould heare and
more than heare. This more than heare, is to
marke, and vnderſtand, and remember, and
beleeue, & follow that which we heare: Like
the Iewes which ſaid, All which thou ſpeakest
from the Lord, we will doe it: Exod. 24. So all
that which wee ſpeake vnto you from the
Lord, you ſhould do it: Therfore all the commaundements
but the laſt are commaundements
of doing. And Salomon in the twelfth
Chapter of Eccleſiaſtes, and thirteenth verſe,
concludes his doctrine with this, which hee
calleth the ſumme of all: Feare the Lord and
keepe his commandements. In the third Chap- of
Exodus, and the fifth verſe, God teacheth
vs how to heare, when he ſpeakes to Moſes
and bids him put off his ſhooes: So we ſhould
put off our luſts, & our thoughts, & our cares,
and our fancies, and all our buſineſſe, when
God ſpeaks, for he which thinks or doth any
thing elſe, when he ſhould doe that which is
better, though it be good which he doth, yet
he doth ſinne in doing it.
            In the 10 of the Reuelation, an Angell teacheth
vs how to heare, when he willed Iohn
to eate the Booke: ſhewing that we ſhould
hunger after the word, and digeſt it into euery
parte as we digeſt meate.
            
               
In Math. 15. Chriſt teacheth vs howe to
heare, when he ſaith, Heare and vnderstand.
And againe in Mark. 4. when he ſaith, Take
heede what ye heare.
               Eſa. 42. 23. And Eſay teacheth you
how to heare, when he ſaith: Heare for afterwards:
ſhewing, that more doe heare for the
preſent then for afterwarde, becauſe they
forget it againe, and after a while are neuer
the better. In 1. Cor. 6. 1. Paul teacheth vs how
to heare, when he ſaith, Receiue not the grace
of God in vaine, ſhewing that many heare cō
               fort,
and are not comforted, many heare inſtruction,
and are not inſtructed. Iames teacheth
vs how to heare, Cap. 1. 22. when hee
ſaith: Be not hearers only, but dooers: ſhewing
that you ſhould do as you heare, as you would
haue vs to do as we teach.Math. 22. In the 10. of Luke,
Marie teacheth vs howe to heare, when ſhe
leaues all to ſit at Chriſts feete and marke his
doctrine: ſhewing that wee ſhould not ſay
like the churliſh gueſtes, we haue other buſineſſe;
but that this is our buſineſſe, as Chriſt
anſwered his Parents, I must goe about my fathers
buſineſſe.
            
            In Luke 2. the virgine teacheth vs how to
heare; when ſhe heard the ſayings of Anna
and Simeon, and Chriſt, it is ſaid that ſhe pondered
them, & laid them vp in her heart: ſhewing
that our eares ſhuld be but meſſengers
to the heart: for our treaſure ſhould be where

the heart is, as the heart is where the treaſure
is. In the 17. of the Actes, the men of
Boerea teach vs how to heare, when they went
home and ſearched the Scriptures ſo ſoone
as they had heard Paul preach, to ſee whether
Moſes and the Prophets did teach the
ſame, ſhewing that the worde is our Touchſtone
to trie the Doctrines if wee will not
crie.
            In the 8. of Luke, all the Diſciples teach
vs how to heare, when they noted Chriſts parable,
& repeated it againe vnto him, to know
the meaning: ſhewing that we ſhould not
onely heare, and the preacher onely preach:
but if you doubt of any thing, you ſhould inquire,
and they ſhould inſtruct you againe.
In the third of Luke, the Souldiers and the
Harlots and the Publicanes teach vs how to
heare, when they come to require, and aske,
Master, what ſhall we doe? ſhewing, that we
ſhould come to heare ſome thing which may
incourage vs to this vertue, or arme vs againſt
that vice, that we goe from hearing to doing
as Iohn taught them: all theſe are glaſſes in
the ſcripture for the hearer to addreſſe himſelfe
by, before he come to the ſermon.
            Beſide theſe, other things doe teach vs
too. As Salomon ſayth, Go to the Piſmire, and
learne to labour: ſo Chriſt in the beginning of
this Chapter ſends vs to the husband-man to

learne to heare, as he prepareth the ground
before he ſow his ſeede, leſt his ſeed ſhould be
loſt: ſo we ſhould prepare our hearts before
we heare, leſt Gods ſeede be loſt. In the 
                  •
               0.
of Iohn he ſends vs to the ſheep: as they know
the voice of their ſhepheard, and will not
heare a ſtranger, ſo we ſhuld know the voice
of Chriſt frō the voice of Popes, or Doctors,
or Counſels, or Traditions, leſt we goe like
Samuel from God to Eli. When you haue bin
in the ſheep-folds, go to the woods, & learne
of the birdes: for they will ſo liſten to him,
which teacheth them to ſing, that they learne
to ſing the ſame note after him, ſo we ſhould
learne to ſing the tune of the ſpirite: for they
which heare the word aright, learne to ſpeake
euen as the Worde ſpeaketh.
            Beſide theſe ſchoolemaſters, we haue other
Teachers too, all the titles which are giuen to
the Word, doe teach vs how we ſhould heare
the Word The Apoſtles call their writings Epſtles.
The Epiſtle to the Romanes, The Epiſtle to
the Corinthians, &c. ſhewing that the Word is
like an Epistle ſent from God to man, wherein
he writes his mind familiarly vnto vs, and
therefore we ſhould read it, heare it, marke it,
and ſcanne it, as we would ſcanne a Letter
which comes from ſome of our familiar and
deare friends.
            In Mark. 14. the Goſpel of Chriſt is called

his Teſtament or Will, ſhewing, that our Legacies
are written in it, and that wee ſhoulde
heare it, and marke it, and plie it till wee
bee as cunning in Gods will, as we are in our
Fathers will. In the firſt Epiſtle of Saint Paul
to Timothie the ſixt chapter, the Word is called
a charge, and in the ſecond to Timothie
the fourth chapter, GOD is called a Iudge,
ſhewing that we ſhuld hear the word of God
as we hearken to a Iudge, when hee giues a
charge, or pronounceth a ſentence: for euery
ſentence in this booke is a charge to the King
or the Counſeller, or the Lawyer, or the Preacher,
or one, or other, let euery one heare his
charge.
            In the fift Chapter of the Epiſtle to the Hebrues,
ver. 14. the Word is called meat, ſhewing
that we ſhould deſire and hunger to hear
it. And as the ſtomacke ſends the ſtrength of
the meat into euery member of the body: ſo
we ſhould ſend to the eye, that which is ſpoken
to the eye: and to the eare, that which is
ſpoken to the eare: and to the tongue, that
which is ſpoken to the tongue: and to the
hande, that which is ſpoken to the hande. If
thou heare comfort apply that to thy feare. If
thou heare a promiſe, apply that to thy diſtruſt.
If thou heare a threatning, applie that
to thy preſumption, and fill vp the gap ſtill
where the diuell entreth.
            
               
In the parable before my texte, the word is
cōpared to ſeede: the preachers to ſowers, &
the hearers to the grounde, ſhewing, that ye
come hither to be watered and dreſſed, and
manured: therefore if Gods ſeede be ſowne,
and the diuels fruits come vp: you are like
the Iewes, which brought Chriſt vineger
when he thirſted for wine.
            As the little birds perke vp their heads
when their damme comes with meate, and
prepare their beakes to take it, ſtriuing who
ſhall catch moſt; now this lookes to be ſerued,
and now that lookes for a bit, and euery
mouth is open vntill it bee filled: ſo you are
here like birds, and we the damme, and the
worde the foode, therefore you muſt prepare
a mouth to take it. They which are
hungry wil ſtriue for the bread which is caſt
amongſt them, & think this is ſpoken to me,
this is ſpoken to me, I haue neede of this, and
I haue neede of this: comfort goe thou to
my feare, promiſe goe thou to my diſtruſt,
theatning goe thou to my ſecuritie, and the
Word ſhall be like a perfume, which hath odour
for euery one.
            Theſe are good remembrances for all
hearers to thinke that the Word is an Epſtle
frō God vnto them, that it is the Will wherein
their Legacies are written, that it is a
charge from the Iudge of life and death, that

it is the meate whereby they liue, that it is
the ſeede which if it growe they are fruitfull,
if it growe not they haue no fruite, but theſe
are generall matters, my deſire is to teach
you a compendious way of hearing, which
you haue not heard before, that as the Word
is called a briefe worde, ſo you may learne it
briefly: for it is not gainfull vnto vs as it is to
Lawyers, Phiſitians and Surgeons, to keepe
you long in hand, but to heale you and diſpatch
you quickly as Chriſt healed the Leapers.
This Age hath deuiſed diuers Methods
to learne many things in ſhorter time than
they were learned of old: A man may ſpend
ſeauen yeares in learning to write, and he
may meet with a Scribe which will teach him
as much in a moneth. A Prentice may ſpende
nine yeares in learning a trade, and ſome
maiſter (if hee were diſpoſed) would teach
him as much in a twelue moneth. A man may
fetch ſuch a compaſſe that he may be a whole
moneth in going to Barwicke, and another
which knoweth the way will goe it in leſſe
than a week: ſo to euery thing there is a farther
way and a neerer way, and ſo there is to
knowledge. You do not remember the hundreth
part of that which you haue heard, & to
morrowe you will not remember the tenth
note which you heare this day. It may be that
ſome wil remember more: and why not thou

as well as hee? becauſe one vſeth a helpe
for his memorie, which the other vſeth not.
If you will vſe his policie, you ſhall remember
as wel as he: for let him neglect his help,
and the beſt memorie here ſhall not carrie away
halfe which he marketh now, vntill it be
night. When the woman of Samaria heard
Chriſt ſpeake of a water, of which he that drinketh
ſhall thirſt no more, Oh (ſaith ſhe) giue me
of that water: ſo now you heare of ſuch a way,
you would faine know it: but will you vſe it?
I wiſh that I were ſuch a meſſenger,Matth. 22. that I
could compell you vnto it: for truely vntill
you vſe it, you ſhall neuer learne faſter then
you doe. Now I thinke you haue a deſire to
heare it, I will ſhew it vnto you. Firſt in mine
opinion, two things out of euery Sermon are
ſpecially to bee noted, that which thou didſt
not know before, and that which ſpeaketh to
thine owne ſinne: for ſo thou ſhalt encreaſe
thy knowledge, and leſſen thy vices.
            Now if thou wouldeſt remember both
theſe a yeare hence as freſh as now, this is the
beſt policie that euer thou ſhalt learne, to put
them preſently in practiſe, that is, to ſende
them abroad to all the parts of thy ſoule, and
members of thy bodie, and reforme thy ſelfe
ſemblably to them, and thou ſhalt neuer forget
them, for thy practiſe remembreth them:

but before this, you muſt vſe another helpe,
that is, record euery note in thy minde as the
preacher goeth, and after before thou doeſt
eate, or drinke, or talke, or any thing elſe, repeate
all to thy ſelfe. I doe know ſome in the
Vniuerſitie, which did neuer heare good Sermon,
but aſſoone as they were gone, they 
                  〈◊〉
               
it thus, and learned more by this (as

                  〈◊〉
                ſayd) then by their reading and ſtudie:
for recording that which they had heard
when it was freſh, they could remember all,
and hereby got a better facilitie in preaching,
then they could learne in bookes. The
like profite I remember I gained when I was
a ſcholler by the like practiſe.
            The Philoſophers and Orators that haue
written ſuch volumes, haue left in their writings,
that this was the keeper of their learning,
like the bagge which beareth the treaſures.
Therefore I may ſay with Chriſt, that
the wicked are wiſer then Chriſtians: for the
Orators and Philoſophers vſed this helpe in
hearing of earthly things, and wee will not
vſe it in hearing of heauenly things. The onlie
cauſe why you forget ſo faſt as you heare, and
of al the ſermons which you haue heard haue
ſcarce the ſubſtance of one in your hearts, to
comfort or counſaile you when you haue
neede, is becauſe you went from Sermon to

dinner, and neuer thought any more of the
matter, as though it were enough to heare,
like ſieues which hold water no longer then
they are in the Riuer.
            What a ſhame is this to remember euerie
clauſe in your Leaſe, and euery poynt in your
Fathers will, nay, to remember an old tale ſo
long as you liue, though it bee long ſince you
heard it, and the leſſons which ye heare now,
will bee gone within this houre, that you
may aske what hath ſtollen my ſermon from
me? Therefore that you may not heare vs in
vaine, as you haue heard others, my exhortation
vnto you, is, to recorde when you are
gone, that which you haue heard. If I could
reach you a better way, I would: but Chriſts
Diſciples vſed this way when their thoughts
ranne vpon his ſpeech,Luk. 8. and made them come
againe to him to aske the meaning: the Virgine
his Mother vſeth this way when ſhee
pondered his ſayings,Luk 1. and laide them vp in
her heart:Act. 17. the good hearers of Beroea vſed
this waye, when they carried Pauls Sermon
home with them, that they might examine
it by the Scriptures. This difference is noted
between Iacob and his ſonnes, when Ioſeph
vttered his dreame, his brethren gaue no regarde
to it: but it is ſayd that Father Iacob noted
the ſaying. Therefore this muſt needes be

an excellent way.Gen. 37. 11. For if Ioſeph, and Marie,
and Chriſtes Diſciples ſhould ſpeake vnto
you as I doe, and ſhewe you a way to heare,
they would ſhewe you the ſame way that
they vſed themſelues. You cannot tell how
much it will profite you vntill you practiſe it:
doe but trie it one moneth, and if you loue
knowledge, I am ſure you will vſe it while
you liue. But if you will not vſe it for all that
can bee ſaid, truely you ſhall be like the olde
women which S. Paul ſpeakes of, which were
alwaies learning, and were neuer the wiſer.
            This is our firſt leſſon vnto you, Take heede
how you heare: I may ſay now, Take heede
how you reade too. For there are bookes abroad
like Iſmaels ſcoffes,Eſa. 36. like Rabſhekeh
his railings, like the ſongs which were made
againſt Dauid, which may write for the title
of their Bookes,1. King. 16. 34. 
               Fooles in print. If Hiel had
not built Iericho againe, theſe might bee fit
worke-men for ſuch a frame. If you muſt
Take heede how you heare: then we muſt take
heede how wee preach, for you heare that
which wee preach.Of negligent preaching. Therefore Paul putteth
none amongſt the number of Preachers, but
they which cut the Worde aright: that is, in
right wordes, in right ſenſe, and in right methode:
and becauſe none can doe this without
ſtudie and meditation, therefore he teacheth

Timothie to giue attendance to Doctrine▪
that is, to make a ſtudie and labour of
it: for as Paul ſaith, that in Peters Epiſtles
there bee many things hard to vnderſtand:
ſo in Pauls Epiſtles, and Iohns Epiſtles, and
Iames Epiſtle, there bee many hard things
too, which Dauid before called, The wonders
of the Lawe, and Paul calleth The mysterie of
ſaluation, and Chriſt calleth A Treaſure hid
in the ground. Therefore Salomon confeſſeth
that he ſtudied for his Doctrines, Eccl. 12. 10.
Although hee was the wiſeſt and learnedſt
man that euer was, yet he thought, that without
ſtudie he could not doe much good. Daniel
was a Prophet, and yet he deſired reſpite
to interpret Nabuchadnezzars Dreame.Dan. 2. 16. Is
the Scripture lighter then a Dreame, that we
ſhould interpret it without meditation? It
ſeemes then that Salomon and Daniel would
not count them Sermons, which come foorth
like vntimely births from vncircumciſed lips,
and vnwaſhen hands, as though they had the
ſpirit at commandement. Wheate is good,
but they which ſell the refuſe thereof, are reproued:
Amos. 8. 6. So preaching is good, but
this refuſe of preaching is but like ſwearing:
for one takes the name of God in vaine, and
the other takes the word of God in vaine. As
euery ſound is not muſicke, ſo euery Sermon

is not preaching, but worſe then if he ſhould
reade an Homily. For if Iames would haue vs
conſider what wee aske before wee come to
pray, much more ſhould we conſider before
we come to preach: for it is harder to ſpeake
Gods words, then to ſpeak to God. Yet there
are preachers riſen lately vp, which ſhrowde
euery abſurd ſermon vnder the name of the
ſimple kinde of teaching, like the Popiſh
Prieſts, which made ignorance the mother
of deuotion: but indeede to preach ſimply,
is not to preach vnlearnedly, nor confuſedly,
but plainly and perſpicuouſly, that the ſimpleſt
which doth heare, may vnderſtand what
is taught, as if he did heare his name.
            But if you will know why many preachers
preach ſo barely, looſely, & ſimply, it is your
owne ſimplicitie which makes them thinke
that if they goe on and ſay ſomething all is
one, and no fault will be found, becauſe you
are not able to iudge in or out: and ſo becauſe
they giue no attendance to doctrine, as
Paul teacheth thē, it is almoſt come to paſſe,
that in a whole Sermon, the hearer cannot
picke out one note more then he could gather
himſelfe: and many loathe preaching, as
the Iewes abhorred the ſacrifice, for the ſlubbering
Prieſts which cared not what they offered:
and the greater ſort imagine that there

is no more wiſedome in the word of GOD,
then their teachers ſhewe out of it. What a
ſhame is this that the preachers ſhould make
preaching bee deſpiſed? In the 48. of Ieremiah,
there is a curſe vpon them which doe
the buſineſſe of the Lord negligently: if this
curſe doe not touch them which do the chiefeſt
buſineſſe of the Lord negligently, it cannot
take holde of any other. Therefore let euery
preacher firſt ſee how his notes dooth
moue himſelfe, and then he ſhall haue comfort
to deliuer them to other, like an experienſt
medicine, which himſelfe hath proued.
            Thus much of preaching: nowe to you
which heare. Thinke that you are gathering
Manna, and that it is God which ſpeakes vnto
you, and that you ſhall giue account for euery
leſſon which ye heare: and therefore
record like Marie whē you are gone,
and the ſeede which wee ſowe,
ſhall grow faſter then the
ſeed which you ſow.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
            THE HEAVENLY
THRIFT.
            
               Whoſoeuer hath, to him ſhall bee giuen: and
whoſoeuer hath not, from him ſhall bee taken,
euen that which it ſeemeth that hee
hath. Luke. 8. 18.
               
            
            
               THe next wordes before,
are, take heede
howe you heare: the
reaſon followes, to
make vs take heede
howe we heare, hee
ſaith, Whoſoeuer hath
&c. This ſentence
hath two hands (as it
were) one giueth, and the other taketh: therfore,
one calleth it a comfortable ſaying, and a
dreadfull ſaying: for it bleſſeth ſome, and curſeth
other, like Moſes, which ſaued the Iſraelite,

and ſlewe the Egyptian, Whoſoeuer hath,
to him ſhalbe giuen: there goeth the bleſſing:
Whoſoeuer hath not, from him ſhall bee taken:
there runneth the curſe. Thus looking backe
to the words before, viz. Take heede how you
heare, This doctrine commeth vnto vs, that
he which taketh heed how he heareth, ſprouteth
and flouriſheth like a twigge which hath
life in it, till it come to a tree: but hee which
taketh no heede how he heareth, fadeth and
withereth like a ſtocke which is dead, vntill
hee hath not onely loſt the giftes which hee
had, but till the ſpirite doe leaue him too,
and he ſeeme as naked to men as Adam did
to GOD. The like ſentence in the twentie
one of Mathew, where it is ſaid, The kingdom
of heauen ſhall bee taken from you, and ſhall bee
giuen to a Nation which will bring foorth the
fruites thereof: there is a taking from them
which bring no fruites, and a giuing to them
which bring fruites. The like is in the 22. of
the Reuelat. where it is ſaid, Let him which is
iust be iust ſtill, and let him which is filthie bee
filthy ſtill: whereby it is meant, that the iuſt
ſhall bee more iuſt, and the filthy ſhall bee
more filthie. The like is in the 15. of Iohn, 2.
where it is ſaide, Euery branch which bringeth
no fruite, he taketh away, but euery branch
which bringeth foorth fruite, he purgeth, that it

may bring foorth more fruite. The likeis in
the 25. of Matthew, where this ſentence is
repeated agayne after the Parable of the Talents:
as to one ſeruaunt were committed
fiue Talents, and to another two, and to another
one, to increaſe and multiplie, and
hee which vſed his Talent doubled it, and
hee which hid his Talent, loſt it: euen ſo to
euery man GOD hath giuen ſome gifte, of
Iudgement, or tongues, or interpretation, or
counſell to employ and doe good, and hee
which vſeth that gift which God hath giuen
him to the profite of others, and Gods glorie,
ſhall receiue moe giftes of GOD, as the ſeruant
which vſed two Talents, receiued two
more: but he which vſeth it not, but abuſeth
it, as many doe, that gifte which he hath ſhal
be taken from him, as the odde Talent was
from the ſeruant which had but one: ſhewing
that one gifte is too much for the wicked,
and therefore it ſhal not ſtay with him. One
would thinke it ſhould be ſayd: Whoſoeuer
hath not, to him ſhall be giuen: and whoſoeuer
hath, from him ſhall bee taken: for,
God biddeth vs giue to them which want.
But this is contrarie: for he taketh from them
which want, & giueth to them which haue.
It is ſayd, that our thoughts are not like Gods
thoughtes: and ſo our giftes are not like

Gods giftes: for he giueth ſpirituall things,
and we giue temporall things. Temporall
things are to be giuen to them which haue
not, but ſpirituall things to them which
haue. Therefore Chriſt calleth none to receiue
his worde, and ſpirite, and grace, but
them which hunger and thirſt, which is
the firſt poſſeſſion of heauen. When it is
ſaide, It ſhall be giuen: GOD ſheweth himſelfe
rich and bountifull, becauſe he giueth
to them which haue: that is, hee giueth after
he hath giuen: for What hath any which
hee hath not receiued? Therefore none can
ſaie as Eſau ſayd to Iſaac: Hast thou but one
bleſſing my Father? For he bleſſeth when he
hath bleſſed, as a ſpring runneth when it
hath runne. Firſt, marke the growthe of
Gods giftes in them which vſe them, how
he watereth his ſeede like a Gardener, vntill
it ſpring in the earth: and then he watereth
it agayne, vntill it ſpring aboue the earth:
and after hee watereth it agayne, vntill it
bring foorth fruit vpon the earth: therefore
GOD is called The Lord of the Haruest, becauſe
the ſeede,Mar. 9. 28. and the blade, and the eare,
and the corne, and all doe come from him.
After you ſhall ſee the wan
                  •
                and the Eclipſe
of their giftes which vſe them not, howe
their learning and knowledge and iudgement

dooth betray them, as ſtrength went
from Sampſon when hee had loſt his hayre:
till at laſt they may ſay like Zedechiah, When
did the ſpirite departe from mee?
               2. Kin. 22. When did
loue departe from me? When did knowledge
depart from mee? When did my zeale departe
from mee? The firſt part of this ſentence
is like the gratulation to him which
vſeth this talent in the twēty fiue of Mathew,
Good and faithfull ſeruaunt, I will make thee
Lord ouer much. The ſecond part is like the
Obiurgation to him which hidde his Talent,
Naughtie and ſloathfull ſeruant: take his Talent
from him. So GOD beginneth here to
ſeparate betweene the ſheep and the Goats.
Iacob ſhall not be curſed, becauſe Eſau is
curſed. Neither ſhall Eſau bee bleſſed becauſe
Iacob is bleſſed: But the Lord Knoweth
who are his, and who are not: and therefore
he ſaith, woſoeuer hath, and whoſoeuer
hath not: as though he knew them all, whoſoeuer
they bee. This Scripture was performed
before it was written. For when Adam
ſerued GOD, God ſerued him: he conſulted
for a Manſion for him: he conſulted for meat
for him: hee conſulted for a companion for
him, vntill Adam rebelled againſt God, wee
read of nothing that God did, but his workes
for Adam ſixe dayes together, as though he

had beene hired to labour for him. But when
hee left his innocencie, then God began to
take againe that which he had giuen: he loſt
his wiſdome, he loſt his quietneſſe, hee loſt
his libertie, hee his glorie, hee loſt his
dwelling, like the man which fell amongſt
theeues. Thus while Adam had righteouſneſſe,
it might bee ſayde of him: Whoſoeuer
hath, to him ſhall bee giuen. And when
he had not righteouſnes, it might be ſayd of
him too: From him which hath not, ſhall be
taken. God is called a Father, becauſe he is
like a Father, which taketh a pleaſure to ſee
his ſonne thriue, and grieueth to ſee him an
vnthriſt. Firſt he giueth vs a ſtock, to prooue
our husbandrie: and then, if wee thriue with
that, hee dooth adde more vnto it, now a little,
and then a little, vntill at laſt the inheritance
come too: As they which trie a veſſell,
firſt put water into it, to ſee whether it will
holde water, then they commit wine vnto it:
ſo, firſt God giueth vs one grace, if wee vſe
that wel, then he giueth another, & another,
and another according to that, He which is
found faithfull in a little, ſhall bee made Lorde
ouer much. My Father (ſayth Chriſt) is an
huſbandman, Iohn 15. ſhewing that as wee
dreſſe the ground, that it may bring foorth
fruite, ſo God dreſſeth vs, that we may bring

foorth fruite. All commeth not at once, but
as the body groweth, ſo the ſpirite groweth:
firſt good thoughts, and then good ſpeeches,
and then good workes: as the blade followeth
the ſeede, and the eare the blade, and
the corne the eare. Looke howe in our firſt
generation one thing comes after another,
ſo it is in our ſecond generation: As the child
ſpringeth in the mothers wombe, from a
gellie vnto milke, and from milke to blood,
and from blood to fleſh, and ſhe knoweth
not how it groweth till it come foorth: ſo the
ſpirite groweth in vs, and we ſee not how it
groweth, but that it is growen. Fayth calleth
to loue, and loue calleth to obedience, and
obedience calleth to conſtancie, and one
grace is the foundation of another. Therefore
Paul ſayth, Whome hee predeſtinated, them
he called: whom he called, them he iustified, &
whom hee iuſtified them he glorified. Thus as
the rich eaſily growe richer, ſo the good eaſily
growe better: hee which hath power to
aske, hath power to receiue; for it is ſayde,
Aske, and you ſhall receiue: hee which hath
power to ſeeke, hath power to finde: for it
is ſaid, Seeke and you ſhall finde: he which hath
power to knocke, hath power to enter, for
it is ſayde, Knocke, and it ſhall be opened vnto
you. As Gods riches are infinite, ſo he is neuer

wearie of giuing: when a man ſerueth
God, at laſt it commeth to this, that God delighteth
(as it were) to doe him good, as it is
ſayd, Ieremiah 32. and Micah. 7. I will delight
to doe them good.
            
            Now when it commeth to this paſſe, that
God hath a delight to doe a man good, then
Aske what thou wilt (ſayth Salomon to his
Mother) and I will not ſay thee nay:
               1. Reg. 2. 20 ſo, Aske
what thou wilt, and GOD will not ſay thee
nay. He which hath the Sonne, may haue the
Father, hee that hath the Wedding garment,
may haue the Wedding feaſt, he which hath
the ſpirite of Eliſha, may haue the ſpirite of
Eliah, he which commeth vnto Chriſt, may
make Chriſt come vnto him: as when the
Sonne came toward the Father, the Father
met him in the way, ſhewing that God is as
ready to giue, as wee to aske. When Dauid
did well, Nathan ſayd vnto him, The Lord
hath giuen thee this, and this, and this: and if
that had not been enough, hee would haue giuen
thee ſuch and ſuch things: ſhewing vs, that
the cauſe why wee haue not ſuch and ſuch
things, is, for that we are not thankefull for
theſe and theſe thinges. When the Eunuch
beleeued,Acts. 
                     •
                  . he ſaid, what letteth me to be baptized?
ſo when thou beleeueſt thou mayſt
ſay, What letteth me to be loued? what letteach

me to be bleſſed? What letteth mee to
be ſaued? And as Philip ſaid, Nothing: ſo
Chriſt ſaith Nothing, but Bee it vnto thee, as
thou beleeuest. From that day righteouſneſſe
ſtandeth ouer their heades, as the Sunne did
ouer Ioſua, and they renewe their vertues,
as the Eagle reneweth her youth. Therefore
when Iſaac had ſaid, Iaacob haue I bleſſed:
he addeth, and he ſhall be bleſſed: as if he ſhould
ſay, he beginneth to be bleſſed now, but hee
ſhall bee more bleſſed: ſo they which are
bleſſed of God, ſhall be more bleſſed, riſing
and riſing like the Sunne, vntill it come to
the height.
            When God hath begun to bleſſe, he ſaith
as hee ſaid to Abraham, What ſhall I hide
from him? What ſhall I keepe from him? As
though one of his giftes did binde him to
giue another: therefore his mercies are called
euerlasting mercies, becauſe when they
begin, they haue no end. So ſoone as hee had
mooued Salomon to pray for wiſdome, he
gaue him wiſedome: ſo ſoone as he had moued
Abraham to goe from his Countrey, hee
began to guide him: ſo ſoone as he had moued
Gedeon to fight, he began to ſtrengthen
him. Gods mercies are reſembled to raine,
firſt it raines ſmall drops, and after fall great
drops, and the ſmall are ſignes of the great.

Firſt, you ſee Eliſha with a ſingle ſpirit, and
after you ſee him with a double ſpirite: firſt
you ſee Paule ſitting at Gamaliels feete, and
afterward you ſee him preaching in Moſes
Chaire: firſt you ſee Timothie a ſtudent, and
after you ſee him an Euangeliſt: Firſt you
ſee Cornelius praying, and after you ſee Peter
inſtructing: firſt you ſee Dauid repenting, and
after you ſee Nathan comforting: firſt ye ſee
the Diſciples worſhipping, and after you ſee
the holy Ghoſt deſcending: firſt you ſee the
Wiſemen ſeeking Chriſt, and after you ſee
them together with Chriſt: firſt you ſee the
Sonne comming toward the Father, and after
you ſee the Father comming toward the
Sonne: firſt you ſee the Eunuch reading, and
after you ſee him vnderſtanding, and after
you ſee him beleeuing, and after you ſee him
baptiſed. Moſte notable is the example of
Nathaniel, ſo ſoone as he beleeued, Chriſt
remembred this promiſe, and ſaid, Beleeuest
thou for this, thou ſhalt ſee greater things than
theſe: ſo hee gaue more to him which had
ſome. That which he ſaid to Nathaniel, he
ſaith to all which are like Nathaniel, Beleeueſt
thou this Sermon, thou ſhalt heare other
Sermons than this, repenteſt thou for
this example, thou ſhalt ſee other examples
than this, loueſt thou for one benefite, thou

ſhalt receiue moe benefites than one, honoureſt
thou God for his giftes vpon others,
thou ſhalt feele his giftes vpon thy ſelfe: for
Hee which keepeth Iſrael dooth not ſleepe, but
watch. What dooth he watch? He watcheth
who ſeeketh for comfort, and who looketh
for wiſdome, and who prayeth for faith, and
who intreateth for patience, that hee may
giue aboundantly, to him which deſires feruentlie.
            If hee ſee one pray like Cornelius, he ſendeth
another to ſtrengthen him like Peter: if
he ſee one ſtudie like the Eunuch, he ſendeth
another to inſtruct him like Philip: if hee ſee
one mourne like Dauid, hee ſendeth another
to comfort him like Nathan: if hee ſee
one willing like Eſay, he ſendeth another to
able him like the Seraphim: if he ſee one that
thinketh well, hee teacheth him to ſpeake
well: if hee ſee one that ſpeaketh well, hee
teacheth him to doe well: if hee ſee one doe
well, he teacheth him to continue well: if
hee ſee one meeke like Moſes, hee maketh
him wiſe like Salomon: if he ſee one wiſe like
Salomon, hee maketh him righteous like Abraham:
if he ſee one righteous like Abraham,
he maketh him patient like Iob: if hee
ſee one patient like Iob, he maketh him penitent
like Peter: if hee ſee one loue one vertue,

he maketh him loue another vertue: if
hee ſee one hate one vice, hee maketh him
hate another vice: if he ſee one like one Sermon,
hee maketh him like another Sermon:
when hee hath him in his ſchoole, and hee
commeth once to this, to ſay like Samuel,
Speake Lord for thy ſeruant heareth,
               1. Sam. 3. then hee
taketh him vp to the mount like Moſes, and
openeth his heart vnto him, teaching him a
waie to make vſe of all that he ſeeth, and of
all that hee heareth, and of all that hee readeth,
and of all that hee feeleth. Thus when
God hath ſtrayned and fined him, he is apt
to euerie good worke, and takes all occaſions
to doe them. If hee but ſee one praye,
his heart burneth to praye too: if hee ſee one
reading, he hath a minde to reade too: if hee
ſee one meditating, he hath a zeale to meditate
too: if hee ſee one ſorrowing, hee hath
a deſire to ſorrowe too: like the Diſciples,
which when they heard Peter ſay, wee goe
a fiſhing, they ſaid, we will goe a fiſhing too.
After this, euery benefit maketh him thankfull,
euery inſtruction maketh him fearefull,
and he is neuer well, but when he is walking
with God like Enoch, or when Chriſt is ſpeaking
to him, or when he is ſpeaking to Chriſt,
for when God meeteth with his children, like
a nurſe hee emptieth himſelfe of his milke,

according to this text which we now handle,
To him which hath, ſhall be giuen.
            
            Thus when you vſe thoſe giftes well
which you haue, the Lorde will come vnto
you, and ſay that your heart may heare him,
Good ſeruant and faithfull, I will make thee
Lorde ouer much: thy ſeede ſhall become a
tree, thy ſpirite ſhall be doubled. Firſt, thou
ſhalt haue a loue to heare, reade and meditate:
after thou ſhalt haue a little knowledge
to iudge and ſpeake of Gods Worde, of the
ſpirite, and of doctrines: then thou ſhalt aſcend
to faith, which will bring thee vnto
peace of conſcience: then thou ſhalt meete
with good bookes, and God will ſend thee
Teachers to inſtruct thee, and incourage
thee like the Angels which came to Chriſt
when hee hungred. Thus a Trauailer paſſeth
from towne vnto towne, vntill hee come
to his Inne: ſo a Chriſtian paſſeth from vertue
to vertue, vntill hee come to Heauen,
which is the iourney that euery man muſt endeuour
to goe till death.
            
               It followeth: And whoſoeuer hath not from
him ſhall bee taken; euen that which it ſeemeth
that he hath.
            As the Lorde ſaith to his faithfull Seruant,
Thou ſhalt bee ruler ouer much: ſo hee
ſaith of his ſlothfull ſeruant, Take his talent

from him. Heere is one like Iaacob whome
God loueth, to him (hee ſaith) ſhall bee giuen:
here is another like Eſau whome God hateth,
from him (hee ſaith) ſhall bee taken: ſo one
may ſay like Iob, The Lorde hath giuen: and
the other may ſay like Iob, The Lord hath taken.
But from whom dooth he take? From him
which hath not. And to whom dooth he giue?
To him which hath. In this God ſeemeth not
to deale his giftes charitablie: for he, ſhould
giue to them which want, Ioſeph maruailed
to ſee Iaacob lay his left hand vpon Manaſſes,
and his right hand vpon Ephraim, as
though the younger ſhould bee more bleſſed
than the elder. Iſhai maruailed to ſee Samuel
chooſe the leaſt of his ſonnes before the talleſt,
as though the vnfitteſt were the fitteſt:
ſo it is maruaile that hee which commandeth
vs to giue vnto them which want, ſhould
take from them which want, and giue to
them which haue. Iſaac would not haue bleſſed
Iaacob but Eſau, but God would haue
him bleſſe Iaacob and not Eſau: Ioſeph
would that Manaſſeth ſhoulde haue more
than Ephraim, but God would that Ephraim
ſhould haue more than Manaſſeth. As
God loueth not as man loueth, ſo hee giueth
not as man giueth. Why ſhould Abraham
haue three Angels, and Lot but two, and Balaam

but one, and Balaac none? Why ſhould
not Philip goe vp the mount, as well as Iames?
Why ſhould not Aaron behold God, as well
as Moſes? Why ſhould not Moſes go to Chanaan,
as well as Caleb?
            According to our loue is Gods loue, and
according to our hatred is Gods hatred.
Reuben ſhould haue had as good a bleſſing
as Iudah, but when Iaacob bleſſed him, (Geneſis
the 35. chapter & 22. verſe) he remembred
his ſinne with Bilhah, and therefore
curbed his bleſſing: for when he bleſſed him
he ſaid,Gen. 49. 4. 
               Thou ſhalt not be excellent: as if hee
ſhould ſaye, Reuben thou ſhalt haue ſome
thing, but thou ſhalt not haue ſo much as
thou ſhouldeſt haue, becauſe of thy vncleanneſſe
with Bilhah. So Moſes ſhould haue
gone to Canaan as well as Caleb: but GOD
remembred his murmuring at the waters of
bitternes. And when he deſired to goe vnto
it, God would not heare him, but let him ſee
it from an hill, and ſo hee dyed. So the third
ſeruant ſhould haue receiued as many Talents
as his fellowes: but the Lorde remembred
how hee hid the Talent which hee had,
and therefore would giue him no more, leaſt
he ſhould hide them too: ſo wee ſhould haue
more vnderſtanding, more iudgement and
more knowledge, but God ſeeth what wee

doe with this, and therefore ſtayeth his hand,
leſt we ſhould abuſe any more. This is Saint
Iohns meaning when hee ſaith, God Giueth
grace for grace,
               Ioh. 1. 16. That is, where he findes one
grace, there he giueth another. This is Saint
Paules meaning Rom. 1. where he ſaith, The
righteouſneſſe of God is reuealed from faith
to faith: ſignifying that they which haue
faith ſhall haue more faith. Therefore this
is the fearefulleſt ſigne, that wee haue no
faith nor grace, if God do not increaſe our
faith and his graces in vs: For to him which
hath, ſhall be giuen: Therefore, if we had faith,
wee ſhould haue loue: if wee had loue, wee
ſhould haue knowledge: if wee had knowledge,
we ſhould haue zeale: if we had zeale,
we ſhould haue holines. As he which hath
broken one commaundement, is made guiltie
of all: ſo hee which hath one vertue, is
made partaker of all. It is ſaid: ſo long as
Iehoiada liued,2. Chro. 24. Ioaſh proſpered and did well;
becauſe Iehoiada inſtructed & guided him,
but when Iehoiada dyed, Ioaſh goodnes died
with him, and he was neuer like himſelfe after,
but turned like his fathers: So there is a
ſeed in the heart, which while it liueth and
is foſtered, wee ſprowt and proſper as Ioaſh
did; but when that ſeede dyeth for want of
cheriſhing, then wee beginne to droope and

fade, and decay againe as loaſh did. If one
vertue bee offended ſhe lureth all her fellowes
from vs, as many of Iſhboſheths friends
ſhronke with Abner.
            Dauid ſetteth forth the godly man like a
tree planted by the waters ſide,
               Pſal. 1. 3. 
               Which ſprowteth,
and grwoeth and bringeth foorth fruite
Straight vpon this, he ſaith: It is not ſo with
the wicked. When hee ſpake of growing and
flouriſhing, and fructifying, hee ſaith: It is not
ſo with the wicked. That is, it is contrarie with
the wicked: therefore their gifts are not like
the tree planted by the waters ſide, but like the
Chaffe which the winde bloweth away.
               Pſal. 1. 5. Nay
ſaith Dauid, themſelues are like Chaffe which
the winde bloweth away.
               Luk. 16. If they bee Chaffe,
then their fruite is Chaffe. The Gluttons table
was for the vngodly, but the Lords table
was for the holy.Matth. 22. Therfore he which had
not the Wedding garment, had not the wedding
feaſt. For if the Lord would caſt pearles
vnto Swine, why doth he forbid vs to doe ſo?
Therfore it is not ſaid, Be it vnto thee as thou
deſireſt, leſt all ſhould looke to receiue: but
Be it vnto thee as thou beleeueſt, that all might
care to Beleeue. It is not ſaid to them which
ſeeke not, yee ſhall find: but Seeke, and you ſhall
find. How ſhould they Enter which haue not
a hand to knocke at the doore? How ſhould

they Receiue, which haue not a tongue to
aske the giuer? How ſhould they haue wiſedome
which haue not the feare of the Lorde,
which is the beginning of wiſedome?
               Prou. 1. Thus as
Iames ſaith, Shew me thy faith, and I will ſhew
thee my faith: So God faith, ſhewe mee thy
loue, and I will ſhew thee my loue: as Chriſt
was knowne at Emaus by breaking of bread,
ſo you may knowe him heere by dealing his
giftes. It is ſaid when Ioſeph feaſted his brethren,Gen. 43.
Beniamins meſſe had fiue times more
than any of his brethren, becauſe Ioſeph loued
him more than the reſt: ſo the mercy and
graces of God will ſhew to whome his affection
ſtandeth. If you ſee Chriſt leaning on
a mans breaſt as Iohn did on Chriſts breaſt,
then may you ſay, this is a beloued Diſciple:
For as Lidia perſwaded Paule and Silas to
come to her houſe,Act. 16. 13. ſaying, If you iudge me to
bee faithfull, come to my houſe: ſo you may
iudge them to be faithfull to whoſe houſe the
Lord commeth.
            If you aske Salomon to whome the Lord
giueth wiſedome and knowledge, hee anſwereth,
To a man which is good in his ſight,
Eccleſ. the ſecond Chapter, and twentie ſixe
verſe: ſhewing that thoſe men are gracious
in Gods ſight, as Ioſeph was in Pharaohs.
Contrariwiſe, if you ſee God flying from a

man, as Dauid fled from Saul, that is, withdrawing
his ſpirite as the Maſter did his Talent,
then you may ſaie, this is not a faithfull
ſeruant to his Maſter: for if he had vſed his
Talent well, the Lord would increaſe it as hee
promiſed, but becauſe he doth abuſe it, therefore
the Lorde dooth withdrawe it againe as
he threatned.
            To ſome God giueth, and neuer recalleth
againe, to ſome he giueth and after taketh it
from them: As ſome Angels went vp the ladder,
and ſome went downe: ſo ſome mens
gifts increaſe and ſome decreaſe. To the Epheſians
the fourth Chapter, you haue GOD
giuing. In Matthew 21. you haue him taking.
In Geneſ. 1. you haue God bleſſing. In
Geneſ. 4. you haue God curſing. In Acts 26.
you haue God opening eyes. In Eſay 6. you
haue God ſhutting eyes. In Dan. 2. you haue
God making wiſe. In Eſa. 44. you haue God
making fooles. In Iohn 15. you haue God
dreſſing trees. In Matthew 3. you haue God
hewing downe trees. When one ſea floweth
another 
                  •
               bbeth. When one ſtarre riſeth, another
ſetteth. When light is in Goſhen, darkneſſe
is in Aegypt. When Mordecai groweth
into fauour, Haman groweth out of fauour.
When Beniamin beginneth Rachel endeth.
Thus wee are riſing, or ſetting: getting, or

ſpending: winning or looſing: growing, or
fading, vntill wee arriue at Heauen or Hell.
As Eliſha his ſpirite was doubled; ſo Saules
ſpirit departed. As the Gentiles become beleeuers,
ſo the Iewes become infidels. As
Saule becommeth an Apoſtle, ſo Iudas becommeth
an Apoſtata. As Iohn groweth
in the ſpirite, ſo Ioaſh decaieth in the ſpirite,
As Zacheus turneth from the world; ſo Demas
turneth to the world,Acts 16. As Lidias heart
is opened, ſo Pharaohs heart is hardened:
Euen as the thornes burne while the Vines
fructifie. When Iſhboſheth was a ſleepe vpon
his bed, Baanab and Rechab came and tooke
away his life: So while men ſleepe and do no
good, God commeth and taketh away their
gifts. It was neuer ſaid, Sampſon hath loſt his
ſtrength, vntill he harkened vnto Dahiah. It
was neuer ſaid, Saul hath lost his ſpirit, vntill
hee harkened not to Samuell. It was neuer
ſaid, Take his Talent from him, vntill he hid it
in the ground. One ſinne openeth the doore
for many vertues to goe out. While Iaacob
ſtaied with Laban; Labans cattell increaſed,
becauſe God bleſſed him for Iaacobs ſake:
but when Iaacob went from him, many of
Labans ſheepe went with him, and he grewe
poore againe: ſo while the loue of righteouſneſ
                  •
               e
is with thee, to husband thy knowledge

and wiſdome like Iaacob, thou ſhalt
thriue in graces, and one daye ſhall teach
another, but when that ſteward departeth
from thee, then looke that thy wiſedome,
and knowledge, and iudgement ſhould decreaſe,
as faſt as the widowes oyle increaſed:
the world will winne the fleſh, and the
fleſh will winne the ſpirit, and one ſinne will
crie to another as the Moabites did at the
riuer, Now Moab to the ſpoyle, now ſinnes to
your ſpoyle: then thy knowledge ſhall flie
as though it were afraide to bee taken captiue
of ignorance, thy loue ſhall not abide
thy hatred, thy humilitie ſhall not abide thy
pride, thy temperaunce ſhall not abide thy
concupiſence. As thou ſeeſt the leaues fall
from the trees in a boyſtrous winde: ſo thy
graces ſhall drop away one after another,
as though thou were in a conſumption. As
the Arke would not ſtaye with the Philiſtines,
ſo the grace of GOD will not ſtaie
with ſinners, but flieth from them like perſecutors.
Dauid was not ſo readie to flie from
Saule, but the ſpirite was as readie to flie
from him too. This muſt come vppon all
which ſinne like Sampſon, their ſtrength
muſt departe from them vntill they learne
like Nabuchadnezzar from whence it came.Dan. 4.
This ſentence is ſuch a meditation, that hee

which would preach it to the quicke, had
neede to haue an eie in all mens hearts, to
ſee how one vertue dieth after another, vntill
the ſoule die too. As there is a fall of
leaues, and an Eclipſe of the ſunne, and a
conſumption of the bodie: ſo there is a fall of
giftes, and an Eclipſe of knowledge, & a conſumption
of the ſpirit. It is ſtraunge to ſee,
how wiſdome, and knowledge, and iudgement
doe ſhun the wicked, as though they
were afraid to be defiled. As Barach would
not goe, vnles Deborah would go with him:
ſo knowledge will not ſtay vnles vertue will
ſtay with her. To this Ieremy poynted when
he mocked the Iewes for ſaying,Iere. 18. 18. 
               Knowledge
ſhall not depart from the prieſt, nor counſel from
the wiſe, nor the word from the prophet: to this
Eſay pointed when he ſaith,Eſa. 26. 14. 
               The wiſdome of
the wiſe men ſhal periſh, and the vnderſtanding
of the prudent ſhall be hid: as if he ſhould ſay,
one day Chriſt will tell you, that Whoſoeuer
hath not, from him &c. And when you heare
that ſaying, then remember theſe examples
how he hath fulfilled it before. After come
the apoſtles, and they ſhew ſome hardened
ſome bewitched, ſome blinded. Paule tels how
Demas fel away, and Iohn ſheweth how many
fel away. Thus the Prophets and Apoſtles
on either ſide, and Chriſt in the mids hold vp

this threatning as if it were a pit, which all
are falling into.2. Cor. 6. 16. The ſoule of man is called the
temple of the holy Ghoſt. As God pulled downe
his temple when it became a den of theeues, ſo
he forſaketh the temple of the ſoule, & taketh
his graces with him (as frō a diuorſed ſpouſe)
when it luſteth after other loues. With any
Talent he giueth this charge, Vſe & increaſe
it vntill I come: being left, at laſt the commeth
againe to ſee what we haue done. The ſeede
was ſowen, this yeere the Lord cals for fruite
& none will come, the next yeere, & the next
after, and none comes: at laſt the curſe goeth
foorth, Neuer fruit grow vpon thee more. Then
as the figtree began to wither: ſo his giftes
begin to paire, as if a worme were ſtill gnawing
at them: his knowledge leeſeth his reliſh
like the Iewes Manna; his iudgement
ruſtes like a ſworde which is not vſed: his
zeale trembleth as though it were in a Palſie,
his faith withereth as though it were blaſted,
and the image of death is vpon all his religion.
After this, he thinketh like Sampſon
to pray as he did, and ſpeake as he did, and
hath no power, but wondereth like zedekias
how the ſpirit is gone from him. Now
when the good ſpirit is gone, then commeth
the ſpirit of blindeneſſe, and the ſpirit of errour,
and the ſpirite of feare, and all to ſeduce

the ſpirite of man. After this, by little
and little firſt he falles into error, then he
comes vnto hereſie, at laſt hee plungeth into
diſpaire: after this if he enquire, God will
not ſuffer him to learne: if he read, God will
not ſuffer him to vnderſtand, if he heare, God
will not ſuffer him to remember, if hee pray,
God ſeemeth vnto him like Baal, which
could not heare: at laſt hee beholdeth his
wretchednes, as Adam looked vpon his nakednes,
and mourneth for his gifts as Rachel
wept for her children, becauſe they were not.
All this commeth to paſſe, that the Scripture
might bee fulfilled, Whoſoeuer hath not
from him ſhall be taken that which he ſeemeth
to haue. As the ſhip ſinketh vpon the Sea,
while the merchant ſporteth vpon the Land
and makes him a banquerout when he thinketh
that his goods are comming in: ſo while
wee are ſecure, and the heart ſpendeth, and
the eare bringeth not in, by little and little
the ſtocke decaieth, and moe become banquerouts
in Religion, than in all trades beſide.
When a man ſinneth, he thinketh with
himſelfe I will doe this no more, after another
ſinne promiſeth as much profite as that,
and hee ſaith againe I will doe this no
more, preſently another ſinne promiſeth as
much profite as that, and hee ſaith againe, I

will doe this and no more. There goeth
ſtrength and there commeth a wound, ſo the
ſoule bleedeth to death and knoweth not
her ſickneſſe till ſhe be at the laſt gaſpe. Euen
as a man vndreſſeth himſelfe to bed, firſt hee
caſteth off his cloake, and then his coate, and
then his dublet: ſo when GOD rifleth our
hearts, he pulleth away one feather after another:
firſt he wounds his faith, after he ſtrikes
his loue, then he blindeth his knowledge, thē
he ſhall haue no delight to heare the word,
after he ſhall growe to hate the Preachers of
the word, at laſt he ſhall euen hate the word
it ſelfe. This is the bleeding of the ſoule, or
the ſpiritual conſumption, when graces drop
away, as the haires fall from an hoarie head
before death. Let Achitophel be a ſpectacle
for all to feare, he was counted a wiſe man
and a deepe Councellor, yet becauſe it was
the wiſedome of the fleſh, the ſtorie ſaith,
that GOD turned his wiſedome into follie,
and that he might ſeeme fooliſh (as he was
in deede) God made him to hang himſelfe,
whereby his follie was more notorious then
his wiſedome. But moſt notable is the example
of perſecuting Saul, when he began to
fall, he ran headlong. Firſt he fell in hatred of
Dauid, then he fell in hatred of GOD, after
God fell in hatred of him: Anon the ſpirit

departed from him: At laſt, hee ſought for
helpe at Witches, which he had condemned
before. This is the propertie of ſin to ſpurre
a man forward, vntill he commit that which
he condemneth himſelfe, that he may be tormented
of his owne conſcience. Now, if I
might applie this ſcripture as Chriſt ſayth,
are there no mo ſinners but they, vpon whom
the Tower of Shilo fell? So I may ſay, is the
Talent taken from none but from him which
hid it in the ground? Nay, Saul was but a
type of many which ſhould looſe the ſpirit,
Sampſon was but a type of manie which
ſhould loſe their ſtrength, Demas was but a
type of many which ſhoulde imbrace the
world: as Dauid cryeth, How are the mightie
ouerthrowne? So wee may mourne and ſay,
how are the zealous cooled, how are the diligent
tired? They which ſhould ſeaſon others
are become like the white of an egge which
hath no taſte: once they ſeemed to haue
fruite, but now they are not hanged with
leaues. As God cryed vnto Adam, Adam
where art thou? ſo they may cry Zeale where
art thou? Learning where art thou? Conſcience
where art thou? Loue where art thou?
They which ſhined like the Sun when they
roſe, ſeeme now to be eclipſed of their light.
The world hath won the fleſh, the fleſh hath

won the ſpirit, and Iordaine is turned backe. As
God tooke heat from the fire when it would
burne his Children, ſo he taketh knowledge
from the learned when they turne it to euill.
Now, when they ſee ſuch ruines of their gifts,
with what heart can they thinke, I am the
tree whom Chriſt accurſeth, or I am the ſeruant
of whom it is ſayd, Take his Talent from
him? Therefore I ſay to you as Chriſt ſayd,
remember Lots wife, as her bodie was turned
into ſalt: ſo your wiſedome may turne
into follie, your knowledge may turne into
ignorance, your vnderſtanding may turne
into blindneſſe; your zeale may turne into
coldnes: therefore let al which haue a Talent
take heede how they vſe it. Three thinges I
note in theſe words, & then end. Firſt, Chriſt
ſaith not, It ſhall be taken from them which
haue, but from them which ſeeme to haue: Leſt
they which ſtande ſhould feare to fall. Paul
ſaith not, Let him which ſtandeth, take heed
leſt he fall, but let him which thinketh he ſtandeth:
ſo leſt they which haue the Spirit ſhuld
feare, Chriſt ſaith, It ſhall bee taken from them
which ſeeme to haue. Marke how warilie the
Scripture ſpeaketh, for this ſpeech doth ſhew
that many ſhall fall, and yet it doth ſhew that
none ſhall fall but they which ſeem to ſtand,
that none ſhall loſe the ſpirit but they which

ſeeme to haue it. For if Chriſt woulde take
from them which haue, as he giueth to them
which haue, hee woulde not ſay, they which
ſeeme to haue at his taking, no more then he
ſayd it at his giuing. So we haue a comfort in
this terrour, like the Honey which Sampſon
found in the Lions iawes: for if God will take
from none but them which ſeeme to haue,
then we neede not feare vnleſſe we be hypocrites:
for the threatning is made to none
but them which ſeeme. Secondly, this ſpeech
doth ſhewe that many haue that ſhew of holineſſe
which Paul ſpeaketh of, wherewith
they would deceiue God and deceiue themſelues:
you haue Pilate waſhing his hands in
hypocriſie, as well as you haue Dauid waſhing
his hands in innocencie: you haue the Sichemits
with their circumciſion, aſ well as the
Iſraelites with their circumciſion: you haue
the Sadduces with their doctrine, as well as
the Apoſtles with their doctrine: you haue
the Phariſie with his prayer, as well as the
Publican with his prayer: you haue the Pythoniſt-with
her confeſſion, as well as Peter
with his confeſſion:Act. 19. you haue the Exorciſts
with their Iesus, as well as Paul with his Ieſus:
you haue Sathan with his ſcripture,Matth. 4. as well as
Chriſt with his ſcripture: you haue Iudas with
his kiſſe, as well as Ionathan with his kiſſe:

you haue Caine with his ſacrifice, as well as
Abel with his ſacrifice: you haue Eſau with
his teares, as well as Marie with her teares:
you haue Achitophel with his wiſedome, as
well as Salomon with his wiſedome: you
haue Zedechia with his ſpirit, as well as Eliah
with his ſpirite: you haue Ieſabel with her
faſts, as well as Anna with her faſts: you haue
the harlot with her vowes; as well as Iacob
with his vowe. Of all theſe this ſcripture is
fulfilled, That which they ſeemed to haue was
taken from them.
            
            This is the firſt note, the verie ſhewe of
goodneſſe ſhall bee taken from them which
haue not goodneſſe it ſelfe: leſt men ſhould
content themſelues with ſhewes and ſhadowes,
Chriſt ſaith, That which he ſeemeth to
haue ſhall be taken from him: As if he ſhould
ſay, take away his Talent and his napkin too,
that hee may not ſeeme to haue a Talent. As
Moſes ſaith, I will not leaue a hoofe behinde.
Thou ſhalt not ſeeme iuſt, nor wiſe, nor houeſt,
but I will make thee as naked to men, as
Adam was to me. Euen as the Fig-tree becauſe
it had no fruit was ſpoyled of his leaues
which ſhewed like fruit: ſo they which haue
made ſhipwracke of honeſtie, ſhall make
ſhipwracke of credite too: Their name ſhall
goe with a brand vpon it like Caine the murderer,

Achan the theefe, Abſolon the rebell,
Magus the ſorcerer; Iudas had for his title,
Iudas which betrayed the Lord, Acts. 1. Ieroboam
had for his title, Ieroboam which made
Iſrael to ſinne. Demas had for his title, Demas
which imbraced the world. Marke how ſinne
doth perſecute and vexe the ſinner. Indeede
Demas had imbraced the worlde, but hee
would not haue all the worlde to knowe it:
but ſee firſt how God makes Paul to knowe
it, and after hee makes him to proclaime it,
that now Demas is not onely an hypocrite,
but knowne to be an hypocrite, like a Rogue
which is burned in the eare. When Ieroboams
wife came to the Prophet to enquire
of her ſonne, ſhe diſguiſed her ſelfe becauſe
ſhe would not bee knowne, yet the Prophet
knewe her, for ſo ſoone as ſhe knockt at the
doore, he called, cometh Ieroboams wife: ſo
though men diſguiſe themſelues with ſober
countenances, and holy ſpeeches, and honeſt
cōpanie, becauſe they would not be knowne,
yet when GOD ſeeth an hypocrite, he will
pull his vizard from his face, as Adam was
ſtript of his figge leaues, and ſhew the Anatomie
of his hart, as though his life were written
in his forehead, and he ſhal maruaile how
men know that▪ which he ſcarce though
                  •
                had
been knowne to God.
            
               
Thus hee which hath made the daye, can
bring forth thy righteouſneſſe like the light:
hee which hath made the night can bring
forth thy wickedneſſe like the darke. Therefore
Salomon ſaith, The candle of the wicked
ſhall be put out: That is, the leaſt light that he
hath ſhall be quenched, Prou. 15.
            Thus you ſee how God will increaſe your
gifts, if you vſe them, and how hee will decreaſe
them, if you vſe them not. Now
let vs pray that he will teach vs this
vſe, that we may receiue his
bleſſing.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            The Magistrates
Scripture.
            
               Pſalm. 82. 6. 7.
               
                  6 I haue ſayd ye are Gods, and ye all are the
children of the moſt higheſt:
                  7 But ye ſhall dye as a man, and ye Princes
ſhall fall like others.
               
            
            
               I May call this text, The
Magistrates Scripture.
Conſidering the ſtate of
Kings and gouernours,
howe much good they
might doe, & how little
they performe, God becomes
a remembrancer vnto them. And firſt
ſhewes what a high calling Princes and Rulers
haue, and then leſt they ſhould be proud
of it, and make their Magiſtracie a chaire of

eaſe, he turnes vpon them againe, as though
hee had another meſſage vnto them, and tels
them that though they be aboue other, yet
they ſhall die like other, and though they
iudge here, yet they ſhal be iudged hereafter,
and giue account of their Stewardſhip howe
they haue gouerned, as ſtraight as their ſubiects
how they haue obeyed. A good Memorandum
for all in authoritie, ſo to deale in
this kingdome, that they loſe not the Kingdome
to come.
            
               I haue ſaid ye are Gods, &c. How can he
cal them Gods, which calles himſelfe the onely
God, and ſaith, There are no more Gods but
hee? Eſa. 44. 5. and 45. 21. I haue made thee
Pharao his God, ſaith God to Moſes. Exod. 7.
1. becauſe he had giuen him power to ſpeake
vnto Pharao in his name, and to execute his
iudgements vpon him: ſo hee calleth Magiſtrates
Gods, becauſe hee hath giuen them
power to ſpeake to the people in his name,
and to execute his iudgements vpon them.
Out of this name, Rulers may learne howe
to gouerne, and ſubiects how to obey. As
the inferiour Magiſtrates doe nothing but
as the ſuperiour Magiſtrate preſcribeth: ſo
they which rule vnder God for God, muſt
rule by the preſcript of God, and doe nothing
but as their conſcience tels them, that God

would doe himſelfe. Therefore they which
vſe their power agaynſt GOD, which beare
the perſon of GOD, and execute the will of
the Diuell, which make lawes againſt Gods
Law, & be enemies to his ſeruants: are worſe
than Balaam,Numb. 22. 18. which would not curſe whome
God bleſſed: and ſo much as in them lyeth,
make God a lyar,Eſa. 30. 33. becauſe they cannot ſo wel
be called Gods, as diuels: ſuch Gods goe to
hell.
            
               I haue ſayd ye are Gods &c. Firſt this name
enformes vs what kinde of Rulers and Magiſtrates
we ſhould chooſe: thoſe which excell
all other men like Gods amongſt men. For a
king ſhould be a man after Gods owne heart
like Dauid, as appeareth in the firſt booke of
Samuel, the thirteenth Chapter & fourteenth
verſe. As all thoſe whom God ſet ouer his
people in his mercy and not in his anger, had
ſome note of excellencie aboue the reſt,
which God choſe them by, as it were the Magiſtrates
marke: the mildeſt man, Numb. 12.
3. or the wiſeſt man, 1. Reg. 4. 31. or the iuſteſt
man, Heb. 7. 2. as though if all theſe had
met in one, the inquiſition ſhould haue ſtaied
there, and all giue place to him: but our vertues
are ſo ſingled, that he which was called
the mildeſt is not called the wiſeſt, and hee
which was called the wiſeſt, is not called the

iuſteſt, as though God found ſome defect in
his owne election. For when hee choſe one
milde, another wiſe, & another iuſt, he ſhewed
that hee would haue one which is milde,
and wiſe, and iuſt like himſelfe, that is, (as I
may ſay) a man made euen in print.
            As Paul biddeth to chooſe widdowes which
were widdowes indeed. 1. Tim. 5. 3. ſo we ſhould
chooſe Magiſtrates which are Magiſtrates
indeed, that is, ſuch as ſeem to be ſent of God
for that purpoſe, as Pharaoh choſe Ioſeph becauſe
he was the fitteſt in all the Land.2. Kin. 2. 9. Gen.
41. 38. Eliſha thought that the ſingle ſpirite
was not enough, but required that the ſpirite
of Eliah might be doubled vpon him, becauſe
he was a Prophet which ſhould teach others:
ſo we ſhould picke out them which haue a
double ſpirit to be Magiſtrates, becauſe they
muſt gouerne others, as God picketh foorth
Ioſua in Moſes roome: hee might haue choſen
many out of all Iſrael which had the ſpirite
of widome:Deut. 24. 9. but he choſe Ioſua, of whom
he ſayth, that hee was full of the ſpirite of wiſedome:
Deut. 24. 9. ſhewing, that if one bee
better than another, he ſhould be choſen before
the reſt, becauſe the beſt haue ſaid, Send
another: Exod. 4. 14. as though none were fit:
but for want of Angels we are faine to make
Magiſtrates of men. Therefore as Samuel

went ouer all the ſonnes of Iſhai to annoint a
ſucceſſour to Saul,1. Sam. 16. 5. and put back one after another
which thought themſelues fit, yet there
was but one amongſt them which pleaſed
God, and the Prophet could ſcarce diſcerne
him: ſo neceſſarie it is that this choyce bee
committed to none but to the godly, becauſe
he which would haue choſen the beſt, yet liked
another before him. Therefore there was
ſuch a ſcrutinie amongſt the tribes to finde
out the man whom God had choſen,Exo. 18. 21. as Iethro
taught Moſes to cull out of all the people
thoſe which had beſt courage, and feared
God, and dealt truly, and hated couetouſnes.
Therefore a wicked man may not ſupply the
place of God,Mat. 23. 2. as the Scribes and Phariſies
ſate in Moſes Chaire:Act. 1. 20. but as it is ſaid of Iudas,
Let another take his place: ſo let better take
their place, for they which are called Gods,
muſt be like God. If all ſhould be holy as he is
holy,
               1. Ioh. 3. 3. how much more ſhould they be pure as
he is pure, wiſe as he is wiſe, iuſt as he is iuſt,
which beare his name, which ſupplie his perſon,
and guide the world vnto good or euill?
If the race ſhould be to the ſwift,Eccl. 9. 11. and the battell
to the ſtrong,2. Sam. 9. 2. then as Saul did exceed all
the men of Iſrael from the ſhoulders vpward,
ſo he which commaunds others, ſhould exceede
other in giftes of grace, that they may

know him from the reſt, and ſay, this is hee,
for he exceedes the reſt in vertue, as Saul did
in ſtature, like the King of Bees, which is faireſt
of all the hiue. Therefore if Pharao would
let none but Ioſeph gouerne Egypt, Pharao
ſhall riſe vp againſt thoſe Kings,Gen. 4. 28. which care
not whom they place ouer their people, imitating
Rehoboam, which made them his
companions, whome he ſhould haue expelled
from his Court. 1. King. 12. 8.
            Secondly,Gen. 48. 16. this extolleth the calling of
Magiſtrates. As Iacob honored Ioſephs children,
when he ſaid they ſhould bee called after
his name: ſo God honoureth the Magiſtrates,
when he giues them his owne name,
calling them Gods, as though there were a
kinde of Godhead in them.Pro. 24. 23. Theſe things
pertayne to the wiſe, and they themſelues do
not alwayes ſee it, yet he which hath a ſpirituall
eye, and carries the patterne of GOD
in his hart, may ſee another like neſſe of God
in Magiſtrates, than in common perſons. As
the builders of the Temple had a ſpeciall
wiſedome and ſpirit,Exod. 31. 3. & 35. 31. which God gaue them
for that worke which they were choſen too:1. Sam. 16. 13▪
               
ſo when Samuel had anoynted Dauid, hee
ſaith, that the ſpirite of the Lord came vppon
Dauid from that day forward: as though hee
had anoeher ſpirite after than he had before.

There is difference betweene Kings & inferior
Magiſtrates:1. Sa. 28. 26 for the Prince is like a great
Image of God, the Magiſtrates are like little
Images of God, appoynted to rule for God,
to make lawes for God,2. Cro. 9▪ 6. to reward for GOD,
to puniſh for God,Numb. 9. 8. to ſpeak for God,Pſal. 2. 6. to fight
for God, to reforme for God: and therefore
their Battelles are called the Lordes battailes,
and their Iudgements the Lordes Iudgements,
and their Throne the Lords Throne, and the
Kings themſelues his Kings, to ſhewe that
they are all for God, like his hands: by ſome he
reacheth mercy,Mat. 14. 19. by ſome iuſtice, by ſome
peace, by ſome counſel, as Chriſt diſtributed
the loaues and the fiſhes by the hands of his
Diſciples. This God requires of all when he
cals them Gods, to rule as he would rule, iudge
as he would iudge, correct as he would correct,2. Cro. 9. 8.
reward as hee would reward, becauſe
it is ſaid, that they are inſtead of the Lord God
                     •
                  
               
that is, to doe as he would doo, as a Scholler
writes by a Copie. This is a good ſtudie
for Magiſtrates in all their iudgementes, to
conſider what GOD would doo, becauſe
they are in ſteede of God, I rule for God, I
ſpeake for God, I iudge for God, I reward for
God, I correct for God: then as hee woulde
doo and determine, ſo muſt be my ſentence.Mat. 11. 29.
As we ſhould thinke how Chriſt prayed before

we pray, and how hee ſpake before we
ſpeake, becauſe his actions are our inſtructions:
ſo they ſhould thinke how Chriſt would
iudge before they iudge,Deu. 17. 10. becauſe Gods lawe
is appoynted for their lawe. Such a thought
muſt needes leuel the way before them, & put
them in mind of a good & iuſt & holy iudgement,
becauſe God is good & iuſt and holy.
            Thirdly, they are called Gods, to teach
them how they ſhould gouerne. Howſoeuer
other care for the glory of God, the performance
of his will, the reformation of his
Church, Princes and Rulers which are Gods
themſelues, are to doe the buſineſſe of God
as their owne buſines, becauſe they are Gods.
Gods buſines is their buſines, Gods Lawe is
their Lawe, Gods honour is their honour.
When the King, or Iudge, or Magiſtrate,
doth ſeek the Kingdome and glorie of God,
he ſhould thinke he ſeeketh his owne Kingdome
and glorie. And therefore ſeeke it, and
further it as earneſtly and diligently as hee
would his owne, and rule, and iudge, and
ſpeake and puniſh, and counſaile as he would
for himſelfe.Pſal. 139. 21▪
                Euen as Dauid counted Gods
foes his foes, and Gods friendes his friendes.
And Moſes perſecuted them that were Idolaters
againſt God,Exo. 32. 27. as he did them which were
Traytors to himſelfe.Numb. 16. 16.
            
            
               
If this were obſerued, we ſhould ſee ſuch
a change, that diuers which take ſhould giue,
& they which giue ſhould take, they which
labour ſhould reſt, & they which reſt ſhould
labour. Howe can they pray to God, which
know that the lawes of God are not obeied,
that his will is not regarded, but the poore
vnpitied, becauſe of the remiſſenes, in not
bridling the inſolent? It may ſeeme that in Eliah
his anſwere to Achab, it was propheſied
who ſhould trouble Iſraell to the worldes
end,1. King. 18. 18. for ſpeaking to the wicked Magiſtrate,
he ſayd, It is thou which troublest it. So the
vngodly Rulers, and graceleſſe ſtriuers againſt
lawful rule, in their owne hearts calling
themſelues Gods, not being ſo called of
God, are cauſe of all diſorder in euery Common
weale.
            Fourthly, they are called Gods, to encourage
them in their office, and to teach them
that they need not dread the perſons of men:
but GOD dooth that which is iuſt and
good without the ielouſie of men, ſo they,
vpon the Bench and in all cauſes of Iuſtice
ſhould forget themſelues to be men, which
are lead by the armes betweene fauour and
feare, and thinke themſelues Gods, which
feare nothing. This boldneſſe is ſo neceſſarie
in them which ſhould iudge all a like, that in

Deut. 3. 28. Moſes encourageth Ioſhua, in
Ioſ. 1. 18. the people encourage him, in ver. 9.
God doth encourage him, ſaying that hee
will be with him: but here he is with him: for
hearing GOD call them Gods, ſhewes that
God is there, nay, that they are hee: which
ſhould ſtrike a wonderfull minde into them,
As a princely ſpirite came vpon Saul ſo ſoon
as he hee was king, ſo hearing that they are
Gods, it ſhould change them, & make them
excell the order of men, vntill they reſemble
God,Kings. 3. 9▪
                after whom they are named, as Salomō
ſtudied and prayed till he was wiſer than all
that he gouerned:King. 4. 30. then they need not bluſh
to reade this teſtimonie, I haue ſayd yee are
Gods: Or elſe it wil ſeeme a checke vnto them
like the mocke which GOD gaue to Adam
when he ſaid that he was become like himſelfe.
               Gen. 3. 22.
As many ſit in Gods place, and yet neuer
knew that the Scripture called them Gods,
nor why they haue this name, no more than
Nabal: ſo many play Nabal in their offices,
and are readier to aske,1. Sā. 25. 25▪
                
               Who is Dauid? Who is
Chriſt? (when his cauſe comes before them)
then ſpeake or doe any thing for him, but the
women goe before them againe like Abigail,
as though GGD would ſhame them with
the weaker veſſell. I cannot compare them
fitter then with King Agrippa, who thought

it better to be a Chriſtian almoſt, than altogether.
This is the Religion of theſe times,
they feare nothing more then to be counted
too preciſe: but God doth call them more thā
preciſe, for he calles them Gods, of all men
then they ſhould not forget his name. Princes
and Rulers haue many names of honour,
but this is the honourableſt name in their
Titles, that they are called Gods: other names
haue been giuen them of men for reuerence
or flatterie, but no man could giue them
this name but God himſelfe. Therefore their
name is a glaſſe wherein they may ſee their
duetie, how God doth honour them, and
how they ſhould honour him. What am I
more than he, that God ſhould ſet me in his
owne Chaire, and giue me his owne name
more than others? he hath not done ſo to all:
but if they which are called his children are
happie,
               Matth 5. they which are called his diſciples are
happie, they which are called his ſeruants are
happie: how happie are they whom he calleth
Gods? It ſeemes, that if GOD could haue
called them by a higher name than his owne,1. Sam. 18. 23
he would haue called them by ſome other
name, but this worde is enough to put them
in minde of all that they ſhould doo. Thinke
that yee are Gods, and it will make you aſhamed
to obey the diuell, for then ye are like

               Gods no more, but like ſinnefull men, and the
pooreſt vaſſal which ſerues God in a cottage,
is liker God than you. Are they Gods which
oppreſſe Gods children? Nay, dooth not he
lie which calles them worſhipfull, or noble?
If ſuch deſerue not their titles, how can Antichriſt
of Rome thinke of his vſurped names,
and not be abaſhed? Can he ſit downe in
Gods place and ſpeake againſt him, iudge agaiſt
him, decree againſt him, euen in the
Temple of God reſiſting God?
            Againe, for another ſorte of Gods: Doth
iniquitie become Gods?
               2. Theſ. 2. 4. Doth partialitie become
Gods? doo bribes become GODS?
They are greedie Gods,
               1. Cor. 4. 4. Idol Gods, bellie Gods,
and may be tearmed Gods, becauſe they are
like the God of this worlde, which doe but ſtay
(like Nabuchadnezzar) vntill their iniquities
be full,Dan. 4. that they may bee caſt out like
beaſtes, as a deriſion to them they gouerne.
But they which regarde this honourable teſtimonie
of God,Nehe. 6. 11. as Nehemiah ſayd when he
was tempted to flie, Should ſuch a man as I
flie? ſo when they are tempted with bribes,
ſhould ſuch a man as I take bribes? ſhoulde
ſuch a man as I doe wrong? ſhould ſuch a
man as I be a lyar, or a ſwearer, or a ſcoffer, or
a drunkard, or a gameſter, or a vſurer, or a
prophaner, vpon whome all eyes are ſet to

take their example, and would harken ſooner
than to God himſelfe? Then he reſolueth
to rule according to his name, knowing that
all the ſoules which might be wonne by him,
ſhall be required of him, as the ſinnes of Iſrael
were imputed to Ieroboam. Thus GOD
doth catechize them in their owne names,
and calles them Gods,
               1 King. 15. 30. to teach them their
duetie to God. All ſhould be godly, but they
ſhould bee like Gods: that is, (as I may ſay)
more then godly, or the nexte to GOD in
godlyneſſe. If any come betweene them,
they loſe of their honour, and would thinke
themſelues put downe, like a gueſt which is
ſet lower, or a Iuſtice which is turned out of
office. For ſo GOD doth humble them and
diſgrace them, which diſhonour their calling,
as he did Saul: when the princely Spirite
departed from him,1 Sam. 22. 7. his ſonnes, and his
daughters, and his ſubiects did fauour Dauid
more than him,1 Sam. 19. 4 that he could do nothing
with them,1. Sa 18. 7. becauſe God did not loue him,
hee would not let his ſeruaunts loue him.
But when Dauid came to the Crowne,1. Sā 22. 17. becauſe
he had grace with God,2. Sam. 5. 10 he proſpered
in all that he went about, and euer reformed
what he would: for the Lord (as hee ſaide)
ſubdued the people vnto him:
               Pſal. 18. 48 that is, made
them incline to his will: as wee reade of Saul

in the beginning of his raigne before hee had
rebelled,1. Sa. 10. 26 
               a band of men did cleaue to him, of
whom it is ſayd, whoſe hearts God hath touched:
as though while the Rulers hearts doe
ſtand toward God, the peoples hearts ſhould
ſtand toward them, and they ſhould carrie
them like God to all their deſires: as it is ſaid
of Dauid,2. Sa. 32. 6. 
               What ſoeuer the King did, pleaſed all
the people.
            
            Therefore looking into this Diuine ordinaunce,
what a power they haue ouer the
people, which they ſhoulde neuer haue got
from men, if GOD had not giuen it them,
I haue thought it an eaſie matter to redreſſe
an hundred things which trouble Chriſtendome
without reaſon, and none would kicke
agaynſt it, if theſe Gods would caſt downe
their Crownes, and begin to the reſt, for all
ſtay vpon them, like the alarme which ſoundeth
firſt to the battell: for our experience
ſhewes, that there will bee no great good
done, if the example of the beſt giue not light
vnto the reſt.
            Oh, woulde that Princely ſpirite woulde
once come vpon them to go before the people,Numb. 27. 17.
which Moſes appoynted for the Kings
place, and not lagge after them like Herod
which ſayde,Mat. 2. 8. he would come after the wiſe
men to Chriſt:Ioh 3. 1. for if Nicodemus come by

night, no maruaile though the reſt come not
at all. Thus their name tels them how they
ſhould rule, and by conſequence teacheth
how we ſhould obey: God calles them Gods,
therefore he which contemneth them contemneth
God: God cals them fathers, therefore
wee muſt reuerence them like Fathers:
God cals them Kings, Princes, Lords, Iudges,
Powers, Rulers, Gouernours, which are names
of honor: and ſhall we diſhonor them whom
GOD doth honour? Our firſt leſſon, is Feare
God:
               Pro. 24. 21. the next is, Honour the King: that is, (as
Paul interpreteth) Wee muſt obey for conſcience,
               1. Pet. 2. 17.
not againſt conſcience:
               Rom. 13. 5. for that were to
put a ſtraunger before the King, and the King
before God, which Chriſt ſaith, haue no power
but from God: and therefore cannot make
themſelues Magiſtrates,Ioh. 19. 11. no more then they
can make themſelues Gods.
               Heb. 5. 4. As none could
giue this name but GOD, ſo no man which
exalteth himſelfe can challenge this honour,
no more then Simon Magus was great,Act. 8. 9. becauſe
hee called himſelfe a great man. But
they to whom GOD ſaith, I haue called yee
Gods, as if he had the naming and appointing
of them.Rom. 13. 2. 
               Euery power is from God, for by nature
no man can challenge power ouer other,
but by the Word,
               1. Pet. 2. 13 and therefore euery ſoule
which is subiect to God muſt be ſubiect to them,
               
for hee which calles them Kings cals vs Subiects:
               Ier. 27. 12
this is their patent (as the Queene of
Sheba ſayd to Salomon) that God had choſen
them kings and ſet them vpon the throne.
               2. Cro. 9. 3. As he
ſayd,Gen. 1. and all things were made, ſo as he ſaith,
al things ſhould be. Therefore vnles ye heare
this, I ſay that ye are Lords, Iudges, and Magiſtrates,
ye are no Lords, no Iudges, no Magiſtrates
of GOD. And therefore the Pope
and his Cleargie to whom God neuer ſayd,
yee are Lords, or Iudges, or Magiſtrates, are
no Lordes, no Iudges, no Magiſtrates of
GOD, but that which the Lorde ſayth they
are, that they are, and no more, though they
put on a triple crowne. If they were worthie
to bee called as others, Paſtors, Doctors,
and Teachers, wee woulde giue them thoſe
titles. They which giue them more then the
Lord giues them, make them proud, and inſolent,
and tyrannous, more then they which
are Lords; Iudges, and Magiſtrates indeede.
But for theſe vſurped titles and baſ-borne
honour which they haue encroached from
men (which puffe them vp, and trouble them
like Sauls armour) they woulde haue intended
the duetie of Miniſters and Teachers,1. Sa. 17. 39. as
the Apoſtles did, whereas nowe they are ſo
cumbred and mingled by their vſurping ouer
Princes, that they are neither good Miniſters,

nor good Magiſtrates, but Linſie
wolſie, a mingle mangle betweene both, nay
vtterly falne from both, being no ſhepherds
but woolues, of whoſe ſlaughters all Chriſtian
Kingdomes haue been the ſhambles, who
ſeeking a ſuperfluous title, they haue for gone
all neceſſarie dueties: and but for their formalities,
a man could not knowe of what
profeſſion they are, for they neuer preach
nor write, but to maintaine their kingdome
which falles (like the Tower of Babel) faſter
then they build.Gen. 11. Therefore as Naomi ſayd,
Call me no more Naomi,
               Ruth. 1. 20. 
               which ſignifieth beautifull:
but call me Mara, which ſignifieth bitter:
ſo they may ſay, Call vs no more Biſhops,
or Paſtors, or Doctors, or Preachers, but
call vs robbers, and ſleepers, and giants, and
Phariſies, whom we ſucceed. For why ſhould
they be called Biſhops which doe not watch,
or Paſtors which doe not feede, or Doctors
which doe not teach, or Iuſtices which doe
not Iuſtice? except this bee the reaſon, The
Idols were called Gods,Exo. 20. 23. though they were
vnlike God. If their bodies had growen as
farre out of ſquare ſince Chriſts aſcenſion, as
their titles, pompe and honour, they might
ſtand in the maine ſeas and not be drowned,
for their heads would crowe aboue the water.
            
               
It followeth: But yee ſhall die as a man.
Heere hee diſtinguiſheth betweene mortall
Gods and the immortall God. Yee haue ſeene
their glorie, now behold their ends, They ſhall
all die like others. Though they be neuer ſo
rich, ſo goodly, ſo mightie, ſo honourable
while their date laſteth, yet they may as
trulie as Iob call Corruption their father,
               Iob. 17. 14. 
               and
the worme their mother: for the graue ſhall be
the last bed of all fleſh. As they were borne
like men, ſo they ſhall die like men, the ſame
comming in and going out is to all: nay, if
ye reſpect but the bodie, hee might ſay, yee
ſhall die like beaſtes: for Man being in honor,
(ſaith Dauid) may well be compared vnto beaſts
that periſh:
               Pſal. 49. though hee bee in honour, yet he
periſheth like the beaſts which haue no honour,
and death will not take his kingdome
for a raunſome, when GOD dooth but ſay,
his time is come. When Eſay had ſaide,
that All fleſh was graſſe:
               Eſay 40. as though hee
would correct his ſpeech, hee addes, and
the glorie of it is as the flower of the field. As if
he ſhould ſay, Some men haue more glorie
than other, and they are like flowers, the other
are like graſſe: no great difference, the flower
ſhewes fairer, but the graſſe ſtands longer,
one ſieth cuttes both downe, like the fatte
ſheepe and the leane that feede in two paſtures,

but are killed in one ſlaughter. So
though the great Man liue in his pallace, and
the poore man dwelles in his cottage, yet
both ſhall meete at the graue, and vaniſh
together. Euen they which are Lordes and
Iudges and Counſailers now, are but ſucceſſors
to them which are dead, and are neerer
to death now than when I beganne to
preach of this theame. It had been a great
Seſſions for all other to die: but for Magiſtrates,
for Princes, for Kinges, for Emperors
to die as they die: What a battell is this, that
leaues no man a liue? Shall the Gods die too?
Hee giues them their title, but he telles them
their lot. Though their power, though their
wealth, though their honour, though their
titles, though their train, though their friends,
though their caſe, though their pleaſures,
though their diet, though their cloathing
be not like other, yet their ende ſhall be like
other: nay, their endes are like to bee more
fearefull than other: For GOD makes him
examples of great men, as he did of Pharaoh,
and therefore wee ſee ſo many ſtrange and
ſodaine deathes of Princes,Exod. 9. 16. more than of other.
            Therefore hee ſpake heere with the leaſt
when hee ſaide, Yee ſhall die like other, for
verie fewe of them eſcape the Swoorde,

or knife, or poyſon, which other neuer or very
ſeldome feare. But if all your ſubiectes were
your friendes, yet yee ſhall dye like them: for
are yee not colde when Winter comes, are
yee not withered when ages comes, are yee
not weake when ſickeneſſe comes, and ſhall
yee not goe (aſwell as the meaneſt) when
death comes?
            Therefore bee not proud of thine honour
as though it would laſt alwaies, for thou
ſhalt dye, and then all thine honour ſhall forſake
thee, and another ſhall riſe in thy place
as great as thou: and when his glaſſe is run,
another ſhall follow him, and ſo another, till
death haue all.
            Bee not cruell in thine authoritie, as
though it woulde laſte alwaies: for thou
ſhalt dye, and then thy Authoritie ſhall
dye with thee: and they which remayne
aliue, will ſende infinite curſes after thee,
becauſe thy life was as a ſcourge vnto
them.
            Be not ſecure for thy wealth, as though it
would laſt alwaies: for thou ſhalt die, and then
another ſhall take thy riches, and thou ſhalt
goe to giue account how thou commeſt by
them. How many things dooth hee implie
when he ſaith, yee ſhall die? This is a Barre in
their armes, which makes the proudeſt peacocke

laye downe his feathers when hee
thinkes vpon it, though he pricke them vp
againe: whereby the holy ghoſte woulde
haue them learne, that nothing will make
them liue, and rule and deale ſo well in their
thrones, as to remember that they ſhall die,
and ſhortlie giue account for all: ſignifying,
that proſperitie makes vs forgetfull of our
endes, and that theſe mortall Gods, liue as
though they were immortall. A hard thing
for Princes to remember death: they haue
no leaſure to thinke of it, but chop into the
earth before they beware, like a man which
walketh ouer a field couered with ſnow, and
ſees not his way, but when hee thinketh to
runne on, ſodainly falles into a pit: euen ſo
they which haue all things at will, and ſwim
in pleaſure, which as a ſnowe couereth their
waie, and dazeleth their ſight: while they
thinke to liue on, and reioyce ſtill, ſodainely
ruſh vpon death, and make ſhipwrack in the
calme ſea.
            Therefore, as it is good for them to heare
they are Gods: ſo it is meete to knowe they
ſhall die. Wherefore ye ſhall die, ſaith he, in the
next wordes, as if hee would preuent ſome
conceit that they would take of the wordes
which hee caſt out before, hee cooles them
quicklie before they ſwell, and deferres not

to another time, but where he calles them
Gods, there hee calles them wormes meate,
leſt they ſhould crow betweene the praiſe
and the checke, I haue ſaid ye are Gods, but ye
ſhall die, &c. but for this die, manie would
liue a merrie life, and feaſt, and ſport, and let
the world ſlide: but the remembrance of
death is like a dampe, which puts out all the
lightes of pleaſure, and makes him rub and
frounce and whine which thinkes vpon it,
as if a moate were in his eie. O how heauie
tidings is this, to heare thou ſhalt die from
him which hath life and death in his owne
handes, when the meſſage is ſent to them
which raigne like Gods, as if he ſhould ſay,
Euen you which gliſter like Angels, whom
all the world admires, and ſues, and bowes
to, which are called honourable, mightie,
and gracious Lords, I will tell you to what
your honour ſhall come: Firſt ye ſhall wax
olde like others, then ye ſhall fall ſicke like other,
then ye ſhall die like other, then ye ſhall
be buried like other, then ye ſhall bee conſumd
like other, then ye ſhall bee iudged like
other, euen like the Beggers which crie at
your gates; one ſickens, the other ſickens;
one dies, the other dies, one rots, the other
rots, looke in the graue and ſhewe me which
was Diues, and which was Lazarus. This is

ſome comfort to the poore, that once he ſhall
be like the rich, one day he ſhall bee as wealthie,
as mightie, and as glorious as a King,
one hower of death will make all alike: they
which crowed-ouer other, and looked downe
vpon them like Oakes, other ſhall walke vpon
them like worms, and they ſhall be gone,
as if they hadde neuer beene. Where is
Alexander that conquered all the worlde,
and after ſought for an other: becauſe one
woulde not ſatisfie him? Where is Xerxes
which coulde not number his Armie for
multitude? Where is Nemrod, which built
his neſt in the clowdes?Gen. 11. 4. Where is Sampſon
which ſlewe an armie with the iawe of an
Aſſe?Iud. 15. 15. Where is Conſtantine, Nero, Caligula,
Titus, Veſpaſian, Domitian, thunderbolts
in their times? One hundred Princes of
Englande are dead, and but one aliue, the
reſt are gone to giue account how they ruled
here when they ſuſtained the perſon of
God.
            
               Who would haue thought (ſaith Ieremie) that
the enemie ſhoulde haue entred into Ieruſalem,
               Lam. 4. 11.
               and ſpoyled that faire Citie? Yet he brake
into it, and Ieruſalem was ranſackt like
other. Who woulde haue thought that Herod,
which was honoured like a GOD,
ſhould haue beene deuoured with wormes,

and ſauoured that none could abide him?
Yet while hee was in his pompe like an Idol,Acts 12. 23.
ſodainelie hee was ſtroken and all his glorie
like the ſnuffe of a Candell,Iob. 12. 5. which all
men looked vppon euen nowe when it ſhined,
and now it ſo ſauors that they tread it
vnder foote.
            Who woulde haue thought Iezabel that
beautifull temptation,2. Kin. 9. 36 ſhoulde haue beene
gnawed with dogs? Yet ſhee was caſt vnto
dogs, & not an eare left to ſeaſon the graue.
What woulde he thinke, that had ſeene Salomon
in his Roialty, & after ſeen him in the
clay? O world vnworthie to be beloued, who
hath made this proud ſlaughter? Age, Sickenes
and Death, the three ſumners which haue
no reſpect of perſons, made them paie the
ranſome themſelues, and bowe to the earth
from whence they came: there lie the men
that were called Gods. How ſoone the flower
of this world is faded? yeſterdaie the talleſt
Cedar in Libanus, to daie like a broken
ſticke troden vnder foote: yeſterday the ſtate
lieth vppon earth, to daie ſhrouded in earth,
forſaken, forgotten, that the pooreſt wretch
would not bee like vnto him, which yeſterdaie
crouched and bowed to his knees.
Then woe to them which had the names of
God, and ſinnes of men, for the mightie ſhall

be mightilie tormented. All their friends and
ſubiects and ſeruants forſake them, becauſe
they goe to priſon to trie the mercie of hell,
and take what the ſpirites of darkenes will
heape vpon them: there lie many of the men
which were called Gods, and thus endes the
pilgrimage of Kings, Princes, and Rulers.
This is our life, while we enioy it, we loſe it,
like the Sunne which flies ſwifter than an
Arrowe, and yet no man perceiues that it
moues: Hee which laſted nine hundred
yeares, could not holde out one houre longer,
and what hath hee now more than a
childe, which liued but a yeare?Gen. 5. 27. Where are
they which founded this goodlie Cittie,
which poſſeſſed theſe faire houſes, and walked
theſe pleaſant fieldes, which erected
theſe ſtately Temples, which kneeled in
theſe ſeates, which preached out of this
place but thirtie yeares agoe? Is not earth
turned to earth, and ſhall not our Sunne
ſet like theirs when the night comes? yet
wee cannot beleeue that death will finde
out vs, as he hath found out them: though
all men die, yet euery man dreames I ſhall
ſcape; or at the leaſt I ſhall liue till I bee
olde. This is ſtrange, men cannot thinke
that God will doe againe that which hee
dooth dailie, or that he will deale with them,

as he deales with other: tell one of vs that all
other ſhall die, we beleeue it, tell one of vs we
ſhall die, and we beleeue it ſooner of all than
of one, though we bee ſore, though wee bee
weake, though we be ſicke, though wee bee
elder than thoſe whome wee follow to the
ground. So they thought which lie in this
mould vnder your feete as you doe. If wiſedome,
or riches, or fauour, could haue intreated
death, thoſe which haue liued before vs
would haue kept our poſſeſſions from vs, but
death would take no bale, wee are all Tenants
at will, and we muſt leaue this Cottage
whenſoeuer the Landlord will put an
other in our roome, at a yeares, at a moneths,
at a weekes, at a daies, at an houres warning,
or leſſe: the cloathes which we weare vpon
our backes, the graues which are vnder our
feete, the Sunne which ſets ouer our heades,
and the meates which go into our mouthes,
doe crie vnto vs, that we ſhall weare, and ſet,
and die like the beaſtes, and fowles, & fiſhes
which now are dead in our diſhes, and but
euen now were liuing in the Elements. Our
Fathers haue ſummoned vs, and wee muſt
ſummon our children to the graue. Euerie
thing euerie daie ſuffers ſome Eclipſe, nothing
ſtandeth at a ſtay, but one creature
cals to another, Let vs leaue this world. While
wee play our Pageants vpon this ſtage of

ſhort continuance, euerie man hath a part,
ſome longer, and ſome ſhorter, and while
the Actors are at it, ſodainelie death ſteps
vpon the ſtage like a hauke which ſeparates
one of the Doues from the flight, he ſhootes
his dart, where it lights, there fals one of the
Actors dead before thē, and makes al the reſt
agāſt, they muſe and mourne, and burie him,
and then to the ſport againe: While they
ſing, play, and daunce, death comes againe,
& ſtrikes another, there he lies, they mourne
him, and burie him as they did the former,
and play againe: ſo one after another, till
the plaiers bee vaniſhed like the accuſers
which came before Chriſt, and Death is the
laſt vpon the ſtage, ſo the figure of this worlde
paſſeth away.
               Iona. 8. 9. Many which ſtand heere, may
lie here or elſwhere within this twelue moneth.
But thou thinkeſt, It is not I, and hee
thinketh, It is not he: but he which thinkes
ſo, commeth ſooneſt to it. If I could make
you beleeue, that ye haue but a yeare to liue,
and that all which heare mee this day, ſhall
come to the barre before this daie tweluemoneth
returne againe, ye would prepare
your ſelues to die, and leaue your ſinnes behinde
you, and depart Chriſtians out of the
Church, with a minde to do all that God wil
haue you, that when the tweluemoneth is
ended, ye might liue with Angels in heauen,

and eſcape that fierie lake, where the Glutton
begs but a drop of water to coole the tip
of his tongue, and it will not bee graunted
him, leaſt it ſhould eaſe him. But nowe wee
know not whether we ſhall liue a weeke to
an end, we will doe nothing that he bids vs,
but abide the venture, and trie the marker
what God wil giue for ſinne, ſo one is taken
after another,Gen. 19. 26. and becauſe we are not ready,
we go againſt our will, like Lots wife out of
Sodom. This is our faſhion to ſee the beſt laſt,
till we can neither forſake our ſin, nor hope
of mercie. Thus I haue proclaimed to all
Kings,1. Kin. 20. 1. Princes, Iudges, Counſellors and Magiſtrates,
that which Eſay foretold to one, Set
thy things in order, for thou ſhalt die: Yet 15.
yeeres were behind when the Prophet warned
him to ſet al things in order. But I cānot
promiſe you 15. yeeres, for many Princes do
not raigne ſo long, for one that doth. That
which Eſay ſpake to one, God here pronounceth
of all, yee ſhall die, therefore the meſſage
is ſent to you, and when ye think of your honour,
think of your end. Theſe 2. notes, that ye
are Gods, and that yee ſhall die, the holy Ghoſt
thought enough to teach you how to liue,
and how to rule. And that wee may bee all
like Gods hereafter, let vs prepare before the
accompt: for none are in heauen but they
that left the world, before it left them.
            
               
Therefore let vs praie that GOD would
keepe vs in remembrance of his iudgements
that the ſubtiltie of ſinne neuer ſteale our
hearts from him, but that we may count this
life a reſpite to repent before the Iudge ſit to
deuide betweene the ſheepe and the goates,
when we ſhall giue account of all his inſtructions,
corrections and benefites, euen
of this ſeede which hath beene
ſowne ſince yee came in,
how yee haue receiued
his worde
this houre.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            The Triall of Vanitie.
            
               Eccleſ. 1. 2.
               Vanitie of vanities ſaith the Preacher: Vanitie
of vanities: All is vanitie.
            
            
               THis booke begins with All
is vanitie,
               Eccl. 12. 13 and endes with
Feare God and keepe his commandements.
If that ſentence
were knit to this which Salomon
keepeth to the end, as
the hauen of reſt, after the turmoyles of vanitie:
it is like that which Chriſte ſayde to
Martha:
               Luk. 10. 40. 
               Thou art troubled about many things,
but one thing is neceſſarie. That which troubleth
vs, Salomon calles Vanitie: That which
is neceſſarie hee calles the Feare of GOD:
from that, to this, ſhould be euerie mans pilgrimage
in this worlde: we begin at Vanitie,
and neuer know perfectly that we are vaine,
vntill wee repent with Salomon. Therefore
this is his firſt greeting and leſſon to all after
his conuerſion, to warne them that All is vanitie,
               
as if God had ſaid to him as he ſaide to
Ezechiel,
               Ezec. 16. 2. 
               Cauſe Ieruſalem to know her abhominations,
               Iob. 15. 31.
as though men did not knowe their
ſinnes how vaine they are, as Eliphaz ſaieth,
He beleeueth not that he is vaine, which makes
euerie man deferre his repentance, vntill the
verie houre come that ſinne maketh preparation
to leaue him, and then fainting hee is
vnwilling to depart, becauſe he is not readie.
Therfore I haue choſen this ſentence; which
ſpeakes of nothing but vanitie, to ſhew how
wee take the waie to miſerie for the waie to
happines, and turne the day of ſaluation to
the day of vanitie. Let euerie man thinke as
I goe in this matter, why he ſhould loue that
which Salomon repented, if he think Salomon
happier after he repented, thā he was before.
This verſe is the ſumme or contentes of all
this booke, and therefore Salomon beginnes
with it, and ends with it, as if he ſhould ſaie,
Firſt this is the matter which I will prooue,
and after, this is the matter which I haue proued,
now you ſee whether I tolde you true,
that All is vanitie. I may call it Salomons
Theame, or the fa
                  •
               dle of vanities, which when
he hath bound in a bundle, he bids vs caſte it
into the fire: for after hee hath done with
them in his laſt chapter and thirteenth verſe
as though hee would haue no more thought
of them, he turnes away from them, as if hee

had buried them & goes to another matter,
ſaying, Now let vs heare the end of all, Feare
God and keeep his commaundements: for this is
the whole dutie of man: as though hee were
exceeding glad that after ſo many daungers
through the rout of vanitie, yet GOD let
him ſee the hauen of reſt, and brought him
to the right end, and ſet him vpon ſhoare,
where hee might ſee his vanities,Exod. 14. 30. as Moſes
looked back vpon his enemies, & ſaw them
drowned behind him.
            The whole narration doth ſhew that Salomon
wrote this book after his fall. When
he had the experience of vanities, and ſeene
the folly of the world, what euill comes of
pleaſure, and what fruite groweth of ſinne,
he was bold to ſay, Vanitie of vanities, &c.
which he auoucheth with ſuch proteſtation,
as though he would iuſtifie it againſt many
aduerſaries: For all the world is in loue with
that which he calles vanitie. Therefore hee
puts to his name in the middeſt of his ſentence,
as if hee would defend it againſt all
commers: if any man ask, who broched this
ſtrange doctrine? the Preacher (ſaith Salomō
               )
To teſtifie his heartie conuerſion to God, he
cals himſelfe a Preacher, in the witnes of his
vnfained repentance, as if God had ſaid vnto
him Thou being conuerted, conuert thy brethren
and be a Preacher, as thou art a King:
               
ſo when we are conuerted, wee ſhould become
Preachers vnto other, and ſhew ſome
fruits of our calling, as Salomon left this book
for a monument to all ages of his conuerſiō.
Therefore they which write, that Salomon
dyed in his ſinne, and that ſuch a famous inſtrument
of God went to the damned, doe
great wrong to the worthie King which
giues them ſuch an example to repent, and
would correct their raſh iudgement, if they
conſidered. Firſt, that he was the cleereſt figure
of Chriſt (except Melchiſedec) which
paſſed all Kings in proſperitie, and all men
in wiſedome. Secondly that hee was inſpired
by the Holie Ghoſt like the prophets,Pſal. 45. 7. to
bee one of the pennes of God to write his
holy word, the word of ſaluation, which was
not fit for a reprobate. Thirdlie, that GOD
promiſed to his father, that hee would not
take his ſpirit and his mercie from him as he
did frō 
               Saule,
               1. Cor. 17. 13 nor forſake him as he did Saule
but correct him in another ſort. Fourthlie,
that GOD is ſaid to loue him,2. Sā. 7. 13. therefore as
Paule concludes that Iacob was elected,2. Sam. 12. becauſe,Nehe. 13. 6
God ſaith,Rom. 9. 
               Iacob haue I loued:
               Gen. 27. So we
may conclude, that Salomon was elected,
becauſe God ſaith; Salomon haue I loued.
Fiftly, that in Luke 13. 28. Al the Prophets
of God are ſaid to be in heauen: and therefore
Salomon being an holie Prophet muſt

beholden to be in heauen. To ſhew that he
was a holy prophet, in 2. Pet. 3, 2. Peter calleth
all the Prophets which wrote the Scripture,
Holie Prophets. Laſtly we may gather
out of the ſeauenth Chapter of this booke
and the thirtieth verſe, and out of the 5. of
the Prouerbes, and the fourteenth verſe that
Salomon had left his concubines and vanities
before he wrote this booke.1 King. 11. 45 Therefore
to ſay that the figure of Chriſt,2 Cor. 9. 31 the penne of
the holie Scripture, the man whom God loued,
the wiſeſt man that euer was, and one
of the holie prophets died a reprobate, is
preſumption againſt the Word, impietie againſt
God,1. King. 11. 4. 5 and wrong to the dead. Although,
becauſe of his grieuous fal in Idolatrie,1. Cor. 10. 12.
and vncleanneſſe, GOD left him in diſgrace,
and makes no mention of his repentance,
where hee ſpeakes of his death, that
they which ſtand, may take heed leſt they fall,
and ſee how eaſie it is to ſlip, by the exāple
of him which was wiſer than they. Salomon
being wicked and yet ſaued, was a figure of
the Church whoſe ſinnes are forgiuen. Thus
hauing found as it were the Mine: now let
vs digge for the treaſure. Vanitie of vanities,
&c. This is Salomons concluſion, when hee
had gone through the whole world & tried
all thinges like a ſpye ſent into a ſtraunge
country, as if he were now come home from

his pilgrimage, they gather about him to inquire
what he hath heard and ſeene abroad,
and what he thinks of the world, and theſe
things which are ſo loued among men, like a
man in admiratiō of that which he had ſeen
and not able to expreſſe particularly one after
another, hee contracts his newes into aword:
you aſke me what I haue ſeene, and
what I haue heard: Vanitie ſaith Salomon: &
what els? Vanitie of vanities: and what els?
All is vanitie.
               Eccl. 2. 11 This is the hiſtory of my voyage,
I haue ſeen nothing but vanitie ouer the
world. Carrie this for the newes from the
Preacher: vanitie of vanities, Al is vanitie,
as if hee ſhould ſay Vanitie, and greater Vanitie,
and more than Vanitie: ſo the further
hee did goe, the more Vanitie hee did ſee,
and the nearer he looked, the greater it ſeemed:
till at the laſt he could ſee nothing but
vanitie.
            
            When he was come to this, that he did ſee
all things vaine, vpon which men ſet their
heartes, he was moued with compaſſion and
could be ſilent no longer, but needes hee
muſt write to them which ſeeke felicitie (as
he did in tranſitorie things, to warne them
that they ſeek it not any longer in theſe fooliſh
things, which haue no ſtability nor contentation,
but flie from them to The feare
of God, which hath the promiſes of this life

and the life to come.2. Tim. 3. 8. Therefore he beginnes
with All is vanitie,
               1. Ioh. 2. 15. as if he ſhould ſay: Loue
not the world nor the things of the world, For
I haue tryed that there is no certaintie in
them.
            Thus hee withdraweth them, Firſt, from
the wrong way,Eccl 12. 13 and then ſets them in the
right way to happines, which he defineth at
laſt, to Feare God and keepe his Commaundements.
When he had gone through a thouſand
vanities, then that comes in at the ende,
euen like our repentance which ſtaies till
death: So his drift is to ſhew that mans happineſſe
is not in theſe things which we count
of, but in thoſe which we deferre: his reaſon
is, they are all vanitie: his proofe is, becauſe
there is no ſtabilitie in them, nor contentatiō
of minde: his concluſion is, therfore contemne
the world, and looke vp to Heauen
from whence ye came, and whither yee ſhall
goe.
            This is the ſcope which Salomon aymes
at, as though wee did all ſeeke happineſſe:
but we goe a wrong waie vnto it: Therefore
he ſounds a retyre, ſhewing that if wee
holde on our courſe, and goe forwards as we
haue begun, wee ſhall not finde happineſſe,
but great miſerie, becauſe we goe by vanitie.
Therefore to fright vs out of this way, hee

breakes forth into an exclamation, Vanitie of
vanities, All is vanitie.
            
            Now, Salomon full of wiſedome, and ſchooled
with experience, is licenſed to giue his
ſentence of the whole world.1. Cor. 2. 15 For the ſpirituall
man iudgeth all things, his iudgement is ſo
certaine, that it runnes before the Euidence,
and condemnes al for Vanitie, before he conuince
them to be vaine, whereas wee prooue
firſt and condemne after, becauſe our words
are no authorities: hee concludes firſt and
prooues after: neuer any iudge did condemne
ſo manie together. Salomon reſolued all the
queſtions of the Queene Shebah,
               2. Cor. 9. 2. yet Salomon
neuer aunſwered ſo many queſtions at
once as now: for what can you enquire, but
heere you haue an anſwere? Aske him as the
Souldiers, and harlots, and Publicans asked
Iohn, What is ſinne? Vanitie ſaith Salomon.
What is Pleaſure?
               Luk. 12. 14. 
               Vanitie too. What is Beautie?
Vanitie too. What is Riches? Vanitie
too. What is Honour? Vanitie too. What is
Long life? Vanitie too. This is the ſtate of all
things after the fall, all turne to Vanitie.
This is no reproch to the things, but ſhame
to him which ſo abuſed them, that all things
ſhould be called Vanitie for him. What a teſtimonie
is this of him which ſhould bee the
onely ſeruant of God on earth, whome hee

created in holines and righteouſnes whom
he framed to his owne Image, whom he placed
in Paradiſe, and woulde haue raiſed to
heauen to heare that he hath ſo polluted his
life with euerie ſinne, that now there is nothing
but Vanitie? That is a lamentable ſong
which will make him weepe that tunes it, if
hee thinke what he ſaith, how his ſtate is
chaunged ſince Adam his father died. Once
God ſaith,Gen. 1. that all was good, and now he ſaith
that all is nought and vaine, as though he
forbad man, that which he created for man.
That is not Salomons meaning to debarre
men from the vſe of creatures:Rom 8. 20. although all
things changed with man, & became worſe
than they were: yet hee dooth heere rather
ſhewe, that man reapes nothing but Vanitie
out of theſe things, by reaſon of his corruption,
than that the things themſelues are
vaine, if they were well vſed. For euen ſince
the creation, Paule ſaith 1. Tim. 4. That euerie
creature of God is good, and nothing is to be
reiected, if it be receiued, or vſed with thankeſgiuing,
for it is ſanctified by the worde of God
and praier. That is it, which maketh them
profitable to vs, which becauſe it is wanting
for the moſt part, therfore Salomon ſaith that
all are vaine to vs, not vaine of themſelues,
but becauſe they are not ſanctified as they
ſhould be, therefore in the 2. 24. the 3. 12.

and 22. the 5. 17. the 8. and 15. he ſhewes a
way how we may make profit of all, and reioyce
in our labours and finde a lawfull pleaſure
in earthly things, ſo often he cals to the
vſe leſt wee ſhould erre as the Monkes and
Eremits haue done before, miſtaking theſe
wordes, when he ſaith that All is vanity, they
haue forſaken all companie, & gouernement
and office and trade, and got themſelues into
the wildernes amongſt beaſts, to liue in quiet
and ſilence, ſaying, that men could not liue in
the world, and pleaſe God, becauſe All is vanitie:
ſo while they counted all things vaine,
they became vain themſelues, and left thoſe
bleſſings which Salomon inioyed after his
knowledge, more than he did before. Therefore
it is vaine man which Salomon reproueth,
which is not onelie called Vanitie, but
lighter thā Vanitie.
               Pſal. 62. 9. If he did not things vainely,
nothing ſhould bee vaine in the worlde,
whereas now by abuſe we may ſe ſometime
as great vanitie in the beſt things, as in the
worſt: For are not many vaine in their knowledge,
vaine in their pollicies, vaine in their
learning, as other are vaine in their ignorance?
Was not the wiſedom of Achitopel a
vaine thing? The ſwiftnes of Hazael a vaine
thing? The ſtrength of Goliah a vaine thing?
The treaſures of Nabuchadnezzar a vaine
thing? The honour of Ammon a vaine thing?

The beautie of Abſolon a vaine thing? The
knowledge of the Scribes a vaine thing? The
deuotion of the Phariſies a vaine thing. And
ſo is the learning of all thoſe a vaine thing,
that do no good with it, but either it lies vnder
a buſhell and mouldes, or elſe it prattles
like Tertullus alwaies againſt Paul:
               Act. 24. 5. ſtriuing
to make warre betweene them which loue
dearer than any brethren.
            By this you may ſee that vanitie is bolde
when ſhe breaks into houſes and Churches
and Pallaces, and ſometime vanitie may
come to infect, where Trueth may not come
to reprooue: Is it not high time then to
ſounde this Alarum againe, Vanitie of vanities?
&c.
            
            If we could heare how vehementlie, and
how pittifullie Salomon pronounced this
outcrie, happilie it would moue vs a little to
heare how hee did exclame of his owne life
and condemned himſelfe, as it were by the
ſounde of a Trumpet that all might heare:
For we are all by nature ſuch deafe Adders,
that whether the Prophets come piping, or
mourning, or crying, they goe away from vs
againe mourning like Ieremie,
               Iere. 5. 9. 
               we would haue
cured Babel, but ſhe would not be cured. Nay
the Citie of Ieruſalem would not (ſaith our Sauiour
Chriſt) when hee wept for his Iſraelites.
            
               
Therefore, Salomon ſpeakes thrice, like a
Cryer, Vanitie of vanities: as the mother
which would faine make her ſonne to heare,
ſhe doubles and trebles her wordes: What
my ſonne and what the ſonne of my wombe,
               Pro. 31. 1 and
what the ſonne of my deſires? So when GOD
would ſtirre vs vp to heare, he crieth thrice
to the earth and ſaith, Earth, earth, earth,
heare the word of the Lord:
               Iere. 22. 39. ſo when Salomon
would diſſwade from the companie of the
wicked: reade Prouerbs 4. 1▪
                4: how often he
repeates the charge: Enter not into the waie
of the wicked, walke not in it, auoid it, goe not by
it, turne from it, and paſſe by, as though hee
would neuer haue done, or as though wee
woulde neuer heare. So Chriſt when hee
taught Peter what was his duetie, rehearſed
it thrice:Ioh. 21. 16. 
               Feede: Feede: Feede. Ioſeph ſheweth
the reaſon of theſe repetitions, when hee
telles Pharaoh why his dreame was doubled,Gen. 41. 32.
becauſe the matter was important and
certaine. Therefore when Salomon repeates
this ſaying ſo often, he calles for audience,
as though hee had ſome waightie and great
matter to vtter. Such a point of wiſedome
it is for euerie man to knowe that All is vanitie,
if we direct not things to their right
end, as when the Holy Ghoſt would ſignifie
that God is all holie, he repeated thrice, holie,
               Eſay. 6.
               holie, holie: So when hee ſhoulde ſhewe

that man is al vaine thrice he repeateth vanitie,
to ſhew how hardlie man beleeues that
he is vaine: therefore he brings in three aſſertions,Iob. 15. 31.
as it were three witneſſes to prooue
it. All agree vppon the ſame words, but that
the laſt is more plaine, and ſaieth that All is
vanitie: that is, that man is not onely changed
and become vaine: but for the vanitie,
of man,Rom. 8. 20 as the Apoſtle ſaieth, The creatures
are ſubiect to vanitie, and haue not the glory and
libertie which they ſhould haue, for the ſinne of
man. A ſpirituall eie doth ſee ſome vanitie
or other in euery thing, as appeareth betwixt
Chriſt and his Diſciples at Ieruſalem. They
gazed vpon the building of the Temple as a
braue thing,Luk. 21. 5. and would haue Chriſt to behold
it with them: but he did ſee that it was
but vanitie, and therfore ſaide: Are theſe
the things that yee looke vpon? as if he ſhould
ſay: How vaine are you to gaze vppon this?
If Chriſt thought the beauty of his Temple
a vaine thing, & not worth the ſight, which
yet was beautified and built by his owne
preſcription: how ſhould Salomon expreſſe
all the vanitie of the world,Mat. 24. 1 to which all men
haue added more and more ſince the beginning?Iohn. 21. 5.
Therefore as if he wanted wordes to
expreſſe it, as hee did ſee it, hee breakes
foorth into an exclamation, and repeates the
ſame often, Vanitie of vanities: as if hee

ſhould ſay I cānot ſpeak how vain the world
is, but vaine it is, and very vaine, and nought
but vaine, ſpeaking as if hee had the feeling
and ſenſe of it, as though the worlde ſtoode
naked before him, and it grieued him to ſee,
he cuts his words in chiding maner, & makes
ſhort riddance, as if it irked him to ſpeake all
that he knewe, therefore that which hee
ſpeakes he ſpeakes roundly, that if they read
no more, but ſleepe all the Sermon after:
yet the firſt ſentence ſhall ſtrike a ſting into
their heartes, and leaue a ſounde behinde to
waken them when they are gone, as manie
(you know) remember this ſentence, which
remember no ſentence in all his booke beſide.
Who hath not heard Vanitie of vanities
&c. Though fewe haue conceiued it?
This is the phraſe of Scripture, when the holy
Ghoſt would commende the ſong of Salomon
aboue all other ſongs, hee calles it the
ſong of ſonges, ſo called in the Hebrewe and
mentioned 1. King. 4. 32. When he woulde
exalt the heauenly king aboue all, hee calles
him the King of kings, ſo when he woulde
note a greate vanitie, and yet a greater, and
a greater than that, which is the greateſt of
all, he calles it Vanitie of vanities, as when we
would note a great foole, we will ſay a foole
of fooles, a ſin of ſins, a ſeruant of ſeruantes,
Theſe are ſcornefull names to the worlde,

and homelie titles, to giue our pleaſures, to
call them Vanitie of vanities, and againe
Vanitie of vanities, and yet againe Vanitie,
as though wee woulde prouoke them to fall
out with vs, like a man which ſharpens his enemie
with taunts, when he woulde egge
him to fight. Hee might haue mollified his
tearmes, before hee condemned the worlde
thriſe, but the worlde is no changling that
Salomon ſhoulde change his iudgement, but
vaine it was, vaine it is, and vaine it will bee,
and therefore a thriſe vaine worlde hee may
call it: Firſt, Vanity, ſtraight Vanity of vanities,
and ſodainelie All is vanitie What a
tranſcendent is this? as though it increaſed
while he ſpake, ſo faſt groweth this weede
to worſe and worſe, like the Image which
appeared to Nabuchadnezzar,
               Dan. 2. the firſt part
was of Golde, the ſecond of Siluer, the
third of Braſſe, the fourth of Iron, the fifth of
clay, ſo by many changes the world growes
worſe and worſe, and all they which folow
it. When a man begins to like of pleaſure, &
opens the doore to one vanitie which hee
loues, ſtraight as many vanities floch to him,
as Salomon had Concubines, till the Temple
of God be like a den of theeues. Therefore
when Salomon beheld ſuch apluralitie, and
Totquot of Vanities,1. Kin. 11. 
                     •
                  
                like Surges comming
one vppon another in pleates and in

foldes, he ſpake as though he would ſhewe
vs Vanity hatching vanities, Vanity of Vanities,
all is Vanity. The firſt ſaying dooth
paſſe without let, but the laſt rubs and ſinks
not into the heartes of men ſo eaſilie as it is
ſpoken. Me thinkes I heare ſome diſpute for
Baal, and bid Salomon ſtay before he come to
All is Vanity. It may bee that ſinne is vanity,
and pleaſure is vanitie: but ſhall we condemne
all for ſinne and pleaſure? What ſay
you to Beautie which is natures dowrie, and
cheareth the eie, as ſweete meate doeth the
taſte? Beautie is like a faire picture, take awaye
the colour and there is nothing left.
Beautie in deede is but a colour and a temptation,
the colour fadeth, and the temptation
ſnareth. But what ſaie you to Riches
which make men Lordes ouer the reſt, and
allow them to goe braue, and lie ſoft, & fare
daintilie, and haue what they liſt? Riches
are like painted grapes, which looke as
though they would ſatisfie a man, but doo
not ſlake his hunger, nor quench his thirſt,
Riches in deede to make a man couet more,
and get enuie, and keepe the minde in care.
But what ſay you to Honour, which ſets a
man a loft, and makes the knee bowe, & the
tongue ſooth and the heade ſtand bare, as
though they were other kinde of creatures
aboue them?
            
               
Honour is like a King in a play: when his
part is done, his ornamentes are taken from
him, and hee which helde the baſon to him
is as good as hee. Honour in deed may commaund
all but life: hee makes a faire ſhewe
now: but when death comes, all is one.
            But what ſay you to profound Knowledge
in deepe myſteries, which makes men ſought
vnto,2. Sam. 11. and called deepe Clarkes, and great
Doctours? Knowledge is like the Letters
which Vriah carried againſt himſelfe: ſo
Knowledge draweth a greater iudgement,
and oftentimes condemnes the bearer.
Knowledge without Vertue, leaues a man
without excuſe, and is a witnes againſt him,
becauſe hee vnderſtandes what is good, and
will not doe it. Yet there is another darling
of account behinde:Pſal. 128. what ſay you to Long
life, which cauſeth a man to ſee his childrens
children, and makes him reuerent before the
people? Long life is like a long night, when
a man cannot ſleepe: ſo age is weariſome
with ſicknes, and ſtriues with it ſelfe becauſe
it cannot walke, nor talke, nor heare, nor ſee,
nor taſte, nor ſleepe, as it was wont: therfore
wiſheth often the night were gone, that the
paine were paſt. Indeede hee that ſees many
daies, ſees many miſeries: and therefore what
is not vayne in life, ſith life it ſelfe is vayne?
Shewe mee the light which will not darken,

ſhewe mee the flowre which will not fade,
ſhewe me the fruite which will not corrupt,
ſhewe mee the garment which will not
weare, ſhew mee the beauty which will not
wither, ſhewe mee the ſtrength which will
not weaken, ſhewe mee the time which will
not paſſe, and I will reclaime that All is vanitie?
but if all things vaniſh, then all things
are vaine, yet this will not goe for truth, before
men haue ſmarted for the triall. Some
are ſo vaine that they count nothing vanitie.
but that which is vainer than the reſt delightes
them moſt,Pro. 12. 12. for there is as it were acommon
weale of vaine perſons,Pro. 14. 9. and hee
which can bee vaineſt, is like a King of the
reſt. Some are of this minde, that they thinke
all is vanitie but that which they loue, and
therefore they call them vaine,Pro. 28. 4. and curious,
and phantaſticall, which ſpeake againſt their
vanities, and ſay that it is neceſſarie to bee
vaine, for they cannot liue vnleſſe they deceiue,
they cannot pleaſe vnles they flatter,
they cannot bee beleeued vnles they ſweare
they cannot be eſteemed vnles they roiſt, as
Demetrius thought that hee ſhould beg vnleſſe
he might ſell Images.Act. 19. 24. There is another
ſort like the buier in Pro. 20. which ſayth. It
is naught, it is naught, but when hee is gone apart
hee boaſteth. So they will ſay of the
worlde, It is naught, It is naught, before men

and ſweare that all is vanitie, but when they
are gone apart, they reconcile themſelues
vnto it and kiſſe it, and promiſe to be vaine
ſtill, but they cannot abide to be counted
vaine, the vaineſt man that is. This ſhewes
that the follie of the worlde is ſo open and
ſhamefull, that her loues muſt needes condemne
her. You ſhall heare them ſay often
times: It is a vaine world, a wicked world,
a naughty world, yet they will not forſake
it to die, like daſtard ſouldiers, who raile againſt
the enemie, but dare not fight againſt
him. Al is vanitie, but this is vanitie of vanities,
that men wil follow that which they
cōdemne. But this is that euery ſinner might
cōdemne himſelfe: for the conſcience muſt
iudge firſt and then God,1. Ioh. 3. 20 as our Sauiour
ſaieth: Out of thine owne mouth, and ſo out
of thine owne heart I wil condemne thee, naughty
ſeruaunt, Shewing that the wicked condemne
themſelues before they are condemned
of God. Theſe are the worldes fooles,
which care not what is their end, ſo that
their way be pleaſant.
            Oh that here were a full ende or concluſion
of Vanities, but beholde, a greater
Vanitie is behind:Mat. 23. 27 for our Religion is Vanitie,
like the Scribes and Phariſies, as Mathew
ſaieth in the 23. Chapter, and 27. verſe
hauing a bare ſhew of holines, as hee ſaieth,

he could call it but a ſhew of holines, & ſcarce
that: our vanitie is vanitie, but our holines is
but a ſhew of holines not worthie to be called
holines but like holines: yet the moſt part
haue not ſo much as the ſhew of holines, as
the Phariſies had, but are vaine in ſhew, inſide
and outſide too. Thus wee finde nothing
yet but vanitie. I cannot leade you
from one vnto another, to ſhew you the
ſeuerall vanities of euerie perſon, or euery
thing, becauſe Salomon ſaith, All is vanitie.
How many ſins then haue we to condemne
vs, whoſe vanities are ſprinkeled in euerie
thing? Which haue not onelie ſo many vanities
as there be things, but many vanities
in euery thing. As in our fare, how many vanities
be there, which makes vs riſe ſomtime
ſicke, ſometime ſleepy, ſometime drunke?
Yet are there more vanities: in our ſportes,
our laughing, and ſwearing and ieſting, and
ſcoffing, and dallying, and playing with the
Scriptures, which oftentimes leaues ſuch a
ſting behinde, that we had rather haue loſt
our ſport, than feele the worme that gnaws
vs for it. And yet there bee more vanities in
our apparrel, ruffe vpon ruffe, lace vpon lace
cut vpon cut, 24. orders to the 3. and 4. degree,
as though our apparrell were apparelled,
vntil the woman be not worth ſo much
as her artire, that if we would ſee vanitie her

ſelfe how ſhe would goe if ſhe did weare apparrel,
ſhe would euen goe like our women:
for ſhe could not goe, nor ſpeake, nor looke
vainer. Who dooth not know that theſe are
vanities, and that they might leaue them, if
they would? But that ye might ſee there is a
heart within vainer than the apparel is without.
Therefore when theſe vanities re worn
out, they wil haue new, and ſtill new, til all
be ſpent vpon vanitie, and then they begin
like the prodigall childe to ſee how vaine
they were,Luke. 15. 12 when they haue bought Wiſedome
with ſorrow. What would Salomon
ſay, if he ſhould ſee how vanitie is growen
ſince his time, what a hight ſhe is mounted,
what a traine followes her, that there is no
prince in the world hath ſo many attendants
as vanitie? She was but an Impe then, but
now ſhe is a mother, and who can number
her ſonnes and daughters: the child is vaine
in playing the mother vaine in dandling, the
father vaine in giuing, the Courtier vaine in
ſpending, the ſouldier vaine in boaſting, the
ſuter vaine in ſtriuing, the trauailer vaine in
talking, the merchant vaine in ſwearing, the
gentleman vaine in building, the huſbandman
vaine in carking, the olde man vaine in
coueting, the Seruingman vaine in ſoothing,
the young man vaine in ſporting, the Papiſt
vaine in ſuperſtition, the proteſtant vaine in

conuerſation. Euery vanitie is ſo pleaſant to
one or other, that they cannot miſſe one. So
ſhe gads by Sea & by land, and ſtill mo diſciples
flock vnto her of gamſters & ſwearers
and players, and tiplers, and hakſters, and
Courtiers, as thicke as the flies of Aegipt,
which buzzed in their eares, and their eies,
and their necks before,Gen. 8. 30. and behind, that a
man cannot ſet his foot but vpon Vanitie.
As the waters couered the earth, when but
eight perſons were ſaued:Gen. 7. 27. ſo vanitie hath couered
it again, a worſe deluge than the firſt,
becauſe it hath not ſuffered eight perſons to
eſcape, but euery man is tainted with ſome
vanitie or other, which God ſeeing in that
place and Citie which ſhould be beſt in the
world,Eſa. 24. 10. (that all men in the citie were vaine)
cals it the Citie of vanitie: So wee may ſay
the world of vanitie, becauſe ſhe hath an intereſt
in euery perſon of it, ſhee ſits vpon the
earth like a Serpent, and hatcheth all the
ſinnes which you ſee amongſt men. As ful as
Heauen is of bliſſe, ſo the world is fraught
with vanitie, Court, Citie & countrey, whither
doth not vanitie goe, but to Heauen?
Seeing then that vanitie is ſo extolled amongeſt
men,Luk. 10. 40 
               Salomon giues his ſentence,
that all is vanitie. Chriſt like a Mediatour
concludes vpon it that there is but one thing
neceſſarie: therefore let our ſentence be like

theirs: For ſure, if wee had Salomons repentance,
we ſhould ſee ſuch an image of vanity
before vs, as would make vs crie againe and
againe as often as Salomon: Vanitie of vanities,
vanitie of vanities, and all is vanitie. What a
ſweet ſentence is this from a King, who may
liue as they liſt by authority, to ſay, that all is
vanitie? Oh, that we might heare Kinges
ſpeake ſo againe: for it is a ſpeech which had
neede of ſome to countenance it, for none
are counted vaine now but they that ſpeake
againſt vanitie. Then Salomon cryed it, but
now we muſt whiſper it. You may ſee how
times are changed: Once this was ſounde
diuinitie, now it is flat railing: to ſay that all
is vanitie, is euen the vpſhot of a diſturber. If
ye aske the Athieſt or Epicure, or theſe rogiſh
plaiers, what is a diſturber? you ſhall ſee
that they will make Salomon one, becauſe he
ſpeaketh againſt vanitie: for this is their definition,
hee which will not allowe men to
prophane the Saboth but ſaith, that Cardes
& dice, & ſtage plaies, & Mai-games & May
poales, & May fooles, and Morris-dauncers
are vanitie, is a pratler, a diſturber, and an
Arch-puſtan,Iohn. 19. 
                     •
                  
                by the lawe which the Iewes
had to kil Chriſt. The reaſon is,Pro. 13. 1. becauſe men
cannot abide to be controlled of their pleaſures.
Therefore they hold it is an offence, to
ſpeake againſt their ſports, or their cuſtoms,

or their follies, or their pleaſures, or their titles,
or their toyes: and they which woulde
not be counted preciſe in theſe times, muſt
take heede that they goe not ſo farre as Salomon
to tearme all Vanitie. But they muſt
ſay, that the vanities of great men are neceſſarie
recreations, & the vanities of the people
are meanes to make vnitie. Greater bookes
are written to maintaine this than Salomon
made to refute it, ſo they haue made their wit
and their learning Vanitie, and are vaine in
Printe. But they that would knowe nowe of
what ſtanding ſuch preciſe reproouers are,
and how ancient this reproofe is, may ſee
heere, that if this bee a crime to call Vanitie,
Vanitie: the wiſeſt man that euer was before
Chriſt was herein criminate, not when hee
ſtrayed, but when hee repented, in his beſt
minde (when he became like a Preacher) he
preached this firſt, Vanitie of vanities, all is vanitie:
yet many had rather trie it with Salomon,
then beleeue it of Salomon: and while
they are wondring with him, ſome are taken
out of their way, and cut ſhorte of the time
which they ſet to repent: from others God
taketh away his grace,2. King. 17. 13 ſo they neuer returne
becauſe their guide is gone. This the holie
Ghoſt pointed at, when he ſaith, They followed
vanitie, & became vaine, ſhewing that the
things wee followe, will make vs like themſelues,

and lead vs whether they belong, to
heauen or hell. In Rom. 8. 20. vanitie is put
for deſtruction, but it is neuer put for ſaluation.
If other creatures are ſubiect to a kinde
of deſtruction for the ſinne of man, as Paul
ſheweth, what deſtruction ſhall light vpon
man for his owne ſinne? Therefore let our
ſentence runne with Salomon, Vanitie of vanities,
all is vanitie. Wee coulde affoord the
worlde better wordes and fairer titles, than
Vanitie of vanities: but call it what we will,
Salomon ſhewes what it is, and what we will
ſay in the end when we haue tried it, then
Vanitie of vanities: yet it is comfort of comforts,
glory of glories, and life of liues. But as
Laban ſhewed himſelfe at parting:Gen. 31. ſo at parting
you ſhall ſee how it will ſerue you, They
ſeeme pleaſant vanities, and honeſt vanities,
and profitable vanities:
               Pſal. 31. 6. but Dauid cals them
deceiptfull vanities.
               Iona. 2. 8. 
               Ionas comes after & cals
them lying vanities, that is, which promiſe
pleaſure, and profite, and all, but deceiue all,
when they ſhould performe. They play Laban
which gaue Leah for Rachel. If they be
lying vanities and deceiptfull vanities, then
are they wofull & miſerable vanities. Therefore,
if we be not come to Salomons concluſion,
to thinke that All is vanitie, it is becauſe
our owne vanitie will not ſuffer vs to ſee the
vanitie of other things. When we haue proued

like Salomon, as faſt as euery man groweth
in knowledge, and experience, ſo he beginnes
to crie vanitie, and after Vanitie of vanities,
and at laſt, All is vanitie: ſo wee contemne
not all at once, but one ſin after another,
one pleaſure after another, till at laſt we
count All is vanitie, and then we are come
home with Salomon and may be Preachers
vnto other. Thus I haue ſhewed vnto you as
it were a limme of vanitie, you may looke about
you and ſee the whole bodie: for if ſhe
be any where in this land, this is her pontiſical
ſeat, where ſhe is neuer nonreſident: now
I will leaue you to examine theſe ſayinges,
whether all things haue not beene in vaine
vnto you yet. If they haue been vaine to you
and yet are good in their owne nature, then
think how vaine you are who haue turned ſo
many good things to vanitie. Yet to ſet you
in the way before I ende, I will anſwer them
which aske, if All things be vanitie: As Salomon
ſaith,Luk. 10. 
               Tell vs what wee ſhould chooſe, that
we be not vaine? Chriſt ſaith, that one thing is
neceſſarie. Is Salomon contrary to Chriſt? No,
therefore one thing Salomon excepts too, to
feare God & keepe his commandements. Therefore
if all be vaine but this,Math. 4. let the Tempter
take thee vp againe, and ſhewe thee the
Kingdomes of the world, when hee ſaith, All
theſe will I giue thee, thou maiſt ſay, All theſe

I contemne, for all is vaine.
            What then?Pſal. 119. 
               Turne away my eies (ſaith the
Prophet Dauid) and my eares, & my heart too
from vanitie. Trie and proue thou no longer,
for Salomon hath proued for thee, it is better
to beleeue him than trie with him. Therefore
now it remaineth that as they brought forth
their vaine bookes ofter Pauls preaching,Act. 19. 19. &
caſt them into the fire: ſo ye ſhould caſt out
all your vanities this day, and ſacrifice them
to God, for they haue been your Idols, therefore
burie them as Iacob did the Idols,Gen. 35. 4. that
neuer man ſaw them after. And as God gaue
Iob other children, ſo they will giue you other
pleaſures, feare not that your ioyes will
goe way with your vanities, as many thinke
they ſhall neuer bee merry againe, if they
ſhould be cōuerted to religion. But as Dauid
daunced before the Arke as merily as Herodias
daunced before the King:2. Sam. 6. 14 ſo knowe vndoubtedlie
that the righteous finde more ioy
in goodnes, than euer the wicked found in
filthines. Nay (ſaith Dauid) more than they
can finde in riches or honours,
               Pſal. 47. 
               when their wheate
and wine abound.
               Pſal. 53. 17. 
               As a horſe is a vaine thing to
ſaue a man: ſo all theſe things are too vaine
to make a man happie. I appeale to your
ſelues, if ye haue tried the pleaſures of vanitie
alreadie, (as I knowe ye haue) whether
yee may readilie ſay with Saint Paule,

What profit haue we of theſe things whereof we
are aſhamed? no profit but ſhame and griefe,
and guilt, & a dreadful expectation of iudgement:Pro. 14. 18.
As Salomon cals folly the inheritaunce
of follie, ſo vanitie is the inheritaunce of vanitie.
Ten times Laban changed Iacobs wages,
but ten thouſand times ſinne hath changed
your wages, and deceiued you with other
ſucceſſe than you looked for, like Shebna
which built his Sepulchre in one Countrey,
and was buried in the other:Eſay. 22. and yet how
many changes are behinde, you knowe not,
for if you did you woulde make inquiſition
now and baniſh them at firſt, for whenſoeuer
ye goe about to caſt them out, they will
ſay ſtill like the Diuels, that thou tormenteſt
them before the time. It ſeemes that manie
are touched with compaſſion of this, & therfore
repriue their vanities, and ſlack the execution,
as though they were affraid to offend
the Diuell:Mat. 8. 29 euen we perhaps are in the trace
of vanitie, hunting with Salomon to finde that
which we loue, and finde it not: becauſe we
ſeeke it out of the way. What is the remedy,
So runne, ſaith Paul, that ye may obtaine, you
haue tried the euil way to happines, now try
the good way,1. Cor. 9. 24 and then that which yee loue
nowe, ſhall not onely ſeeme vaine, but Vanitie
of Vanities: that ye wil maruaile how ye
could loue them ſo long, and would not bee

in that dotage of thē again for all the world.
Vntill theſe earthlie things ſeeme vaine, no
heauenlie things ſhal ſeeme precious, therefore
loſe no more time the daie comes when
Vanitie of vanities ſhall be turned to miſerie
of miſeries, and All is vanitie, to All is miſerie.
There is a certain place called Hel, where
God keepes generall Seſſions, there Iuſtice
ſhall ſit to examine vanity, who hath embraced
her and who hath forſaken her God, and
he which made his pleaſure of ſinne, ſo ſoone
as he heares this doome, Depart from me yee
wicked, ſhall goe downe by a blacke waie
with many a ſigh and 
                  〈◊〉
                from God from
the Angels from the Saints, from ioie, from
glory, from bliſſe with the fiends of hell, to

                  〈…〉
                Pallace of darkenes with the Princes
of horror, at the table of vengeance, in
the 
                  〈◊〉
                of calamitie, with the crowne of
death vpon his head: & he which tempted him
to ſinne, ſhall plague him for ſinning vntil he
crie like Gam, My puniſhment is greater than I
can beare for all the griefes, and feares, and
cares, and troubles, which fed vppon him
while he liued ſhall meete in an houre, and
exceede them ſo farre, that he ſuffers for all,
and maruaile how any torment can bee left
for other. What faith or feare haue they, that
go dauncing & leaping to this fire, as it were
to a banquet, like a foole which runneth to

the ſtocks? How happie were it for men as
we liue in theſe daies, if there were no iudgment
at all? What will we anſwere when he
which made Salomon to write this,2. Sam. 11. 26. ſhall aske
why we would not beleeue it? what ſhall we
ſay when he which came from his kingdom
to bring vs vnto it, demaunds why we did
turne the day of ſaluation vnto the date of vanitie?
if ye cannot excuſe it here, how will ye
defend it there we were borne in vanitie, and
we liue in vanitie, but wee would not die in
vanitie, becauſe no man lookes for any good
of his ſinnes after he is paſt this world, therefore
let vs remember that whither the vaine
men are gone, thither vaine men ſhall goe.
There be not two endes for ſinners, but one:
what a wofull bargaine will it ſeeme then to
remember that thou didſt ſell they ſoule for
vanitie? If any thing wil reclaime vs, this wil
                  •
               
be a terrour in our heartes, to thinke that we
ſhal giue account vnto him, which will
meaſure to vs as much miſerie as wee haue
taken vanitie,
               2. Sam. 13. 15. therefore as Abner ſaide to
Ioab, knoweſt thou not that it will be bitternes
in the latter ende? So let euery man conſider
with himſelfe, though his vanities be ſwee
                  •
               
now, yet they will bee bitter in the ende
As Ammon after hee had fulfilled his luſt
did hate Thamar (which defied her) more
than he loued her before, ſo when the ſport

is paſt, and Death lookes vs in the face, wee
ſhall hate our vanities more, than wee loue

                  〈…〉
               . All this 
                  〈◊〉
                conclude that our
Sauiour ſaid to Martha,
               Luk. 10. 40. 
               but one thing is neceſſarie. Which God graunt wee may
chooſe for his ſonne Ieſus
Chriſt, and then wee
haue learned this
leſſon.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            The Ladder of Peace.
            
               Reioyce euer more, pray continually, in all
things giue thankes.
            
            
               WHen I ſpake laſt of theſe words,
I ſhewed you how the Apoſtle
commēdeth vnto vs three vertues,
of greater price than the
three preſents which the wiſemen
brought vnto Chriſt: the firſt is, Reioice
euermore, the ſecond is, pray continually, the
third, in all things giue thankes. All three are of
one laſt, for wee muſt reioice continually becauſe
he ſaith, reioyce euermore, and we muſt
pray continually, becauſe he ſaith pray continually,
and wee muſt giue thankes continually becauſe
he ſaith, in all things giue thanks. Theſe
are the three things which one ſaith, Al men
doe, and no man doth, becauſe euerie man
doth them, and ſcarce one doth them as hee
ſhould. Therefore the Apoſtle to ſhewe vs,
how we ſhould doo them well, doth put continually
vnto them, as though continuance
were the perfection of al vertues. I choſe this
ſcripture for a conſolation to them which are

afflicted in conſcience, which is commonly
the diſeaſe of the innocenteſt ſoule: for they
thinke that they doo wel to mourne continually,
and Paul ſaith, Reioice continually: and
therefore I will ſpeake a little more of theſe
wordes than I did before. If you marke it,
it may well be called, The Ladder of Peace▪
               
for it ſtands vpon three ſteps, and euery ſtep
is a ſtep from trouble to peace, from ſorrow
to ioy, for hee which can Reioyce, is paſt his
griefe: & he which can pray, is paſſing from
his griefe, & he which can giue thankes, hath
obtained his deſire. A man cannot reioyce &
mourne, a man cannot pray and deſpaire, a
man cannot giue thankes, and bee offended,
therefore keepe ſtill vpon one of theſe three
ſteps, and you ſhall neuer ſorrow too much.
If thou canſt not reioyce as if thy paine were
paſt, then giue thankes, becauſe thy paine is
profitable: if thou canſt not thinke that thy
payne is worth thankes, then pray that thou
maiſt haue patience to beare it: and it is vnpoſſible
that in praying or thanking or reioycing,
that any greefe ſhould want patience enough
to beare it. But when you forget to
reioyce in the Lord, then you begin to muſe,
and after to feare, and after to diſtruſt, and at
laſt to deſpayre, and then euery thought
ſeemes to be a ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt.
How many ſinnes doth the afflicted conſcience

recorde againſt it ſelfe, repenting for
breaking this commaundement, and that
commaundement, and neuer repenteth for
breaking this commaundement, reioice euermore.
            
            It is not an indifferent thing to reioyce or
not to reioice, but wee are commaunded to
reioyce, to ſhew that wee breake a commandement
if we reioyce not. Oh what a comfort
is this when the comforter himſelfe ſhall cō
               maund
vs to reioyce? God was wont to ſay,
repent and not reioice becauſe men reioyce too
much, but heere God commaundeth to reioyce,
as though ſome men did not reioyce
enough.
            Therefore you muſt vnderſtand to whom
he ſpeaketh.Pſal. 149. 5. In 149. Pſal. 5. It is ſaid, Let the
Saints be glad, not let the wicked be glad, and
in Eſaiah 40. 1.Eſai. 40. 1. Hee ſaith, Comfort my people,
not comfort mine enemies, ſhewing to whō
this commandement of Paul is ſent reioyce euermore,
it is not in this as Chriſt ſaieth that
which I ſay vnto you I ſay vnto all, but that
which I ſay vnto you I ſay not vnto all.Pro. 13. 9. 
               Giue
wine (ſaith Salomon) vnto him that is ſorrowfull;
that he may forget his griefe: So giue comfort
vnto him which is penitent that he may
forget his feare. Salomon ſaith fiue times that
this is the portion of man vnder the ſunne,
               Eccle. 2. 24. 
               to receiue
the gifts of God with thankefulnes and to

reioyce in them,
               Leuit. 11. hee which would haue vs
holy as he is holy,
               1. Pet. 1. 16. would haue vs ioyfull as he
is ioyfull, he which would haue vs do his will
vpon earth, As the Angels doo it in heauen,
would haue vs reioyce vpon earth as the Angels
reioyce in heauen, he which hath ordained
vs to the kingdome of Saints, woulde
haue vs reioice that we haue ſuch a kingdom
to receiue.
            Therefore he ſaith to his Diſciples, Reioice
that your names are written in the booke of life,
as B
                     •
                  az ſaid vnto Ruth
                     •
                  , goe not out of this
fielde to gleane in any other field,
               Luk. 10. 20. 
               for here thou
ſhalt haue inough,
               Ruth. 2. 8. ſo he woulde not haue vs
goe from this comfort vnto any other comfort,
for here we ſhall haue enough: the ſpirite
of God is called the Comforter,
               Ioh. 14. 16. becauſe
we ſhould haue comfort in it, I will ſend you
the Comforter ſaith Chriſt, to ſhew that they
which haue the ſpirit haue comfort too, and
they which reſiſt comfort, reſiſte the ſpirit,
therefore the ſonne of GOD is called the
Conſolation of Iſraell,
               Luk. 2. 25. to ſhew that hee bringeth
Conſolation with him, and that ioye
is where Chriſt is, as light is where the Sūne
is.
            Therefore the chiefeſt ioy is called the
ioye of the holie Ghoſt, to ſhewe that they
haue the chiefeſt ioye,Rom. 14. 17 which haue the holie
Ghoſt, therefore the greateſt peace is called

               the peace of conſcience,
               Phil. 4. 7. to ſhew that they haue
the greateſt peace, which haue a good conſcience:
therefore the faithfull are ſaid, to be
annointed with the oyle of ioy,
               Eſai. 61. 3. as though ioie
were in their countenance: therefore they
are ſaid to be cloathed with the garmēt of gladnes,
               Rom. 1. 17.
as though gladnes did compaſſe them
like a garment:1. Cor. 1. 3. therefore Paul (in al his Epiſtels)
doth ioine grace & peace together,2. Cor. 1. 2. &
ſhew that the peace of God doth follow them
which haue the grace of God.
               Gal. 1. 3. It is not in vaine
that the holy Ghoſt when he named Barnabas,
               Eph. 1. 2.
interpreted his name too, becauſe it ſignifieth
the ſonne of conſolation:
               Col. 1. 2. as though he
delighted in ſuch men as were the ſonne of
conſolation.
               2. Theſ. 2. 1 
               Comfort one another ſaith Paule:
               Tit. 1. 4.
How ſhal we comfort one another without
comfort?Philem. 3. Therefore Paule ſaith,Act. 4. 39. 
               GOD comforteth
vs;
               1. The. 4. 18. 
               that we may be able to comfort other
by the comfort wherby we our ſelues are comforted
of God:
               1. Cor. 14. ſhewing, that wee cannot comfort
other, vnleſſe wee be comfortable our
ſelues: and therefore that we may performe
this dutie, we are bound to nouriſh comfort
in our ſelues Paul ſaith, I am full of comfort:
who then can ſay,1. Cor. 7. 4. I am full of ſorrow, but he
muſt contrarie Paule? As the bodie may not
offend the ſoule, ſo the ſoule may not iniure
the body, becauſe it is the bodis keeper: but
a penſiue man doth iniure the body, and the

ſoule too,Pro. 18. 14. for Salomon ſaith, A ſound ſpirit
will beare his infirmities, but a wounded ſpirite
who can beare? As if he ſhould ſay, The heart
muſt be kept couragious, and ſtrong, & liuely
like an inſtrument which is tuned to tune
all the reſt, or els euery griefe wil make thee
impatient. In Deut. 30. 9. it is ſaid that God
reioiceth to doe vs good, & therefore in the 28
of Deut. the Iewes are reprooued, becauſe
they reioyced not in the ſeruice of God. As
he loueth a cheerfull giuer, ſo, hee loueth a
cheerfull ſeruer, and a cheerefull Preacher,
and a cheereful hearer, and a cheereful worſhipper:
and therefore Dauid ſaith, Let vs
ſing hartelie vnto the Lord, ſhewing as it were
the tune which delighteth Gods eares. If
you would know with what tune ye ſhould
ſing vnto God,Pſal. 95. 1. 
               Dauid ſaith Heartelie, that is,
you muſt giue heartelie, you muſt loue heartelie,
you muſt obey heartelie, you muſt pray
heartelie: and when you do all thinges heartely,
then you ſhall doe all things cheerfully.
            
            Therfore now I may ſay vnto them which
reſiſt comfort and nouriſh griefe, as the Prophet
ſaith,Iſa. 1. 12. 
               Who hath required theſe things of
you? GOD doth require no ſorrowe but the
ſorrow for ſin, no feare but the fear to ſin, no
care but the care to pleaſe him, nay hee hath
forbidden al other care: and therefore Peter
ſaith,1. pet. 5. 7. 
               Caſt your care vppon him. As though

God did not allow vs to care, he ſent his Apoſtle
with this charge, Caſt your care vppon
him, As wee doo caſt our ſinnes vpon Chriſt
ſo we muſt caſt our cares vpon him: for God
hath commaunded vs to labour, but not to
care, becauſe care hindereth our labour, like
the Samaritanes, which ſeemed to helpe the
Iewes to build the Temple & hindered them
to build the Temple:Ezra. 9. 2. ſo care, and ſorrow, &
thought ſeeme to helpe vs in our labours, &
our ſtudies, & our prayers, and our ſtrife, but
indeede they hinder vs, for they take al the
time from that which we ſhould do, & diſable
vs to do it: and therefore, when care
commeth to vs, we ſhal anſwere it as Chriſt
ſaid vnto Sathan. Auoide Sathan, auoide care
for euery care which is not of God,Mat. 4. is of Sathan,
and we may not beare that which God
commaundeth vs to caſt vppon him: ſhall I
hang my ioy, and my faith, and my hope, becauſe
I haue ſinned, as Iudas hanged himſelf?
The Scripture ſaieth not, let him which hath
ſtolne deſpaire of mercie,Iohn. 41. but Let him which
hath ſtolne ſteale no more, and it is enough. As
we are taught to diſcerne of ſpirites & of doctrines:
               2 Cor. 7. 10
ſo we muſt diſcerne of cares and ſorrowes:
for when Paul ſaith, There is a repentance
not to be repented of: Hee ſheweth that
there is a repentance to be repented of, that
is, a repentance which is a ſin like the teares

of Eſau, which wept not for his ſins, but for
his patrimony.Gen. 25. 33 When wee ſorrowe for any
thing but ſinne,Gen. 27. 34 as Eſau did, then our ſorrow
is murmuring: and when wee ſorrow more
for ſinne then wee ſhould as ſome doe: then
our ſorrow is diſtruſt, which hurteth vs more
than the thing which wee ſorrow for:Pro. 17. 22. For,
The ſorrowe of the heart (ſaith Salomon) is the
conſuming of the bones: not onely the conſuming
of the ſoft fleſh, but the conſuming of
the hard bones, that is, it will pull down the
ſtrongeſt man that is: and hee which intertaineth
it,Ruth. 1. 10, ſhall quickly ſay with Naomi: Call
me no more beautifull, but bitter. Call mee no
more ſtrong, but weak, for it wil change him
like a ſicknes: therefore as Chriſt refuſed the
vineger & would not drinke it when he had
taſted it:Pſal. 69. 6. So let no man drinke of ſorrow before
he taſte it: But if anie thing eat thee vp,
let the zeale of Gods houſe eate thee vp: for
thy charge is not to get thy liuing with the
care of thy minde, but with the ſweate of thy
browes. Now (as Iames ſaith) Reſiſt the deuil, &
hee will flie from you:
               Gen. 3. 19. So reſiſt ſorrowe, and it
will flie from you. This is all the care, and all
the feare, and all the repentance, which euer
I could find in the Scripture.Iames. 4. 7. Therefore let
vs pray God euery day to tourne all our ioye
into the ioy of the Holy Ghoſt, and all our
peace into the peace of conſcience, and all

our ſorrow into the ſorrow for ſinne, and all
our feare into the feare to ſinne, that ſo wee
may ſorrow & reioyce together, feare & hope
together: that is, haue one eie to the Law to
keepe vs from preſumption, and another eie
to the Goſpel to keepe vs from deſpaire, and
then this comfort is ſent to vs, Reioyce euer
more, or els we haue nothing to do with it.
            It followeth:1. Kin. 3. 15. 
               Pray continually. As Eliſha
would not prophecie vntill the Muſitian
came, and while the Muſitian played Eliſha
prophecied: ſo when the heart reioyceth in
God, then it is fitteſt to call vppon God, and
therefore Paul putteth reioyce before pray,
like the Muſitian which played before Eliſha
prophecied. After Reioyce continually, hee
biddeth vs Pray continually: ſhewing that
it muſt be ſuch a reioycing continually, that we
may pray continually too, or els he doeth not
allowe vs to reioyce. How can theſe two
ioyne together, Pray and Reioyce. Some if
they ſhould praye cannot reioyce for theyr
heartes: Nay their harts are ſicke vntill their
prayers bee done, although they praye not
themſelues, but heare another praye for
them, this is the difference betweene the reioycing
of the wicked, and the reioycing of
the godly. The comfort of the wicked, is
like a compound medicine made of many

mixtures: for there muſt be piping and daunſing,
and leaping, and feaſting, and dallying,
at their game, or elſe they cannot be merry.
but the comfort of the faithfull is like a
light in the aire, which ſhines when no matter
is ſeene: So the godlie reioyce when no
cauſe is ſeene: if they doo but thinke vppon
God, they reioice ſtraight. If there bee but
a praier, and a thankefulnes, and a meditation,
there are inſtrumentes inough for them,
and they can bee as merry as birdes in May.
The reaſon of it is this,Iohn. 4. 32. as Chriſt ſaid: I haue
another meate which you knowe not of, ſo the
godlie haue another ioy which the worlde
knoweth not oft of this ioy, a man may reioice
continually. And therefore Salomon ſaieth, A
good conſcience is a continuall feaſt,
               Pro. 15. 15. that is, a
continuall ioy. But of the wickeds ioy hee
ſaith, In laughter their hearte is ſorrowfull:
that is, their laughter is ſorrowe: as if hee
ſhould ſay: the wicked neuer reioice indeed
but counterfait ioy, as they counterfait vertue.
Thus Paul ioineth, Reioyce continuallie
with Praie continually, as if hee ſhoulde
ſay: by this thou ſhalt knowe whether thou
reioice well, if thou canſt pray too: that is, if
thy reioicing mooue thee to praier, as the ioy
of the Angels makes them praiſe GOD and
ſing, Holy, Holy, Holy, vnto him. This is
according to that in the 5. of Iames.
               Iam. 5. 13. 
               If anie

man bee merry let him ſing Pſalmes: marke
how Iames ioyneth mirth & Pſalmes, as Paul
ioineth Reioicing and praying, all this doth
conclude, that as we ſhould do Gods Wall in
earth as it is done in heauen,
               Luk. 11. 2. ſo we ſhoulde reioice
in earth as they reioyce in heauen, and
then this ioy is a ſigne of another ioy, but if
we cannot reioice in praying, how ſhall wee
reioice in ſuffering; I am now in a large field▪
where I might ſhewe you to whome wee
ſhould pray, and the cauſe why wee ſhoulde
pray, and the things which we ſhoulde pray
for, and the Mediator which we ſhoulde pray
by, and the affections which wee ſhoulde
bring to 
                  〈◊〉
                but I will keepe my ſelfe
within my Text, which ſaieth no more but
pray continually. Firſt wee are commaunded
to pray, and then we are commanded to pray
continually, of all our dueties this is our onely
duetie, which is giuen to none but GOD
according to that, him onelie ſhalt thou ſerue:
Such an excellent thing is praier,Mar. 4. 10. that it is offred
to none but to him which Salomon calleth
Excellent.
            
            Secondlie, it is ſuch a pleaſant thing, that
Paule ioineth, Pray continually; with Reioice
continually,
               Pro. 26. 10 to ſhewe that no man hath ſuch
ioy as he which is often talking with GOD
by Praier, as if hee ſhoulde ſay, if thou haue
the skill to pray continually, it will make

thee reioice continually, for in the companie
of GOD is nothing but ioy and gladnes of
heart.
            Thirdlie, it is ſuch a neceſſarie thing that
Chriſt calleth his temple the houſe of praeier
to ſhewe that as we ſell in our ſhops, and
as we buy in the market, and as wee eate in
our Parlours, and as we ſleepe in our Chambers,
and as we walke in our Galleries, ſo we
ſhould pray in the Temple, which is ſuch a
neceſſarie Trade for men, that GOD
built a houſe for it and called it the houſe of
Prayer, as though Praier brought GOD and
vs to dwell continuallie in one houſe together.
            Further hee hath made a day for it in euery
weeke as though hee woulde binde vs to
Pray: and becauſe wee can not Praye before
we be ſanctified, therefore he ſet downe
an order for vs to obſerue and keepe, which
is this, that before euery Sabboth he appointed
another day beſide, in which we ſhoulde
prouide ourſelues to ſanctifie and prepare
vs that we might Praie in ſo effectuall manner
as we ought.
            Fourthlie, if we indeuour our ſelues to
liue vprightlie and in the feare of GOD.
according to the preciſe rule of his commandements,
we ſhall find it ſuch a heauenly life
that it will make vs like the Angels which

are in Heauen, for when we reade, God ſpeaketh
to vs, becauſe we reade his worde: But
when we pray, wee ſpeake to God, becauſe
we commence one 
                  〈◊〉
                to him: and ſo praier
makes vs like the Angels which are alwaies
ſinging to God. Nowe if the companie of
wiſe men can ſo change one, that in a ſhorte
time he repreſenteth their, ſpeeches & qualities:
how will them nature and their maners
alter, which are ſtill talking with God,
like the beloued Diſciple which learned on
Chriſtes boſome?Ioh. 2. 20.
            
            Fiftlie, it is ſuch a ſweete thing aboue other
things that we do for God, that in Reue.
7. the Praiers of the Saints are called incenſe;
becauſe when they aſcend to Heauen, God
ſeemes to ſmell a ſweet ſauour like incenſe.
            
            Sixtly, it is ſuch a profitable things, that it
doth more good than 
                  〈◊〉
               : for with mine
almes, I helpe but three or foure: but with
my praier I helpe thouſandes Praier is the
rich-mans almes as well as the poore mans.
For Pharaoh begged for praiers as well as Lazarus
begged for cromes.
            Laſtlie, it is victorious and powerfull,
that it ouercommeth God himſelfe which
ouercommeth all things. For if we will ouercome
our Lord as Iacob did we muſt ouercome
him with praier.
               Gen. 22. 38 This God ſheweth
when he ſaith to Ieromiah:
               Ier. 11. 14. 
               Pray not for this

people. Shewing that the praier of the righteous
is of ſuch force and power, that God is
faine to forbid them to pray when he would
not graunt, leſt he ſhould be ouer come. This
Chriſt ſheweth againe, when he reſembleth
his father to the deaffe Iudge,Luk. 18. 23. and his ſuppliants
to the importunate woman which
cryed vpon him, and made him hearken to
her, as if ſhe had compelled him. Therefore
one compareth prayer vnto Samſons haire:
As all Sampſons ſtrength lay in his hayre,Iud. 16. 17. ſo
all our ſtrength lyeth in praier. I haue read of
many which write, that they did learn more
by praying than they could by reading. And
I haue heard ſome saie, that they haue done
that by prayer, which they could not doe by
counſell▪ In the 17. of Exodus, we reade that
the Iewes preuailed more by prayer, than
they could by fight. Therefore one ſaith: that
he which can pray can do all things, becauſe
hee can ouercome God which helpeth him
to do al things. And he which can ouercome
God, can ouercome the diuell too, which
hindereth all things.
            Whoeuer fell into hereſie, or into Apoſtaſie,
or into deſpaire, before hee fell from
praier,
               Mat. 17. 22. the preſeruatiue of the ſoule? If thou
hadſt beene heere, (ſaith Martha) my brother
had not died: So if prayer had beene heere,
theſe euils had not happened.
            
               
This is the Holie water which driueth awaie
vncleane ſpirites, as Chriſt ſheweth
when he ſpeaketh of the Diuell which is not
caſt out but by faſting and praier.
               Mat. 6. 13. This is the
Croſſe which ſaueth vs from euill, as Chriſt
ſheweth when hee teacheth vs to praie, as it
is wrtten in the 11. Chapter of Luke, Deliuer
vs from euill. This is the oyle which healeth
our ſickneſſe, as Iames ſheweth in his
fifth Chapter, verſe. 15. when hee ſaith, The
praier of faith ſhall ſaue the ſicke. It hath ſuch
a hand in all thinges, that it is like the ſanctifier
of euery thing, it bleſſeth our thoughts
and bleſſeth our ſpeeches, and bleſſeth our
actions. As Abraham bleſſed his ſeruaunt
before hee wente from: ſo prayer bleſſeth
our workes before they goe from vs.
Whatſoeuer thou doeſt before thou haue
bleſſed it with praier,
               Gen. 24. thou haſte no promiſe
that it ſhall proſper nor doe good becauſe
hee which ſhould bleſſe it is not made
a counſell to it. Therefore we ſhoulde not
preſume to vſe anie of Gods giftes, or anie
of Gods graces without prayer, leſt that
which is good, doe not good but hurt vnto
vs.
            For this cauſe S. Paule in the 14. to the
Romans and the ſixth verſe,Act. 20. 36. 38. teacheth vs to
pray before wee eate. For this cauſe Paule
prayed before hee iournied. For this cauſe

               Eliah prayed before hee ſacrificed, as it appeareth
in 1. King. 18. 36.
            For this cauſe the Iſraelites praied before
they fought: and for this cauſe wee pray before
we preach. It is a good thing to preach,
and yet you ſee wee doe not preſume to
preach before wee pray, becauſe Paule planteth,
               1. Cor. 3. 
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
               and Apollo watereth, but GOD giueth
the increaſe. Euen ſo, wee ſhould not preſume
to giue Almes, nor to giue counſell,
nor to giue helpe before wee haue prayed
that it may doe good. Nay, wee ſhoulde not
preſume to exerciſe our faith, nor our repentance,
nor our obedience without prayer,
becauſe there is no faith ſo Perfect,
but it had neede of Prayer to ſtrengthen
it.
            Alſo, there is no loue ſo perfect, but it had
neede of praier to confirme it. There is no
repentance ſo perfect, but it had neede of
prayer to continue it. There is no obedience
ſo perfect, but it had neede of praier to direct
it. Therefore hee dooth ſinne which
preſumeth to doe anie good worke without
praier, becauſe hee ſeemes to doe it by
his owne power, for that he craueth not aſſiſtance
from GOD which giueth power to
faith to bring forth works, as well as he doth
to trees to bring foorth fruites, or to Phiſicke
to bring forth health. Therefore no vertue

hath done ſo much as praier hath done:
For all vertues haue had their power from
prayer: and therefore one ſaieth, that prayer
hath done as manie exploites, as all vertues
beſide.
            The Apoſtle Paule in the 11. to the Hebrews
ſaith, that by faith Noah did this, and
Abraham did this, and Dauid did this, and Enoch
did this, but did their faith anie thing
without praier? For their faith was ſtrengthened
by praier: and therefore the Diſciples
praied Chriſt to ſtrengthen their faith.Luk. 17. 5.
By praier,
               1. King. 18. 14. 
               Eliah made the clowdes to fall.
By prayer, Ioſua made the Sunne to ſtande
ſtill.Ioſh. 10. 12. 23▪
                By praier Eliſha raiſed the dead to life.
By praier Moſes made the enemies to flie.
By praier Salomon obtained wiſedome.1. King. 4. 33. 34. 35. So
that as Paule in the firſt to Timothie,
               Exo. 16. 11. and
fourth Chapter ſaieth of godlineſſe:1. Kin. 3. 12. 
               Godlineſſe
is profitable to all things. So I may ſaie
of praier: Prayer is profitable to all things.
The Doue coulde finde no reſt for the ſoale
of her foote,Gen. 8. 9. vntill ſhee returned to the
Arke: So the ſinner when hee can flye no
longer, nor ſuffer anie longer, nor helpe
himſelfe anie longer: at laſt he turneth to
praier,
               Nū. 15. 11. which is like the Citie of refuge,
where no enemie, where no aduerſitie, and
where no temptation hath power to hurte
him.
            
               
Laſtly, as prayer is excellent in reſpect of
GOD, to whome onely it is offered, ſo it is
excellent in reſpect of the godlie, who onely
offer it: For as Paule ſaieth of Faith in the
ſecond to the Theſſalonians: All men haue
not faith: So I may ſay of prayer, all men haue
not the gift of prayer, and therefore Zachariah
ſpeaketh of a ſpirit of prayer.
               Zac. 12. 10. And when
wee pray, Paule ſayeth, That the ſpirite helpeth
our infirmities & prayeth in vs,
               Rom. 8. 26. as though
there were a peculiar ſpirite for prayer, and
none could praye but they which had that
ſpirit.
            I haue knowne many wicked men heare,
and I haue knowne many wicked men ſtudie:
and I haue knowen many wicked men
faſt: and I haue knowne many wicked men
preach, and I haue knowne many wicked
men counſell: but I did neuer knowe any
wicked man that could pray well: nor any
that could praye well, liue wickedly. This
Peter prooueth in his firſt Epiſtle: and
fourth Chapter, when hee ſayth, Bee ſober
and watchfull in prayer: ſhewing that all cannot
pray, but they which are ſober and watchfull.
            
            This Peter the Apoſtle prooueth againe in
his firſt Epiſtle, and third Chapter, when
hee exhorteth the huſband and wife to loue
one another, leſt their praiers be interrupted,

ſhewing that ſinne dooth hinder our Prayer,
and that a man cannot pray heartilie when
wrath or malice, or luſt doth carrie his mind
away.
            This Paule witneſſeth againe when hee
ſaith, Howe ſhoulde they call vpon him in whom
they haue not beleeued? ſhewing, that none
can pray but they which haue faith: and that
is a ſigne that the Spirite is within, if he can
pray and therefore one ſayth: ſo long as
God doth not take away thy praying, he hath
not taken away his mercie. Seeing then that
prayer is ſuch a ſacrifice, as is offered to none
but GOD: and none can offer it but they
which haue faith,Exo. 29. 4. and loue, and repentance,
to bring it to him: As Aaron did not ſtande
before the Lorde before he was waſhed: ſo
let no man call vppon GOD before hee be
ſanctified. For as Iſaac did firſt taſte Iacobs
meate,Gen. 27. 25 and then bleſſed him when hee liked
his offering: ſo God will haue an offering
which pleaſeth him before he giue the bleſſing
which pleaſeth vs. Therefore as Iacob
charged his ſonnes when they went vnto
Ioſeph: Take the beſt fruites of the land and giue
vnto him:
               Gen. 43. 11 So I aduiſe my ſelfe and you, when
we go to GOD, let vs take the beſt fruites
of our heartes and giue vnto him: that is, not
the ſhewe of repentance, but repentance in
deede.
            
               
As Abraham left his Aſſes at the foote of
the hill when hee went to ſacrifice: ſo when
wee goe to praie, wee muſt leaue our paſſions
and affections, and luſtes behinde, leſt
they trouble vs, like the fowles which hindered
Abraham in his ſacrifice. And when
our prayers doe pleaſe GOD, as Iacobs
meate did pleaſe his father, then GOD will
heare our prayers, and bleſſe vs as his father
bleſſed him.
            Now to informe vs what prayer delighteth
GOD, the Apoſtle Paul in his firſt
Epiſtle to the Corinthians, and the fourth
verſe, ſheweing that hee had the minde of
Chriſt, teacheth vs to praie continually. This
hee expoundeth in the ſeconde Epiſtle to
the Theſſalonians, the third Chapter and
the thirteenth verſe, when hee ſaith, Be not
wearie of well doing. Therefore, if you doe
well when you pray, you muſt not be wearie
of praying.
            
            The like ſaying is in the twelft Chapter
to the Romans, where it is ſaide, Continue
in praier, The like ſaying is in the firſt
Chapter to the Romans, where it is ſaide,
Pray at all times. The like ſaying alſo is
in the eighteenth Chapter of Saint Luke,
where it is ſaide, Praye alwaies and bee not
faint. Wee are not commaunded to preache
continually, nor yet to heare continuallie,
               
nor to faſt continually▪
                nor to Watch continually:
nor to gone continually, but wee are
commaunded to pray continually▪
                as though
praier were more needefull than all the reſt.
Wee want continuallie, and wee are tempted
continually, and we ſinne continuallie,
and therefore we had need to pray to GOD
continual
                     •
                  y, that GOD woulde ſupplie our
wants, and forgiue our ſinnes, and preuent
our temptations.
            To ſhewe that wee ſhoulde pray dailie,
Chriſt teacheth vs in the eleuenth Chapter
of S. Luke, to ſaie, Giue vs this day our dailie
breade, this day wee aske no more but our
daily breade: and if wee liue till the morrowe
then wee aske no more but our dailie
bread: ſo the worde dailie, dooth teach vs to
pray dailie: for there is great reaſon, that
they which haue continually need of God,
ſhould pray continually vnto him. But as
ſome aunſwered Chriſt, as it appeareth in
Saint Iohns Goſpell: Who is able to doe this?
So you will ſay vnto mee, Who is able to
pray continually.
            
            Saint Paul in his twelft chapter to the Romās,
teacheth vs a reaſonable ſeruice of God
Here hee ſeemes to inioine vs an vnreaſonable
ſeruice of God, For who did euer praie
continually! Or if wee ſhould pray continually,
when ſhould we heare, or Preach? or when

ſhould we ſtudie, or when ſhould we worke,
ſo one ſeruice ſeemes to hinder all ſeruices:
but indeede it doth further all ſeruices, and
therefore we are commanded to praie continually,
becauſe we can doo nothing without
Praier. But if you imagine that this cō
               mandement
is broken if your lips be not alwaies
going, which was the hereſie of the
Meſſaliant, or if you dwell not alwaies in
the Church like the golden Candleſtickes,
then you are out of Pauls minde, for Paul did
not praie continually with his lips, and therefore
he doth not meane a lip-prayer: neither
did Paule liue day and night in the Temple,
and therefore he doth not meane a Church-prayer:
and further, it ſeemes that the Iewes
were not appointed to praie at all times, for
they had ſet times of praier, and therefore
we reade how Peter and Iohn went vp to the
Temple at the time of praier, therefore to
praie continually, is to lift vp our hearts continually
vnto God,Act. 3. 4. & to praie in our thought,
as Moſes did though wee open not our lips,
and ſo we may praie continually. As when
a good man is to anſwer before the perſecutor,
a thought praieth in his hart that he may
anſwer wiſely: when he is to giue Almes a
thought praieth in his heart that it may doo
good, when he is to giue counſel, a thought
praieth in his heart that it may proſper: whē
               
he is to heare a Sermon, a thought praieth in
his heart, that he may be edified, and ſanctified
by it. Thus we may pray and heare, praie
and ſpeake, praie and eat, pray & ſtudie, pray
and woorke together, as the Iewes built and
fought together, and therfore praying ſeems
a harder thing than it is, for if it had beene
irkſome for any to pray, Paule woulde not
haue ioined praying & reioycing together.Nehe. 47. It is
not hard which a man may do & reioyce too.
If a mā loue intirely, he hath no ſuch delight
as to talke often and to conferre daily with
him whō he loueth, for by this his loue is increaſed,
and his ioy is doubled, but the ſeldomer
we cōmune together by little & little
our affections abate, til at laſt we become
ſtrange one to the other, as though wee had
neuer beene acquainted. Euē ſo our affections
and familiaritie doth grow toward God
by often praying vnto him,Dan. 6. 10. and when wee
leaue of to pray,
               Pſal. 119. 164. then our affections drawe
from him, and his affections from vs, therefore
we read how often the goodmen were
wont to praye. In times paſt Daniel ſaith that
hee prayed thriſe a daye: Dauid ſaith that hee
prai
                     •
                  d ſeauen times a daye: It is ſayed that Cornelius
praied continually:
               Rom. 2. It is ſaide that the
Diſciples prayed continually: & in the firſt to
the Romans, Paul which teacheth vs here to
praie without ceaſing ſaith, that he himſelfe

               prayed without ceaſing. As Iacob woulde not
let the Angell go before he had bleſſed him
ſo a Chriſtian ſhould not let God reſt before
he heare him: This is the ſtate that a Chriſtiā
ſhould ſtriue to, and neuer thinke that hee is
ſound at the heart till all his thoughts bee a
kinde of prayer. Now if wee ſhould examine
our ſelues whether we Pray as we ſhould,1. Cor. 11. 28. as
Paul teacheth vs to examine our ſelues whether
we beleeue as we ſhould: I am of opinion,
that there is no ſuch want in this land as
the wāt of praier, for it is neglected as though
it were neuer commaunded, as if there were
no God to worſhip, or as if we had no neede
of him. In the Papiſts time none were called
Beads-men, that is, men which were
bound to pray but the poore men: as though
none were bounde to pray but poore men:
but nowe the world goeth as though neither
rich nor poore were bounde to pray: one
would thinke that our deliuerance our of Egipt,
that our victorie againſt the Spaniards,
that the weather which threatneth ſicknes,
that the dearth which threatneth famine,
ſhould make vs pray, and yet it doth not, for
where is the perſon which praieth now more
thā he did before.Pſal. 141. Some are like the fool which
ſaith in his heart there is no God: for they pray
neuer,Gen. 5. though Paul ſay, Pray euer▪ Caine was
reiected for offering an vnworthie ſacrifice:

               
                  〈…〉
               
cannot admire but in a circle, ſo they cannot
praie but in the church, and then they praye
when they ſhould heare. Some are like the
Ephramites,
               Iudg. 12. 8. which can pronounce euerie
word but that which they ſhould, ſo they
neuer want wordes but when they ſpeake to
God. It is ſtraunge to thinke how liuely they
are to euerie thing els, and how dead they
are to praie, as many come to Sermons and
neuer marke what the Preacher ſaith vntil
he come to this, To whome be all praiſe, power,
and dominion for euer: ſo many praie and neuer
marke what they ſay vntil they come to
this, Giue vs this day our dailie bread: Dooſt
thou thinke that God doth marke that praier
which thou dooſt not marke thy ſelfe? Some
come to God as if they did fetch fire, a ſpurt
and away like a meſſenger which is gone before
he haue his anſwere. If God wil take a
Pater noſter of them and heare them for that,
ſo it is, for they neuer made any other praier
in their liues, but euen as a child ſaith Grace
ſo they say Our Father: put them out of that
and they cannot praie a word, no more than
the child can make a grace if he be put out of
his owne. Some are like Nadah and Abihu,
which neuer looke with what fire their ſacrifice
is is kindled,Num. 3. 4. ſo they neuer reſpect with

               
                  〈…〉
               
ſometime they praie or ma
                  ••
               ce for reuenge:
ſometime of greedines for riches: ſomtime
of luſt for pleaſure. Now as no ſacrifice was
accepted with God but that which was kindled
with the fire which came downe from
Heauen:Leuit. 3. 5. ſo no praier is accepted with God,
but that which is kindled with ſome motion
from Heauen. Their praier neuer aſcendeth
to Heauen:Gen. 4. 4. for Abels heart made Abels
offering accepted.Gen. 11. 13. Some are like the
builders of Babel, which call for one thing
when they ſhoulde call for another, ſo they
praie for one thing when they ſhoulde praie
for another: when they called for ſtones,
they brought them timber: when they called
for timber, they brought them ſtones: ſo
when they call for health, God ſendes them
ſicknes: when they call for reſt, God ſendes
them trouble: when they cal for riches, God
ſendes them wants: when they call for honor
God ſendes them ſhame: when they call for
eaſe, God ſendes them a yoke: For it is a iuſt
thing with GOD, that they which doo one
thing for another, ſhould receiue one thing
for another.Luk. 15. 12. Some are like the prodigall
ſonne which praied but vntill he had gotten
his patrimonie, and then he forſooke his father
which gaue it him: ſo they praie no longer

but vntill they haue that which they
would haue, and then they flie from God as
he did from his father, and liue like ſwine in
another Countrie till extremitie and penury

                  〈◊〉
                them home again. Theſe are the Beadſmen
of our age, and theſe are the praiers
which wee offer to him which made heauen
and earth. Wouldeſt thou regarde his ſute,
which ſhoulde intreate thee ſo contemptuouſlie
as thou intreareſt God? let vs conſider
how that praier ſhould obtaine remiſſion of
ſinne which is ſinne it ſelfe. Paul ſaith, Let al
which call vpon the name of the Lorde,
               2. Tim. 2. 19. 
               departe
from iniquitie, as if hee ſhould ſay, the Lord
will he are none which praie vnto him, but
them which depart from iniquitie:
               Pro. 28. 9. 
               Salomon
ſaith, the praier of the wicked is an abhomination:
if his beſt worke be an abhomination,
what are his worſt deedes? And the ſinner
himſelfe? Therefore hee aduiſeth, Prepare thy
hearte before thou goe into the Temple, leſt
thou offer the Sacrifice of fooles:
               Eccle. 18. 9. as if hee ſhould
ſay, as hee which offereth a preſent vnto a
Prince which the Prince likes not, is a foole
for his paines. This is the cauſe ſaith one why
God doth not heare our praiers as he did our
Fathers, becauſe wee pray not with ſuch humilitie
and perſeuerance as they did. Many
touched Chriſt, but one drewe vertue out of
him, ſo manie praie vnto Chriſte but fewe

draw comfort from him.
            Now if you will knowe what praier is accepted
with God, Iames ſaith, the praier of
the iuſt auaileth much if it bee feruent, hee
ſaith not that the praier of the wicked auaileth
anie thing though it bee neuer ſo feruent,Iames. 5. 6.
but the perſon muſt be iuſt, & the praier
muſt bee feruent too, by this thou knoweſt
then whether thy praier bee accepted with
God. As God ſent downe fire from heauen
to conſume Eliah his Sacrifice, becauſe it
pleaſed him, ſ he will ſend downe a kind of
ioy, and lightnes vpon thy heart which ſhall
kindle thee within, as the fire kindled Eliahs
Sacrifice and ſende thee awaie with ſuch a
ioie,1. Kin. 18. 38▪
                like a Sutor which commeth from the
Prince when his petition is graunted, this is
the ende of euerie praier which is made in
Faith, as Chriſt anſwered the Centurian, Be
it vnto thee as thou beleeueſt, So thy heart ſhall
aunſwere thee Be it vnto thee as thou beleeueſt.
When we begin to praie, we are going from
the Diuell, and when we ende our praier we
are come to God: At firſt manie temptations
will hinder thee, but with earneſtnes
thou ſhalt driue them away. Then Make no
haste as Salomon ſaith,Gen. 15. 17. 
               to get out of the kinges
preſence: For the Lord and thy praier are met
together in heauen,Iohn. 4. like Chriſt and the woman
at Iacobs well,
            
            
               
Seeing then that prayer is ſuch an excellent
thing that it is giuen to none but to him
which is called Excellent: and ſuch a pleaſant
thing that Paul ioyneth Pray continuallie,
with Reioice continually: and ſuch a heauenlie
thing that it makes vs like the Angels,
which are in Heauen: and ſuch a neceſſarie
thing, that God built a houſe for it, and made
a daie for it: and ſuch a holy thing that none
but the holie can deale with it: and ſuch a
ſtrong thing that it ouercommeth GOD,
which ouercommeth all: How is it then, that
our Fathers ſpent ſo much time in praier, and
we make no account of it? Haue we nothing
to praie for as well as they? Nay they prayed
for nothing, but wee had neede to praie for
the like. The Turkes and Idolaters praie to
them which cānot heare, but he which ſaith
I will heare, hath not ſo many Supplications
to him as Noble-men. What will we giue
God, if we will not afford him thanks? What
will we doe for him, if we wil not praiſe him?
If thou be wiſe (ſaith Salomon) thou art wiſe
vnto thy ſe
                     •
                  fe, ſo if we doo praie, we do praie
for our ſelues. Shall the birds ſing vnto God,
and not they for whome hee created birdes?
What a foole is he which will fight and trauaile,
and watch for himſelfe, and will not
ſpeake for himſelfe? If GOD had required
ſuch coſtlie Sacrifices of vs, as hee did of the

Iewes, it is to be feared, that hee ſhall not be
ſerued at all, for we are ſuch Gregeſites, that
we would not part from our beaſts to Sacrifice
to him. Therefore let vs not ſay, God will
not heare, but let vs ſay, we doe not aske, for
God is red
                  •
               er to giue than we to aske:
therefore let vs pray that our
neglect of prayer may
be forgiuen.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            The betraying of Chriſt.
            
               Math. 27. 1. 2. 3. 4.
               
                  When the morning was come, all the chiefe
Prieſtes, and the Elders of the people tooke counſaile
againſt Ieſus to put him to death:
                  And led him away bound, and deliuered him
vnto Pontius Pilate the Gouernour:
                  Then when Iudas which betrayed him ſawe
that hee was condemned, hee repented himſelfe
and brought againe the thirtie pieces of ſiluer to
the chiefe Prieſts and Elders:
                  Saying, I haue ſinned betraying the innocent
bloud: but they ſayd, what is that to vs? ſee thou
to it.
               
            
            
               THE laſt time you heard how a
Publican receiued Chriſt, now
you ſhall heare howe an Apoſtle
betraieth Chriſt: But firſt,
heere is ſet downe what the
Prieſts and the Elders did againſt Chriſt, of
whom it is ſaid, When the morning was come,
all the chiefe Prieſts and the Elders of the people

tooke counſaile againſt Ieſus to put him to
death. 2. And led him awaie bound, and deliuered
him vnto Pontius Pilate the gouernour.
The Prieſts were Eccleſiaſticall perſons, and
the Elders were ciuill Magiſtrates: ſo they
which ſhoulde haue ſtoode moſt for Chriſt,Mar. 15. 5.
ſtoode moſte againſt him. Marke putteth in
the Scribes too,Luk. 22. 66 & Luke putteth in the whole
multitude, as if he ſhould ſay, The Prieſts &
the Scribes, and the Phariſies, and the Elders
and the people. Hee which ſtood for all had
all againſt him. Heere is fulfilled that which
was propheſied in the ſecond Pſalme, They
banded themſelues againſt the Lord,
               Pſal. 2. 
                     •
                  . 
               & againſt
his annonited: But why did they band themſelues
againſt the Lord, or againſt his annointed?
What was their deſire of him? To
haue his goods? nay, hee had non for himſelfe,
but they were richer than he: To haue
his libertie? Nay, that would not ſuffice them,
for they had bound him before: To bring the
people into diſlike of him? Nay, that would
not ſerue them, for they had done ſo alreadie,
vntill euen his Diſciples were fled from
him. What would they haue then? his bloud?
yea they tooke counſaile (ſaith Mathewe) to
put him to death: They had the Diuels minde
which is not ſatisfied but with death, and
how doe they continue it? Hee ſaith, They
tooke counſaile about it.
            
            
               
When Pharaoh did moſt fooliſhlie,Exod. 1. 10. hee
ſaid, come Let vs worke wiſelie. So when they
did worſt, then they ſeeme to doe it in beſt
maner, for they will not ſinne without counſaile:
a wiſe counſaile to couſult of murther,
like the Papiſts counſels when they giue licence
for treaſon. They may be fitlier ſaid to
take armes, then to take counſell. For Chriſt
ſaith before, that they came with ſwords &
ſ
                  •
               aues to take him.Mat. 16. 25 
               Dauid ſpeakes of a malignant
Church, that is a Church of malicious
perſons, ſuch a Church was this, for they called
themſelues the Church, and went about
to kill the head of the Church. In the beginning
of the night Chriſt inſtituted the Sacrament,
and conſulted how to ſaue them,
and at midnight they inſtitued their treaſon
and conſulted how to deſtroy him. The time
which they choſe, and the Iudge which they
choſe, are ſpecially to be noted, the time, In
the morning, &c.
            
            This therefore is not to be expounded of
the beginning of their counſell, but of the
end of their counſell: for they tooke counſell
in the night and executed it in the morning.
When they agreed to goe vnto Pilate it was
night, but when they brought him to Pilate
it was morning. But marke how vniuſtly they
handled him before they brought him to
the Iudge. They ſhould haue done nothing

againſt him before he came to his iudgment:
but they did all againſt him except condemning
him, and crucifying him, before they
came to the Iudge. For all that is ſpoken before
of examining him, and mocking him,
and reuiling him, and buffeting him, & ſpitting
in his face, was done before they came
to the Iudge, which ſhewes that they were
euen angry that they could not kil him without
the Iuge too.
            All this was done in the night, and therefore
Chriſt ſaide to his Diſciples in the Euening:
This night all of you ſhall bee offended for
mee:
               Mat. 26. 31. Shewing that all theſe things ſhould be
done in the night.
            Therefore Saint Marke ſaith, that Peter
and Iames and Iohn where a ſleepe, when Iudas
and his companions came againſt him,
which ſheweth that it was the time of ſleep:
and in the one and fiftieth verſe, hee ſayth,
that a yong man ran after with a linnen garment
vpon his bare bodie: which ſheweth
that hee hearing a tumult and an vprore to
grow in the night, ran forth of dores in great
haſt without his clothes, as they doe in a fire
(to ſe what was doone) and it is added that
they ſtroue to take him, and that hee was
fayne to ſlippe of his Linnen and runne away
from them naked, as Ioſeph did when
hee left his Cloake with his light Miſtreſſe,

when he ſlipt from her, which ſheweth how
voyde of ſhame and modeſtie they were to
offer ſuch violence to a ſtraunger, that hee
coulde ſcarſe ſcape their handes naked, although
they had nothing againſt him. This
I note to ſhew that their conſpiracie againſt
Chriſt was a night worke, like them which
hate the light becauſe they doe euill. It was
not their woont to ſit in counſayle in the
night but in the day. It would haue troubled
them to watch ſo long for a good cauſe. but
it was fit that the worke of darknes ſhoulde
be done in draknes, & therefore Chriſt ſaith,
This is the houre of darkneſſe:
               Luk. 22. 53. the houre of
darkenes, and the power of darknes, and the
worke of darknes met together. When they
ſhould reſt, malice would not ſuffer them to
reſt, but they became like Owles which
watch in the night and cannot ſleepe. Heere
was fulfilled Salomons ſaying,Pro. 4. 36. 
               They cannot
ſleepe before they haue done euill, ſo eagre wee
are vpon reuenge more than anie thing elſe.
They ſay that hee cannot ſtay which rideth
vpon the Diuell: for malice draweth him,
and furie ſpurres him. Therefore Zacheus
went not ſo haſtely to receiue Chriſt, as his
enemies haſt to deſtroy him. Nay rather I
may ſay, to deſtroy themſelues.
            For as they prayed at Chriſtes death, ſo it
came vpon them. They ſayed, his bloud be vpon

vs and vpon our children,
               Mat. 27. 29 ſo his bloud is
vpon them and vpon their children, which
haue beene Vagabonds ouer the earth euer
ſince and haue no countrie of their owne:
for if they be curſed which do the Lords buſines
negligently, they muſt be curſed too
which doe the Diuels buſines diligently.Iere. 16. If
men were ſo haſtie in executing Iuſtice, as
they were in executing malice, ſo many mē
ſhould not be vndone by ſutes of Lawe: for
in one day they could apprehend, & accuſe,
and examine, and condemne, and execute
him which was Innocent: but hee which is
iuſt cānot be quit in one terme nor two: nay
if he haue right in a yeare, it is counted quick
diſpatch, and hee is glad that hee met with
ſuch a ſpeedie Lawyer.
            How then when they take a bad cauſe in
hand, and prolong it too, which keeps their
Clients in ſuſpence from day to day, and
from weeke to weeke, in great charge and
ſinne together. I would to GOD that
ſome did not ſit in counſaile againſt good
Chriſtiās, as theſe Prieſts did againſt Chriſt,
but GOD in his mercie dooth daily confounde
and bring to nothing the accurſed
counſailes of the wicked Antichriſt, and all
his rebellious confederates. So when the
wicked tooke counſaile together, wickedneſſe
was the ende of their counſayles:

for there is nothing woorſe to the vngodlie
than to meete together: for before they
meete, their wickednes is a little hid like the
poyſon in a Serpent: but when they meete
together, one ſetteth on another, and the
poyſon breakes forth into vile ſpeeches, and
deteſtable workes, and vngodly practiſes, as
we ſee in Tauernes and ſuch like aſſemblies
as this.
            For now they are met together, they haue
conſpired amongſt themſelues to accuſe vnto
the Gouernour the moſt innocent man
in the world, as if he were the worſt man liuing,
they abuſed him, and mocked him, and
reuiled him, and buffeted him, before they
brought him to the Gouernor, which ſheweth
that they woulde haue killed him too,
if they durſt without the Gouernour, but ſin
is craftie, and therefore they obſerue the order
of lawe, and forme of iudgement, leſt
they ſhould be takē in the ſnare which they
made for him.
            Firſt becauſe Pilate had the authoritie ouer
iudgements of death, and not they:
Therefore they are inforced to ſeeke vnto
his iudgement ſeat to ſaue themſelues from
blame, and to be deliuered out of trouble, if
they did vſurpe any thing vpon the Magiſtrates,
Office.
            Then becauſe they might not runne vnto

the gouernour before daye without ſuſpition
of tumult, they ſtaide vntill it was morning:
but ſo ſoone as they coulde come,
they came poſt haſt, for the Sunne did no
ſooner peepe, but euen at the verie breake
of day, they were all readie to flocke vnto
the Iudge againſt him.
            This they did without knowledge: but
God directed euery thing vnto a right end.
For it was meete that the Sonne of GOD
ſhoulde bee cleered in a ſolemne manner,
by an earthlie Iudge, to ſhewe how wee
ſhalbe cleered by the heauenlie Iudge: and
therefore, as it appeareth in the ſeuen and
twentieth Chapter, and foure and twentieth
verſe of Saint Mathewes Goſpell, Pilate
ſaide: that he found no euill in him before he
gaue ſentence againſt him, which ſheweth
that he died not for his owne ſinnes but for
our ſinnes, and therefore though they went
to the Iudge to ſaue thēſelues from blame,
yet God ſent them to the Iudge, that his
worde might be fulfilled.
            Laſtly, this Pilate was a Roman gouernour,
which ruled for Caeſar, as Zacheus
was a Romane collectour which gathered
for Caeſar: For at that time the Romanes
had brought much of the worlde vnto their
ſubiection: as ſince that time, they haue
brought much of the worlde vnto Idolatry:

and therefore God would haue his ſonne to
be iudged by the Romane policie, and to be
condemned by a Romane Iudge, and to be
ſlaine with a Romane death, as it were ioyning
the Iewes and the Romans in impietie
together, to ſhewe, that theſe two Nations
ſhoulde be the odiouſt people vnto him in
all the worlde, and how his ſeruaunts ſhould
be crucified there, where hee was crucified
himſelfe: for as the Romanes then did crucifie
Chriſt vpon a Croſſe, ſo they crucifie
him nowe vpon their Altar, and reſemble
the Dragon,Rom. 12. which when he could not preuaile
againſt Michaell himſelfe, then hee
fought againſt the woman and her ſeed, that
is, the Church and her children, which are
ſlaine in Rome, as the Prophets were in Ieruſalem.
Thus Rome began with the heade,
and ends with the members. So much of
the Prieſts and the Scribes, and the Phariſies,
and the elders & Pilate, what they did
againſt Chriſt,Sam. 15. 31. of whome was fullfilled Dauids
praier: Lord turne the counſell of Achitophell
vnto follie: So their counſell was turned
vnto follie. For as Paule reuiued when
he was ſtoned, ſo Chriſt roſe againe when he
was buried, to ſhewe, that there is no counſell
againſt God, and therefore let all our
counſels be for God.
            Now we come to Iudas to aggreuate this

tragicall counſell. The Euangeliſt annexeth
vnto it, the deſperate end of the curſedſt mā
that euer was. Three things are ſpeciallie noted
of this Traitor: his death, the cauſe of his
death, & the confeſſion which hee made before
his death. His death in the fift verſe: Hee
went & hanged himſelf: The cauſe of his death
in the 3. verſe: For that hee had betrayed his
Lord, & now did ſee him condemned & had no ioy
of the money which was giuen vnto him for his
Treaſon. His confeſſion in the thirde verſe: I
haue ſinned betraying innocent bloude. I will
ſpeake of euerie worde as they lie for your
memorie. Therefore, firſt of his Treaſon.
When Iudas the traytor: before hee was called
Iudas the Apoſtle, now he is called Iudas
the traitor, to diſtingiſh him from other
of that name, leſt anie of his name ſhoulde
be defamed for him, a brand is ſet in his forehead
like the letter Tau,
               Gen. 4. or Caines marke, to
make him hatefull like a rogue which is
burned in the eare: ſo Eſau was called Edom
which ſignifieth Redde, to keep his wickednes
in remembrance, becauſe hee, ſolde his
birth-right for a meſſe of red pottage.Act. 8. So Simon
is called the Sorcerer, as though GOD
would note him for the worſt of that name:
So God knoweth Simon Peter from Simon
Magus: and Iudas his brother, from Iudas
his betrayer: and therefore, as Ieroboam
               
comes in with his trayne after him:
                  
                     •
                  . King. 22. 
                     •
                  2. 
               Ieroboam
which made Iſrael to ſinne: So Iudas comes in
with his trayne after him: Iudas, which betrayed
the Lord: For when God ſayde: I will
honour them which honour mee, hee ſignified
how hee woulde diſhonour them which diſnour
him, and therefore this name is a word
of reproach vntill this day: and all Traytours
are called Iudaſſes for his ſake: that the
Propheſie might bee fulfilled: The names of
the wicked ſhall rot:
               Pro. 10. 7. that is, they ſhall be named
with lothſomnes, and remembred with
diſdayne, as a man paſſeth by a rotten carrion,
and ſtoppeth his noſe vntill hee be paſt
it: This is the iuſt wrath of God. As Chriſt
promiſed that Maries good worke ſhoulde
bee ſpoken of to the worldes ende: So hee
hath cauſed Iudas euill worke to bee ſpoken
of vnto the worldes ende too. For there were
three euilles in one: Firſt his practiſe was
impudent, becauſe hee offered himſelfe to
bee a Traytour before he was asked. Then
it was Couetous, becauſe hee was contented
to betray his Lord for 30. pence. And laſtly
it was craftie, becauſe hee betrayed him
with a kiſſe, which is a ſigne of loue. Like this
traitour do all other traitours, and therefore
are all called Iudaſſes, that is, impudent, and
couetous, and craftie like their maſter.
            The next conſideration is: how Iudas his

repentance came vpon him, in theſe wordes:
When hee ſawe that Ieſus was condemned, &c.
Peter heard three crowes before he felt any
remorſe, ſo Iudas ſaw his Lord apprepended,
& yet he repented not, then he ſaw him accuſed,
and yet he repented not, then he ſawe
him mocked, & yet he repented not, then he
ſawe him buffeted, & yet he repented not, at
laſt he ſawe him condemned, and then ſaith
Mathew he repented, like one which ſlayeth
his friend in his rage, and ſorroweth when it
is paſt. In the ſixt of Geneſis, God is ſaid to repent,
but GOD repenteth not like men: ſo
here the wicked are ſaid to repent, but the
wicked repent not like the faithfull: But as it
is ſaid of Eſau, that he ſought repentance, ſo
they may bee rather ſaide to repent, than to
repent in deede. For if Iudas had repented
like Peter, he ſhould haue been forgiuen like
Peter: but to ſhewe that hee did not repent
well, when he had cōmitted one ſinne, he addeth
another to it: for when he had murthered
his maiſter, hee murthered himſelfe too.
Therefore, if you aske how hee repented? I
thinke he repented ſo as moſt vſurers repent
vpon their death-beds. There is a ſhame of
ſinne, & guilt of conſcience, & feare of iudgement,
euen in the reprobate, which is a foretaſte
of hell which the wicked feele: euen as
peace of conſcience & ioy in the holy Ghoſt

is a foretaſte of heauen, which the godly feele
before they come thither. So Iudas was diſpleaſed
with the vglines of his trecherie, and
had a miſhapen ſorrowe like a Beares whelp,
but without any conuerſion to God, or hope
of mercie, or praier for pardon, or purpoſe
to amend. Onely hee felt a ſhame and guilt,
and anguiſh in his heart: which was rather
a puniſhment of his ſinne, than a repentance
for his ſinne, and a preparatiue to Hell which
he was going vnto: for hardnes of heart, and
deſpaire of mercie are ſinnes & puniſhments
for ſinne too: but true repentaunce is ſuch
a ſorrow for one ſinne as breedeth a diſlike of
all ſinnes, and mooueth to pray, and reſolueth
to amende, which falleth vpon none
but the elect, and therefore Paule calleth
the heart of the reprobate,Rom. 2. 5. 
               A heart which cannot
repent. But if the Papiſtes doctrine of repentance
be true, there is nothing wanting
in Iudas repentance: for in him may bee
found all the partes of their repentance. For
we ſee in this reprobate, contrition of heart,
confeſſion of mouth, and ſatisfaction of
worke which is all the Papiſtes repentance:
For contrition it is ſaide, Hee repented: For
Confeſſion, he ſaith, I haue ſinned: For Satisfaction,
hee reſtored his money againe, and
yet he is Iudas the ſonne of perdition: and
therefore, as Chriſt tolde the Lawyer, that

one thing was wanting in his obedience: ſo
Iudas telleth the Papiſtes, that one thing is
wanting in their repentance, that is the conuerſion
of a man to God, & change of mind:
when a ſinner renounceth himſelf for ſhame
of his ſinne, and yeeldeth to righteouſneſſe
with as great loue as euer hee loued wickednes:
If Iudas had repented ſo, he would rather
haue ſuffered paine like Iob, than by vnlawfull
meanes ridde himſelfe out of paine,
like Caine which thought to preuent Gods
iudgments againſt him. This was not a ſigne
of repentance, but a ſigne of deſpaire. Therefore
let euerie one learne this, that ſo long
as Gods mercie is greater than mans iniquitie,
there is no cauſe to deſpaire, but to hope▪
For why did our Sauiour ſaue Marie Magdalen,
which had ſeuen deuils, and ſpare the
theefe which neuer did good, but leſt as
great ſinners as they ſhould deſpaire of mercie,
if they repented. If thou canſt knocke,
his promiſe bindeth him to open. Therefore
ſay not, God will not giue, but, I doe not
aske: for God is readier to giue then wee to
aske. The next conſideration is, how Iudas
reſtored his bribe againe. In the firſt of the
Prouerbes 31. Salomon ſaith, The wicked ſhall
bee filled with their owne deuiſes. And in
the 14. Chapter 14. verſe, hee ſaith, They
ſhall be ſatiat with their owne wayes: For Iudas
               
hath ſinned ſo long, that now he is wearie of
his ſinne, & would reſtore his bribe againe,
euen the ſame daie that he tooke it. It was
giuen him in the night, and in the morning
hee brought it backe: So ſoone is the pleaſure
of ſinne ecclipſed. Euen nowe his thirtie
pence was the ſweeteſt ſiluer that euer hee
fingured, and now it is the bittereſt money
that euer he purſed. Therefore let all conſider
what Abner ſayde vnto Ioab, Knowest
thou not that it will bee bitternes in the latter
end? 2. Sam. 2. 26. The ſting of the Serpent is
in his ta
                  •
               le: ſo the taile of ſin hath the ſting
that is the ende. There is no ſinne but it hath
three puniſhmentes which followe it like
bondmaides: Feare, Shame and Guilt: Feare
of iudgement, ſhame of men, and guilt
of conſcience. All theſe did ſurpriſe Iudas
at once, ſo ſtuddenlie as Adam ſpyed his
nakednes: and though they come after euerie
ſinne, yet they are neuer looked for. Geheſi
tooke his bribe merrilie, but hee did
weare it heauilie. Iezabel thought that ſhee
had got a Vineyarde for nothing,1. King. 21. but ſhee
payed more for it than ſhee woulde giue for
all the world. So Iudas thought that hee was
made for euer, when hee was vndone for euer.
Heere was the ſcripture fulfilled: The
bread of deceit is ſweete to a man,
               Pro. 20. 17. 
               but his
mouth ſhall be filled with grauell: So this gaine

of treaſon was ſweete to Iudas, but when hee
digeſted it, it cracked like grauel in his teeth.
Who woulde ſuffer for millions of gold that
which Iudas ſuffereth for thirtie pence? and
yet manie are contente to ſinne for leſſe,
Iudas was a traitour for thirtie pence, but a
thouſand are liars, and deceiuers, and ſwearers
for a penie. If they can get anie thing
by lies, or oathes, or wiles, it is like the miſterie
of their occupation. Bee not deceiued,
the time commeth, when you would reſtore
this gaine againe, as Iudas did, and peraduenture
you ſhall not find the owners where
to make reſtitution. How many at the houre
of death haue offered their praiers and their
ſupplications, and ſeruice vnto God, as Iudas
offred his money to the Prieſts, and God
woulde not accept it: but they dyed as they
liued, and went from deſpaire vnto deſtruction?
Therefore, to day heare his voyce. If
you will not be ſo good as Zacheus to reſtore
foure folde for all that you haue gotten by
vſurie, or briberie, or extortion, or deceite,
yet be ſo good as Iudas to bring againe ſo
much as you haue taken, and if you doo
it not with Iudas minde, but with Zacheus
minde, it ſhall be accepted as Zacheus
was.
            
               
                  •
                The laſt conſideration, is the confeſſion

                  ••
               ich he makes before his death. I haue

ſinned &c. Oh Iudas (ſaith one) doeſt thou
know that thou haſt ſinned, and diddeſt not
knowe that thou ſhouldeſt ſinne? it is not
enough to ſay, I haue ſinned: So ſaid Saul, and
Caine and Pharaoh, I haue ſinned: But who
ſaith, I will not ſinne? When ſin is paſt, then
wee knowe it: but if wee did looke to it before,
then we neede not ſay, I haue ſinned:
for ſin is choſen in the darke, like bad wares,
when the faults are not ſeene. Sinne ſeemes
no ſinne vntil it come to I haue ſinn
                     •
                  d, that is,
vntill it be paſt. If Iudas had ſhewed his repētance
to God, as he ſhewed it but to men,
happily his offence might haue founde mercy.
But he did ſeparate himſelfe further from
God by his deſpaire, than he was ſeparated
before by his treaſon, & choſe rather to run
vnto them which would mock him than vnto
him which ſhould ſuccour him. Therefore
his confeſſion was without remiſſion: and
though he ſaide, I haue ſinned, yet God aunſweres
not, I haue forgiuen, to ſhew that except
our repentance be better than his, it ſhal
not weigh againſt one ſinne. Yet Iudas doth
not onelie acknowledge himſelfe a ſinner,
which is the moſt that manie of vs confeſſe,
becauſe hee woulde not be counted worſe
than other, but reckoned his ſin without an
accuſer, as if one ſhould come forth and 
                  〈◊〉
               
I haue ſtolen an horſe, ſo he ſaith, I hau
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
trayed my maiſter. In what did Iudas ſinne? in
treaſon: then treaſon is ſinne, and yet the
Papiſtes counte it a merite, as though they
ſhould merite by ſinne. There was neuer any
heretike which maintained treaſon but the
Papiſt. Touch not mine annointed (ſaith God,)
nay kill his annointed (ſay they.) How farre
are they from Dauid which would not laie
his hand vpon Saul. If hee were a man after
Gods heart, as hee is called, then they muſt
be men after the diuels heart.
            After that Iudas had reciued meate of
Chriſt, he went about to betray him: So after
they haue receiued Peace and Plentie,
and proſperitie of their Prince, they goe about
to betray her. As Dauids enemies longed
and ſaide, When will Dauid die, and the
name of Dauid periſh? So they long and crie,
when will Elizabeth die, and the name of
Elizabeth periſh? But Elizabeth liueth, and
they die which ſeeke her death. Iohn cals
the Phariſies a generation of Vipers, which
neuer are borne, but their mother dyeth for
it.
            How right this fitteth with the papiſtes,
for they cannot liue without the death of
their mother. For the Spaniard which would
ſlaughter them, they woulde ſlaughter the
Nurſe which cheriſheth them. Had Zimri
Peace (ſaith Iezabel) which 
                     •
                  lue his maiſter?
               
So I may ſay, haue they died in peace which
would haue ſlaine their miſtreſſe? they which
haue not hanged themſelues like Iudas, haue
beene hanged by others like Hammon, as
though they had beene ſent ouer but to viſite
Tyborn. So God hath bleſſed them that
bleſſe her, and curſed them which curſe her.
Therefore ſome Traitoures haue confeſſed,
that they had ſinned in betraying the Lords
annointed, as Iudas confeſſed that hee had
ſinned in betraying the Lord himſelfe. He
betraied him, as though he had not beene
innocent, and nowe hee muſt die, he ſaith, I
haue betraied innocent bloud. Innocent
in deede: For when he asked his enemies
which of them coulde accuſe him of ſinne?
they had nothing to anſwere: Innocent in
life: Innocent in ſpeech: and Innocent in
thought. The infants which be called innocents
were not ſo innocent: therefore howe
ſhould he bee innocent which betraied the
innocenteſt of all? We are taught to be good
vnto al, but eſpecially to the good: but Iudas
was naught to all, but worſt to the beſt. If
he had betraied anie, he might ſay, I haue
ſinned, becauſe all diſſimulation and guile
is condemned. 1. Pet. 2. 1. But when the innocents
are betrayed, nay when the innocenteſt
is betraied, it ſeemeth more than
ſinne, becauſe neuer any betraied innocent

Chriſt but Iudas. Thus Chriſt was iuſtified of
his Diſciples, and his enemies. He which betrayed
him ſayd, he was innocent. He which
condemned him ſaid hee was innocent. And
the Diuels which made Iudas betray him, &
Pilate condemne him, ſayde before, that hee
was the ſonne of God, and called him holy.
Thus euery ſinner ſhall bee condemned of
himſelfe before hee be condemned of God
that the Lord may bee iuſtified when he iudgeth.
If Iudas coulde haue ſayde, I beleeue,
when hee ſaide, I haue ſinned: God woulde
haue aunſwered him as Nathan aunſwered
Dauid: Thy ſinne is forgiuen: But hee confeſſed
and amended not. What ſhall be to them
which doe not confeſſe, but defende their
ſinnes? Is not thy ſinne worſe then Iudas?
when Iudas ſaith I haue ſinned, and thou ſaiſt,
I haue not ſinned. This is our manner to
pleade not guiltie ſo long as we liue. Sinnes
and excuſes are twinnes, borne at a birth, &
one followeth the other, Zarah came after
Phares out of the wombe. Gen. 38. 30. Iudas
ſayth, I haue ſinned, but wee ſay, I haue not
ſinned, or I haue ſinned but a little, or I haue
ſinned againſt my will, ſo wee minſe our
ſinnes, as though they needed no forgiuenes.
Salomon ſayd, I am more fooliſh then anie man:
but wee would bee counted wiſer than anie
man.Pro. 30. 2. Paul called himſelfe the greateſt ſinner,

but we would be iudged the leaſt ſinners: ſo
we are aſhamed of ſinne, and yet not aſhamed
to ſinne. If we would iudge our ſelues
wee ſhould not be iudged. Be not deceiued,
for ſinne doth not ende as it begins. When
the terrours of Iudas come vppon the ſoule,
the tongue cannot hide his ſinne: for deſpaire
and horror will not bee ſmothered: But hee
which hath Sauls ſpirite haunting him, will
rage as Saul did. There is a warning conſcience,
& a gnawing conſcience. The warning
conſcience commeth before ſinne: The gnawing
conſcience followeth after ſinne. The
warning conſcience is often lulled a ſleepe:
but the gnawing conſcience wakeneth her
againe. If there bee anie hell in this world:
they which feele the worme of conſcience
gnawing vpon their hearts, may truely ſay,
that they haue felt the torments of hell. Who
can expreſſe that mans horror but himſelfe?
Nay, what horrors are they which he cannot
expreſſe himſelfe? Sorrowes are met in his
ſoule as at a feaſt: feare, thought, & anguiſh,
deuide his ſoule betweene them. All the furies
of hell leape vpon his heart like a ſtage,
Thought calleth to Feare: Feare whiſtleth
to horror: horror beckeneth to deſpaire, and
faith; come and helpe mee to torment this
ſinner. One ſaith, that ſhee commeth from
this ſinne: and another ſaith, that ſhee commeth

from that ſinne: ſo he goeth through a
thouſand deaths & cannot die. Irons are laid
vpon his bodie like a priſoner. Al his lightes
are put out at once: hee hath no ſoule fit to
be comforted. Thus he lieth, as it were vpon
the racke & ſayth, that he beares the world
vpon his ſhoulders, and that no man ſuffereth
that which he ſuffereth. So let him lye
(ſaith God) without eaſe vntil he confeſſe &
repent, & call for mercie. This is the goodlie
waye which the Serpent ſayde would make
you Gods, and made him a diuel. Therefore
at laſt, learne the ſleight of Sathan in this
wretched traytor. His ſubtilties are wel called
the depth of Sathan:Ap. 2. 24. for is ſo deepe,
that few can ſoūd him. Now he lets Iudas ſee
his ſinne, before he hid it from him. Vntil he
had ſinned, hee made as though it were no
ſinne, but with promiſes and bribes mufled
his face and couered the vileneſſe of his fact,
leſt ſhame ſhould keepe him frō it. But whē
he had done, he made it ſeeme as vile as hee
could, to make him deſpaire for it. All his
baites are made of this faſhion, that the ſinne
is done before the puniſhment bee conſidered.
Let vs not looke for Iudas to come out
of hell to warne vs, for this is written for our
learning: & therefore, Be as wiſe as Serpentes,
that the Serpent may not deceiue you.
         
         
            
            The Petition of Moſes
to God.
            
               The Text, Deut. 3. Chap. 23. 24 verſe.
               And I beſought the Lord the ſame time, ſaying,
O Lord God, thou haſt begunne to ſhew
thy ſeruant thy greatnes, and thy mightie
hand, for where is there a God in heauen or
earth that can doe like thy workes, and like
thy power.
            
            
               HEere Moſes teacheth vs
howe to pray, hee beginneth
firſt and telleth God
that he hath begunne to
ſhewe him fauour, & well
might Moſes ſo ſay, for
hee was no ſooner borne
but the Lorde beganne to ſhewe him his
greatneſſe, in ſauing him when he was caſt
into the Riuer,Exod. 26. and deliuering him vnto a
Kings daughter to be brought vp: and after
by his mightie prouidence bringing him to
his mother to be nurſed. If all that the Lorde
hath done for him till this time be conſidered,
hee had great cauſe to ſay, O Lorde thou
haſt begun to ſhewe thy ſeruaut thy greatnes.
Heerein Moſes in ſome part ſheweth himſelfe

thankefull, for that hee hath receiued,
truſting thereby to intreat GOD to continue
his benefits and louing-kindnes towards
him, which is a thing that pleaſeth God, for
which of vs hauing a friend, at whoſe hands
wee had receiued a benefite heretofore, if we
ſhould ſtand in neede of him againe, woulde
not ſaie vnto him, Sir, you haue beene my
friend heretofore, and many waies good
vnto mee, the conſideration whereof at this
time hath imboldened mee to come vnto
you againe? Who is it but will account this
a thankfull fellow, and ſaye, ſee, it is a good
deede to doo for one which ſheweth himſelfe
ſo thankfull? Euen ſo Moſes commeth
to God, he is not like one who ſitting in his
doore and ſeeth one day by daye come by
him and ſalute him, and yet taketh no acquaintance,
ſo that if he ſtand in need of him
either hee knoweth not where he dwelleth,
or els becauſe he is not acquainted with him,
he is abaſhed to aske any thing of him. Moſes
is not ſuch a one, but hee is acquainted
with the Lorde, who ſo often paſſed by him
and therefore he now ſayth, Thou haſt begun
(O Lord) thou haſt begun to ſhewe thy ſeruaunt
thy greatneſſe and thy mightie hand. Of this is
already ſpokē, what this greatnes and mightie
hand which God ſhewed to Moſes was,
we haue alreadie heard: namely, that mightie

deliuerance which the Lorde euen from
his birth to this time had ſent him in the
time of neede.
            
               For where is there a God in heauen or in
earth that canne doo like thy woorkes or like
thy power? Here Moſes challengeth all the Idoll
Gods, and telleth them, that amongſt
them all, there is not one of them that can
doo like his God.Pſal. 87. 7. So God when he is oppoſed
and ſet againſt his enemies, is then moſt
glorious and confoundeth them all. Now
Moſes procedeth in his prayer, ſaying: I
praye thee let mee goe ouer and ſee the good land
that is beyond Iordan, that goodly mountaine &
Lebanon.
            
            But the Lord was angrye with mee for your
ſakes, and would not heare mee, and the Lord
ſaid vnto me,
               Deut. 3. 25. 26. Let is ſuffiſe thee or bee content,
ſpeake no more vnto me of this matter. Get thee
vp into the top of Pisgah, &c.
            Heerein is foure things to be conſidered:
Firſt, the prayer of Moſes in theſe wordes, I
pray thee &c. Then the anſwere of God for
his prayer, then the mitigating of his anger
ſet downe in theſe wordes, Let it ſuffiſe thee,
or be content, &c. Speak no more vnto mee of
this matter. Then the promiſe which God
maketh vnto Moſes that hee ſhall ſee the
land of Canaan, though not poſſeſſe it?
            
            Firſt for the prayer of Moſes ſet down in

theſe wordes. I pray thee let mee goe ouer and
ſee the good Land, &c.
            
            Here Moſes prayeth like one of vs, who
are alwayes crauing, but neuer haue reſpect
to the will of God, to ſay, Thy will bee done:
Chriſt hath not taught vs to aske Our dayly
bread, before he taught vs to ſay. Thy will be
done: and therefore Chriſt when he went to
pray,Mark. 14. 33. 36 after hee had prayed that if it were poſſible
that houre might paſſe from him: Yet after
remembring how hee had taught his Diſciples
before, returned againe and ſaide, Neuertheleſſe,
not that I will, but that thou wilt bee
done.
            
            And our prayer made after this ſort is the
cauſe many time why wee are not hearde,
therefore let vs hereafter learne in our prayers
to pray that Gods will may bee doone.
What this Mountaine Lebanon is, ſurely Moſes
meaneth the place where the Temple
ſhoulde bee built, and God honoured: For
after that Ioſua had quietly poſſeſſed the
Lande of Canaan,
               Ioſu. 22. 10. he builded a Tabernacle,
wherein to call vppon the Lorde, not perfect.
            
               Nowe it followeth in the Text: But the
Lorde was angrie with mee for your ſakes and
would not heare me, &c.
            So ſoone as Moſes changed his praier, God
turneth from him and will not heare him:

So ſoone we make God to forſake vs, if wee
doe not according to his will: Moſes ſheweth
the cauſe why God woulde not heare
him, although he were a great man and in
high authority, yet he is not aſhamed to confeſſe
his fault, which hee might haue kept ſecrete
if he would: for the people knewe not
that he had ſinned, becauſe the ſinne which
he committed was not open but ſecret: yea,
it was but a little repine, as in the eleuenth
of Numbers the eleuenth verſe, & therefore
Moſes might haue kept it from them,Num. 1. 11. 12. 13. but
becauſe hee woulde not iuſtifie himſelfe, hee
telleth them that the Lorde was angry with
him,Exo. 5. 22 and becauſe hee would not haue the
people to iuſtifie themſelues, he telleth them
it is for their ſakes. Thus when Moſes changeth
his prayer, God will no longer heare
him: ſo wee ſee that where ſin is, their prayer
is not effectuall: ſo that if wee will hope to
receiue by prayer any thing at Gods handes,
wee muſt firſt remooue and take a way the
cauſe of our hinderance (which is ſinne) before
wee can receiue the thing wee pray for.Num. 14. 19.
For here we ſee that prayer which before pacified
the wrath of God:Exo. 31. 14 which healed Meriam
being ſtriken with Leproſie:Num. 12. 14. which raiſed
the widdowes Sonne from death to life,1. King. 17. 22. 23.
by which Dauid obtayned victorie:2. Kin. 4. 25. which
brought downe fire from heauen to conſume

the Idolaters Sacrifices,Act. 20. 19. which brought
Ieremiah out of priſon,1. Cro. 18. and Ionah out of the
Fiſhes belly,2. Cro. 7. 1. and made the Sunne to ſtande
ſtil,Iere. 34. 14. and the raine to fall from heauen,Ion. 1. 2. 10. and triumphed
ouer all,Ioſua. 8. 12. is heere by a little ſinne,
quite ouerthrowne euen like a greate Monarke
poyſoned with a little Spider. But
the Lord was angrie with me for your ſakes
and would not heare me. God when Moſes
had prayed did not graunt his requeſt, but
was angrie with him: but leſt Moſes ſhould
be quite diſcouraged, he ſtraight wayes mitigateth
his anger & biddeth him be content
and ſpeake no more vnto him of that matter.
God doth not bid him that hee ſhoulde not
praie any more vnto him, but that he ſhould
pray no more for that thing. Firſt God biddeth
him to be content, as if he ſhould haue
ſaid, although thou maiſt not enter into the
land, yet I will content thee other waies: thus
God woulde haue vs in what eſtate ſoeuer
we be, to be content with our calling, for it is
his appointment. And ſeeing he hath in ough
to content vs all, therefore wee ſhoulde not
murmure nor grudge one at another, but be
thankfull vnto him, becauſe it is his good will
and pleaſure it ſhoulde bee ſo. And ſurelie
Moſes woulde, and was willing that the
Iewes ſhould profite by his Doctrine, for he
hath ſet it downe in the 20. of Numbers,
               
twiſe,Num. 20. 12▪ 24. 27. 13. and in the 27. 13. in the 32. Deut. 49.
and in this place, all to the intent to ſhewe
that God is able to content all.Deu. 32. 49. He is not like
to Iacob,
               Gen. 27. 33 who when hee had bleſſed one of
his ſonnes, could not bleſſe the other: but he
when hee had bleſſed the poore, bleſſed the
hungry, and when hee had bleſſed the hungrie,
he bleſſed them that wept, when he had
bleſſed them that wept, he bleſſed them that
were reuiled, and ſuffered for Chriſtes ſake.
There is no ende of his bleſſing, becauſe his
mercie indureeh for euer. God is ſo mercifull,
that though we are nor able to praie aright,
yet he conſidereth of our praiers, and turneth
to the beſt for our good,Pſal. 135. not graunting
our requeſt manie times, but a better thing
than we doe deſire of him: as when Dauid
praied that the Childe gotten in adultery,
might liue, God heard him and did conſider
of it, yet did not graunt his requeſt but
a better thing, that was, that his Sonne Salomon
ſhould raigne after him: And when our
Sauiour Chriſt praied that that houre might
paſſe ouer him, God heard him and did conſider
of it, yet did not grant his requeſt, but a
better thing, that his death ſhould take away
the ſinnes of the world, and here in this place
where Moſes priaeth, God heareth his praier,
and doth conſider of it, yet doth not grant
his requeſt, but a better thing, that is, that he

ſhall goe into heauenly Canaan. Thus wee ſee
that God is ſo mercifull that hee can ſcarce
puniſh ſinners, hee is ſo louing that often he
giueth vs better things than wee can deſire,
who then will offend ſo merciful and louing
a father? Let vs, ſeeing God is ſo merciful vnto
vs, take heede that we abuſe not his mercies,
leſt in ſo dooing we prouoke him vnto
iudgement. Now God hath told Moſes, that
he ſhall not goe into the Land, he beginneth
to teach him how hee ſhall doe to ſee it, and
biddeth him goe vp into the top of Piſgah, and
caſt his eies Eſtward, and weſtward, and Northward
and Southward, and behold it, &c.
            
            As a Bird ſtaied with a little ſtring, or a
ſtrong man in ſwimming held backe by a
ſmall twig: ſo a little ſinne ſtaieth this great
Captaine that he cannot come within the
land of Canaan. Firſt God is angry with him
& enuies him altogether, as though hee were
not worthy ſo much as to go vp the mount:
thus we may ſee how one of the leaſt ſinnes
is able to turne from vs all the goodnes, & all
the fauour which God beareth to vs.
            After God commands Moſes to go vp the
mount. Here Moſes obeieth Gods cōmandement,
but if he had bin like many a murmuring
man, he would haue denied to go vp the
moūt, ſaying, what banquet is this to me, but
a dainty diſh ſet before one forbiddē to eate?

but Moſes had rather die than anger the
Lorde againe, when he had bid him be content.
Thus we may learne of Moſes to bee
content with our calling whether wee haue
little or much: For God contented Moſes
as wel with the ſight of Canaan, as thoſe who
poſſeſſed it. So when GOD hath not ordained
vs to ſee great ſubſtance as he hath ſome
of our brethren: yet becauſe we ſhould not
be diſcontent, he will giue vs as much pleaſure
at the ſight of them in others, as though
we our ſelues enioyed them. So GOD contenth
Moſes, and he contenteth Ioſua: for
as Ioſua came into the land as Moſes could
not, ſo Moſes saw it as Ioſua coulde not. So
I ſay God contenteth all, that Ioſua ſhould
not enuie Moſes, nor Moſes enuie Ioſua.
And this was the great power of God: who
although Moſes were very old, yet was his
eie-ſight moſt perfect, inſomuch that hee
could ſee farther than any of all his company:
For,Deut. 34. 1. 26. 
               being vpon the Mount, hee ſawe all the land
of Gilead vnto Dan, and all Nepthalie, the
land of Ephraim & Manaſſes, and all the lande
of Iuda, vnto the vttermoſt Sea, &c. The like
to this did neuer any ſee beeing of the age
of Moſes who was 120. yeares olde. Manie
things might Moſes haue obiected which
might haue hindered him from going vp
the Mount: For ſurely it muſt needes be a

griefe to him when he conſidered that great
paine which he had taken in bringing them
through the wilderneſſe, and conducting
them 40. yeares together, and nowe when
he had no further to goe but euen ouer Iordaine,
to be taken a waie then: and another
which neuer tooke any paines, poſſeſſe all
his labours. This I ſay, muſt bee a great and
intollerable thing to fleſhe and bloode: for
when one hath laid a foundation, and anothere
come and build vpon it, ſurely hee will
think himſelfe hardly dealt withal: Or if one
haue drawne a picture, head and face, and all
ſauing the legges, if one come and drawe the
legges, and ſo take his labours, hee woulde
hardlie take it well. You knowe how they
which were hired and wrought all the daie
long,Mat. 20. 11 becauſe the had not more than thoſe
which began the laſt houre, murmured againſt
the maiſter of the houſe. Such is our
nature, and yet notwithſtanding all this Moſes
is content. Hee knoweth that God doth
him no wrong,Gen. 49. 55 but is iuſt and mercifull alſo.
He bleſſeth all alike, as Iacobs children were
bleſſed.
            
               Moſes ſo long as he was vpon the plaine
ground, could not ſee the types of heauen:
but when he was vpon the Mount, he ſaw it
before he came to heauen it ſelfe: So let vs
euen now ſeale the Mount as Moſes did, that

we may ſee and conſider theſe ioyes. Which
thing ſhall be to reclaime our heartes from
earthly matters. As Peter went vp the mount
to ſee Chriſts glory, and Moſes went vp the
mount to ſee the lande of promiſe: ſo let vs
aſcend from theſe earthly things to the contemplation
of heauenly. This ſhould be our
iourney till wee come vp to heauen it ſelfe,
to clime the hill: for we are lowe men of ſtature
like Zacheus, who cannot ſee Chriſt
before we be lifted from the earth, ſo that if
we will euer poſſeſſe heauen, we muſt pluck
our heartes from the earth, and then ſhall we
ſee God nearer than we can poſſibly, if wee
keepe our mindes vppon earthlie matters.
God ſheweth himſelfe to ſome nearer, to
ſome farther off, and to ſome in parables:
As the Prophetes ſawe God nearer than the
Patriarches: and the Apoſtles nearer than
the Prophetes:Gen. 22. 18 As to Abraham hee ſaide In
thy ſeede:
               Eſa. 9. 6. 
               Eſaiah came nearer and ſaid, vnto
vs a childe is borne,
               Iohn 1. 36. 
               &c. Iohn yet came more
neare and ſaid,2. Pet. 1. 18 
               Behold the Lamb of God.
            
            Get thee vp into the top of Piſgah, and lift thine
eies Weſtward, and Northward & Southward,
and Eaſtward, and beholde it with thine eies, for
thou ſhalt not goe ouer this Iordaine.
            Now Moſes is in his proſpect, as Dauid
was in his Tower. Here he muſt prepare him
ſelfe to die, while hee is looking vpon the

land which ſo long he hath beene in comming
to. Who woulde not but haue grieued
at this? That after ſo long as fourtie
yeares trauaile in hope to poſſeſſe it, ſhould
now in the ende bee content with a ſight of
it, and ſo vaniſh awaie. Yet Moſes (for all
this) murmureth not, but like Iob taketh it
patiently. And as hee was vpon the Mount
where GOD vaniſhed: So heere hee is vpon
the Mount and vaniſheth away himſelfe:
as it appeareth in Deuteronomie the thirtie
foure Chapter, and the ſixth verſe, no man
knoweth his tombe, nor which way hee is
gone, leſt the Iewes ſhoulde haue worſhipped
his Reliques as the Papiſtes doe theirs.
So good Rulers are taken awaie in a time
when death is leaſt ſuſpected. As Lot was
taken away before the people of Sodom knew
as is ſhewed in the nineteenth Chapter of
Geneſis, and the tenth verſe: So wee ſee
that when our time is come, and our glaſſe
run out: that neither our riches, nor our wits,
nor our friends, nor any thing that wee haue
in this world, can cary vs no further. No, no
more than Moſes coulde goe ouer this Iordaine.
            
            
               But Charge Ioſua, and incourage him, and embolden
him, for he ſhall goe before this people, and
hee ſhall deuide for inheritance vnto them the
land which thou ſhalt ſee, &c.
            
               
Now Moſes fainteth, here commeth Ioſua
a figure of Chriſt, who leadeth the people
into Canaan, as Chriſt doth lead them into
heauen. Moſes is no ſooner dead, but God
chooſeth another to goe in & out before his
people. And now God chooſeth a gouernour:
See what a man he chooſeth. O would
that God might haue the chooſing ſtill, for
then all gouernours ſhould be ſuch as Ioſua:
for ſuch is our corruption,Nu. 27. 16. that if we chooſe
our ſelues, that we ſtill chooſe ſuch as God
would not haue choſen, and therefore wee
had neede to pray to the Lord God as Moſes
did,Deu. 27. 16 that hee would appoint a man which
may go in & out before vs, that we be not as
ſheepe without a ſhepheard. More was ſpoken
touching this point, which I haue not
noted, becauſe I coulde not ſet it downe in
ſuch perfection as it was deliuered.
            But Charge Ioſua, incourage him, and imbolden
him, &c. God would not haue Moſes to
incourage Ioſua words onely, but in deeds
too: and therefore Moſes giueth him all the
glory he can, as Iohn gaue it vnto Chriſt.
            
               Charge Ioſua, incourage him, & bolden him.
Heere God woulde haue Ioſua incouraged
with all the incouragement that may bee, as
though he coulde neuer bee incouraged enough.
God had incouraged him himſelfe
before,Deut. 3. 21. as in the 21. verſ. before: And I charged

Ioſua the ſame time,
               Nu. 27. 22. 
               &c. And in 27. Deut.
Moſes ſetteth him before Eliazar the Prieſt,
and he put his hand vpon him,
               Deu. 31. 23. 
               and gaue him a
charge, &c. And in 31. Deut. 23. GOD bids
him Be ſtrong & of a good courage.
               Ioſu. 1. 5. 6. 7. 8▪ 9. 10. And in 1.
Ioſua 50. God tels him, That there ſhall not be
a man able to withſt and him all the dayes of his
life, For he will be with him and neuer leaue
him, nor forſake him. And againe in the 9.
verſe, hee ſaith, Haue not I commaunded thee
not to feare? for I will bee with thee whither ſo
euer thou goeſt. And in the 31. of Deut. verſe. 7.
When Moſes prepared himſelfe to die:Deu. 31. 7. hee
called Ioſua & bid him Be ſtrong and of a good
courage.
               Ioſ. 8. 10. And in 8. Ioſua, ver. 10. the Lorde
biddeth him, Not to feare when his enemies
come vpon him. Thus is Ioſua incouraged of
all: and thus ſhould Ioſua bee encouraged
ſtill: But who encourageth Ioſua ſo? Nay,
where is that hee, that doth not diſcourage
Ioſua? Now Ioſua is contemned & ſcorned
of the vileſt. And is this to encourage him?
No, Ioſua had neede of better incouragemēt
than this: elſe Ioſua and all the Ioſuas in this
land will faint, and ſo ſhall the people be left
without a guide to goe in and out before
them, and then ſhall they be readie and a fit
pray for the Wolfe. Well, we ſee that Ioſua
here is better incouraged, and it is not without
a cauſe that God would haue Ioſua thus

incouraged. For if hee had an eare at euerie
mans mouth, hee would rather wiſh to die
with Moſes vpon the mount, than take in
hand to bring ſuch wicked Caines into the
lande of Canaan. That which olde Ie
                     •
                  hro
taught Moſes (that a gouernour had neede to
be a man of courage) heere he findeth true:
for nothing more burteth Iustice than feare.
Therefore a Magiſtrate had need to be ſuch
a one as ſhall not feare the face of any whatſoeuer:
which cauſed Moſes to ſpeake ſo oftē
to Ioſua bidding him to bee of good courage.
And to that end God commaundeth Moſes
againe and againe, to incourage him, vſing
theſe three words, Charge, incourage, and imbolden
him, as the cock crowed thriſe, that if
Peter were ſleepe the firſt and the ſecond
time, yet he might at laſt awake him.
            Now it reſteth, that I ſhoulde incourage
Ioſua which ſucceedeth me. But how ſhould
I begin to incourage him? or where ſhoulde
I begin? ſhall I tell him, that he ſhall liue now
at eaſe and in ſecurity? No. Why, how ſhould
I incourage Ioſua? ſhall I tell him, you will
loue him, and follow him, and that hee ſhall
finde you willing and forward in euery good
action? If I promiſe it, ſhall I not lie? If I become
bounden for you, ſhall I not forfeit? I
feare yes. Why, how then ſhould I incourrage
Ioſua? ſhall I tell him, all will ſpeake wel

of him? or ſhall I tell him none will ſlaunder
him? No. For if he be as righteous as Chriſt,
yet ſome of the Scribes and Phariſies will
ſeeke to perſecute him. If hee will liue in
quietnes, he muſt not vtter all the Counſell
of God, though God commaund him. Nor
he muſt not reprooue ſome ſinnes, for then
he ſhall be thought to enuie againſt ſome
perſons. Nor he muſt not keepe company
with the godlie, for then ſhal he be accounted
a partaker. No, he muſt not denie the
company of the wicked, for then he ſhall be
accounted a Preciſian, a Puritane, and I
knowe not what. But thou wilt ſaye: what
then, is there no comfort for Ioſua? I anſwer,
yes. And that is: it may be after ſome 3. or
4. yeares labour and trauaile, he ſhall winne
ſome 2. or 3. vnto Chriſte which ſhall extinguiſh
al griefe: For God will one day reward
him for his labour, & glorifie him in heauen.
But if Ioſua ſhould bee in trouble, as he cannot
almoſt otherwiſe chooſe, if hee keepe a
good conſcience and reprooue the mightie
vnder his charge, then he ſhall ſee, moſt of
the great ones wil quite forſake him which
now ſeeme to fauour him, & they wil ſee him
perſecuted like Chriſt, and ſtand a farre off
like Pilate, and waſh their handes, as though
they were innocent, when it is in their power
and authoritie to amend it.
            
               
If he ſtand out like a valiant ſouldier & preuaile,
then all will draw vnto him. But if hee
faint for lack of ſtrength, although he weepe
like Peter yet none will pitie him. Therefore
ſtand you to him both in proſperity & aduerſitie.
Loue him & obey him in all righteouſnes
as the Iewes did their Ioſua, and heere I
deliuer you vnto him, & with my loue, leaue
and good will, I giue him my poſſeſſion, my
labors, & my twelue moneths trauailes. And
here becauſe I woulde not keepe you ouerlong,
like as Ioſua kept the people before
his death with an exhortation to feare God:
or as one friend holdeth another by the hand
being loth to part. I wil make an end, beſeeching
you, as Ioſua beſought the people of
Iſrael, that you will henceforward feare the
Lord & ſerue him in truth, and put away all
enuie and vngodlines, that it may not be ſaid
they haue returned, with the dog to his vomit,
or with the ſwine to their puddle, but
that you may go on forward in all goodnes,
ſeruing the Lord in ſpirite and trueth. Then
ſhall the God of heauē bleſſe & proſper you
in all temporall graces, and in the end glorifie
you in the kingdome of heauen: to the
which, the Lord for his mercies ſake bringe
you all, Amen.
            This was the laſt Sermon that Henry Smith
made at Clement Danes.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            The Dialogue betweene
Paul and Agrippa.
            
               Acts. 26. 27.
               
                  O King Agrippa, beleeueſt thou the Prophets?
I know that thou beleeueſt.
                  Then Agrippa ſaid vnto Paule, Almoſt thou
perſwadeſt me to become a Chriſtian.
                  Then Paule ſaide, I would to God, that not onely
thou, but alſo all that heare me this daie
were both almoſt, and altogether ſuch as I
am, except theſe bands.
               
            
            
               IN this Dialogue betweene
Agrippa the King, and Paule
the Apoſtle: firſt you ſhall
heare what Paule ſaith: then
you ſhall heare what Agrippa
aunſweres: after you
ſhal heare what Paul replies. In Agrippa you
ſhall ſee what we are, In Paule you ſhall ſee
what we ſhould be: For the king ſhewes that
hee is almoſt a Chriſtian, and the Apoſtle
ſhewes that he ſhould be altogether a Chriſtian.

This is the ſumme of their confeſſion:
Firſt, Paule begins, and ſpeakes, as though
he would teach vs a way to win ſinners, euery
word is a motiue, and ſhewes that hee
which fiſheth for ſoules, had neede to haue
many nets, and obſerue time, and place, and
calling, and fit al words before in his minde,
leſt he loſe his bait. For vnleſſe he ſeeke the
vantage, and get the vpper ground of ſinne
before he incoūter, it is liker to giue him the
foile, as the Diuels did to the Exorciſts, than
to be driuen out by him. Therefore as Iacob
came to Eſa
                     •
                  
                with ſeuen curteſies to prepare
his heart and turne his wrath before they
met together,Gen. 33. 3. ſo Paul vſeth (as it were) three
preambles, before he imbrace this King.
            Firſt with a reuerent title, O King Agrippa,
Secondly with a profitable queſtion.Act. 19. 16. 
               Doeſt
thou beleeue the Prophets? Thirdly, with a
fauorable preuention, I knowe that thou beleeueſt.
With theſe three congies he cloſeth
ſo with King Agrippa, that he could not ſtart
out of his circle, the holie ſpirit ſo placed euery
word when he ment to doe good, that
it was not poſſible to correct them, ſo they
hit in their ſpeeches which haue that prōpter
and ſeeke not themſelues, but woulde
faine ſpeak that which might touch the hart
& win the hearer to God. O King Agrippa I
note here a queſtiō, & an obiectiō, as though

he were opponent & correſpondent too, for
he askes the queſtion, & anſwers himſelfe: O
King doeſt thou beleeue? Now Agrippa ſhould
ſay I or no, & Paul takes the word out of his
mouth, leſt he ſhould ſay no, hee anſwers for
him, I know thou beleeueſt. This is his preparatiue
to Agrippa, before hee come with that
hard leſſon to be a Chriſtian altogether. Before
Paul had to deale with Feſtus the Preſident of
Ceſarea, which came nowe from the Idolatrous
Gentiles, an obſtinate brutiſh and barbarous
man, which becauſe he ſauoured not
the things of God, but fleſh & bloud, thought
that Paul was beſide himſelfe when he ſpake
of Chriſt, and ſaid that too much learning had
made him mad as ſome giddy ſpirites thinke
now, that they which are zelouſer than thē
               ſelues
know not what they ſay nor doe, and
impute all the troubles of the Realme, & the
inuaſion of the Spaniards vnto the preaching
of the worde, & the faſts & praiers that were
exerciſed about that time, like Achab which
ſaid that the Prophet troubled Iſraell, when
he himſelfe was the cauſe of all their plagues.
What will not dogs ſpue out, when they are
ſet to vomite? When Paul ſaw ſuch a brutiſh
Preſident, he turned his ſpeech from him to
Agrippa, in whom he did ſee better tokens of
faith, thinking to kindle the ſparks which he
ſawe in him, thus boldy he ſets vpon him.
            
               
               O King Agrippa beleeueſt thou the Prophets?
As if he ſhould ſay, If thou beleeueſt the Prophets,
it is eaſie for thee to beleeue that which
I teach out of the Prophets: for all that I
ſpeake of this Ieſus is written in the Prophets,
and fulfilled in Chriſt. Looke vpon the Prophets,
and looke vpon him, there thou ſhalt
ſee all that I ſay, that it is no report of mine,
but that which I haue receiued from good
witnes, and thou maiſt heare it of the ſame,
if thou doe but read the Prophets: therefore
before other queſtions, he askes, Doeſt thou
beleeue the Prophets? Like a wiſe Schoolemaiſter
which examines his Scholler, before
he beginne to teach him, to know what hee
hath learned already, and how he vnderſtandeth
that he may goe forward with him. So
Paul examines this king, when he intended
to make him a Schooller of Chriſt, hee askes
him what he hath learned already, before he
teach him farther: and poſing him, he begins
at the foundation which is faith, ſaying, tell
me, Doeſt thou beleeue the Prophets? Yet if
wee ſhould aske ſome of you, before you
come to the Lordes Table, doe you beleeue
the Scriptures? Doe you know Chriſt? Can
you giue a reaſō of your faith? you will think
your ſelues much diſgraced to bee Catechiſed
as this king was, wee muſt not aske you
with Paul, Do you beleeue? but ſay with Paule
               
we know that ye beleeue, before we aske you.
Is this like the childe which Chriſt ſet in the
midſt of his Diſciples, & ſaid, that whoſoeuer
receiued the kingdome of heauen, he ſhoulde receiue
it as a childe? that is, he ſhould humble
himſelfe, and take correction, and learne like
a child, for heauens gate is low, and he muſt
ſtoope that goes in at it. The Souldiers and
Publicans and harlots had ſuch remorſe, that
they came to Iohn before they were baptized,
confeſſing their ſinnes, and asked, Maister,
what ſhall we doo? They were not aſhamed to
acknowledge both their ſinnes and their ignorance,
which made Iohn wonder and aske
who had taught them, as though this ſhould
be a ſtrange thing in time to come, and ſo it
is: if ye be not like Publicans, when will yee
be like Chriſtians? They confeſſed before
they were baptized, but we muſt thinke that
you know, though you know that we thinke
wrong: wee muſt take you for religious,
though you know we take you amis. Shame
of face was ordained for ſinne, but ſhame is
turned from ſinne to righteouſnes, for they
which are aſhamed of no euill, are aſhamed
of any good, this is a baſhfull Diuell.
            Now when Paul had asked him, he aunſwered
himſelfe, Doeſt thou beleeue? I knowe
that thou beleeueſt, Hee askes Agrippa whether
hee beleeue, and ſaith hee knoweth that

hee doth beleeue. What neede he aske that
which he knowes? Here you may ſee that we
haue neede to ſuſpect our iudgment, when
wee conceiue not the cauſe, when they
which are wiſer, and holier than our ſelues,
doe thus or thus, ſpeake thus or thus. Let vs
remember that the Spirituall man iudgeth
all, and is iudged of none, becauſe no man
knowes the counſeles of the Spirite, but hee
which hath it, wiſe men haue large exceptions:
and it becomes vs to conſtrue their ſayinges
and doinges better than others ſhould
conſtrue ours. As the Diſciples reuerenced
many ſayings of Chriſt when they knew not
his meaning: ſo we ſhould rather thinke that
we know not the reaſon, then that they ſpeak
without reaſon. Chriſt did know that Peter
loued him, yet that he might get a confeſſion
of him and inſtruct him farther, hee did aske
him that which he knew, ſo Paul catechizing
Agrippa, doth aske him that which he knew,
to teach him that which hee knew not. But
why doth Paul ſay flatly, that hee knowes
that which no man thought of this king before?
Either becauſe he did perceiue that Agrippa
did beleeue in part, and therefore hee
reioiced like the Father to ſee his Son comming
towards him: So he meetes him in the
way, and imbraceth him as it were with this
commendation: I knowe that thou beleeueſt,
               
that is, I knowe thou haſt a kinde of faith, &
beleeueſt that the Prophets ſaide truelie, as
many of the Gentiles did, though thou canſt
not apply it vnto thy ſelfe: So to bring him
from faith to faith, frō knowledge to knowledge,
from loue to loue: he cōmends thoſe
ſparkes in him, which ſerued not to bee called
faith, but almoſt faith, as Agrippa ſaith.
            Or elſe he ſaith, I knowe thou beleeueſt, becauſe
he would haue him beleeue. Therefore
he preuents him and aunſweres for him, leſt
Agrippa ſhould go backe, and miſlike with
his boldenes, and ſaie no, I beleeue not the
Prophetes, as it is like he would haue ſaid, if
Paul had not ſpoken mildly to him, therefore
hee begges the queſtion and anſweres him,
I know that thou beleeueſt: As when wee will
make a man our friend and willing to doe vs
a pleaſure, as though he were willing already,
and as though we had no doubt of him.
Doeſt thou beleeue? yea, I knowe that thou beleeueſt.
And yet it was but almoſt beleeue, as
Agrippa confeſſed himſelfe, but if hee had
not beleeued, this was the way to make him
beleeue, for this makes many zealous to bee
counted zealous, & many ſtudious, valiaunt,
& bountifull, to haue a name of more than is
in them, as if ye marke ye ſhall ſee generally
to ſpeake well of a man rather than euil doth
ſtir him to vertue, & incorage him in vertue

for no man is ſo humble but hee leanes to
Fame, and a good report dooth tickle and
pleaſe him which deſerues it, and him which
deſerues it not. Therefore Paul which knewe
by long experience what baite was beſt to
catch ſouls, when he caſt forth ſuch a ſtrange
queſtion, anticipates the anſwere, leſt Agrippa
ſhould anſwere otherwiſe than he woulde
haue him: he will not truſt him with ſuch a
queſtion, but ſpeaks for him, I know that thou
beleeuest. Salomon ſaith that hee is wiſe who
winneth ſoules, Pro. 11. 30. And ſo you may ſee
in this example, heere zeale and diſcretion
were met together, the Doues ſimplicitie,
and the Serpents pollicy kiſſed each other to
win one ſoule to God, what ſtudy Paul tooke
and how he beate his braine, and picked his
words to win a king to religion, becauſe many
turne with their head. Hee doth not ſo
much flatter Agrippa, as hee perſwades him
to doo that which he ſaith hee doth, this was
Pauls drift to drawe him as it were with the
cords of ioy, and make him confeſſe Chriſt
before hee was a ware, that ſo he might get
more & more of him, euen as Nathan made
Dauid by a ſleight to confeſſe againſt himſelfe,
and repent his adultrie, when as it is
like that plaine and blunt ſpeeches, would
haue done more hurt than good. This is the
ſubtiltie of wiſedome (as I my tearme it)

which Salomon intendeth when ſhe ſaith, I
wiſedome dwell with Prudence, Pro. 12. where
prudence ſignifieth Chriſtian policie, which
Chriſt commends when hee ſaieth, bee wiſe
like Serpents, Mat. 10. 10. Thus you haue a
patterne before you, they which conuert
ſoules to God, may ſee how Paule incounters
with Agrippa, whereby no doubt the holie
Ghoſt would haue vs learne how to gratulate
to our brethren their ſmal beginnings
and praiſe the mite which comes from them
that haue learned but a while, and take hold
of ſuch as are comming forward, and drawe
them further with all the ſignes of loue: and
not diſdaine thoſe which come at the laſt
houre to the vineyard, though we our ſelues
haue labored ſince the morning. For he which
is firſt may bee laſt, and hee which ſeemes last
may be firſt. Therefore let no man inſult beyonde
the liſtes of humilitie, as many make
themſelues vnprofitable ſeruants by counting
themſelues more profitable than other.
It is a fault among the beſt which are like
Aaron and Miriam, a little proud of the Spirit,
and contemne them which are ſo ignorant
as Agrippa: whome Paul beares in his
armes like the loſt ſheepe to the ſold againe.
            Now Paul hath ſpoken, Agrippa anſweres,
Almoſt thou haſt parſwaded me to become a
Chriſtian. Wherein ye may ſee how Paules
               
ſpeech wrought with him, that hee was almoſt
conuerted with a worde, when it was
ſpoken in wiſedome and loue: what power
is in one Sermon, if ye heare attentiuelie. Agrippa
was an heathen euen nowe, and worſhipped
Idols, and neuer heard a Preacher
before, yet one Sermon made him almoſt a
Chriſtian. As Luke ſaith of Steeuen, when he
diſputed againſt the Sirenians, Acts the ſixt
Chapter, and the tenth verſe, they could not
reſiſt the wiſedome and the ſpirite by which
he ſpake: So Agrippa coulde not riſiſt the
wiſedome and the Spiritte by which Paul
ſpake, but was ſo fettered with the holie
chaine, that as Paule was captine to Festus, ſo
Agrippa nowe was captiue to Paul, the
worde had him in bands like a priſoner, and
made him confeſſe againſt himſelfe before
Festus, that hee was almost a Chriſtian. For
Pauls ſpeech to the amaſe of that obſtinate
Preſident, and wonder of all that ſtoode by,
to ſee a King, an heathen, and an Idolatour,
which ſate to iudge, to be ſo chaunged with
a worde of a captiue from his opinion, whom
they though all the wordes in Gods booke
coulde not alter, if Paul and Chriſt had ſpoken
to him all his life: Then it was verified
which before was prophecied, They ſhall
binde Kinges in chaines, and Nobles in fetters
of Iron, Pſalme one hundred fortie nine, and

the eight verſe. O the Maieſtie and force of
the word, when faith dooth kindle it, and
zeale dooth vtter it, it flies like the ſtone out
of Dauids ſling, and ſtrikes ſinne and ſinner
both together at the heart.
            This Paule did in bondes: when hee was
bound, he was ſtronger than they that bound
him: when hee was a Captiue, he was 
                  •
               reer
than they which kept him: and when his
Iudges examined him, hee examined them,
and made them free which are bound to Sathan,
before hee was free from them. Sende
for Paule out of priſon to inſtruct Agrippa,
and he is in bandes which ſhould conuert.
O that ſuch Doctors might preach vnto the
Romiſh Princes of Europe, or that the Kings
that honour yet the moſt Antichriſtian beaſt,
would heare like this King: But they haue
ſome Anaſiahs which haue an eye to Amos
that hee cannot ſpeake in the Courte.
Goe thou ſeer, flie into the lande of Iuda, propheſie
to the Lambes, and keepe Sheepe: Speake
no more at Bethel, for this is the kings Chappell
and the kings Courte. A goodlie reaſon
why none but flatterers ſhould preach to
Princes, becauſe it is the kings Courte: Should
not Kings heare the trueth as well as others?
Muſt not Bethel heare of ſaluation as well as
Iudah, becauſe Amaſiah dooth feare his fall,
leſt A
                     •
                  os get his honour from him? When

will hee conuert Agrippa which will not
preach in bands nor in libertie? Happie Agrippa,
not by the name of a King, but by the
name of a Chriſtian. Happie Agrippa, not
by the preſents which thou receiuedſt of Feſtus,
but by the words which thou heardſt of
Paul: thou cameſt to ſee, but God brought
thee to heare: thy intent was to gratulate
Feſtus, but now thou maieſt gratulate Paule.
The Captiue is better to thee than the Preſident,
for Feſtus hath ſhewed thee but his
pompe, but Paul hath ſhewed thee his Sauiour,
and perſwaded thee to become a Chriſtian.
            
               Almost ſaith Agrippa, but not altogether.
Heere you may ſee your pittance, how you
meaſure God with almoſt, and ſerue him by
halfes which hath giuen all,Acts. 5. like Ananias
which brought a part and kept a part behind.
This is our worſhip of God: though we will
not ſay for ſhame with Agrippa that wee are
but almost Chriſtians: yet wee are not almoſt,
when we would be counted altogether. We
goe before him in hypocriſie, and come behinde
him in modeſtie, for Agrippa woulde
not ſhewe more than he had, to be counted
better than hee was. Though altogether had
been as ready as almoſt, as it is to vs, yet when
almoſt was all, hee ſaid almoſt, not altogether.
It ſeemes that the flaxe began to ſmoake,

though it did not burne. The firſt temper is
colde, the next is luke-warme, the laſt is hot:
Almoſt is firſt, and Altogether is laſt: and
many come betweene before wee can goe
from one to another. Agrippa confeſſeth
that almoſt is all, and here he ſtayes to heare
what Paule will ſay to inſtruct him farther.
Paule thou haſt perſwaded mee almoſt to become
a Chriſtian. It is like the faint confeſſion
of him that wept and ſaid, I beleeue Lord,
helpe my vnbeleefe: I am a Chriſtian, teach
me to be a Chriſtian? Therefore they which
deſcant vpon his name, doe note that Agrippa
is as much as Aegre pario, which ſignifies
him which hardlye laboureth, and brings
forth with paine as Agrippa did. Nabal is
his name (ſaith Abigail) and folly is with him,
So Agrippa is his name and difficultie is with
him: for hard and ſcarce was his conception
in ſtead of a Chriſtian, hee brought forth almoſt
a Chriſtian.
            Shall we nowe behold our face in Agrippaes
Glaſſe, whether wee bee altogether like
Paule, or almoſt like Agrippa, or like Feſtus
not at all? Chriſtians or no Chriſtians, or
what kind of Chriſtians are wee? There bee
many degrees vppon earth, but this is the
higheſt degree: There be many names of honour,
but this is the honourableſt name: there
bee many profeſſours of men, but this is the

beſt profeſſion to be a Chriſtian, that is, the
Sonne of GOD, the fellowe of Angels, the
heire of heauen: yet whether we ſhould be
Chriſtians, or Chriſtians almoſt, or Chriſtians
altogether, is a queſtion which troubleth
euery man, and when altogether is approoued
for beſt, yet wee chooſe almoſt before
it.
            There is ſome thing alwaies behinde, like
the eye which looked to Sodome: as an
Owle peeps at the Sunne out of a barne but
dares not come to it, ſo we peepe at Religion
and will not come neere it, but ſtande a
loofe off pinking and winking as though we
were more afraid of GOD than the diuell:
For ſelfe-loue, and regarde of perſons, and
feare of lawes, and ſway of time, more are
afraide to be too holie, than too prophane,
becauſe holineſſe is worſe intreated than
prophaneſſe.
            
               Goe away and ſinne no more, becauſe thou
art healed. Nay, goe away and ſinne againe
becauſe thou art healed. As Naaman intreated
for one ſinne: that he might ſtand before
the Idoll when his Lorde leaned vppon his
ſhoulder: So this ſinne, and that ſinne will
not let vs paſſe the compaſſe of almost, leſt
we ſhould haue a perfect reward.
            God would haue nothing ſo perfect as a
Chriſtian, for whome he hath giuen his welbeloued

Sonne, his ſpirit, his Lawe, and his
prophets, That the man of God may be perfect,
as Paule ſaith. Yet euery thing growes vntill
it be perfect, the builder buildes till it bee an
houſe: The Tailour ſoweth till it be a garment:
The painter paints till it be a picture:
Onely the Chriſtian leaues off before he attaine
to bee a Chriſtian, and makes a full period
at almoſt.
            That which GOD would haue to be perfecteſt
of all, hee had rather haue vnperfect
than perfect, halfe than all, a little wealth, a
little reſt, a little honor, and a little pleaſure
ſeems nothing, but a little faith is enough although
it be neuer ſo ſmall a mite.
            We haue a waight of al kinde of mettals,
a touchſtone for gold, a meaſure for grame,
and we will not take one iot leſſe than meaſure
of any man, onely wee cut GOD of his
waight and meaſure, and waigh our ſeruice
in halfe ballances: This I will doe, and this I
will not doe, God ſhall haue one part, and the
the world ſhall haue another part, and the
fleſh ſhall haue another part, and the diuell
ſhall haue another part. Thus wee haue
brought GOD to his ſtint: aske while hee
will, hee ſhall haue no more but almoſt:
Almoſt zealous, almoſt faithfull, almoſt
righteous, as though almoſt were better than
altogether: that is, the counterfeite than the

truth, the ſhadow than the bodie. Paul ſaith
that the Athenians were too religious in worſhipping
an Idoll. Act. 17. 22. But where doth
Paul find that exceſſe in worſhipping God:
we are not too diligent, but too negligent
where we ſhould be diligent. Iames ſpeakeing
of our ſinnes cals them the ſuperfluity of
our maliciouſnes, whereby he ſheweth that
though our wickednes be a ſuperfluous and
vaine thing, yet it ouerfloweth, and exceedeth
the bankes. But Chriſt ſpeaking of his
Diſciples progreſſe in righteouſneſſe, calles
them all by this name, O ye of little faith, &c.
So he may ſay of little loue, of little zeale,
&c. for all our vertues are little ones, and the
waters of life are at ſuch an ebbe, that the
leaſt temptation may wade ouer them and
not be drowned. God hath a controuerſie with
vs, as he ſaith with Iſraell: and this is it, wee
were borne when wiſedome cried in the
ſtreetes, and yet ſhe may call vs fooles and
ſay: How long wilt thou hate knowledge? Pro. 1.
For what could God doe more vnto this vineyard,
that he hath not done? Thirtie yeares we
haue been dreſſing, and pruning, and watering,
and yet what is in Ieruſalem more than
in Samaria? In th Vineyarde than in the
Mountaines, which were neuer tilled nor
dreſſed, Howe long ſhall hee dreſſe a barraine
figge tree, which is dead at the roote?

Our Church is in a conſumption: her heads
are ſicke, her members weake, her Phiſitians
fearefull. From little to little, our zeale
is come to the laſt gaſpe, readie to take her
leaue of all, becauſe ſhee ſee not that wee
loue religion, but chaſe it from vs. Her enimies
are placed about her: ſhee growes amongeſt
thornes: ſhee is fed with checkes:
ſhee mourneth in a corner: ſhee ſpeakes on
a reed. Her garments are clipt: Her friendes
dare not defend her for her enimies. What
ſhall I ſaye? Wee had rather bee whole ſinners
than halfe Chriſtians. White is counted
no coulour: ſo zeale is counted no vertue.
But meere hypocriſie is counted true
Chriſtianitie: and true Chriſtianitie is counted
by hypocriſie. Our wealth is in an Epha,
our zeale is in a Gomer. Our ſinne like an
Oake, our faith like a Muſtard ſeede. They
which haue no religion are counted honeſt
men: for they count it as eaſie a mater to be
a Chriſtian as to ſaie the Lordes prayer, the
Apoſtles Creede, the tenne Commaundementes,
and goe to the church, this is countrie
Diuinitie, this is Citie Diuinitie, and I
may ſay Saint Clements Diuinitie. He which
can ſweare that the Pope is Antichriſt, and
that fleſh is good on Fridaies, is a proteſtant
at leaſt, a Chriſtian euerie inche: hee hath
zeale, knowledge and religion in Folio. This

is the rampier in our daies, like a Lion in the
paſſages. Almoſt ſtandeth in the waie before
wee can come to altogether: and they which
wil goe beyond Almoſt, are counted curious,
factious, preciſe, phantaſticall, as though Almoſt
were more than altogether, and altogether
were not ſo much as almoſt. If his righteouſnes
exceed the righteouſneſſe of the Scribes
and Phariſies which is but Hypocriſie, he ſhal
be puniſhed for his righteouſnes,Gen. 4. as if it were
a fault, as Caine perſecuted Abell becauſe
his ſacrifice was better than his. Our ſauiour
ſaith, Learne of me to be hūble & zealous and
righteous:
               Matt. 11. But now we muſt learne of other,
and ſet a crooked paterne before vs, leſt we
goe too ſtraight. We may preach like Iohn,
as in Matthew. 3. Bring forth fruites, But
wee may not preach like Chriſt: Bring foorth
much fruites. Iohn. 15. For that is counted an
vnreaſonable ſeruice of God. If we giue him
the ſeauenth daie, the ſeauenth part, the
tenthes or tithes of our life, and of our
thoughtes, and of our ſpeeches, and of our
workes, it is enough: ſo wee define Altogether
out of meaſure. Thus wee dodge with
GOD, and drawe backe from our promiſe
which we made in baptiſme, as though
hee were not worthie of ſuch a goodly creature,
to haue that which he giues. Euer ſince
wee were borne wee haue ſerued two maſters

If one foote ſtand in the Church, the
other ſo
                  •
               te ſticketh in the worlde. If one
hand carrie fire, the other hand carries water.
If one worde ſauour of religion, the
next worde ſauoureth whatſoeuer pride, or
enuie or luſt.
            How fewe of our thoughtes are conſecrated
to GOD? Howe fewe of our ſpeeches
taſte of grace? Howe fewe of our
workes are ſquared to the worde of GOD,
which ſhoulde bee the line and leuell of all
our thoughts, ſpeeches, and actions? Tell
thy ſinnes which thou haſt committed ſince
thou diddeſt riſe in the morning, and record
thy good deedes which thou haſt done euer
ſince thou waſt borne, and the firſt ſhall exceede
the laſt. Thou which ſayeſt thou art a
Chriſtian, haſt rebelled more ſince thou roſe
than thou haſt obeyed ſince thou were
borne.
            Is this altogether like Paul, or like Feſtus
not at all? Now if wee bee almoſt Chriſtians,
Let vs ſee what it is to be Almoſt a Chriſtian.
Almoſt a ſonne is a baſtard. Almost ſweete,
is vnſauorie. Almoſt hote, is luke warme,
which GOD ſpueth out of his mouth. Reuel.
3. 15. So Almoſt a Chriſtian, is not a Chriſtian
but that which GOD ſpueth out of his
mouth. A Chriſtian Almoſt, is like a woman
which dieth in trauaile: Almoſt ſhe brought

foorth a ſonne, but that almoſt killed the
mother and the ſonne too. Almost a Chriſtian,
is like Ieroboam which ſaide, It is too
farre to goe to Ieruſalem to worſhip, and therefore
choſe rather to worſhip calues at home.
Almoſt a Chriſtian, is like Michah which
thought himſelfe religious enough becauſe
he had gotten a Prieſt into his houſe. Almost
a Chriſtian, is like the Ephraimite
which could not pronounce Shibboleth, but Sibboleth.
Almost a Chriſtian, is like Ananias
which brought a part, but left a part behind.
Almoſt a Chriſtian, is like Elyes ſonnes which
polled the ſacrifices: like the Figge tree
which deceiued Chriſt with leaues: like the
virgins which carried lampes without oyle:
like the willing vnwilling ſonne which ſaid,
He would come and came not. What is it to be
borne almoſt? If the newe man be but borne
almoſt, hee is not borne. What is it to bee
married almoſt vnto Chriſt? Hee which is
married but almoſt, is not married. What is
it to offer a ſacrifice almoſt? the ſacrifice muſt
bee killed or euer it can bee ſacrificed. Hee
which giues Almoſt, giues not but denyeth.
Hee which beleeueth Almoſt, beleeueth not
but doubteth. Can the dore which is but almoſt
ſhut keepe out the theefe? Can the cup
which is but almoſt whole, holde any wine?
Can the ſhip which is but almoſt ſound, keep

out water? The ſouldier which doth but almoſt
fight, is a coward. The Phiſician which
doth but almoſt cure, is a ſlubberer. The ſeruant
which doth but almoſt labour, is a loyterer.
I cannot tell what to make of theſe
defectiues, nor where to place them, nor
howe to call them, nor vnto what to liken
them: They are like vnto children which ſit in
the market place whereis mourning and piping,
and they neither weepe nor daunce, but keepe a
note betweene both, they weepe almoſt, and
daunce almoſt. Beleeueſt thou almoſt? Bee it
vnto thee (ſaith Chriſt) as thou beleeuest.
Therefore, if thou beleeueſt, thou ſhalt bee
ſaued. If thou beleeueſt almoſt, thou ſhalt
bee ſaued almoſt. As a pardon comes while
the theefe hangs vpon the galowes, hee is almoſt
ſaued, but the pardon dooth him no
good: So he which is almoſt a Chriſtian, almoſt
zealous, almoſt righteous, which dooth
almoſt loue, almoſt beleeue, ſhall bee almoſt
ſaued: that is, if hee had been a Chriſtian, altogether,
hee ſhould not bee damned. Thus euery
man is a Chriſtian almoſt, before he bee
a Chriſtian altogether.
            
            Now I muſt leade you from almoſt to altogether,
as it were to Chriſtians from the figure
of Chriſtians. This is the ſtep which we
muſt treade at this time. I would to God (ſaith
Paul) that thou wert not almoſt but altogether

as I am. When he ſawe Agrippa comming on,
and ſaid almoſt, then Paul caſt vp his lure againe:
Commeſt thou Agrippa? Come Agrippa,
I will not haue thee ſtay at almoſt, if
any thing will bring thee to altogether I did
not aske thee whether thou didſt beleeue
the Prophets, that thou mighteſt be a Chriſtian
almoſt but a Chriſtian altogether. Art
thou come thus farre, and ſtaieſt thou at
almoſt? Nay Agrippa thou muſt take out this
leſſon, for there is no meaſure in Chriſtianity.
Come vnto me ſaith Chriſt, not come toward
mee, yet he was glad like the father to ſee his
ſonne comming toward him, for it was a
ſigne that he would come to him: hee was
comforted with almoſt, but he was not ſatiſfied
without altogether. Is this thy offering
Almoſt? it will not ſerue Agrippa: it is
light, it is ſothered, it is crakt, correct it
againe: For our maſter ſaith, Be ye holy as I
am holie: Therefore almoſt a Chriſtian will
not pleaſe him. But if thou be almoſt a Chriſtian
alreadie, how eaſie is it for thee to be a
Chriſtian altogether. Therefore come Agrippa,
let vs goe forwarde to heauen. The
ſeed is ſowne to growe. Euerie thing muſt
encreaſe and multiplie. Almoſt is thy firſt anſwere,
and altogether thy laſt. I muſt not take
this for an anſwere. Shall I tell Chriſt, that
Agrippa is almost a Chriſtian? O Agrippa,
               
God woulde haue thee hot or colde, as it appeareth
in the third Chapter of the Reuelation
of S. Iohn, and the 15. verſe. Cold to him
is as pleaſing as luke-warme: he loueth altogether,
and he will not be loued almoſt: Who
ſhall haue the other halfe, if God haue but
almoſt? Therefore ſpeake againe good Agrippa.
Thus he pleadeth vnkindneſſe with
him, like an importunate ſuter with wil not
be anſwered. Shal I go with almoſt? then thou
vſeſt mee but hardlie, if thou wilt giue mee
no more. Thus he ſtands in argument with
him. What ſhall I ſay to Agrippa, if hee will
giue me but almoſt? I will praie for thee till
thou commeſt off with all. If I can get no
more of Agrippa, I will craue more of God.
He which hath made thee almoſt, can make
thee altogether. I would to God, &c.
            
            So now he conuerteth himſelfe to praier.
Thus we muſt learne to fiſh for ſoules with
praiers and intreaties, and queſtions. Change
the baite: caſt thy Lure againe: follow the
ſiege: purſue the blowe: cloſe with ſinne:
and gather more of it: at firſt hee will call
thee his enemie as Achab did Elias: Art thou
heere mine enemie? But if thou wilt not bow
to him, hee will bowe vnto thee, and hearken
what thou ſayeſt, and change his robes, and
put on ſackcloth, and mourme and faſt,
and doe all that thou wouldeſt haue him.

A Preacher muſt not looke to finde them
Chriſtians, but make them Chriſtians. Thou
ſhalt not take them conuerted becauſe thou
commeſt to conuert them. If Paule will not
yeeld to Agrippa, Agrippa will yeeld to Paul.
But if Paul had fallen to almoſt, hee had neuer
brought Agrippa to altogether. Therefore
they which fiſhe for ſoul 
                  〈◊〉
                muſt take
Paules net, and remember what God ſaith to
Ieremie 15. 19. Let them bee conuerted vnto
thee. But be not thou conuerted vnto them: for
then thou ſhalt neuer conuert them: Signifiing,
that our conſtancie in goodnes ſhall induce
others to turne from their wickednes,
and make him which is but almoſt come to
altogether. This is the ſubſtance of Paules
replie, that it is not enough to be a Chriſtian
almoſt, that is, to haue a kinde of religion, a
little knowledge, a little faith, a cold zeale
a flattering holines, like the touch of the
hem: but we muſt march to perfection, and
doe his will vpon earth, as it is in heauen, and
contend to be holie as hee is holie. This is religion
(ſaith Iames) to keepe thy ſelfe vnspotted,
like a glaſſe which is ſtill wiped. To this
end ſaith Paul. 2. Tim. 3. The Scripture doth
teache, and reproue, and inſtruct, and comfort,
That the man of God might bee abſolute.
And in the 1. to the Ephe. 41. To this ende wee
were elected, that wee might be holie and without

blame. And Rom. 1. He deſcribes our iourney
from faith to faith, not from faith to diſtruſt.
As Dauid deſcribes the waie of the
righteous Pſal. 840. 7. From vertue to vertue,
as a trauailer goes from towne to towne, till
he come to his Inne. What a fooliſh thing
were it for the Scribe to ſtay there, whē our
Lord telles him, Thou art not farre from the
kingdome of heauen? for therefore Chriſt telleth
him, that he is not farre from heauen, to
incourage him, leſt he ſhould giue ouer before
he come to it, So, if yee ſtaie at almoſt,
and repente in ſome ſort as Eſau did when
hee wept, you may hunt for the bleſſing as
Eſau did, and goe without it: for God is
not mocked: but God is mocked if colours
and ſhewes will ſerue.
            When GOD ſaid, Seeke my face: mine
heart aunſwered (ſaid Dauid) I will ſeeke
thy face. Pſalme. 27. 8. So wee muſt aunſwere
the Lorde to that which he asketh: and not
when hee biddes vs ſeeke his face, ſeeke his
backe: when he requireth al, giue him halfe:
God aſketh, Art thou a Chriſtian? and thou
aunſweres: O Lord, I am almoſt a Chriſtian.
What niggardlie aunſwere is this to him
which deſerueth a thouſande times more
than the beſt can giue? If thy maiſter aske
thee, art thou my ſeruant? wilt thou aunſwere
him, I am almoſt thy ſeruant? If the

Prince aske thee: Art thou my ſubiect? wilt
thou aunſwere, I am almoſt thy ſubiect? If
thy father aske thee: art thou my ſonne?
wilt thou anſwere: I am almoſt thy ſonne? If
thou art but almoſt his ſon, then he is but almoſt
thy father: And ſo it is with God, a ſon
or no ſonne: halfe a ſonne, is a baſtard. How
doeſt thou know God to be thy God, but as
thou art his ſeruant? How doeſt thou knowe
God to be thy father, but as thou art his ſon?
By thy loue thou ſhalt know Gods loue: for
according to thy minde towards him, is his
minde of thee, whereby thou maiſt truelie
iudge whether he fauour thee or hate thee,
and no way elſe.
            God loueth nothing almoſt, therefore he
doth not loue almoſt. Therefore, loue as thou
maiſt be loued, or elſe thy loue is loſt. Thou
muſt ſeeke as thou maiſt finde, or elſe thy labour
is loſt. They ſhall ſeeke and finde me (ſaith
God) becauſe they ſhall ſeeke with all their
hearts, as in Ieremie 29. Chapter, and the 13.
verſe: as though they ſhould not finde him
though they ſought him, vnleſſe the ſought
him with all their hearts.
            
               Naaman is not onelie commaunded to
waſh himſelfe in Iordan, but to waſhe himſelfe
ſeuen times, and then he ſhall bee healed:
So man is not onely commaunded to
obey God, but to obey him while hee liues,

and then he ſhall be ſaued. Be faithfull (ſaith
the Angell) vnto death, and then I will giue
thee the Crowne of life. Reuel. 2, 10.
            When Saul was commanded to kill the Idolatrous
beaſts, he was commaunded to kil
all: and becauſe he ſpared ſome, God reiected
him. Yet God hath more mercie on beaſts,
than on ſins. Would he haue the beaſts of ſinners
die, & their vices liue? No (ſaith Chriſt)
Make cleane within: that is, leaue no filth behind.
Whenſoeuer Chriſt caſt out one deuill,
we read that he caſt out al, euē the legion together:
ſo when thou caſteſt out one vice, caſt
out all, for one is not worthier than another.
            The Prophet doth teach vs to power out
our ſins like water which leaueth no taſte or
colour or ſent behinde. There is a whole old
man, and there muſt be a whole newe man.
The old man muſt change with the new man
wiſedome for wiſedome, loue for loue, feare
for feare, his worldlie wiſedome for heauenlie,
wiſedome, his carnall loue for ſpirituall
loue, his ſeruile feare for Chriſtian feare, his
idle thoughts for holy thoughtes, his vaine
wordes for wholeſome wordes, his fleſhlye
workes for righteous workes. This is a Chriſtian
altogether, as if he were caſt in a newe
mould. As a Painter woulde drawe a beautifull
picture which ſhould bee fairer than all
women in the worlde, hee would marke the

ſpeciall grace of euerie one, and make one
beautie of all: ſo we muſt make vp a Chriſtian,
and take modeſtie from him, faith from
him, loue from him, patience from him, zeale
from him, and humility from him, vntill it be
like the Image of Chriſt. This is the building
of a Chriſtian. Firſt his foundation is
laide, and then his walles, and then his roofe,
and then a Chriſtian like Adam in Paradiſe.
               Gen. 2.
               God made all things good:
               Gen. 1. therefore if we bee
but almost good, all thinges are better than
wee. The wicked man ſpeaketh out of the
corruption of his fleſhlie heart, and ſhall not
the righteous ſpeake of the aboundance of
his ſpirituall heart? Hee which is merrie
would be merrier if he knew how. He which
is enuious would looke ſterner if he could.
He which is proud, would goe brauer if hee
had it: and all if wee could bee worſe, wee
would, but let them amend which looke to
die. For what kinde of man ſhould hee bee
which muſt beare the Image of God, be the
Temple of the holie Ghoſt, and inherite the
kingdome of heauen? Who is fit for theſe
things (ſaith Paul?) Nay, who is fit for theſe
things? Do ye know no enough in riches, nor
pleaſure, nor ſinne, and thinke that you haue
enough of religion, before yee haue any? The
good are knowne becauſe none but they
which are good ſtriue to be better. Wee are

inuited to a banquet, & ſhall we go but halfe
the way vnto it? Were it not better that the
fig-tree had borne fruites than leaues? that
the Virgins had carried oyle than lamps? So
is it not better for vs to be veſſels of gold that
come to the Lords table, than like the image
in Daniel, part of gold, part of ſiluer, part of
braſſe, part of iron, & part of clay, which was
after broken? If the crowne did lie in the
midde way, then thou needeſt run but halfe
the way: but to ſhew that there is no reward
for them that begin well, all the promiſes are
made to him that continueth to the end. Hee
is curſed not onely which doth euill, but hee
which dooth the worke of the Lorde negligently,
or by halfes, that is, hee which offereth
a maymed ſacrifice for a ſound, almost
a Chriſtian, for altogether. Therefore Dauid
before hee prayes, ſummoneth his thoughts,
his ſpeeches & actions, and ſaith: All that is
within mee praiſe the Lorde, as a man giueth
that which he thinketh wil be accepted, that
he may be welcome for it. If we did ſerue an
vngratefull maſter: then we might thinke almoſt
enough. But Chriſt did not loue almost,
when he ſhed his heart bloud for vs, & therefore
he cannot aske more than he gaue, and
yet the inheritaunce of his bleſſings is behinde:
why ſhouldeſt not thou giue as much
for them as Abraham or Dauid or Simeon,
               
which would haue ſerued God till this time
if they had liued, & ſtill reformed themſelues,
& yet thought they had done nothing, as Iacob
counted his ſeruice for Rachel nothing,
becauſe he loued her: but thou thinkeſt that
if thou giueſt thy pleaſures, thou ſhalt want
thy pleaſures. No, as Abrahā
                did not loſe his
ſon when he would haue ſacrificed his ſonne,
ſo God can keepe his pleaſures when thou
reſigneſt thy pleaſures. Thou thinkeſt that
God will not miſſe it, as Ananias thought that
Peter woulde not miſſe it: but if Peter did
miſſe it, will not God miſſe it? So we pare the
offering like Elies ſonnes, which kept the
beſt and fateſt to themſelues, which made
the people abhor the ſacrifices: and ſhall not
God abhor ſuch ſacrifices? If Ely reprooued
his ſons? how wil God reproue them, which
reproued Ely for not reprouing thē enough?
A ſpirituall eare can heare GOD reprouing
this land, for this mincing of his worſhip.
Can the preaching of the word, the ſignes of
heauen, the ſhaking of the earth, the victorie
of your enemies, and all the bleſſings of God
make you but almoſt Chriſtians, almoſt religious,
almoſt thankefull?
            Is this my reward (ſaith God) as though
you were afrayde to bee too good? If you
thinke that you ſhall bee mocked if you bee
too zealous, as Micholl ſcorned Dauid when

he daunced before the Arke: Dauid tels you
how you ſhal ſtop ſuch ſcorners mouthes: O
(ſaith Dauid) I will be more humble yet before
my God. When Michol ſawe his reſolution,
ſhe mocked him no more, but reuerenced
him euer after. So tell the Diuell and all his
mockers, I wil be more zealous, more feruēt
and more holy yet, vntill I be like him which
ſaid, Follow me, and they which mocke thee
ſhall reuerence thee as Michol did Dauid.
            
            This when thou art in the way to heauen,
remember that thou muſt goe forwarde or
backward: for Iacob did ſee none ſtand vpon
the ladder which aſcended vp to heauen, but
either thy went vp or down: they which go
not forward, go backward. They which will
not come ſo forward as altogether, ſhall not
ſtay at almoſt, but fal from their faith, & loue,
and knowledge and zeale, by deſcents, till
Chriſtes threatning be fulfilled. That which
they ſeeme to haue ſhall be taken from them, as
though they neuer had any taſte at al.
            Thus I haue ſet you a glaſſe to beholde
whether you are in almoſt or altogether. Yet
Paul lured for Agrippa. Now he ſues to the
people. When he had caught the King, hee
ſpred his net for the people.
            
               I would to God, that not onely thou but all
that heare mee, were not onely almoſt, but altogether
as I am. Hee might wiſh rather than

hope and therefore hee praies, I would to
God that all were Chriſtians: As Moſes wiſhed
that all coulde propheſie. Peter was
taught both to feede the ſheepe and the
lambs, great and ſmall, and old an young, rich and
poore: So Paul praies for the King and for
the people too, & wiſheth that they were all
Chriſtians. This prayer we may ſay for them
that doe not praye for themſelues, to make
them aſhamed, when they ſee other more
careful for their ſoules than they thēſelues.
The Paſtours care extendeth to all, although
ſome are more to be laboured, yet none is to
be deſpiſed, which is but a lamb of the flock.
Paule doth not wiſh Agrippa more honour,
or more wealth, or more friēds, but more religion,
which is the greateſt want of Princes.
Although they haue receiued a kingdome,
yet they are not ſo thankfull, as they which
haue receiued nothing, but from hande to
mouth. Though they haue done a thouſand
times more euil, yet they are not ſo penitent
as he which hath done leaſt of all: They ſit
in Gods ſeat, & are called Gods, but are not
like God, but like Mammon, more than their
names, and their Crownes, except Dauid, or
Salomon, or Ioſua, a fewe which remember
whoſe perſon they bear: the reſt are like Herod,
and Saul, and Nabuchadnezzar, which
know not from whō their kingdoms come.
            
               
               As I am, ſaith Paul directly. Paul ſhoulde
haue replied, altogether a Chriſtian, and not
altogether as I am: but who ſhall teach the
Spirit to perſwade? Hee choſe to ſay, as I am
that Agrippa might ſee his ſingle heart and
loue toward him, who went not about to ſeduce
him, but wiſht it vnto him as vnto him
ſelfe: Euen as I am. If any thing will perſwade,
moſt fit is the example, when he
which teacheth vs goes before vs, for then
we ſee that hee dealeth plainly, and ſpeakes
of loue, and meanes no deceit, when we ſee
him doe as he ſaith. Saul hath ſlaine his thouſand,
but Dauid his ten thouſand. So where
another conuerts a thouſand, hee ſhall conuert
ten thouſand, which can ſay like Chriſt
Follow mee. Oh what is this when a Chriſtian
and I am all one, that ye might ſay to your
children, I woulde to God thou were a Chriſtian,
when you ſay, I woulde to God thou were
like me.
            
            The king ſhoulde bee like Paule by this
ſaying: How then doe ſome ſay with Feſtus?
Too much zeale hath made thee mad. If the
people know the Lords prayer, the ten cō
               mandemēts,
& the Articles of beleefe, it is
enough, is this to be like Paul? No Feſtus, the
knowledge of the word doth not make a mā
mad, but makes him wiſe to ſaluation. Can
that which makes a mā wiſe, make him mad
            
               
Therefore they which ſay that we are the
worſe for knowledge, or worſe for religion,
or worſe for zeale, are like Feſtus which had
neither knowledge, zeale, nor religion in
him. And they which teach the people that
they ſhall not neede to be as Paul, but that
a mediocritie will ſerue, incurre that curſe
of Paule: Hee which teacheth another doctrine
than that which yee haue receiued of vs (which
wiſhed all as perfect as himſelfe) Let him bee
Anathema, that is, accurſed. They which
loue you like Paul, doo not wiſh you zeale
by waight, and knowledge by ounces, and
workes by number, a Sicle, or an Omer, or
an Epha: but that yee abound in all knowledge,
and all zeale, and let them bee lukewarme
which will be ſpued out.
            
               Except my bands: yet Paule excepteth
ſomthing, not his knowledge, nor his zeale,
but his bands, Not altogether as I am, but altogether
as I am, except theſe bands. He excepteth
nothing but his troubles. Charity had rather
ſuffer than other ſhould ſuffer, as Dauid
prayed God to turne his wrath from the Iſraelites
vpon him. Now if yee aske me, who
can loue his neighbour as himſelfe? Heere is
one that had rather ſuffer himſelfe, than Agrippa
ſhould ſuffer: he would haue him partaker
in all his good, but not in his troubles:
As I am, except theſe bandes.
            
            
               
               Paul glories in his bands, and ſhewes his
chaynes like his Enſignes: theſe are the
markes of Chriſt: this is the cogniſance of
my Lord, his ſweete yoake and eaſie burden.
But he wiſheth faith to them without a burden,
the battaile is to the ſtrong & the Croſſe
is not to be wiſhed for, but to be borne.
            Thus the ſpirit of wiſdome hath ſet vs an
example how men are wonne to the trueth,
and led forward by little and little with lenitie
and ſoftnes, putting difference betweene
them which know not the trueth, and them
which reſiſt the trueth. Paul did not ſpeak ſo
to Elimas the Sorcerer which withſtood the
truth. Act. 13. 16. But ſet his eyes vppon him &
ſaid, O full of all ſubtiltie and miſchiefe, the
childe of the Diuell and enemie of all righteouſnes.
Neither did Peter ſpeak ſo to Simon Magus▪
Act. 8. 23. But as Salomon ſaith, A wiſe
man knoweth the time and place, and as Paule
ſaith, the Spirituall man diſcerneth all things, ſo
he knoweth when to be ſoft and when to be
rough. They which reſiſt the truth as Elimas,
and labour to keepe the Rulers from it as
Elimas did Sergius Paulus the Deputie of
Cyprus, and many like him now, muſt not bee
intreated like Agrippa which is comming to
the truth, but as Elimas was. Hee which hath
Pauls Spirit knoweth how to handle both in
their kind. Though we may not diſcouer the

nakedneſſe of ſome, yet wee may not hide
the nakedneſſe of other: An humble heart is
a good Schoolmaiſter both to apply comfort
and reproofe. Now the Lord Ieſus
which hath made you Chriſtians
almoſt, make you Chriſtians
altogether.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            The humilitie of Paul.
            
               Rom. 12. 1. 2. verſe.
               
                  I beſeech you therefore brethren by the mercies
of God, that ye giue vp your bodies a liuing Sacrifice,
holy, and acceptable vnto God, which is your
reaſonable ſeruing of God.
                  And faſhion not your ſelues like vnto this
World, but be you changed by the renuing of your
minde, that ye may prooue what is the good wil of
God, and acceptable and perfect.
               
            
            
               
                  PAul an Apoſtle to the Gē
               tiles,
writing to the Romanes
which were Gentiles,Ro. 11. 13.
after he had ſhewed
what God had done for
them in receiuing them
into his couenant which
were out of his couenaunt, and making
them his people, which were not his people,
that the Gentiles might triumph nowe
ouer the Iewes, as much as the Iewes triumphed
ouer the Gentiles, becauſe the Iewes

were reiected, and the Gentiles receiued in
their place. Nowe hee ſheweth what they
ſhould doe for God. Giue your bodies a Sacrifice
to him: that is, as Chriſt gaue himſelfe
for you, ſo you muſt giue your ſelues to him:
as he was ſacrificed for you, ſo you muſt bee
ſacrificed for him, not your ſheepe, nor your
Oxen, nor your Goates, but your ſelues. You
muſt be the Sacrifice: this Sacrifice, Paul calleth
a liuing, and holy, and acceptable ſacrifice,
a liuing ſacrifice, becauſe the Iewes ſacrifices
were dead ſacrifices: an holie ſacrifice, becauſe
they might ſacrifice beaſtes and not be holy: but
they cannot Sacrifice themſelues, but they
muſt needs be holy. An acceptable Sacrifice,
before the ſacrifices of beaſts did not pleaſe
God, vnleſſe they did ſacrifice themſelues too.
But if they ſacrifice themſelues it doth pleaſe
God, though they doe not ſacrifice beaſts. It
is true that God did require this ſacrifice of
the Iewes as well as the Gentiles, for in Deu.
the tenth Chapter and the ſixteenth verſe,
he ſaith, Circumciſe your heartes, & in the firſt
of Samuel the 15. Chap. and 22. ver. he ſaith,
Obedience is better than ſacrifice, which ſhews,
that euen then God did require the ſacrifice of
the bodie, more than▪ of beasts: but although
God did require this of the Iewes alſo that
they ſhoulde ſacrifice their bodie
                  •
                too, yet
Paul ſignifies that God requireth larger of

the Gentiles,Mat. 11. 11. becauſe a Chriſt ſaith, we haue
a greater light. The Goſpell is a greater benefite
than the law, and therefore our thankfulnes
ſhould be greater than theirs.
            Firſt here is an exhortation to ſacrifice our
bodies to God. Then an explication what this
ſacrifice is. It is your reaſonable ſeruice, and not
faſhioning your ſelues to the World: and the renuing
of your mindes to the image of GOD, in
which they were created. Then follow two reaſons
to perſwade, one drawn from the mercies
of God, I beſeech you brethren by the mercies
of God: The other drawn from the fruit
of our regeneration, that ye may proue what
that good and acceptable, and perfect will of God
is. The exhortation is to ſacrifice our ſelues
to God. It ſeemes that the Iewes grudged
to ſacrifice their beaſter, therefore Paule
thought that the Gentiles would grudge to
ſacrifice themſelues, and therefore marke
how he prepared himſelfe for them.
            
               Brethren I heſeech you by the mercies of
GOD.
               Math. 1. 7. This is his preparatiue, Firſt, hee
calles them Brethren, which ſhewes his affection
to all Chriſtians, which after Chriſt
were called brethren. Secondly our adoption
by Chriſt which makes vs brethren.
Thirdlie the dutie which we owne one to an
other, as if we were brethren. The Apoſtles
do not vſe this name ſo lightly as we, as you

may ſee here, for Paul made it a preamble to
perſwade the Romans to godlines: So Abraham
made it a mediatour to keepe peace
betweene Lot and him, Are we not brethren
ſaith Abraham? as if hee ſhoulde ſay, ſhall
brethren fall out for trifles like infidels. This
was enough to pacifie Lot, for Abraham to
put him in minde that they were brethren,Gen. 
                     •
                  3. 8.
when hee hearde the name of brethren,
ſtraight his heart yeelded, and the ſtrife was
ended: ſo this ſhould bee the Lawyer to end
quarrels betweene Chriſtians, to cal to mind
that they are brethren. And they which haue
ſpent all at lawe, wiſht that they had taken
this Lawyer, to thinke with Lot whether it
were meete for brethren to ſtriue like enemies:
with ſuch reuerence then they did vſe
the name of brethren, but nowe there is no
reuerence in naming of GOD: For manie
ſpeak of him when they do not think of him,
and many neuer ſpeake of him but whē they
ſweare by him.
            When he had called them brethren, then
he beſeecheth them, Brethren I beſeech you.
This is the Apoſtles ſtile. If God did humble
himſelfe for man, much more ſhould mā
humble himſelfe for men, therefore though
Paul ſpeake of a matter, wherein he might
commaunde, as he ſaith to Philemon I might
commaund thee: yet as he did rather beſeech

him, ſo he doth rather beſeech them. Marke
the ſubtiltie of wiſedome (as I may call it.)
As the ſerpent did vſe pollicie to tempt, ſo
the Preacher may vſe pollicie to conuert,Gen. 3. 1. and
ſo Paule won Agrippa to beleeue, by perſwading
him that he did beleeue.Acts. 26. 27. It was Pauls
Office to teach the Romans, but it was Pauls
pollicie to beſeech the Romans, vntill compulſion
need, gentlenes is better than bitterneſſe:
Lenitie deſerues to goe firſt, and correction
hath no place if perſwaſion wil ſerue.
            
               I beſeech you brethren, we doe not vſe to
intreat and beſeech, but for our profite, but
Paul did beſeech them for their profite. Wee
would haue other humble themſelues to vs,
but Paul humbled himſelfe to his inferiours,
to make them humble themſelues to God.
Here the Preachers may take example of the
Preacher of the Gentiles,Rom. 11. 13 the louing phraſe
is the Apoſtles phraſe, and hee which beſeecheth
ſhall perſwade eaſier than hee which
thundereth. Many haue beene drawn with
the cordes of loue, which coulde neuer bee
haled with the chaines of iron. God is loue,
and his Miniſters muſt ſpeake like loue or
elſe they doe not ſpeake like Paul: he which
fiſheth for ſoules and doth not take his Net,
ſhall fiſh all daie, as Peter fiſhed all night and
catch nothing. Although a temperate Preacher
be a wiſe Preacher, and this be our pollicie

to intreat and beſeech you like Paul,
               Math. 22. yet
you ſhould not looke to be intreated like the
gueſtes which woulde not come, but to bee
compelled like the gueſts which came to the
banquet: For you muſt be intreated to your
profit. It is no reaſon that Chriſt ſhould pay,
and pray: the ſeruant praieth, but the maiſter
commaundeth.
            Yet Paul hath not done his preparatiue:
hee is loth that his ſuite ſhoulde take the repulſe,
and therefore he vſeth a Mediatour
vnto them: and beſeecheth them by the mercies
of God. I beſeech you brethren by the
mercies of God: mercie is a louing ſoliciter
and worthy to be heard, becauſe it heareth againe.
God doth intreate vs by the ſame
Mediatour that we intreat God, we intreate
God for his mercie, and God intreateth vs for
his mercie. So that mercie is like a ſigne betweene
vs, which calleth God to heare vs, and
vs to heare him. What will not a good ſubiect
doo for a mercifull Prince? Many ſweet
things are in the worde of God, but the name
of mercy is the ſweeteſt word in all the ſcriptures,
which made Dauid harpe vpon it 26.
times in one Pſalme, ſixe and twentie times
he repeats this in the hundred thirtie and ſixt
Pſalme, For his mercie endureth for euer. It
was ſuch a cheerefull note in his eares when
he ſtroke vpon mercie, that like a bird which

is taught to record, when he had ſung it, hee
ſang it againe, and when hee had ſung it againe,
he recorded it againe, and made it the
burden of his ſong, For his mercie endureth for
euer. Like a Nightingale which when ſhe is
in a pleaſant vaine, quauers and capers, and
trebles vpon it, ſo did Dauid vpon his mercie,
For his mercie endureth for euer. But heere
Paule ſpeakes in the plural number, not by the
mercie, but by the mercies of God.
            
            There is a plurality of Gods mercies, his leſſer
mercies in his corporall bleſſinges, and his
greater mercies in his ſpirituall bleſſinges:
his temperall mercies in earth, and his euerlaſting
mercies in heauen: his preuenting
mercies in deliuering vs from ſinne, and his
following mercies in pardoning of our ſinne.Gen. 3.
Howe many ſinnes came with Adam, and
howe many curſes came with ſinne, ſo manie
mercies came with Chriſt to anſwere thē
both. Therefore when Paule coulde not
number them for multitude, hee was faine
to laie them downe together in the groſſe
ſumme, and in a word called them mercies:
as if hee ſhould ſaie, I cannot number the
mercies of God, but the leſſe I can number
them, the more they are. Thus much why
Paul calleth them brethren, and why he beſeecheth
them, and why hee remembreth
them of Gods mercies.
            
               
Now he hath prepared the way, he commenceth
his ſuite, that they woulde giue their
bodies to God, hee ſpeakes not heere of the
ſoule, though he would haue them giue their
ſoules too. As you may ſee in the next verſe,
but he ſpeakes heere of the bodie, to ſhewe
that the bodie is a ſeruant to God as well as
the ſoule, both are too little, and therefore
one is not enough. And therefore Paul ſaith,
Glorifie GOD in your bodies and in your ſoules
too,
               2. Cor. 6. 20 but here he ſpeakes the rather of the bodie,
to ſhewe that their battaile will be with
the fleſhe, and that the fleſhe will be vnwilling
to this Sacrifice, as Chriſt ſaith, the ſpirit
is willing but the fleſh is fraile.
               Mat 26. 43. That is, the
fleſhe will not afforde anie thing to GOD,
though he do neuer ſo much for her, yet ſhe
is like churliſh Naball, which will doe nothing
againe. Therefore the Apoſtle vrgeth
ſo to giue the body, as if he ſhould ſay, drawe
forwarde that which he draweth backeward,
and let the conuerſion beginne where ſinne
hath his roote: if you can winne the fleſhe
which is like Nabal, the ſoule will come like
Abigail, and bring her traine with her.
            Now to ſhew how we ſhould giue our bodies
to God, the Apoſtle ſaith giue your bodies
a Sacrifice to God. That is, you muſt giue
your bodies to God,Leuit. 1. 9. &. 13. as if you did Sacrifice
them: The Lawe appointed a Sacrifice, in

which all the members were offered together:
So yee muſt giue your members to God, for
the bodie is all, all is but partes of the bodie,
therfore if you muſt giue your bodies,
               Rom. 8. you muſt
geue eie, & eare, & tongue, & hand, and feete
vnto him, For the heart (ſayth Paule) doth but
beleeue, becauſe it is not enough to beleeue,
therefore hee addeth, the mouth doth confeſſe
as it is as neceſſary to confeſſe vnto Saluation,
as to beleeue vnto Iuſtification: So it is as
neceſſary to ſacrifice the tongue as the heart.
            What then, is the tongue enough? Nay,
(ſayth Chriſt) hee which hath an eare to heare
let him heare.
               Mat. 11. 15 Is the eare enough? Nay,
(ſaith Dauid) Lift vp your handes to his Sanctuarie.
               Pſal. 134 2.
Is the hand enough? Nay, (ſaith Salomon)
Let thine eyes beholde the right.
               Pro. 4. 25. Is the
eye enough?Pro 4 27. Nay, (ſaith Salomon) Remoue
thy foote from euill. So the worde paſſeth like
a Collectour from one member to another,
to gather tribute for GOD, vntill the body
haue paied as well as the ſoule. Therefore in
Deut. 6. 5. GOD commaundeth, not onely
Thou ſhalt loue the Lord with all thy ſoule, &
with all thy mind: but with all thy ſtrength
that is, if thou canſt doe any thing for him
with the ſtrength of thyne hand or the
ſtrength of thyne eie, or the ſtrength of thine
eare, or any part elſe: Thou art bound by this
commaundement, to doe it with all thy

ſtrength. Therefore when Dauid went about
the ſeruice of God, he called al his powers
together, ſummoning them like a Cryer,
All that is within me praiſe the Lorde. If euery
parte looke to be glorified of GOD, it is
reaſon that euery part ſhould glorifie him:
for this is all that they pay. As euery ſubiect
oweth loyaltie vnto his Prince: ſo euerie
member oweth a duety vnto his Creator.
The heart to loue him, the tongue to praiſe
him, the eye to marke him, the eare to attend
him, the hand to ſerue him, the foote
to followe him, and euery parte ſhoulde
ſerue GOD as it ſerueth vs: Nay, more
than it ſerueth vs, becauſe wee are bound
to loue GOD more than our ſelues: For it is
ſaide, Loue God aboue all: therefore we muſt
giue more to Gods deſire than to our owne
deſire.
            Chriſt hath a parte in euery parte: Nay,
euery parte is his parte, becauſe hee gaue
all for all. Shall the hande ſaye to the heart,
ſerue thou him, or the heart ſay to the tongue,
ſerue thou him, or the tongue ſay to the eye,
ſerue thou him, or the eye ſay to the foote,
ſerue thou him? Nay, if Chriſt bee the head,
euery part will ſerue him, for all the bodie is
ruled by the head: and therefore if hee bee
the head, euery parte of the bodie will ſerue
him like a head.
            
               
Nowe if you will knowe how euery part
may be a ſacrifice,Luke. 1. 46. thus it is. When thou
canſt ſay with the Virgin, Mine heart doth
magnifie the Lorde: then thine hearte is a ſacrifice
to God. When thou canſt ſaie with
Samuell: ſpeake Lorde for thy ſeruant heareth,
then thine eare is a ſacrifice to God.1. Sam. 3. 9. When
thou canſt ſaie with Dauid,
               Pſal. 25. 11 
               Mine eies are
euer towarde the Lorde, then thine eie is a ſacrifice
vnto God. When thou canſt ſay with
Dauid: All the daye long I ſtretch out mine
hand to thee, then thine handes are a ſacrifice
to GOD. When thou canſt ſay with Dauid,
               Pſal. 88. 9.
as it appeareth in the 25. Pſalme, and the
twelfth verſe: My foote ſtandeth in vprightnes,
then thy feete are a ſacrifice to God: So
at length by following of theſe examples, euerie
member is a ſacrifice.
            Hee which offereth this ſacrifice, is freely
excuſed of all ſacrifices beſides. For ſince
Chriſt ſacrificed himſelfe, God hath required
none other ſacrifice of Iewes nor Gentiles,
But that they ſacrifice themſelues. Nowe
when God doth require of thee to ſacrifice
thy bodie, he doth but require thee to ſacrifice
the ſinnes of thy body, as you may picke
out of the next wordes, Be chaunged, that is,
chaunge thy thoughts, chaunge thy wordes,
chaunge thy workes: Let thy tongue ſpeake
no more idelly: Let thine eies looke no

more to vanitie: Let thine eares hearken no
more to folly: Let thine handes worke no
more iniquitie, and then thou haſt Sacrificed
thy bodie.
            This ſeemes a deare ſacrifice to ſacrifice
the bodie, yet thou ſeeſt it is but a cheape ſacrifice,
for it is nothing but to ſacrifice thy
ſinnes, which woulde Sacrifice thee. If
GOD had required thee to Sacrifice thy
Sonne to him as hee required Abraham Geneſis,
the twentie two Chapter, and the ſecond
verſe: Wouldeſt thou not giue him?
But nowe he requireth nothing of thee but
thy ſinnes, it is as if he ſhould ſue vnto thee
for thy ſhame, and thy trouble, and thy
guilt, and thy feare, that he might haue all
which hurtes thee. What wilt thou parte
from if thou wilt not part from thine hurte?
Therefore ſacrifice thy bodie, and thou haſt
Sacrificed all that hurts thee.
            Heere Chriſt is the alter, and we the ſacrifice,
and the fire which kindleth it, the loue of
God, and the ſmoake which goeth vp, the cō
                  ſumption
of our ſinnes, but a worldly man killed,
and a ſpirituall man reuiued, and the ſacrifice
is ended.
            This ſacrifice goeth vnder three titles, liuing,
holie, and acceptable. Euerie one perſwades
with the Apoſtle, that they ſhoulde
offer it: for in it is a holie ſacrifice, it cannot

but pleaſe, becauſe hee is holy which takes
it: in that it is a liuing ſacrifice, it cannot loſe
them any thing, becauſe there is no death
nor loſſe in it, as there was in the Iewes ſacrifices:
in that it is an acceptable ſacrifice, it
muſt needs benefite thē, for when the ſacrifice
is accepted, the ſacrificer is accepted too:
as Abel pleaſed,Gen. 4. when his ſacrifice pleaſed.
            Firſt, it is called a liuing ſacrifice, becauſe
the beaſts died, when they were ſacrificed,
but men liue when they are ſacrificed, nay
they die vnles they be ſacrificed. As Abraham
did not loſe his ſonne,Gen 32. when he was cō
               tent
to ſacrifice him to God, ſo mē do not
loſe their pleaſures, when they ſacrifice thē
to God. But as Chriſt ſaith, He which leaueth
father or mother for me, ſhall receiue an hundred
folde: So he which leaueth any cōfort for
God, ſhall receiue an hūdred comforts for it.
For Gods demands are not onely demands,
but gifts. Hee bids thee ſacrifice thy bodie,
that thou mighteſt partak the ſacrifice of his
body. Here then is but one Sacrifice for an
other, one body for another, a beggers body
for a Kings body: Well may he require a liuing
ſacrifice which hath giuen a dead ſacrifice.1. Cor. 6. 19.
               Chriſt died for vs, but hee deſireth not
our death, but our life, that we would ſerue
him with our life. It is called an holy ſacrifice,
becauſe our bodies are the temples of the holie

ghoſt that is, if they are not, they ſhoulde be
the Temples of the holy Ghoſt. But as the Iewes
abuſed the Temple of ſtone, ſo we haue abuſed
the Temple of fleſh, and there is no waie
to make it holy againe but for the holy ghoſt
to dwell in it, that is to ſacrifice it to God, &
then it is holie, becauſe as vertue came out of
Chriſt to heale the womans diſeaſe, ſo holynes
commeth out of Chriſt to heale euerye
mans ſinnes, and then they are holie.
            As nothing dooth pleaſe vs, vnleſſe it bee
ſome waie like vs, and agreeable to our nature:
ſo nothing doth pleaſe God, but that
which is like God, therefore becauſe God is
holy, no ſacrifice doth pleaſe him, but the
holie ſacrifice, therefore holie goeth before
acceptable,
               1. Sam. 15. 72. to ſhewe that our ſacrifice is not
acceptable, vnleſſe it be holie. Aliniug, holy
and acceptable ſacrifice.
            
            3 It is called an acceptable ſacrifice, becauſe
no ſacrifice is ſo accepted, as when we
offer our ſelues. Therefore Sāuel ſaith, obediēce
is better than ſacrifice:
               Gen. 4. 5. that is, it pleaſeth
God better than ſacrifice? Now if we muſt
ſacrifice to God, we ſhould doe as we doe to
Princes, that is, offer that which may be accepted,
               Gen. 4. 5.
that we may be accepted for our gift:
or els better vndone than done. When Caine
had ſacrificed to God, becauſe his ſacrifice
was not accepted, therefore Moſes ſaith that

               his countenance was cast downe: but if wee ſacrifice
our bodies, our countenance neede
not bee caſt downe: for Paul ſaith, that this
ſacrifice is accepted.
               1. King. 18. 39 All other ſacrifices were
kindled with the fire of the Temple: but this
Sacrifice is like the ſacrifice of Eliah, which
God kindled himſelf with fire from heauen,
and therefore this muſt needes bee acceptable,
which man doth not only offer, but God
himſelfe doth offer.
            When the Apoſtle endes our Sacrifice,
with this clauſe acceptable, hee meaneth that
this ſhould be the leuell of all our thoughtes,
that whatſoeuer we thinke,1. Chro. 17. 1. & 16. or ſpeake, or do,
bee acceptable and liking vnto God. As Dauid
thought to builde the Temple, but would
not builde it,Acts. 9. when Nathan tolde him that
God woulde not haue him builde it: As Ananias
would not baptize Saul,
               Act. 9. 13. but did baptize him
whē he vnderſtood that God wold haue him
baptized:Mat. 5. 16. As Ioſeph would not take Mary to
wife, ſo long as he thought God did diſalow
his marriage, but did marry her when the
Angell told him that he ſhould marry her: ſo
a good man will doe nothing before he doe
conſult with Gods worde: all that hee doth
hee approueth vnto God before hee doe it,
if it bee not his Worde and Will, then hee
turneth backe, as if the winde and weather
were againſt him, alwayes refourming his

owne will to Gods will, that his thoughtes,
and wordes, and workes may bee acceptable.
If reaſon teach vs this, that when wee offer
vnto God, wee muſt giue him an acceptable
ſacrifice, an acceptable honour, an acceptable
ſeruice: then why doe we not giue him that
which he asketh, for he knoweth what is acceptable
to him. If he aske the firſt fruits, we
muſt not offer him the laſt fruites, for the firſt
is acceptable: So if he appoint his diſcipline,
we may not ſet vp our diſcipline, for that is
not acceptable to him, but to vs.
            Now Paul ſhewes what this Sacrifice is, it
is your reaſonable ſeruice of GOD, leſt they
ſhould grudge to ſacrifice their bodies, hee
ſheweth that he meaneth but the ſins of their
bodies. For this ſacrifice (ſaith Paul) is your
ſeruice, your reaſonable ſeruice. He calleth it a
reaſonable ſeruice, becauſe it is not in ceremonies
like the Iewes ſeruice, but in ſpirit (as Peter
ſaith:) thē becauſe it is that ſeruice, which
euery mans reaſon and conſcience doth tell
him that he oweth vnto God, wherefore it
may well be called a reaſonable ſeruice, becauſe
it is ſo reaſonable. Therefore if we will
not ſerue God thus, that is, as our reaſon teacheth
vs: Then we ſerue him not like mē, but
like beaſts voide of reaſon, whome God may
be ſayd to rule, but they cannot be ſayd to obey,
becauſe they are ruled perforce. All

thinges doe yeeld a ſeruice to God, but all
things doe not yeeld a reaſonable ſeruice, which
he requireth of man: here was no reaſon why
Chriſt ſhoulde ſerue vs, but there is greate
cauſe why we ſhould ſerue Chriſt, becauſe he
ſerued vs without cauſe, ſo that I may ſaie,
Chriſt requireth but a reaſonable ſacrifice,
for an vnreaſonable ſacrifice, a liuing ſacrifice,
for a dead ſacrifice, a cheape ſacrifice, for a precious
ſacrifice, counting vs as it were like the
poore widdowe, of whome he is content to
take a mite, becauſe wee are needie, thus
much of our reaſonable ſeruice.
            The law of this ſeruice is laid down in theſe
wordes: Faſhion not your ſelues to the world, the
world followeth the world,Ioh. 15. 19. 
               but I ſaith Chriſt
to his Diſciples, haue choſen you out of the
world, therfore do not you follow the world. The
world is taken ſometime for heauen & earth,Acts. 17. 24.
and ſea which are partes of the world: ſometime
for the men of the world,Math. 16. 7. ſometime for
the elect in the worlde:Iohn. 1. 24. but moſt commonly
it is taken for the wicked in the worlde,Iohn. 7. 7. becauſe
the wicked are moſt common,Iohn. 8. 23. like a
man which by often faulting is growne to an
euill name, ſo the world which doth not signifie
euill of it ſelfe, yet is taken for euill, becauſe
it is accuſtomed to do euill, and therefore
the Deuill is called the God of this world,
               2. Cor. 4. 4.
becauſe the worldes faſhions are the Deuils

faſhions, Therefore faſhion not your ſelues vnto
the world, leſt you bee in the Diuels faſhion.
Then you muſt not pranke vppe your ſelues
like Plaiers, for this is the faſhiō of the world:
then you muſt not reſpect perſons more than
iuſtice, for this is the faſhion of the worlde:
Then you muſt not flatter to Pleaſe, for this is
the faſhion of the world: Then you muſt not
deceiue to grow rich, for this is the faſhion of
the world, then you muſt not ſeeke reuenge
for euery word, for this is the faſhion of the
world, then you muſt not take ſcorne to bee
tolde of your faultes, for this is the faſhion of
the world, then you muſt not giue almes to
be ſeene, for this is the faſhion of the world,
then you muſt not obey for feare of the law,
for this is the faſhion of the world, then you
muſt not receiue the ſacrament for order, for
this is the faſhion of the worlde, then you
muſt not come to church for cuſtom, for this
is the faſhion of the worlde, then you muſt
not make religion but a table talke, for this is
the faſhion of the world, then you muſt not
turne with the time, for this is the faſhion of
the world, then you muſt not deferre to doe
good till you die, for this is the faſhion of the
worlde. The worlde is a badde patterne to
followe, becauſe as the fleſh followeth the
deuill: ſo the worlde followeth the fleſhe.
Therefore ſaie no more wee muſt doe as the

worlde doth, but rather we muſt not doe as
the world doth. You ſay you go ſo, becauſe
it is the faſhion, God ſaith goe not ſo, becauſe
it is the faſhion. If you come but in the faſhion,
you ſhall bee in the abuſe: There is no
man that weareth the cutters faſhion, but he
is a cutter, none which cutteth his haire like
them which are proud, but he is proud: none
that coloureth her face like them which are
wanton, but ſhee is wanton: none which
ſweareth like them which lie, but hee will lie
as well as ſweare.
            Therefore make not your life of the
worldes faſhion,Mat. 22. the wedding garment was
of an other faſhion than all the reſt: therefore
if thou faſhioneſt they ſelfe like the reſt,
thou haſt not on thee the wedding garment,
for this was nothing like vnto the reſte.Iohn. 19. 23
Chriſtes garment was of another manner of
faſhion differing from the worlde, ſo thy
life muſt bee of another faſhion than the
worldes: or elſe as the faſhion of the worlde
paſſeth away, ſo thou ſhalt paſſe and periſh
with it. God doth not like the faſhion of the
worlde and ſurelie he liketh as ill the faſhion
of Idolatrie, or the faſhion of Antichriſt,
as the faſhion of the worlde. He which biddeth
vs to refraine from euerie ſhewe of euill:
would haue vs refraine from the ſhewe of
Idolatrie,1. Theſ. 5. 22. and the ſhewe of Hereſie: for theſe

are the greateſt euils. But if we bee not Idolatours,
yet we haue the ſhewe of Idolatry.
If wee bee not of Antichriſtes religion, yet
we bee of Antichriſtes faſhion, ſo long as
wee ſhew foorth the ſame badge, and cogniſance,
you know what I meane. This is to
iumpe with the world and leape to hell. This
is not to be in faſhion, but out of faſhion,
therefore nowe yee ſhall heare the beſt faſhion.
It followeth, Be you changed, by the
renewing of your mindes. This is the ſecond
part of your reaſonable ſeruice: The changing
and renewing of the minde to the likeneſſe
wherein it was created. As before he required
you to giue your bodies, ſo here hee requireth
you to giue your mindes. Outwarde ſeruice
is like a tinckling Cimball, though it
hath neuer ſo pleaſant a ſounde, yet it doth
not pleaſe God, becauſe it hath no minde to
pleaſe him, ſo is the ſeruice of the eie, or the
eare, or the hand, or the foote, if the minde be
away: it may pleaſe other like the Cimball,
but it pleaſeth not God.
            The body is a ſeruant as well as the ſoule,
but there is no promiſe made to the bodilie
ſeruice, but to the Spirituall ſeruice: For vnleſſe
the minde worke, the bodie will ſerue
but a while: Therefore make cleane within,
ſaith Chriſt.Mat. 23. 26 
               Sanctification begins within,
vntill the minde be renewed, the body is neuer

ſacrificed. Therefore now Paul ſhewes
as it were the knife that muſt kill this ſacrifice,
that is the minde, the minde muſt ſacrifice
the bodie.Gen. 11. 
               Be ye chaunged, as if he ſhould
ſay, Suffer your ſelues to be chaunged as Noah
ſuffered himſelfe to bee couered, that is,
Grien
                     •
                   not the ſpirit,
               1. Theſſ. 5. doe not reſiſt God, bee
not againſt your conuerſion, and GOD wil
conuert you, God will comfort you, God
will renew you. By this renewing of our minds,
Paule calleth to our remembrance, that once
we had a pure minde, and that we come the
neerer vnto God, the neerer we draw to that
ſimilitude againe. And therefore the Scripture
calleth ſo often for a newe man, a newe
creature,Pſal. 51. 10 a new heart: As ye may reade, Pſal.
51. 10. Dauid praieth the Lorde to create him
a new heart, not to correct his olde heart, but
to create him a new heart. Shewing that his
heart was like an old garment ſo rotten and
tattered, that he coulde make no good of it
by patching and peecing, but muſt euen caſt
it off, and take a newe. Therefore Paul ſaith,
Caſt off the olde man: Not pick him and waſh
him till hee bee cleane, but caſt him off, and
begin a new as Dauid did. Wil yee knowe
what this renewing is? It is the repairing of
the Image of God, vntill we bee like Adam
when hee dwelt in Paradiſe: As there is a
whole olde man, ſo there muſt bee a whole

new man, the olde man muſt chaunge with
the new man, wiſedome for wiſedome, loue
for loue, feare for feare, his worldy wiſedome
for heauenly wiſedome, his carnall loue for
ſpirituall loue, his ſeruile feare for Chriſtian
feare, his idle thoughts, for holie thoughts,
his vaine wordes for holeſome wordes, his
fleſhly works for ſanctified works.
            If the minde muſt be ſo renewed, I would
know of the Papiſts where are their pure naturals,
if our naturals were pure, our mindes
neede not to bee renewed, for it is good to
bee pure, and euill to change it: but becauſe
there is no purenes in vs, therefore the Apoſtle
would haue vs changed. Againe, let
them tell me why our mindes ſhould bee renewed,
if we haue free will to doe good if
wee liſt: But becauſe our mindes are ſo corrupted,
that wee haue no free will to good,
nor will to doe good neither, therefore the
Apoſtle would haue our mindes renewed.
Thus one word of
God hath battered
two Caſtles of
Antichriſt.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            A looking Glaſſe for
Chriſtians.
            
               Rom. 12. 3.
               I ſay through the grace that is giuen vnto me,
to euerie one that is among you, that no man preſume
to vnderſtand aboue that which is meete to
vnderſtand, but that he vnderſtande according
to Sobrietie, as God hath dealth to euerie man the
meaſure of faith.
            
            
               FIrſt of the Preface, and
then of the counſell. In
the firſt verſe of this
Chapter, Paule perſwaded
the Romanes, by the
mercie of GOD towardes
them, heere hee perſwadeth
them By the grace of GOD towardes
him. Paul ſpeakes like a man in his deathbed.
which is ſet to giue good counſel, and goeth
from one leſſon to another, as though hee
would ſpeake al with a breath. Firſt he counſelled
them to make their bodies ſerue God,
becauſe the bodie is a ſeruant as well as the

ſoule, then he forbad them to faſhion themſelues
to the worlde, becauſe no man can ſerue
two contrarie maiſters. Then he aduiſed thē to
renew their mindes, becauſe except the minde
be reformed, the body will ſerue but a while.
And he ſetteth them to ſeeke Gods will, becauſe
the will of man doth ſeduce him. And
now to make vp this Teſtament (as it were)
hee admoniſheth them to reſt in the knowledge
of Gods will, and not to ſearch further
nor to be proud of their knowledge, but to
vſe their knowledge to humble their pride.
This leſſon may ſeeme vaine to the Romanes:
for they were not yet come to be wiſe, and he
councelleth thē not to be too wiſe. Paule ſaith;
That the Gentiles ſought after wiſedome:
               1. Cor. 1. 22 but
he ſaith there, That the preaching of the Goſpell
ſeemed fooliſhnes vnto them, which was
wiſdom: & therefore God calleth them a fooliſh
nation, becauſe they counted the true
wiſedome fooliſhnes,Deut. 32. 21. and their owne follie
wiſedome. For this cauſe there was ſuch emulation
between the Iew and the Gentile,
one deſpiſed another, becauſe they did not
accorde what wiſedome was, although both
ſought for it. Therefore that ye may not only
ſeeke wiſdome as the Gentiles did, but finde
wiſedome as Salomon did,A word of his preface. 
               Paul laieth a foundation
for wiſedome to ſtay vpon, which he
cals Sobrietie. Be wiſe according to Sobrietie,
               
which is this, By the grace of GOD which is giuen
to me. Becauſe he ſpeakes to all, and his
charge is of great moment, and they which
thinke themſelues wiſe, will hardly bee perſwaded
but that they are wiſe: therefore he
comes with authoritie like an ambaſſadour
from GOD, and ſaith, By the grace of GOD
which is giuen to mee, that is, by the vertue of
mine Apoſtleſhip, which I haue not receiued
from men, but from GOD, nor from earth
but from heauen, I charge you that no man among
you, whether he be learned or vnlearned,
whether he bee an hearer or a teacher,
preſume to knowe aboue that which is meete to
knowe: that is, make himſelfe wiſer than he
is, or boaſt of the graces which GOD hath
giuen him, or deſpiſe the giftes of God in other,
or rome beyond his calling, or trouble
his head with curioſities, but that hee bee
wiſe according to ſobrietie, that is, walke
within his vocation, be humble in his knowledge,
and vſe his gifts to the profite of other,
as GOD hath giuen to euery man the meaſure
of faith: that is, remembring that it is a
gift of God, which hath dealt gifts to other
as well as to him, that they might doe him
good, as he may do them good, ſo that if you
aske Paul as the Iewes asked Chriſt, By what
authoritie doeſt thou this? he ſheweth his letters
Patents from the King himſelfe, by the

Grace of God, &c. Well doth he call his Apoſtleſhip
the grace of God: for he was a perſecutor
of the ſame doctrine which hee preached,
and therefore if it had not beene Gods
meruailous grace, he ſhould neuer haue bin
an Apoſtle. It was as ſtraunge to heare that
perſecuting Saul was among the Apoſtles,
as to heare that King Saule was among the
Prophets,Act. 13. but by the grace of God (ſaith Paul)
ſo it is. I did not vſurpe this calling, but it was
giuen me. I came not from men, as I did before
when I perſecuted, but I am ſent from
God. do not count mine office a labour or a
burden, but I eſteeme it a grace, The grace of
God both to me and to you. By this Paule teacheth
vs to receiue the miniſterie of the worde
as a grace from God: For if Paule ſpeake by
grace, then you heare by grace, as hee ſaid,
I ſpeake by the grace of God which is giuen to
me: ſo you may ſay, Wee heare by the grace of
God which is giuen to vs: and therefore I exhort
you, as he did the Corinthians. Receiue
not the grace of God in vaine.
               1. Cor. 9. 1.
            
            Now to his counſell: Let no man preſume
to vnderſtand aboue that which is meete to vnderſtand,
but let euery man vnderſtand according
to ſobrietie. When the Apoſtle ſpeaketh
of things meete to vnderſtand, he ſignifieth,
that it is not meete to ſearch all things. It
ſeemes that many among the Romanes were

ſicke of our diſeaſe, which is, to thinke our
ſelues wiſer than we are: therefore he which
taught them to bee wiſe in all his exhortations
before, teacheth them here not to bee
ouerwiſe, but ſober wiſe. As God appointeth
the Iewes a meaſure, howe much Manna
they might gather, ſo Paule appointeth
the Romanes a meaſure, howe much wiſedome
they might gather. The Iewes meaſure
of Manna was ſo much as an Homer
would hold, the Romans meaſure of wiſedome
is ſo much as ſobrietie woulde holde.
For as the Manna which the Iews gathered
ouer an Homer did them no good but mold
and fuſte: ſo the wiſedome which men gather
more than Sobrietie, doth no good, but
puffe them and corrupt them, and turne
them either into pride, or into enuie, or into
wiles, or into ſtrife, or one cogitation or other,
as their ſuperfluous Manna turned into
wormes: When Paule entred into this ſage
doctrine, which I may call the lopping or
pruning of wiſedome, which muſt bee kept
lowe, like a man which is giuen to be purſie
and groſſe, hee ſummoneth all ſorts of men
to heare him, as though he ſpake of a faulte,
like the darkeneſſe of Aegipt which went ouer
the whole land: therefore hee exceptes
no calling nor perſon, but crieth, I ſay vnto
euerie one, &c. The wiſe and the auncient

and the learned are to learne this leſſon.
One thing is behinde ſaith Chriſt to him which
thought be had done all: So one thing is behind
to him which thinkes that he knoweth
al. Art thou wiſe? be not too wiſe like thy mother
Eue, which would knowe as much as
God. Paul hath two ſuites to moue vnto you,
The firſt is,Gen. 3. 7. that ye would be wiſe, the other
is, that yee would not bee too wiſe, for too
good (we ſay) is ſtarke naught: So he which
is too wiſe, is a verie foole. Nay (ſaith Salomon)
there is more hope of a foole, than of him
which is wiſe in his owne conceit: there is hope
of a foole that he may be wiſe, becauſe he wil
heare inſtruction, but of him which is wiſe in
his owne conceit, there is no hope to make
him wiſe, becauſe hee thinketh he knoweth
that which he ſhould learne. For this cauſe
Chriſt pronounced his woes to the Phariſies,
and his doctrines to the people: Becauſe the
whole (ſaith Chriſt) haue no neede of a Phiſitian,
that is, they that thinke themſelues wiſe
like the Phariſies, thinke they haue no need
of a teacher, and therefore Chriſt did not
teach them, but rate them, and teach them
which did not thinke themſelues wiſe. Therfore
if we will be Chriſts ſchollers, we muſt
be Paules ſchollers, that is, Preſume to know
no more than is meet to know, and then he will
teach vs as much as is meet to knowe.
            
               
There is as much need to warne men with
Paule, that they be not ouer wiſe, as to warne
them with Salomon, to ſeeke wiſedome, for
there is an errour of the left hand,Prou. 4. and of the
right hand. A man may bee as well too wiſe
as too ſimple, too carefull as too careleſſe,
too haſtie as too ſlacke, and therefore Salomon
ſaith, Turne not to the left hand, nor to
the right.
               Prou. 4. 27. And againe, Be not too iust, neither
make thy ſelfe too wiſe,
               Eccl. 7. 18. And againe, If thou
haue found honie, eat not too much. All which
places doe ſhew,Pro. 25. 16. that men are giuen to ouer
reach, like Moſes, which when he had heard
God, would needs ſee him too, which was
not poſſible for man to beholde. This is the
laſt ſleight of Satan when hee cannot keepe
men frō knowledge, then he caſteth how to
puffe them vp with their knowledge, which
makes them as vaine, as ignorance made thē
before. Feſtus did not apply truely, when he
ſaid,Act. 26. that too much learning had made Paule
mad: but it is true, that too much learning
hath made other mad, & would haue made
Paul mad too, if he had beene as proud of his
learning, as Feſtus was of his honor: & for all
that hee was an Apoſtle, yet it beganne to
worke vpon him:1 Cor. 12. As he ſaith, I was almoſt
puft vp with the multitude of reuelations, hee
was not wiſe aboue ſobrietie, but he was almoſt
wiſe aboue ſobrietie. And therefore hee

might well ſound the retire of wiſedome:
            Looke to your wiſedome, and learning,
and knowledge, for I my ſelfe was almoſt
puft vp with it. If Paule might learne his
owne leſſon, then it is like that none heere
haue learned it. The Scribes and Phariſies
did not come to Chriſt, as the people came
to Iohn to aske, Maiſter what ſhall wee doe?
But theſe Rabbies might haue come to Chriſt
as well as there ſchollers came to Chriſt diſciples:
to whom hee would haue aunſwered
like Paul, Be wiſe vnto ſobrietie.
            
            Fiue things in my iudgmēt, are to be noted
in theſe wordes. The firſt is, that wiſedome
is a thing to be deſired, for when hee ſaith,
not aboue ſobrietie, hee woulde haue vs wiſe
within ſobrietie. The ſecond is, that euerie
man affecteth a kinde of wiſedom, either according
to ſobrietie, as Paule counſelled the
Romans, or aboue ſobrietie, as the Romanes
did before. The third is, few are wiſe, as God
counteth wiſedome, & therefore Paul ſpeaketh
to all, as though all were to learne this
leſſon. The fourth is, that ſobrietie doth ſhew
like a glaſſe who are wiſe, and who are not
The laſt is, that the wiſedome which goeth.
beyond ſobrietie, doth hurt him which hath
it, and other. For when Paul ſaith be wiſe to
ſobrietie, he implieth that who is not ſo, is in a
kind of diſtemperature, like one ſcarſe ſober.

As the meate which is not digeſted with exerciſe,
doth rumble in the ſtomacke: So the
knowledge which is not digeſted with ſobrietie,
troubleth the braine.
            Touching the firſt point, the forbidden
tree ſeemed to Eue a tree to bee deſired, becauſe
it would teach them knowledge. Nature
taught her that knowledge was a thing
to be deſired: Though the Serpent pointed
her to a wrōg tree. For in deed the tree of life
was the tree of knowledge. and when they
went to the other tree, they chaunged their
knowledge for ignorance,Prou. 4. 7. as they chaunged
their holines for wickednes. Beſide all other
vertues are called wiſedome, to ſhewe that
wiſdome is the bond of vertues, and as much
to be deſired as all the reſt. Beſide, God himſelfe
is called wiſedome,Prou. 5. 7. to ſhew, that in nothing
we can come neerer God, than in the
ſtudie of wiſedome. Beſide, the word, the ſpirit
and the miniſterie, are all appointed to
teach wiſedome, becauſe other thinges are
not ſo neceſſarie,Prou. 2. 15. therefore they haue not ſo
many ſchool-maſters.
            
               Salomon ſpeaking of wiſedome, preferreth
it before ſiluer, to ſhew, that wee ſhould deſire
it before ſiluer: then before gold, to ſhew
that we ſhould deſire it before gold: then before
precious ſtones, to ſhew that we ſhould
deſire it before precious ſtones. Therfore Salomon
               
prayed for wiſdome, and Moſes ſtudied
for wiſdome, & the Queene of Sheba trauelled
for wiſedome, to ſhew that wiſedome
will requit all the laboures and paines that
are taken for her. As wiſedome is excellent
aboue all, ſo it is affected of all, as oyle was,
both of the wiſe Virgins and the fooliſh Virgins:
Nay, the verie name to be wiſe, is ſo
plauſible, that Paul ſaith the Grecians ſought
after wiſedome, they whome God called a
fooliſh nation,1. Cor. 1. 22 
               The fooliſh nation (ſaith Paul)
ſought after wiſdome, though hee doe not ſay
that they found wiſdome.Deu. 32. 2. And in the ſecond
of Mathew we find, that the Gentiles called
thoſe men that were ſingular amongſt them,Math. 2.
by the name of wiſe-men, as we call them noble-men
which are fingular amongſt vs, ſhewing
that wiſe-men ſhould be noble-men, or noble-men
ſhould bee wiſe-men, according to
the ſaying of Dauid:
               Pſal. 2. 10. 
               Beewiſe yee which iudge
the earth. And likewiſe in Paul, we read that
they which neuer knew what wiſdom ment,
yet named themſelues Philoſophers:Col. 2. 8. that is
Louers of wiſdome, as though there were ſuch
a thing behinde which all men ſhould loue.
Thus wiſdome hath beene a marke, which
euerie man hath ſhotte at, euer ſince Eue
ſought to bee as wiſe as her maker. But as an
hundred ſhoote, and not one hit the white: ſo
ſome come ſhort of wiſdome, and ſome flie

ouer, and ſome goe beſide, like the arrowes
which Ionathan ſhot at Dauid. Therefore Salomon
ſpeaking of wiſe men ſaieth, I haue
ſcarce found one among a thouſand.
               Eccl. 71. 30 Therefore
Paule makes a generall charge, Iſaie to euery
one, be wiſe according to ſobrietie, as though
euerie one had too much wiſedome, or too
little. Vertue is a meane betwixt two vices,
which couch ſo cloſe beſide her, that one can
ſcarſe ſee her. Couetouſneſſe on the one ſide,
and prodigalitie on the other ſide, and charitie
in the middeſt: pride on the one ſide, ruſticitie
on the other ſide, & comelines in the middeſt:
Flaterie on the one ſide, malice on the other
ſide, and loue in the middeſt: carefulnes
one the one ſide, careleſnes on the othe ſide, &
diligence in the middeſt: difference on the one
ſide, preſumption on the other ſide, and faith
in the middeſt: ſuperſtition on the one ſide, Atheiſeme
on the other ſide, and religion in the
midſt: ignorance on the one ſide, curioſity on
the other ſide, and knowledge in the middeſt.
So that there is but one vertue ſtill for two
vices, therefore extremities beare rule in this
world. Either we crie Hoſanna, or elſe crucifige,
either Chriſt muſt not waſhe our feete,
or elſe he muſt waſh our feete & body too,Act. 28. 3. either
we will haue Paul a God, or elſe we ſay
he is curſed of God, either we ſay, touch not,
taſt not, for it is vncleane, or elſe we ſay, let vs

eate and drinke for to morrowe we ſhall die. If
we loue, we do ouer-loue, if we feare, we doe
ouer feare, if we bee carefull, wee are ouer
carefull, if wee be merrie, we are ouer merie,
if we be ſolemne, we are ouer ſolemne, if
ſo we cannot be wiſe, but we are ouer wiſe,
ſo ſoone as we are thought to knowe ſome
thing, we would be thought ignorant of nothing.
There is a kinde of downe or curdle vpon
wiſedome, like the traine of Gentle women,
which is more then needes, which wee
call the crotchets of the braine which muſt be
weeded out as the tree is lopt when it groweth
too thicke, or elſe they will periſh the
brain, like the skim which ſeatheth into the
broth. The Scripture ſpeaketh of manie ancient,
and many rich, and many ſtrong, and
many mightie, but of one wiſe man, and yet
that wiſe man too before hee died, ſ
                  •
               ept beyond
ſobrietie. Therefore euen as yee looke
leſt other mens wiſedome ſhoulde deceiue
you, ſo looke leſt your owne wiſedome deceiue
your ſelues: there is a kinde of wiſedome,
which is more contrarie to wiſedome
then ignorance, as good corne and bad corn
come both to the market to be ſolde, and the
bad would haue as much monie as the good:
ſo true wiſdom & falſe wiſdome come both,
ſhew both, offer both, praiſe both, & as Iacob
took Leah for Rachel: ſo many take the worſe

for the better.Exo. 7. 70. 
               Pharao ſaide, Come, let vs doe
wiſelie: when he went about that which deſtroied
him. The Scribes, and the Phariſies
and the Elders, tooke counſel againſt Chriſt,
as though they woulde moſt wiſely preuent
their ſaluation. Iudas would betray his maiſter
wiſely, and therefore hee came with a
kiſſe, and ſaid, Haile Maiſter, when he betraied
him.Gen. 4. 
               Cain thought to murther his brother
wiſely, and therefore he called him a ſide into
the field, as though he would walk with him,
that none might ſee. Iezabel thought to kill
Naboth wiſely, and therefore ſhee ſuborned
falſe witneſſes, and proclaimed a faſt before
the murther. Eue thought it wiſedome to eate
the forbidden fruite.Gen. 3. 5. 
               Abſalon thought it wiſedome
to lie with his fathers concubines.1. Kin. 23. 5 The
idle ſeruant thought it wiſedome to hide his
talent, The falſe ſteward thought it wiſedom
to deceiue his maiſter. All theſe were wiſe aboue
ſobrietie. Of whome wee may ſay with
Paul,
               Rom. 
                     〈…〉
                  
                
               preſuming to be wiſe, they became fooles:
becauſe they were wiſe to euill, their wiſedome
had but an euill ende: All theſe examples
are recorded to giue credite vnto this
doctrine, Be not wiſe about Sobrietie.
            
            
               As Paul would haue the Galathians zeale
according to knowledge, ſo hee would haue
the Romans knowledge according to ſobrietie.
Hee which forbiddeth vs to truſt in our

riches, and in our friendes, & in our ſtrength,
forbiddeth vs to truſt in our wiſedome, Truſt
not in thine owne wiſedome. Wee count the
ſimple, fooles, but God countes the craftie,
fooles. He which thinkes himſelfe wiſe, is a
foole ipſo fact
                     •
                  . And to ſhew that they are
moſt fooles of all; the Apoſtle ſaith, that God
chooſeth the fooliſh to confound them.1. Cor. 1. It is
ſaid, Be merrie and wiſe: but it may be ſaide,
Be wiſe and wiſe: for euerie wiſedome is not
wiſe. As the wiſe men went no further than
they were guided by the ſtarre; ſo a wiſe mā
ſhoulde runne no further than hee is led by
the worde.Mat. 2. When God hath brought thee
vnto goodnes, hee ſaith acquieſe: ſet downe
thy reſt: goe no further than goodneſſe: So
when thou art come to wiſedome, reſt where
thou are well, as the Doue did in the Arke.
The firſt bleſſing which Chriſt pronounced
to anie,Mark 3. is to the poore in ſpirite. As Paule
woulde haue you rich in knowledge: ſo
Chriſt woulde haue you poore in ſpirite, that
is humble in your knowledge, for the proude
knowledge is the diuelles knowledge: and
wiſedome to the wicked, is like the Arke
vnto the Philiſtines▪
                which did them more
hurt than good: Therefore as God appointed
the people their boundes, which they
might not paſſe, when he talked with Moſes
in the Mount: ſo he hath appointed certaine

precinctes of wiſedome, which when wee
tranſgreſſe, we may bee ſaid to exceede our
commiſſion, like Shemei when he went beyond
the riuer which Salomon forbad him.
The Rayle or Pale of wiſedom is Sobrietie.
As wiſedome is made ouerſeer of all other
vertues, ſo Sobrietie is made ouerſeer of wiſdome,
to meaſure it foorth in euen portions
and due reaſons, that none of Gods gifts be
loſt, as water is vnto the wine, to delaie the
heate of it, and ſalt is to meate, to make it ſauourie:
So Sobrietie is to wiſedom, to make
it wholeſome and profitable to him which
hath it, and them which ſeeke it of him. If
thou haſt found honie (ſaith Salomon) take not
too much leſt thou ſurfet.
               Pro. 25. 15 Nay if thou haue
found wiſedom, take not too much, leſt thou
ſurfet. There is a ſurfet of wiſedome, which
is the daungerouſeſt ſurfet of all other.
When a man beginnes like Paul to bee puffed
vp,Num. 12. 3 which was Aaron and Miriams
diſ
                  •
               aſe, when they murmured againſt Moſes,
becauſe they thought themſelues fitter
to gouerne than hee. No vertue is better
than wiſedome and humilitie, but if a man
bee proude of his wiſedome and humilitie:
then the vertue is turned into a vice. If the
light bee darknes (ſaieth Chriſt) howe great
is that darkenes? So if our humilitie be pride,
howe great is that pride? If our knowledge

be ignorance, how great is that ignorance?
Therefore as we remember, Bewiſe as Serpents:
ſo let vs remember, Be ſimple as Doues,
or elſe we drowne in our wiſedome, like a
light that quencheth in his owne tallowe.
            Nowe that yee may knowe howe to bee
wiſe according to Sobrietie, there be certaine
properties of his ſober wiſedome,
which I will ſhewe you. The firſt, is not to
arrogate to our ſelues more than GOD hath
giuen vs. As the man ſaide, I beleeue, Lorde
helpe my vnbeleefe:
               Fiue marks of a wiſe man. So the wiſe man may
ſaie, I vnderſtande, Lorde, helpe mine ignorance:
For one thing which wee knowe,
wee are ignorant of a thouſande thinges
which we ſhoulde knowe: yet the fooliſh
virgins woulde be thought as wiſe as their
ſiſters.
            No man can abide to be diſgraced of his
wit: wee had rather ſeeme wicked than ſimple.
As euerie birde thinkes her owne birdes
faireſt: ſo euerie man thinkes his owne wit
ripeſt.Pro. 30. 12. 
               There is a generation (ſaith Salomon)
which are pure in their owne conceipt, but they
are not cleanſed from their filthines: So there
is a generation, which are wiſe in their owne
conceipt, but they are not cleanſed from
their fooliſhnes.
            There is a generation of ſuch wiſe men:
but he which is wiſe in deed ſaith, I am more

fooliſh than any man.
               Pro. 20. 2. He which is called wiſedome
ſaith,Mat. 11. 29 
               Learne of me to be humble. And hee
which was counted the wiſeſt man before Salomon,
               Num. 12. 3.
is called the mideſt man vpon the earth.
Therefore Iames deſcribing the wiſedome
which is from aboue, ſaith, that it is a gentle
wiſdome: the gentle are not arrogant but
the ſcornefull.
            The ſecond propertie is not to glorie of
any thing in our ſelues, as Iames ſaith, Let
him which is merrie ſing Pſalmes: So Paule
ſaieth, Let him which glorieth, glorie in the
Lorde: For as wee ſaie, Thine is the kingdome,
ſo wee ſay, Thine is the glorie: and therefore
Dauid ſaith, Not vnto mee Lord, not vnto mee,
&c. Oh (ſaith Sathan) this is a thing to glorie
of, knowledge and learning and wiſedome,
or els what ſhould a man bee proude
of? But when Chriſt heard his diſciples glorie
that they had the gift of miracles, which
is a greater matter than knowledge: yet hee
ſaid, Glorie not in this that yee can worke myracles,
therefore glory not in this, that ye know
him which can worke miracles. If thy wiſedome
be giuen thee, then thou haſt receiued
it, if thou haſt receiued it, then I ſay with
Paule,
               1. Cor. 4. 7▪
                
               Why doeſt thou glorie, as if thou hadſt
not receiued it? Wiſedome is not ſo baſe a
thing that thine owne glorie ſhould be the
ende of it: but as Heſter thought that her honour

was giuen her for the glorie of God, ſo the
learned ſhoulde thinke that their learning is
giuen them for the glorie of God, the rich
ſhoulde thinke that their riches are giuen
them for the glorie of God, the wiſe ſhould
thinke that their wiſdome is giuen them for
the glorie of God: the value and praiſe and
honour of wiſedome is to doe good, if we be
wiſe to doe euill, wee are not as wiſe as ſerpents,
but wiſe ſerpents.
            The third propertie is not to deſpiſe other:
therefore Iames calleth the true wiſedome
a peaceable wiſedome,Iames. 3. becauſe it makes no
ſtrife, as hee which had fiue talents, did not
diſdaine him which had but one, ſo they
which haue moe giftes ſhould not contemne
them which haue fewe: For as the Vnicorne
dooth more good with one horne than other
beaſts do with two, ſo ſome man doth more
good with one gift, than other do with fiue,
becauſe they choake them with pride. When
the Phariſie ſaid, I am not like this Publican
hee ſaid true, for then hee was not like the
Publican in deede, becauſe the Publican was
better than he.
            The fourth propertie is to keepe within
our calling, he which medleth with that hee
hath not to doe, is compared to one that catcheth
a dogge by the eares, and dare neither
hold him ſtill, nor let him go, ſo he can neyther

go forward for wāt of skil, nor backward
for ſhame. Paul ſaith, hee was ſet a part to
preach the Goſpell, ſo to euerie worke God
hath ſet ſome men apart, and fitted them to
that work, as he did Bezalred to the building
of the tabernacle, & therfore vnles a man ſet
himſelfe apart to this worke, he ſhould think
of Peter, which whē he ſtroke with the ſword
was bid to put vp his ſworde againe, for the
ſworde was not committed to him, but the

                  •
               eies. In Exod. 17. 11. we finde Ioſua fighting,
and Moſes praying,Exo. 17. 11. and Aaron and Hur holding
vp his hands, ſo euery man ſhould haue
a ſeuerall worke. God hath giuen certaine
gifts to certaine callings, as no man can exceede
his gifts, ſo no man ſhould exceed his
calling. It is not meet that he ſhould be a free
man, which was neuer a prentiſe, nor that
he ſhould leape into Moſes chayre, that neuer
ſat at Gamaliels feete: If thou doeſt neuer
ſo well, and be not called to it, the Scripture
ſaith ſtraight, Who hath required this of thee?
thou art an vſurper of anothers Office. A
foole (ſaith Salomon) is medling, ſhewing
that a wiſe man medleth not, but where he
hath to doe. Wee are compared to a bodie,
ſome men are like the head, and they muſt
rule: ſome are like the tongue, and they muſt
teach: ſome are like the hand, and they muſt
worke: when this order is confounded, then

that commeth to paſſe which wee reade of
Eue,
               Gen. 3. 
               When the woman would lead her husband,
both fell into the ditch.
               Luk. 12. Therefore as Chriſte
ſaide, Who hath made me a iudge ouer you? ſo
they which are not Iudges ſhould ſay, who
hath made me a Iudge? he which is not a teacher
ſhould ſay, who hath made mee a teacher?
hee which is not a ruler ſhoulde ſaye,
who hath made me a ruler? And this is a better
peacemaker than the Lawier.
            The firſt propertie is not to bee curious in
ſearching myſteries: this Paul meaneth, whē
he ſaith, let no man preſume to vnderſtand,
aboue that which is meet to vnderſtand: the
ſtar when it came to Chriſt ſtood ſtil & went
no further, ſo when wee come to the knowledge
of Chriſt, we ſhould ſtand ſtill & go no
further: for Paule was content to know nothing
but Chriſt crucified: It is not neceſſarie
to know that which God hath not reuealed,
and the well of Gods ſecrets is ſo deepe,
that no bucket of man can ſound it: therfore
we muſt row in ſhallow waters, becauſe our
boats are light & ſmall, & ſoone ouerturned.
They which haue ſuch crotchets and circumſtances
in their braine, I haue marked this in
them, that they ſeldome find any roome for
that which they ſhould knowe, but goe too
and fro, ſeeking and ſeeking like them which
ſought Elias▪
                bodie and found it not.
            
               
Let men deſire knowledge of God, as Salomon
did, but not deſire knowledge as Eue
did. For theſe aſpiring wits fall againe like
Babell, and run into doubts, while they ſeek
for reſolutions. As the Iewes when they
hard the Apoſtle preach, burnt their curious
bookes, and had no more delighte to ſtudie
ſuch toyes, ſo as men come to the truth, they
are content to leaue theſe fancies, and ſay
with Paule, I knowe nothing but Chriſt crucified,
Curious queſtions and vaine ſpeculations
are like a plume of fethers, which ſome will
giue any thing for, and ſome will giue nothing
for. Paule rebuked them which troubled
their heades about Genealogies, howe
would he reproue men and women of our
daies, if he did ſe how they buſie their heads
about vaine queſtions, tracing vpon the pinacles
where they may fal, while they might
walke vpon the pauement without daunger?
Some haue a great deale more deſire to
learne where hell is, than to knowe any way
how they may eſcape it: to heare what God
did purpoſe before the world beganne, rather
than to learne what hee will doe when
the worlde is ended: to vnderſtand whether
they ſhall know one another in heauen, than
to know whether they belong to heauen:
this rocke hath made many ſhipwracks that
mē ſearch miſteries before they know principles,

like the Bethſhanites which were not
content to ſee the Arke, but they muſt prie
into it and finger it: commonly the ſimpleſt
men buſie their head, about the higheſt matters,
ſo that they meet with a rough & crabbed
queſtion, like a knob in the tree, & while
they hacke and hewe at it with their owne
wits, to make it plaine, their ſaw ſticks faſt in
the clift, and cannot get out againe, at laſt in
wrath they become like male contents with
God, as though the Scripture were not perfect,
& either fall into deſpaire, or into contempt
of all. Therefore it is good to leaue off
learning, where God hath left off teaching:
for they which haue an eare where God hath
no tongue, hearkē not vnto God, but to the
tempter, as Eue did to the ſerpent. This is the
rule whereby a man may know whether his
wiſedome ſtand right: as a couetous man is
needy in the middeſt of his riches, ſo a proud
man is ignorant in the middeſt of his knowledge.
Now, if our wiſedome were examined
by theſe properties, I feare, as the Angell
ſaide, Thou haſt examined them which
called themſelues Apoſtles,
               Reue. 3. 
               and found them liars:
ſo I might ſay, I haue examined them
which call themſelues wiſe men, and founde
them liars. In deed Salomon ſaith, many boaſt
of their goodnes,
               Pro. 20. 6. 
               but who can finde a good man?
So many boaſt of their wiſedome, but who

can finde a wiſe man? They are wiſe (ſaith
he) in their owne iudgements, but he ſaith
not that they are wiſe in others iudgements,
As Paule tolde the Athenians, that they
were too religious: ſo hee would tell many
now that they are too wiſe, ſo wiſe, that they
are fooles againe. The Galathians zeale
was without knowledge,Col. 2. 3. but our knowledge
is without zeale, hauing a ſhew of holynes
as Paul ſaith: So they haue a ſhewe of
knowledg. But as the ſhew of holines is hypocriſie,
ſo the ſhew of wiſedome is vanitie.
If they which thinke themſelues wiſe, bee
wiſe; then we haue more wiſe mē then beggers,
and peraduenture here be more wiſemen,
then of any other beſide.
            As you haue heard the notes of them
which are wiſe according to ſobrietie: So if
you would know ſuch as are wiſe aboue ſobrietie,
you ſhal diſcerne thē by theſe marks.
Firſt, they will haue all the talke whereſoeuer
they come, like parrats. Secondly they
contemne other like the Phariſies. Thirdly,
they ſpurne at him which tels them of their
fault, like Abner. Fourthly, they iumpe with
Caeſar, like the Herodians. Fiftly they turne
with the time, like Demas. Sixtly, they ſeeke
their owne credite by the diſcredite of others,
like the enimies of Paule. Seuenthlie,
they loue to heare their owne praiſe, like

               Herode. Eightly, aboue al things they would
haue their owne will, like Iezabel. Whenſoeuer
theſe eight markes meete, there is a
wiſe man, and a foole, a wiſe man in his own
conceit, and a foole in proofe: theſe are the
wiſemen of the north, and the Philoſophers
of Englande.
            
            Thus you haue heard the wiſedome which
is according to ſobrietie. If any man doe ſee
the ſpottes of his owne face in this glaſſe, let
him waſh and be cleane. Hee that is wiſe (ſaith
Salomon) is wiſe to himſelfe, but he that is ouer
wiſe, is wiſe againſt himſelfe: heere you
may ſee: that note aboue Ela is a iarring note
and alwaies maks a diſcord in the harmony.
Chriſt would not haue vs wiſe Serpents, but
as wiſe as ſerpents, leſt they which are like
ſerpents ſhould circumuent vs, to be wiſe to
euil is an euil wiſedom, and there is no ſuch
enemie vnto knowledge, as the opinion of
knowledge: for one which is wedded vnto
his owne witte, wil neuer be counſelled of
any. Therefore how neceſſarie it is to remember
this doctrine, and God graunt wee
may remember it. I cannot tell howe, no
man can ſerue GOD, vnleſſe hee knowe
GOD: for none doe obey him excepte
they which doe knowe him, and yet it is
ſaide that there was neuer ſo much knoweledge
and ſo little goodnes. Surely as Chriſt

ſaide to his Diſciples, O ye of little faith, ſo he
might ſay to vs, O yee of little vnderſtanding:
for there is not too much wiſdome, but too
much oſtentation, Humilitie is none of our
vertues. They which ſhould teach others to
be wiſe according to ſobrietie, paſſe the bonds
of ſobrietie themſelues: euerie man hath a
common-weale in his head, and trauels to
bring foorth newe faſhions. As the Iewes
were not content with ſuch rulers as God
had appointed them, but would haue a king
like the Gentiles. As the Papiſts are not content
with ſuch lawes as God hath appointed
them, but they will haue traditions like the
Iewes: So the wiſedome of this worlde is, to
deuiſe better orders, better lawes, better titles,
better callings, better diſcipline, than
God hath deuiſed himſelfe. Euery plant ſaith
Chriſt, which my father hath not planted ſhall
bee rooted vp, that is, euerie title, and euerie
office, and euerie calling, which God hath
not planted, ſhall be rooted vp: to bee wiſe
according to this booke, is to bee wiſe according
to ſobrietie. Therefore ſeeke the wiſedome
of Chriſt, for the wiſedome of the ſerpent
is turned to a curſe, the wiſedome of the
Phariſies is turned to a woe, the wiſedome of
Achitophell is turned to folly, the wiſedome
of Nimrod is turned to confuſion, the wiſedome
of the ſtewarde is turned to expulſion,
               
the wiſdome of Iezabel is turned to death.
This is the ende of the deceiuers wiſedome,
of the extortioners wiſedome, of the vſurers
wiſedome, of the perſecutors wiſedome, of
the flatterers wiſedome, of the ſorcerers wiſdome,
of the hypocrites wiſedome, of the
Macheuelians wiſedome. As Moſes ſerpent
deuoured the ſorcerers ſerpent: ſo Gods wiſdome
ſhall deuoure mans wiſdome.
            
               Wherefore by the grace of God which is giuen
vnto me, I ſay vnto euery one of you with
Paule, Be wiſe vnto ſobrietie, bee not aſhamed to
ſeeme ignorant of ſome things, but remember
that it is better to ſeeme ignorant, than to
bee proude. Thus you haue heard
what wiſedome is, now let
vs pray vnto God
for it.
            
         
         
            
            Food for new borne babes.
            
               1. Pet. 2. 2.
               As new borne babes diſire the ſincere milke of
the word, that ye may grow by it.
            
            
               THis Scripture (beloued in the
Lord) containeth an exhortation
to in
                  ••
               re and ſtirre vp the
beleuing Iewes, that as God
had illightned them with ſome
knowledge of his trueth, and ſanctified them
in ſome meaſure with the grace of his ſpirit:
ſo they would proceed & grow on and dailie
increaſe more and more in the faith and
feare of Ieſus Chriſt, like the glorious ſunne
which ſtill augmenteth and redoubleth his
heat and light, till it bee come to the middeſt
of heauen, where is perfect daie. Nowe the
meanes whereby we receiue all our grouth
and increaſe in God, is the liuelie preaching
of the word of trueth. And therefore the Apoſtle
by a figuratiue, and borrowed kinde of

ſpeech, earneſtly preſſing them to thirſt & to
long for the word of God, euen the foode of
their ſoules, as little infants (which are new
borne) crie for the mothers milke to nouriſh
and ſuſtaine them. For there are two birthes
mencioned in the Scripture: the one fleſhly,
and naturall by propagation from the firſt
Adam, whereby originall and our birth-ſin,
as it were a Serpentes poiſon, paſſeth and
tranſfuſeth it ſelfe into vs: the other heauenly
and ſpirituall by renouation, from the ſecond
Adam which is Ieſus Chriſt, whereby
grace and holineſſe is deriued and brought
vnto vs.
            In this latter and better birth, God is our
Father to beget vs, the Church his ſpouſe
our mother to conceiue vs,1. Pet 1. 2. the ſeede whereby
we are bredde and borne againe,Gal. 4. 6. is the
worde of God,1. Pet. 1. 29. the Nurſes to feede, and
to weane,1. Theſ. 2. 7 and to cheriſh vs, are the Miniſters
of the Goſpell, and the foode whereby
we are nouriſhed, and held in life, is the milk
of the worde, as in this place. And therefore
in as much as children which are newe
borne, cannot increaſe in grouth and ſtature,
but muſt needes die, and come to diſſolution,
vnleſſe they bee continuallie fedde
and nouriſhed with wholeſome foode: it
behooueth all the faithfull and godlie, who
are quickened and reuiued in the life of

God, as new borne babes to deſire the ſincere
milke of the worde, that they may grow by it.
I thinke we neede not many words to cleare
the generall drift and ſcope of this Scripture,
as we need not many fingers to pointe
at the ſhining ſun. Let vs now therefore diſcend
to the particular doctrines which iſſue
and ſpring from the ſeuerall branches of this
ſcripture.
            Firſt here is noted a preparation, if we wil
be bettered and increaſed by the worde, wee
muſt bee as new borne bares. Secondlie, our
affection and duetie when we are newe borne
we muſt deſire. Thirdly the matter & obiect
of our deſire, the milke of the worde. Fourthly,
the qualitie of the milke, it muſt bee ſincere.
Laſtly, the ende and vſe for which we deſire
it,Mat. 18. 4. 
               that we may grow thereby. For the firſt point
we muſt be as new borne babes:
               1. Cor. 14. 20 Children wee
know are principally commended for ſimplicitie
and harmeleſnes: and therefore all
thoſe which will profite in the ſchoole of
Chriſt and receiue light and comfort by the
preaching of the worde, are here taught to
become as babes, to laie aſide all maliciouſneſſe,
and to bring holy and ſanctified hearts
to the hearing of it.Luk. 18. 29 
               Suffer the little babes to
come vnto mee (ſaith our ſauiour) and forbid
them not: for of ſuch is the kingdome of heauen:
as if we were neuer fit to heare & learne

of Chriſt, til we be reformed & newly changed
into little babes againe. For the ſecrets of
the Lord (as the Pſalmiſt ſpeaketh) is with
them that feare him:
               Pſal. 25. 14 to teach vs, that as Dauid
would admit no vile perſon into his coū
               ſell:
So God will admit no ſinfull ſoule into
his ſecretes. If any man will doe Gods will,
(ſaith our Sauiour) he ſhall know of the doctrine
whether it be of God or no,Iohn. 7. 17 becauſe no
man can learn this doctrine, but he that doth
it,Reue. 14. 3 as no man could learne the Virgins ſong,
but they which ſang it. And Salomon to the
ſame effect ſaith, The feare of the Lord is the
beginning of knowledge,
               Prou. 1. 17. as if the firſt leſſon to
be wiſe, were to be holie: & therefore Chriſt
is ſaid to haue expounded all thinges to his
Diſciples apart, to ſhew, that if we will haue
Chriſt to teach vs, we muſt go a part from the
world. So that as a man ſlippeth off all his
cloathes, when he goeth into a bath to waſh
him: So we muſt ſlippe off all our ſins, when
we come to the word to feed vs: for wiſedom
will not reſt in the defiled ſoule, nor in a bodie
that is ſubiect vnto ſinne. As the Deuill
woulde not dwell but in a houſe that was
ſwept from godlines:Luk. 11. 25. ſo the graces of God
will not come vnto the heart which is not
cleanſed from wickedneſſe, for God will not
powre new wine but into new veſſels: therefore
vnles ye haue prepared new hearts,Math. 9. 17 look

for no new bleſſings to bee powred on you.
The Iewes reade the Scriptures daily in their
Synagogues to finde Chriſt, but all in vayne,
becauſe the vaile is not takē away in reading
them: Euen ſo doe we preach in vayne, and
you heare in vaine, becauſe the vaile of ſinne
which is drawne like a Curtaine ouer your
harts, hideth and eclipſeth the glorious light
of the Goſpell from you. And therefore (beloued
brethren) if you will haue the Lord to
bleſſe your hearing, and to proſper our preaching,
you muſt waſh and rince out the dregs
of ſin that are frozen in you, you muſt purge
the leauen of maliciouſnes that ſowreth your
ſoules, you muſt caſt vp your couetouſnes, &
your pride, and your ſlothfulnes, & your partiall
preiudice, like the ſerpent which ſpues
vp his poyſon when he goes to drinke: For
this is the cauſe why there are ſo many fruitleſſe
& non-proficient hearers, becauſe there
are ſo many ſinfull and wicked hearers. It is
ſayd of Chriſt,Mat. 13. 11 that he did not many great works
in his owne countrey for their vnbeliefs ſake: ſo
it may be ſayd, that GOD concealeth many
great myſteries of faith from vs for our ſinnes
ſake. Our wickedneſſe ſtops Chriſts mouth
that hee will not ſpeake, as the Iewes incredulitie
chayned his handes that hee woulde
not worke. Will an Embroderer teach an
other mans ſeruant his trade, if he knowe he

will hurt him? No more will God teach the
Diuels ſeruants his truth, becauſe hee knoweth
they will offend him. The ſeed which fell
into the thornie groud, ſprang vp very cherefully
for a time, that it might ſeeme to giue
great hope of a ioyfull harueſt: but becauſe
thornes grewe vp with it,Mat. 13. 22 at length they choked
it: ſo that vnleſſe wee cut vp the thornie
ſinnes which naturally ſprout and ſpring vp
in vs, they will ouerthrow all the good plants
of holy doctrine that are graffed in vs: and
therefore the Prophet Ieremie willeth vs to
breake vp the fallowe ground,
               Iere. 4. 4. 
               and not to ſowe among
thornes, as if the heart muſt firſt be ſanctified,
and afterward inſtructed, as yron muſt
firſt be heated, and afterwards be faſhioned.
In regard whereof, I beſeech you (my beloued)
in the feare and reuerence of Gods bleſſed
name, looke to your feete when ye enter
into the houſe of GOD: preſſe not into this
marriage feaſt without a Wedding garment,
treade not into the holie Sanctuarie to heare
the word, with an vnſanctified, and a defiled,
and a filthie ſoule.
            A man will not keepe the Sabbaoth in
his working apparell, but will put on his
richeſt iewelles, and array himſelfe in his
beſt attyre, and yet wee make it no ſeruple at
all to come vnto the Sabbaoths exerciſe with
a prophane, and a wicked, and our workie

day heart. When Nadab and Abihu offered
ſtrange fire before the Lord,Leu. 10. 3. God ſayd, I will
bee honoured in them that draw nigh vnto mee,
to ſhewe that the Lord doth then looke for
more holines at our hands, when by practiſe
of his ſeruice, and the duties of holy religion,
wee approach to drawe more neere vnto
him. Wherefore, to ſhut vp this point; as the
begger (in the Goſpell) caſt off his cloake to
come to Chriſt: ſo muſt we caſt off the cloke
of our wickedneſſe, when we come to heare.
We muſt be as babes,
               Mat. 11. 25 if wee will bee Chriſtes
pupilles; becauſe he reuealeth knowledge &
wiſedome to none but babes. And yet wee
muſt not be babes only, but newe borne babes,
which haue a newe ſoule, a newe life, newe
members, new affections imparted to them.
Whereby wee learne, that it is not enough in
our regeneration, to redreſſe and reforme
ſome one diſordered affection in vs, but wee
muſt bee chaunged and new faſhioned in euerie
part.1. Sa. 10. 9. As Saul when the kingly ſpirite
came vpon him, was turned as it were into
another man: So wee when the word begetteth
vs a new, muſt be turned and chaunged
into other men, and therefore they which
are implanted into Chriſt,2. Cor. 5. 17. are called new creatures,
becauſe neither the olde hearn, nor the
olde hand, nor the olde eare, nor the olde eye,
will ſerue the turne, but all muſt bee 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
and newe framed agayne.Ioh. 3. 6. For whatſoeuer is
borne of the fleſh, is fleſh: If wee will haue it ſpirit,
that is fit for Gods worſhip, who is a ſpirit,
               Ioh. 4. 24
               and will bee worſhipped in ſpirit and truth,
it muſt bee borne agayne of the ſpirit. The
ſenſe hereof made the Prophet Dauid crye
out,Pſal. 51. 10 
               Create in me a cleane heart, O God, and renue
a right ſpirit within me: and therefore we
muſt not patch and peece vp our hearts for
GOD like a beggers cloake which is made
of ſhreds, but we muſt be renewed and thorowly
chaunged in the ſpirite of our mindes.
When Naaman the leper had waſhed in Iordan,
his fleſh came agayne like the fleſh of a
young child: If the leproſie of ſinne be waſhed
and purged from vs, al our affections, and
all our deſires will bee altered and chaunged
like the fleſh of a child. And therefore if wee
will fit our ſelues to bee good hearers, wee
muſt not entertaine friendſhip with any ſin.
As the Adder ſlippes off her skinne, and the
Eagle caſteth her bill: ſo wee muſt quite ſlip
our ſelues of all our luſts, when as newe borne
babes we come to heare.
            
               Touch no vncleane thing,
               2. Cor. 6. 17 ſayth the Lord,
becauſe ſinne will cling to the conſcience
like bird-lime to a feather, therefore we muſt
not touch it: it muſt not haue a finger of vs.
When the Diuell made his reentrie, he tooke
vnto himſelfe ſeuen other ſpirites worſe thenIoh. 15. 5.
               
himſelfe. Thus one diuell brings moe diuels,
and one ſinne pulles on more ſinnes, as one
crow calleth many crowes to a carrion: and
therefore as the leauen was hid in the meale
till all was ſowred: ſo let vs neuer reſt ſeaſoning
our ſoules till all be ſanctified: for then
wee bee fit to vnderſtand euery part of Gods
will, when we bee in euery part newe borne againe.
            Furthermore, this poynt diſcouereth and
deſcrieth a groſſe errour in Poperie, concerning
the works of nature, which are wrought
and effected by the ſingle vertue and power
of our owne free will without the finger and
grace of GOD. For whereas the Papiſts acquite
manie of them, and cleare them from
ſinne, as if an vnregenerate man, by the
ſtrength and abilitie of his owne will, as it
were mounted vpon his owne wings, were
able to aſpire to the accompliſhment of holie
deſires: wee ſee that the Apoſtle in this
place maketh no other account of the vnregenerate,Eph. 4. 14.
then of dead men: and therefore
that they muſt bee quickened and new borne
againe, before they can practiſe or performe
any vitall action in the life of GOD. Chriſt
is reſembled to a vine, and wee to the braunches:
for that all the iuice and ſappe whereby
the braunches ſpring and liue, iſſueth and
ariſeth from the roote of the vine: ſo all the

grace and goodneſſe that is in vs, droppeth
and diſtilleth from the riches of the perſon
of Ieſus Chriſt. Before GOD bleſſed Sara,
ſhe was barren, and childleſſe: ſo vntill God
bleſſe our hearts, they bee wicked, and fruitleſſe.
And therefore as an vncleane fountaine
cannot ſende foorth ſweete water, nor a bad
tree bring foorth good fruite: no more can
the corrupt and wicked heart of the vnregenerate,
bud and bring foorth anie good
and vertuous actions. Thus much of our
condition and preparation, whereby wee
haue learned with how holie, and with how
ſanctified affections, wee ought to repaire to
the hearing of the worde. Now followeth
our duetie and affection when wee are newe
borne.
            
            
               As newe borne babes deſire. Wee muſt not
bee children in wauering and inconſtancie,
becauſe the Apoſtle ſayth, that GOD hath
furniſhed his Church with Paſtors and Teachers,Mat. 12. 41
               That we bee no more children wauering
and carried about with euery winde of doctrine,
reeling from faith to faith, from religion to
religion, like a drunken man from wall to
wall. Nor we muſt not be children in vnderſtanding
and knowledge, becauſe the ſame
Apoſtle ſayth,1. Cor. 14. 20. 
               Brethren be not children in vnderſtanding,
but concerning maliciouſnes bee
children, but in vnderſtanding be of a ripe age.
               
But wee muſt bee children in an ardent and
burning affectiō, in thirſting and longing for
the word of God. Bleſſed are they which hunger
and thirſt after righteouſnes,
               Matth. 7. 6. 
               for they ſhall
bee filled, becauſe God filles the hungrie with
good things, but the rich and the wealthie he
diſmiſſeth emptie. The kingdome of God ſuffereth
violence, becauſe none can enter at
the narrowe gate, but ſuch as ſtriue, & throng
and thruſt to enter. And therefore as when
the damme feedes her young, euery bird gapeth,
and ſtruggleth, and ſtretcheth out the
necke to receiue the foode: So when wee
come to heare, euery man muſt reach, and
ſtretch out his heart to receiue the word. For
then indeede the word worketh moſt effectually
in vs, when our hearts before are kindled
and inflamed with deſire of it, like waxe
which receiueth any ſtampe after it is heated.
The Shunamites child which was raiſed by Eliſha,
ſo ſoone as his fleſh beganne to waxe
warme, neeſed, and opened his eyes, and reuiued
agayne: So when wee waxe warme in
the ſpirite, and conceiue a deſire and a thirſt
of the word of GOD, it is an vndoubted token
that wee are borne agayne, that there is
breath and a ſoule within vs, and we are not
vtterly dead in the life of grace. As contrariwiſe,
they which haue not a ſharpe and hungrie
appetite to bee fedde and ſatisfied with

               the milke of the word, are but dead carcaſſes,
and skinnes full of rotten bones: ſo that this
Citie which ſhoulde bee the glorie of the
kingdome, may well bee tearmed Golgotha,
The place of dead mens skulles, in regard there
are ſo manie thouſand ſoules dead in ſinne,
dead in deſire, who haue no thirſt and hunger
for the word of God. If they haue a bare reading
Miniſter, as children haue a puppit to
play with, they thinke themſelues in a happy
ſtate: as if Eliſhaes ſtaffe could raiſe the dead
child without Eliſha, and the word giue life
without a preacher. It may bee they can bee
content with Micah, to accept a Leuite if
they light vpon him: But who will ſende to
Hieruſalem the ſchoole of the Prophets, as
Saul ſent to Bethelem to fetch Dauid for his
comfort? I thinke you know my meaning. I
would not wiſh you wait till preachers offer
themſelues to inſtruct you, but to ſende to
the ſchooles of learning, to prouide godly &
able men, who may miniſter the word in due
ſeaſon. Balaake, becauſe he longed for Balaam,
went to the vtmoſt coaſt of the countrey
to meete him. The father, becauſe he longed
for his prodigall ſonne, ranne to kiſſe him a
great way off. Dauid becauſe he longed for
the Arke, went and brought it vp from Kiriathaim:
So then indeed we deſire the word of
God, when we will not ſtay till it come vnto

vs, but we will preuent it, and goe to the vtmoſt
borders of our coūtrey to fetch it home
vnto vs. We muſt deſire the milke of the word,
and we muſt deſire it as babes, that is, in three
reſpects.
            Firſt they ſay children ſo ſoone as they are
borne into the worlde, preſently crie out for
the mothers dugge: ſo muſt wee ſo ſoone as
wee feele the grace of God to haue renewed
vs, while wee are yet hote from the wombe,
hunger and thirſt for the milke of the word. If
the mother ſhould deferre to giue her childe
ſucke, were it able to liue a moneth, or a
weeke, or a day? No more is our faith able to
ſuſtaine and ſupport it ſelfe, vnleſſe it be preſently
nouriſhed with the foode of life.Mar. 5. 46. Chriſt
ſo ſoone as he had rayſed vp Iairus daughter,
commanded her meate, as if it were in vaine
for vs to be quickned by the finger of his power
vnles we be fed by the word of his grace:
and therfore Eden was watered ſo ſoone as it
was planted,Gen. 2. 6. to ſhew that we muſt be ſtrengthened
ſo ſoon as we are inſtructed: ſo that it
is a great fault among vs, when GOD hath
quickned vs with his ſpirit, & we perceiue his
graces to budde and to bloſſome in vs, that
we preſently prouide not moyſture to nouriſh
and to preſerue them. We count it a miracle
that Elias liued fortie dayes without
foode: and yet we after many yeares of famine

ſtill poſte off the feeding of our ſoules.
We thinke it alwayes too ſoone to beginne,
though we begin then when we are ready to
end, as the rich man, who then went in hand
to inlarge his barnes, when hee was euen at
deaths doore to reſigne his life. As Chriſte
was then ſent for to heale the Rulers daughter,Mar. 7. 23.
when ſhe was ready to departe: ſo, manie
neuer deſire the preachers company till they
be ready to die. They ſay that the time is not
yet come that the Lords houſe ſhoulde bee
built: not yet time to ſanctifie their ſoules
for God; not yet time to prouide for the milke
of the word. And thus we poſte off from day
to day, from yeare to yeare, till wee bee arreſted
by death: As the bad Lawyer driues
off his Client from terme to terme, till the
ſuite be loſt. Lot was ſo long loytering and
trifling in Sodome, that the Angell was
fayne to plucke him out with violence; and
certainly vnleſſe the Lorde by the good
meanes of his prouidence ſhould plucke vs
out of ignorance and darkeneſſe wherein we
vſe ſuch trifling, and plunging, and delaying,
that ſcarce one of a thouſand would bee
ſaued.
            Wherefore (beloued in Chriſt) if Paule
haue planted you in the true fayth, deſire
alſo an Apollo to water you: If the foundation
be layde by a maiſter builder: ſeeke

out a skilfull workeman, who may roofe it
alſo: if ye haue receiued one grace, ſpeedily
deſire the preaching of the word, that it may
increaſe and grow vp by dreſſing and manuring
vnto a double grace: for euen the beſt
giftes will wither and decay in you, vnleſſe
they be preſently watered with the word.
            
            Againe we knowe, that children are ſo
greedily carried with a deſire of the foode,
that when hunger aſſayles them, they neither
regarde leiſure, nor neceſſitie, nor willingnes
of the mothers, but all excuſes & buſines
ſet apart, ſo ſoone as they crie for it,
they muſt be fedde; Euen ſo wee muſt not
thinke it enough to deſire the worde, but we
muſt bee earneſt and feruent, and importunate
in calling and crying for it. A notable
parable is in Luke,Luk. 11. 5. how one called for bread
in the night, the other anſwered that he was
in bed; which ſeemed a reaſonable anſwere,
and yet it would not ſerue: So we haue long
called (my brethren) and wee haue a great
while craued the bread of life, though it may
ſeeme a reaſonable anſwere, that they cannot
giue it vs without impoueriſhing themſelues
and their children, who are fat and inriched
with the Miniſters mayntenance: yet
we ought not to be daunted and diſcouraged
ſo, but to continue asking ſtil, as Peter
continued knocking til the doore was opened.Act. 12.
               
For as Iehu was knowen by his furious
marching; ſo you may know a faythfull and
true Chriſtian, by his zealons perfecting of
holy purpoſes. The mother doth not alwayes
feede her childe for loue, but many times to
keep it ſtill and quiet, is conſtrayned to leaue
all, and giue it ſucke: So if our mother neyther
reuerenced God, nor feared men, yet if
we would be earneſt and importunate with
her, if we would continually crye and call
for it, as babes doe for the milke, ſhe would
feede vs at laſt, if not of loue, yet at leaſt to be
eaſed of vs. It is an olde ſaying, that he which
asketh faintly teacheth vs to denie him: If
we will teach men to graunt vs, we muſt aske
it with courage and conſtancie. And therefore
as Iacob wreſtled with the Angel and
ſaid, I will not let thee goe vntill thou bleſſe me:
ſo muſt our requeſts wreſtle with the Gouernours
of our land, and ſay, I will not let you
reſt vntill you heare me.
            This doctrine enditeth and conuinceth a
great number of vs, who though we haue a
deſire to the worde, yet we are ſo chill and
ſo colde, and ſo looſe in it, that in euery croſſe
euent, we ſtand ſtone ſtill. If it be but a ſtraw
it is a blocke in our way,Ier. 9. 3. becauſe as Ieremie
ſpeaketh, We haue no courage for the truth vpon
earth: we haue ſome loue to the trueth,
but we haue no courage to labour and aduenture

for it, as a merchant that would gladly
gaine, but dares not venture the ſeas for
feare of drowning. If the people be ſomwhat
backward or a Preacher cannot be procured
at the firſt daſh, while the fitte is freſh vpon
vs, we take our diſcharge, and caſt off the care
for euer after. The ſlouthfull man ſayes, There
is a Lyon in the way: And ſo we diſcourage
our ſelues in ſeeking good things, becauſe
there is paines in the way. But if we deſire the
word, as babes doe milke, we muſt neuer reſt to
deſire it, vntill we haue it.
            Laſtly, we know, children are continually
crauing foode; a little pauſe, and then to
the breaſt againe: and therefore we muſt not
bee gorged and glutted with once ſeruing,
but continually deſire it: We muſt be of Elias
diet, bread and fleſh in the morning, and
at euening too; So morning and euening
our ſoules muſt bee fedde. The Apoſtle exhorteth,
Let the worde of GOD dwell in you,
               Col. 3. 16.
becauſe it muſt not take vp a nights lodging
and ſo be gone, but it muſt be a continuall
reſidence and abode in our hearts. Though
the ground be good, yet it muſt haue the former
and the latter rayne to make it fertile,
and yet many of vs thinke to grow greene
with one ſhower, and to goe vnto heauen
with one ſermon. It is reported of the faythfull,
that they continued daylie in the temple,

as if a Sabbaoth dayes exerciſe would not
ſerue the turne,Act. 2. 6. vnleſſe we had ſome ordinarie
repaſt in the worke dayes alſo: and
therefore as the lampe burned continually in
the Temple without quenching: So the word
muſt continually ſound in our eares without
intermiſſion. Thus you ſee (beloued) that
if you wil deſire the milke of the word as newe
borne babes, you muſt deſire it preſently without
delay, importunately without fainting, &
continually without loathing, and being ſatisfied
with it.
            Now we come to the matter and obiect
which we muſt deſire; namely, our food and
nouriſhment in Chriſt, which is here called
the milke of the worde. To this our Sauiour recalleth
vs from al our dayn
                  •••
               s,Ioh. 6. 27. Labour not
for the meate that periſheth, but for the meat
which endureth to eternal life. For the word
is euerlaſting foode and immortal ſeede, becauſe
it makes vs immortal,1. Pet. 4. 23. and to laſt for
euer. We deſire wealth, honour, and pomp,
and pleaſure, and euery thing, ſaue the milke
of the word which we ſhould deſire, like Adam
who had al trees, and yet liked none but
the forbidden tree.Mat. 13. 22 There is a deſire of the
worde, but it is a tare to choak the good corne;
There is a deſire of money, but it is the roote
of al euil;1. Tim. 6. There is a deſire of the fleſh, but it

fighteth and wageth warre againſt the ſpirit;Iam. 4. 1.
There is a deſire of preheminence, but it is
ſwelling and ambitious; There is a deſire of
reuenge, but it ariſeth from a raſh and carnal
ſpirite; There is a deſire of praiſe, but it is curſed
and phariſaicall;Luk. 9. 54 the bleſſed and holy deſire
is, to deſire the milke of the word. When
Ionathan ſaw the hony dropping, he muſt
needs be licking: ſo when ye ſee the milke of
the Goſpel ye muſt deſire to be ſucking. Of al
the bleſſings of Canaan this was the chiefeſt,
that it flowed with milke and honie; and this
incouraged the Iſraelites to trauail to it, in
the deſart to poſſeſſe it. The worde is a land
flowing with better milke and hony, and we
muſt not think any paine or toyle too much
to attaine it.Ioh. 12. 45. God hath many names in Scripture
to make vs conceiue more honorably of
him: ſo hath the word many titles to make it
more amiable: It is called a lanterne to direct
vs,Pſal. 119. 10 
               a medicine to heale vs, a guide to conduct
vs, a bit to reſtraine vs, a ſworde to defend vs,
water to waſh vs, fire to inflame vs, ſalt to
ſeaſon vs, milke to nouriſh vs, wine to reioice
vs, rayne to refreſh vs, a treaſure to inrich vs,
and the keye to open and vnlocke heauen
gates vnto vs. Thus the worde is named in al
things, that we ſhould onely deſire it in ſtead
of all things. And ſurely therefore the worde
is in ſo ſmall requeſt among vs, becauſe wee

know not what bleſſings it bringeth with it.
It is the word of ſaluation, becauſe it ſaueth
the ſoule from pyning, as the corne which
Ioſeph ſent, did Iacobs houſe from famine.
So that as Eliſha ſayd of Iordan, waſh and be
cleanſed; ſo may we ſay of the word, Heare
it and be ſaued. It is called the worde of life,
becauſe it reuiueth the ſpirite, as Eliſhaes
bones reuiued the Iſraelites. It is called the
worde of reconciliation, becauſe it is like a golden
chayne to linke GOD and vs together.
And in regarde hereof,Mat. 13. 16 it is called a iewell of
ineſtimable price, as if all the treaſure in Egypt
were not wealthy enough to buy it. And therfore,
as Dauid longed for the Well of Bethlehem;
ſo muſt we long and languiſh for the
milke of the worde.
            
            The Word is reſembled to milke in three
reſpects. Firſt, becauſe it is the onely foode
of the faithfull, as milke is the onely and proper
foode of babes. Secondly, becauſe it is
not hard and intricate, but playne and eaſie to
be conceiued, as milke is eaſie to be digeſted.
Thirdly, becauſe it is ſweete and comfortable
to the ſoule, as milke is ſweete and pleaſaunt
in taſte.
            For the firſt poynt, the Lord chargeth the
Iſraelites,
               Deu. 12. 32. 
               to doe whatſoeuer he had commaunded,
and not to adde or diminiſh any thing. And
Ioſua, Ioſiah, Ezra, and the reſt, when the
                  •
               
               
would renew the Lordes couenant with the
people, reade nothing but the lawe, to ſhewe
that it was the only rule and ſquare of al their
duety:Eſay. 8. 20. and therefore Eſay recalleth vs to the
lawe and to the teſtimonie, &c. and Chriſt
ſends vs to ſearch the Scriptures,
               Iohn. 5. 39▪
                
               becauſe by
them we haue eternall life: and therefore the
Popiſh church (which nor content with the
milke of the Gospell) hath broached manie
heathen traditions, and vnwritten traſh; doth
not feede but choke and poyſon her children
with them, and depriue the Lords people of
this foode of life, and like curſed Philiſtines
ſtop vp the wells of water which other haue
digged: what doe they elſe but ſtarue and
famiſh ſo manie Nations? For well may their
hedge prieſts like drie Nurſes delight and diſport
the children for a ſeaſon; but when
hunger bites; when the diſtreſſed conſcience
would bee fed and comforted, then they are
not able to affoorde them the very crummes
from Chriſts table, and therefore wee muſt
needes account the eſtate of thoſe congregations
to bee full of dread and horror which
haue not this milke of the word to feede their
ſoules, which want a good ſteward to giue
them their meate in due ſeaſon; which like
the AEgyptians lye crawling in the darke,
when other churches enioy moſt comfortable
light. Iaacob forſooke the bleſſed land of

Canaan when it had no bread, and can we be
enamored of thoſe aſſemblies where there is
no ſoules foode? If ye did conſider (my beloued)
that ye cannot be nouriſhed vnto eternall
life, but by the milke of the word; ye would
rather deſire your bodies might be without
ſouls than your churches without preachers.
I tremble to thinke how oft you haue heard
this, and yet how little you haue performed it.
For the ſecond poynt, that the doctrine of
the Goſpel is plaine, appeareth, when the
wiſe man ſaith, Al the words of his mouth are
plaine & eaſie to him that wil vnderſtand.
               Pro. 8. 9. 
               The
teſtimony of the Lord is ſure & giueth light to
the ſimple.
               Pſal. 19. 7 
               If our Goſpel be hid (ſaith the Apoſtle)
it is hid vnto them that periſh:
               2 Cor 4. 3. for as the
Sunne which was made to lighten all things,
is moſt light; ſo the word which was made
to cleare all things, is moſt cleare: ſo that if
there be no communion betweene light and
darknes,Pſal. 119. 5 & the word of God be a lanterne vnto
our feete, & a light vnto our pathes; then it is
euident that the Word hath no darknes in it.
If we ſee not all thinges, the fault is not in the
light, but in the eie; as Agar could not ſee
the water which yet was before her, & therfore
our aduerſaries falſly charge the Scriptures
of exceeding hardnes and intricatenes▪
When the ſpies were returned from Canaan
                  •
               
they could not ſay,Num. 13. but that it was a good

lande; but they ſayd it was hard to come by:
So the Papiſts muſt needes confeſſe, that
the Scripture is a good Word, and yet to diſſwade
the Lordes people from a ſerious and
diligent ſearch of it; they bring vp a ſlaunder
and ſay; it hath many obſcurities and bypathes.
But as Eliſha ſaw the horſes and fiery
chariots which his enemies could not ſee: So
(beloued) if yee come with a faithfull and a
holy heart to the Worde and to the Scripture,
yee ſhall ſee that plainneſſe and eaſineſſe
in the doctrine which our aduerſaries
cannot ſee. For the third poynte, that the
Goſpell is the onely comfort and conſolation
of a faithfull ſoule; The Prophet Ieremie
ſaith, Thy wordes were found by mee, and I did
eate them,
               Ier. 15. 16. 
               and thy worde was vnto mee the ioye
and reioycing of my heart. Thy testimonies
haue I taken for an heritage for euer:
               Pſal. 119. 111 
               for they
are the ioye of my heart. As a man will bee
glad to be hired to a noble man: ſo Dauid
when hee had gotten the milke of the Worde,
reioyced as much as if hee had been hyred
vnto God: and therefore, in all the ſtorie of
the Acts, we ſee ioy and comfort to haue followed
the word, as Eliſha followed Elias, and
would not leaue him. So the wiſe men reioyced
exceedingly when they ſaw the ſtarre
which ſhould leade them to Chriſt: ſo yee
haue matter of great ioy & comfort, when ye

heare the woord preached which ſhall carrie
you to heauen, like the chariots which conueyed
Iaacob into AEgypt. There be many
Micols in this land which haue mocked King
Dauid for dauncing before the Arke. There
are many which terme vs heady and fooliſh
men, becauſe we come and throng, & preaſe
thus to a ſermon: but as Chriſt ſaid, Father
forgiue them, they knowe not what they doe; So
God forgiue them, they know not what they
ſay: for if they did feele the calme of conſcience,
the ioy of heart, the conſolation of ſpirite,
and the exceeding and euerlaſting comforts
in God, which the faithfull poſſeſſe and
enioye by hearing the word, they would account
vs not onely fooles, but ſtarke mad, if al
the pleaſures, or profites, or daungers of the
world ſhould withdrawe or with-holde vs
from it. So much for our food; now we come
to the qualitie of our foode.
            It muſt be ſincere. Sincere both in his ſauor,
and alſo in effect and operation: for, as in nouriſhing
our bodie naturally, our blood cannot
be good if our diet be vnholſome: ſo in feeding
our ſoules ſpiritually, neither our hearts
nor affections, nor our words, nor our workes
can be good, vnleſſe the milke bee wholſome
whereupon we feed, and therefore, as our Sauiour
b
                  •
               ds vs take heede what we heare: ſo the
Apoſtle to the like effect,Math. 4. 24. giues a caueat to

take heede vpon what we feede; for there is a
pure and freſh doctrine, in. Ier. 1. 7. and there is a
ſower and leauened doctrine, in Matth. 16. 6.
There is a new wine of the Goſpel in Matth. 9.
17. & there is mixed wine in the cup of Fornicators
in Reu. 17. 4. There are wholſome wordes
in 2. Tim. 1. 13. and there are corrupt and vnwholſome
words, Epheſ 4. 29. There is a doctrine
of God, Ioh. 7. 16. and there is a doctrine
of Diuels. 1. Tim. 4. 1. There is an edifying and
a building worde, and there is a fretting and a
cankred word, 2. Tim. 2. 17. As the Prophets
children cryed out death in the pot; ſo ſome
places may ſay, death in our foode: and hereof
it is, that we are ſo often for warned in Scripture
to beware of the leauen of the Scribes and
Phariſies; to take heede of the Prophets which
come to vs in ſheepes cloathing: to beware that
no man ſeduce vs through Philoſophie: to trie
the ſpirites whether they be of God or no; as we
muſt taſte our foode before wee digeſt it: to
trie our gold before wee treaſure it: Chriſt
taſted the vineger but would not drinke; ſo
when wee taſte falſe doctrine we muſt reiect
it. There are many greedy of milke, but it is
Dragons milke: they take great paines to
learne, but it is to learne the language of Aſhdod,
& not the language of Canaan: they run
to heare, but to heare fables and vntruthes.
Nimrod was as paineful in building of Babel,

as Salomon in rearing the holy temple. Micah
entertained a Leuit, & conſecrated his ſiluer
but to an idolatrous worſhip. The Iſraelites
melted their eare-rings, but to erect a calfe.
Iezabel fed a great rout of trencher chaplains,
but to honor Baal. Many deſire to haue milke,
but they wil haue it from dragons poyſoned;
and therefore we are here warned to deſire the
ſincere milke, &c. For the Lord will not haue
the wine of his word to be mingled and maſhed
with the water of humane inuentions.
He that hath my word,
               Ier. 23. 28. 
               let him ſpeake faithfully:
what is the chaffe to the Wheat? God would
not haue one fielde ſowed with two kindes of
graine; to ſhew vs that hee would not haue
one heart filled with two kindes of doctrine.
Dagon could not ſtand with the Lords Arke;
no more can Chriſts trueth holde any fellowſhip
with the word of error: and therefore as
the miniſters muſt beware that they make
not merchandiſe of the word of God, ſo muſt
the people alſo, that they drink not any milke
but that which is ſincere. And here ye ought
(my beloued) more carefully to behaue your
ſelues, as yee ſee the diuell more ſubtilly to
aſſault you, and vnder the cloake of zeale and
reformation, to bring into the Lordes ſanctuarie
moſt wicked prophanation.
            As a man will be more warie to trie euery
peece of gold, when he ſees many counterfeit

and Flemiſh angels to flie abroad: ſo, when
yee ſee many ſortes of doctrine, crawling
daily like Locuſts out of the bottomles pit,
yee muſt bee more diligent to taſte and trie
which is ſound and ſincere. It followeth:
            
               That ye may grow by it. Here is the end of
our hearing, That we may grow in grace and
increaſe in the faith of righteouſnes: for the
faithfull are called the trees of righteouſnes,
               Eſay. 61. 3.
becauſe they muſt bee alwaies ſpringing:1. Pet. 2▪ 3. 
               liuing
ſtones, becauſe they muſt growe in the
building:Mat. 25. 16 
               good ſeruants, which muſt trade and
traffique the Lords talents to increaſe: fruitfull
branches,
               Ioh 15. 2. which muſt be purged & pruned
by the hande of the heauenly husbandman.
Iſaac muſt not alwaies hang on Saraes
breaſt, but muſt be weaned: ſo we muſt not
alwaies be children, but grow vp and increaſe
and profite more and more. As the ſtar neuer
ceaſed till it came ouer Chriſt; ſo we muſt
neuer reſt walking till wee come to GOD.
If we haue faith, we muſt proceede from faith
to fayth:
               Ioh. 1. 17. if we haue loue,
               1. The. 3. 12 we muſt increaſe and
abide in loue:
               Ioh. 2. 17. if we haue zeale, we muſt endeuour
to be conſumed with zeale: if wee be liberall
to the diſtreſſed ſaints of GOD, wee muſt
double our liberalitie, as Elkana gaue Annah
a double portion.
            If we read the Scriptures,
               1. Tim. 4. 13 we muſt go on and
continue in prayer:
               Ioh. 12. 12. if we giue almes, we muſt

ſtep on one foote further,2. Cor. 9. 7. and giue them with
cheerefulnes: and thus as the Eagle continually
ſoareth till ſhe come to the higheſt: ſo
muſt we ſtill increaſe till we come to perfection.
Let vs be led forward vnto perfection:
               Heb. 6. 1. as
if a faithfull man were like a ſhip vnder ſayle,
neuer anchoring till he arriue at heauen. The
greater is our ſinne which heare, and heare,
but are neuer the more reformed for our hearing,
like Pharaohs ill fauored kine which deuoured
the fat kine, but remained as il fauoured
as they were before; ſo many of vs, when
we haue lugged the breaſt almoſt drie, after
twentie or thirty yeares feeding, are as skregged
and leane as we were before. No man almoſt
among vs is more zealous, no mā more
faithfull, no man more conſtant for the truth,
no man more feruent in religion, no man
more ſanctified, no man more diligent in
practiſing, nor leſſe vitious now, then he was
one hundred ſermons a goe, as if wee were
night black-rauens, which cannot bee waſhed
with all the ſope of the Goſpel. Though
wee haue long heard and ſtil deſire to heare,
yet we doe not grow by our hearing, wee are
verie dwarfes in Chriſt ſcant able to goe, little
in faith, little in loue, little in patience, little
in obedience, little in zeal, like Zacheus,
ſo little that wee cannot ſee Chriſt. This is an
vndoubted euidence that we haue not fleſhly

but ſtony hearts, which though they bee
waſhed, yet they cannot be watred with the
ſweete ſhowers of the Goſpell: For, is there
not in euery tauerne, and in euery ſhop, and
in euery houſe, and in euery hall, as much
couetouſnes, as much briberie, as much coſening,
as much wantonnes, as much maliciouſnes
after this long ſhine of the word, as
ther was before? Are we not now as ſlothfull
in Gods ſeruice, as diſſolute in the practiſe
of Chriſtian dueties, as diſhoneſt in our dealing
between man and man, as proud in our
attire, as light in our behauiour, as hypocritical
abroad, as ſinnefull at home, as we were
before? And what is the reaſon hereof, but
that we come to the fountayn rather, to draw,
than to drinke: rather to heare, than to bee
bettered, and ſanctified, and increaſed by
our hearing? One ſort heareth not at all, like
Eutichus which was ſleeping when Paul was
preaching:Act. 20. 9. another ſort forgets all as Nabuchadnezzar
did his dreame, the moſt ſort remembers
all, but will make no practiſe of it
as a Carpenter which ſhoulde ſquare all by
rule, and ſticks it at his backe, and workes all
by aime. But aſſuredly (my beloued) it were
better you neuer heard, then thus in deſpight
of God to abuſe your hearing. If I had not
ſpoken vnto them (ſayth Chriſt) they ſhoulde
haue had no ſin,
               Ioh. 15. 22. 
               but now haue they no cloake for

their ſinne. What cloake can yee haue when
God offereth grace, and ye wilfully refuſe it?
As meat, the more a man receiueth, the more
it diſtempereth, if it be not digeſted; ſo the
more yee learne, and the more yee heare, the
greater is your ſin if ye grow not by it: if the
ſeruant which hid his talent in a napkin was
ſo handled, what ſhalbe done to them which
ſuffer their talent to periſh? And therefore
euery man muſt beware how he heareth, euery
man muſt take heede that he receiue not the
grace of God in vaine, that he deſire the milke of
the word, to bee bettered and increaſed by it.
Wherefore whoſoener thou bee that heareth
this, and will heare other; ſearch thy conſcience,
whether thou be growne in any vertue
ſince thou heardeſt the laſt ſermon: conſider
what ſinne thou haddeſt the laſt Sabboath,
which thou haſt not this Sabboath? If thou
finde no change, then the Word hath not had
his working in thee: thou art not inereaſed
by the food which thou receiuedſt. Will not,
a man be angry to ſet his childe to ſchoole,
and finde him alwaies at his A, B, C. or the
firſt principles of ſanctification? So will God
be diſpleaſed, if wee be negligent and ſlacke
and neuer take out his leſſons, but ſtand at
a ſtay.
            I know many of you will giue me the hearing
of this, as you haue done many of my

brethren heretofore: but as the worme ſtroke
Ionahs guord, and it died in the morning: ſo
by the next morning a greedy worme of couetouſnes,
or the like ſinne wil haue periſhed
all. If it doe ſo, knowe the Iudge ſtandeth before
the doore ready euery houre to ſummon
you by death, to make your appearaunce at
the barre of iuſtice, and to giue vp your account
for euery talent, yea, for euery leſſon
that ye haue learned and left vnpractiſed.
            As for you, (if any of you) walke in dutifull
obedience to the word, I beſeech you in the
feare of God, and in the bowels and loue of
Ieſus Chriſt, that yee will abounde and increaſe
yet more and more, and contend by
all meanes to put in practiſe & exerciſe thoſe
things that yee heare, that ſo at length when
yee be ripe for the ſickle, and the great day of
harueſt be come, ye may be gathered as good
corne into the Lords garner, and be inueſted
in the holy heauens with that bleſſed
kingdome which God hath prouided
for them that ſerue
and feare him.
Amen.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            THE BANQVET
of Jobs Children.
            
               IOB. 1. 4. 5. verſes.
               
                  4 And his ſons went and banquetted in their
houſes euery one his daye: and ſent and called
their three ſisters to eate and drinke with them.
                  5 And when the daies of their banquetting
were gone about, Iob ſent and ſanctified them,
and roſe vp early in the morning and offered
burnt offerings, according to the number of
them all. For Iob thought, it may bee that my
ſonnes haue ſinned and blasphemed God in their
hearts. Thus did Iob euery day.
               
            
            
               THis booke is a ſtory of patient
Iob, to ſhew how God can deale
with all, and how they ſhoulde
receiue all thinges at his hand,
ſeeing the moſt innocent man
in the world, when God ſhould try him, was
brought ſo low, that the Diuel had power to
lay vpon him what torment he would, death
onely excepted, and yet he ſtoode to it with

ſuch conſtancy, that he ſaith, though the Lord
kill mee, yet will I trust in him, the thirteenth
Chapter of Iob, and fifteenth verſe. Such
power was giuen vnto his faith, and loue, and
patience, that they ouercame the Diuell,
which ſaide that if hee might haue leaue to
plague him, hee would make him blaspheme
God to his face, verſe, 11. Therefore God
would haue this victory to bee recorded for
all ſuch as are ſicke, or ſore, or needy, or oppreſſed,
that whatſoeuer paine we ſuffer, wee
may remember that Iobs paine was ſharper
than this, and yet it coulde not make him ſo
impatient: but when like a man hee was offended
with his torments; like an holy man
he was more offended with himſelfe, and angrie
with his anger. Therefore at laſt God returned
to him, and remoued his troubles and
made his end more honourable than his beginning,
as if he ſhuld ſay, Thus it ſhal be done
to the man which is not offended with my chaſtiſementes.
Now to our purpoſe, in the firſt
verſe of this Chapter, the holy Ghoſt ſheweth
what a good man Iob was, ſaying; that
hee was an vpright and iust man, one that
feared God and eſchewed euill. In the ſecond
verſe, he ſheweth what ſtore of children Iob
had: ſaying, hee had ſeauen ſonnes and three
daughters. In the third verſe hee ſheweth
what ſtore of riches Iob had: ſaying, his ſubſtance

was ſeuen thouſand ſheepe, and three
thouſand Camels, and fiue hundred yoke of Oxen,
and fiue hundred Aſſes, &c. In the fourth
verſe hee returneth againe to his children,
ſhewing how they were occupied, before the
winde came and blewe the houſe vpon their
heads, ſaying, his ſonnes went and banquetted,
in their houſes euery one his daye, and called
their three ſisters to eate and drinke with them.
In the fift verſe hee commeth againe to Iob,
and ſhewes a proofe of his vertues, which he
commended him for before, ſaying, that
when his ſonnes had banquetted, hee ſent for
them, and ſanctified them, and roſe vp earely,
&c.
            
            So if ye aske what his ſonnes did, the holy
Ghoſt ſaith, that they banquetted. If yee
aske where, he ſaith, in their owne houſes. If ye
aske when, he ſaith, euery one kept his daye. If
yee aske who were the gueſts, hee ſaith that
one inuited another, and the other inuited him
againe, and they called their ſisters to them.
and ſo they made merrie together. If yee aske
what father Iob did, the ſtory ſaith, that after
euery feast, first he ſent for his ſonnes, and then
he ſanctified them, and then hee ſacrificed for
them: the reaſon is added, becauſe Iob thought,
It may be that may ſonnes haue ſinned and blaſphemed
God in their hearts, his zeale in this action
is declared by three circumſtances.
            
               
Firſt, that he roſe vp early in the morning.
Secondly, that he offered ſo many ſacrifices as
he had ſonnes. Thirdly, that he perfourmed this
offering euery day while their feaſt laſted. Of
euery circumſtance a little, becauſe ſome had
rather heare many thinges then learne one.
Firſt heere is to bee noted that amongſt the
bleſſings of Iob, his children are reckoned
firſt, ſo ſoone as the holy Ghoſt was paſt
his ſpirituall bleſſings which he mentioneth
in the firſt verſe of all, before all his other
bleſſings, landes and houſes, and goods, and
cattell, and friends, and ſeruants, hee ſpeakes
of his children, as the chiefeſt treaſure which
Iob had next vnto his vertues; although hee
was counted the greateſt man for riches and
cattels, and all things elſe in all the eaſt parts,
3. verſe. Therefore the Diuell when hee had
taken away all his other riches, tooke away
his children laſt of al, trying him as it were by
degrees, as if he ſhould ſay, I haue a greater
plague for him yet, if the looſing of his goods
and ſtealing of his cattell, and burning of his
houſes, and ſlaying of his ſeruauntes will not
moue him, yet I know what will rowſe him:
when his children are all feaſting together I
will raiſe a mighty wind, and blow downe the
houſe vppon their heads, and kill euery ſonne &
daughter which he hath at a clap. Indeed this
newes frighted him foreſt, as appeareth in

the 20. verſe, his patience was ſo great, that
when they brought him word of his oxen, &
camels, and aſſes, and ſheepe, he neuer ſhrinked,
we doe not reade that he made any anſwer;
as though he cared not for thē, but whē
he heard that his deare children, ſeuen ſonnes,
and three daughters, after he had brought thē
vp to ripe yeares, were ſlaine all at once, then
the ſtory ſaith, that he roſe vp from his ſeat, and
rent his garments, and ſhaued his head, and fell
downe to the ground and cryed; Naked came I
out of my mothers wombe, and naked ſhall I returne
againe. So euen the diuell knoweth what
a man loueth, and what a bleſſing it is to haue
children, therefore when God commaunded
the man and the woman to increaſe and multiply,
it is ſaide before, that God bleſſed them.
Gen. 1. 28. which was the firſt bleſſing that
was giuen to man, which is called a bleſſing,
The bleſſing of children. Againe, when God
ſpake the ſame words to Noah & his ſonnes,
it is ſaid before, that God bleſſed Noah & his
ſons Gen. 9. 4. ſo children came ſtill vnder the
name of bleſſing. Thus God himſelf ſheweth
that children are his gifts to make you thankfull
for them, and carefull of them as Iob was.
And therefore ſome men haue more riches,
and ſome leſſe, & ſome none, becauſe it is the
bleſſing of God (as Salomon ſaith) which maketh
rich. Pro. 10. 22. ſo ſome men haue many

children, & ſome few, & ſome none, becauſe
it is the bleſſing of God, as Dauid ſaith, which
ſendeth children. Pſal. 128. But this is the difference
betweene temporall bleſſings and
ſpirituall bleſſings: that ſpirituall bleſſings
are ſimplie good, and therefore doe all men
good that enioy them: as faith, and loue, and
patiēce can neuer hurt a man, but better him:
and temporall bleſsings are as he which hath
them, to good man riches are good, honors
are good, health is good, libertie is good, becauſe
he doth good with them: but to an euil
man they are euill, becauſe they make him
worſe, and he doth euill with them: as Ieroboam
had not done ſo much hurt, if he had
not been in ſuch honour. Therefore we pray
for health, and wealth, and honour, and reſt,
and libertie, and life, with a caution, If it bee
Gods will: As Chriſt praied for the remouing
of his croſſe; becauſe we knowe not whether
they be good or euill, whether they will make
vs better or worſe, or whether wee ſhall doe
good with them, or hurt. Thus when Iob had
his cattell, and his houſes, and his friends, and
his ſeruants, and his children about him, hee
was like the man of whom Dauid ſpeakes,
The righteous man ſhall flouriſh like a palme
tree, Pſalm. 91. 13. Therefore the diuell ſayd,
that God had made an hedge about Iob. verſ. 10.

As an hedge goeth round about a garden: ſo
Gods bleſsings went round about Iob, according
to that Pſal. 33. 10. Him which trusteth
in the Lord, mercie ſhall embrace on euery ſide.
            
            Thus Iob was endowed with children, but
how his children were affected we cannot define
ſo well as of their father, becauſe the holie
Ghoſt ſaith nothing of them, but that they
banquetted, which doth ſound as though he
noted a diſparagement betweene Iob and his
ſonnes, as there was betweene Ely and his
ſonnes: for oftentimes a godly father hath vntoward
children, which make him watch, and
faſt, and pray, & weepe when they little think,
while they themſelues ruffle, and ſweare, and
banquet, and game, till pouertie fall on their
purſes, as the houſe fell vpon their heads: ſo it
ſeemes that Iobs ſonnes were ſecure vpon
their fathers holines, as many are vpon their
fathers husbandrie, which thinke the olde
man hath enough for vs, we need not care to get
or ſaue: ſo they might thinke, Our father ſacrificeth
for vs, wee may feaſt and be merrie, his
deuotion will ſerue for vs: he is an olde man,
let him pray and GOD will heare him. One
Lot is enough in an houſe: but if Iob had bred
vp his ſonnes ſo, God would not haue commended
him, but rebuked him, as he did Ely.
Therfore this is not ſpoken againſt Iobs ſons,
that they banquetted, as it is ſpoken againſt the

Iſraelites, that they ſate them downe to eate, and
roſe vp to play. For firſt it is not like that hee
which was ſo cōmēded of God, that he ſaid,
No man was like him vpon the earth, verſ. 8.
would not teach his children in their youth,
as he prayed for them after. Agayne, if they
had been Epicures, and Libertines, and beazlers,
GOD would not haue heard his prayer
for them, no more then he would heare Samuels
prayer for Saul. Agayne, if they had
deſpiſed that GOD which their father worſhipped,
hee would neuer haue ſayd as hee
ſaith, It may bee that my ſonnes haue blaſphemed
God, as though ſome fault might ſcape
them by ignorance, or raſhnes: but he would
haue ſayd, My ſonnes are blaſphemers, and
therefore I muſt puniſh them. For that which
the lawe ſayd againſt blaſphemers after, that
Iob vnderſtoode by the lawe of conſcience
written in his heart, as Paul ſayth, Rom. 2. 15.
Agayne, if they had vſed theyr feaſts for
theyr luſts, like them which ſay, Let vs eate
and drinke, for to morrowe wee ſhall dye, it had
beene vayne for Iob to ſpeake to them of
ſanctification, for they would not haue ſanctified
themſelues at his bidding. But it is
ſayde, that before Iob offered ſacrifice for
them, they were ſanctified, that is, they conſidered
the faults which they had committed,

and repented for them, and reconciled themſelues,
& then Iob ſacrificed for them. Again,
if their feaſts had been ſurfetings, and diſorders,
like our Wakes and Reuels, Iob ſhould
haue forbidden their feaſts, & not praied God
to pardon their ſinnes which they committed
in feaſting, & ſuffer them to ſinne ſtill, for that
were to mock God, as though he deſired not
pardon for their ſinnes paſt, but rather leaue
for them to ſinne ſtill. Laſtly, we doe not ſee
by any circumſtance of the ſtorie, that they abuſed
their feaſts either in ſuſpected houſes,
or prophane cōpany, or corrupt ſpeeches, or
impure geſtures, or wanton dauncings, or vnlawfull
daliances, or vaine ſuperfluities, but
that our feaſts might be allowed, if they were
like vnto theirs. For firſt they did feaſt in their
owne houſes, they did not run to Ordinaries,
or Ale-houſes, or Tauernes, as they which
ſeeke for the ſtrongeſt wine, or hunt after
newes, or worſe purpoſes, but like good
neighbours they inuited one another home,
and kept their hoſpitalitie in their owne houſes,
as our Gentlemen ſhould doe that lye about
London, which are a kind of Non-reſidents,
from their poore neighbours. Secondly,
they did not feaſt euery day, like the rich
Glutton in Luk. 16. euery one kept his day in
the yere whē their feaſtings came: ſo it is not

ment, that the ſonnes did nothing but feaſt,
and the father nothing but pray: but as the
feaſts of the Iewes came at certaine times of
the yeare, to celebrate ſome bleſſings of God,
ſo they obſerued their feaſting times, to celebrate
their good wils one to another. Laſtly,
they did not ioyne themſelues with ruffins, &
ſwearers, and tiplers, as all are wont to meete
together at a feaſt: neither did they inuite the
rich to their tables, as Iames ſaith, which are
feaſts of flatterie: but they were all of one
kinne, and one heart, brethren and ſiſters, like
the Diſciples which ſate downe together.
            All this doth ſhew that their meetings tended
to nouriſh amitie, & that they had reſpect
to the continuance of their peace, & encreaſe
of their loue one towards another, which was
the firſt cauſe that feaſts were inſtituted in the
Primitiue Church, & therfore called the feaſt
of charitie, only that friends and kinſmen and
neighbours might meet one with another to
receiue the bleſsings of God, & reioyce together
like Ioſeph & his brethren, leſt Chriſtian
familiaritie ſhould weare out of vſe, & be forgotten.
For ye may ſee in Eccleſ. 2. 24. and 3.
12. and 5. 17. where Salomon ſpeaketh of the
ioy, and pleaſure, and delight which we maie
take in Gods creatures. And againe, in Pſal.
104. 15. where Dauid ſayth, that as bread was

made to ſtrengthen, ſo wine was made to cō
               fort
the heart, that God would not only haue
vs fed, but of his exceeding goodnes he wold
haue vs cheered and comforted beſide, as he
ſheweth by this aboundance of his creatures,
in that he hath ordained ſo many things moe
thē we need. Why did God create mo things
then we need? but to ſhew that he alloweth
vs needful & comfortable things, for al good
things which were not created for need, were
created for delight. Therfore euen the Scriptures
haue commended ſolemne feaſts in Le.
10. Num. 29. Exo. 23. where ye may reade of
ſundrie feaſts cōmanded by God himſelfe, as
the feaſts of gathering fruits, the feaſts of trū
               pets,
the feaſts of Tabrnacles, the feaſts of
new Moones, the feaſts of reconciliation, the
feaſts of dedication of the temples, &c. Beſide
it is ſaid, that Abraham made a great feaſt the
ſame day that Iſaac was weaned, Gen. 21. 8. So
it is ſayd of Sampſon, that he made a feaſt whē
he was married. Iud. 14. 10. and at a feaſt in Canaan,
Chriſt ſhewed the firſt miracle that euer
he wrought, turning water into wine. Ioh. 2. If
feaſts had been vnlawfull, Chriſt would not
haue been there: therefore the wiſeman ſaith,
there is a time to laugh, as well as he ſaith, there
is a time to weepe, Eccl. 3. 4. whē he ſaith, there
is both a time to laugh & weepe, he implieth,

that the time to laugh is not euery day: as it
is ſaid of Diues, that he fared deliciouſly euerie
day, Luke. 16. for then there were a time to
laugh, but no time to weep. Therfore if ye wil
know the time whē to laugh, & whē to weep,
God hath ſet Vriah for an example, when the
Church was quiet, & his countrie ſafe, Vriah
could reioyce aſwell as other: but when the
Church was troubled, & his countrie in daunger,
though the king bad him go home, & eate
and drink, & ſolace with his wife: he would not
doe ſo, but ſaid, the Arke of Iſrael and Iudah,
dwelleth in tents, and my Lord Ioab and the ſeruants
of my king abide in the open field, and ſhall
I go to my houſe, and eate and drink and be merrie
with my wife? by thy life, & by the life of my
ſoule, I will not doe this thing. See what a ſin he
coūted it to feaſt then, which at another time
he counted no ſin. Therfore if ye aske whē it is
time to feaſt, & when to faſt, learne of Vriah:
he forbad not to feaſt, but if he ſhuld ſee your
feaſting now, he would ſay, as Eliſha ſayd to
Gehezi, Is this a time to take a reward? Is this a
time to make feaſts? nay the father and the ſons
both had need to riſe earely now and ſacrifice
together: for if euer the houſe were falling
vpon our heads, as it did vpon theirs, now the
Diuell hath ſent foorth his windes, now the
Pope hath layd his Ordinance, nay our owne

hands which ſhould proppe it, are digging as
buſily as the enemies, with reproaches, and
ſlaunders, and ſuggeſtions, to vndermine the
Church, which is falling alreadie, that wee
might die like the Philiſtines, with the temple
vpon our heads. Is this a time to feaſt Vria?
when the houſe of God is beſet like the houſe
of Lot: when the armies of Antichriſt are preparing
againſt Gods people? As the voyce
asked Zacharie, and Amos, and Ieremie what
they did ſee: So if ye aske your Prophets what
they doe ſee, they may ſay they doe ſee the
woolfe deuouring the lambes. We ſee a darke
ignorance running ouer the lande, like the
blackneſſe of Aegypt: wee ſee the Romanes
comming in againe as they came to Ieruſalem
and ſacking the temple: we ſee the Papiſts
caruing of Images, & the people kneeling
before them: we ſee the profeſſors of the
Goſpell ſhrink away, as the Diſciples fled frō
their Maſter when he was taken. Is this a time
to feaſt Vria? Is this a time to flatter? Is this a
time to diſſemble? Is this a time to loyter?
Is this a time to keep ſilence? Is this a time to
gather riches? Is this a time to reuenge wrōgs?
Is this a time to ſet forth pageants? No ſaith
Ezekiah. 2. King 19. 3. This is a time of tribulation,
in which the Prince, & Nobles, & people
ſhould humble themſelues, as the Citizēs

of Niniuie, left the Arke be taken from England,
as the Arke was takē from Iſrael, which
God grant that our eyes neuer ſee.
            Thus much of Iobs childrē, how euery one
had his ſeuerall houſe, which ſheweth how
God bleſſed thē with riches, as he did their father,
& what care Iob had, like a father to prouide
for them: then how they feaſted together,
which ſheweth how ſweet and pleaſant
a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in
vnitie.
            Nowe you ſhall ſee what the olde man
doth which was ſo commended in the 1. verſ.
the ſtorie ſaith, that hee ſent for his ſonnes and
ſanctified them, & ſacrificed for thē. In which
wordes the holy Ghoſt ſheweth the patterne
of an holy man, and good father, which kept
the rule that God gaue vnto Abrahā, to bring
vp his children in the feare of the Lord. Iob
doth not as ſome, which when they haue paſſed
their bounds, ſet all at randome, and ſay
with Cain, in Gen. 4. My ſinne is greater then
can be forgiuen: but he goeth to the remedie,
as the Iewes when they were ſtinged, went to
the braſen ſerpent: Albeit my children haue
not done their dueties in al poynts, but offended
in their feaſtings, yet I am ſure that God
will haue mercie vpon them, and vpon me, if
ye aske him forgiuenes. Therefore he ſent for

his ſonnes like a father, and then hee taught
them like a preacher to ſanctifie them ſelues,
and then he offered ſacrifice for them. Firſt,
we wil ſpeake of the cauſe which moued Iob
to ſacrifice for his ſonnes, ſet downe in theſe
words: Iob thought, It may be that my ſonnes
haue blaſphemed God in their hearts. He was
glad good mā to ſee his children agree ſo wel
together, but he would haue them merry and
ſin not, and therfore he puts them in mind euery
day while they feaſted, to ſanctifie themſelues;
he condemneth not honeſt mirth and
ſober feaſts, to maintain amity and peace, but
being throughly acquainted with mans infirmitie:
this ſheweth, that he had obſerued neuer
any feaſts ſo duely celebrated, but ſome
diſorder or other hath crept in, whereby God
hath been diſhonoured at his owne table, either
for ſuperfluitie of meat, or exceſſe of
drinke, or vnchaſt ſongs, or corrupt ſpeeches,
or wanton dancings, or vnſeemely daliances;
the diuel hath been ſtil at one end, & is lightly
the maſter of the feaſt. Therefore Iob thought
with himſelfe; It may be that my ſonnes haue
committed ſome ſcape like other men: I cannot
tell, they are but men: it is eaſie to ſlip when
occaſion is readie, though they thinke not
to offend; he had no apparant cauſe to ſuſpect
them, and therefore he ſpeakes in the doubting

phraſe, It may bee that they haue ſinned.
It is better to be feareful, than too ſecure: that
which happeneth often in the like caſe, he
might well doubt of it, though he had warned
them before: therefore his heart was not
quiet, but ſtill this ranne in his minde, all the
while they feaſted: It may bee that my ſonnes
ſinne. How wary was Iob ouer himſelf which
was ſo ielous ouer his ſonnes, leaſt one ſinne
ſhould ſlippe from them: nay if ye marke, he
ſpeaketh not of any open or groſſe ſinnes
which he feared, but he ſpeaketh of a ſinne in
the thought, It may bee that my ſonnes haue
blaſphemed God in their hearts.
            
            
               Blaſphemie is properly in the mouth, when
a man ſpeaks againſt God, as Rabſhakeh did;
but Iob had a further reſpect to a blaſphemie
of the heart, counting euery ſiniſter affection
of the heart, as it were a kind of blaſphemie,
or petie treaſon. Thus the penitent man
doth aggrauate his ſinnes, and retch them as
it were vpon the racke, to make his ſmall
ſinnes ſeeme great ſinnes, that he might beware
as well of ſmal as great. contrariwiſe,
the prophane and carnal minded man doth
min
                  •
               e, and flatter, and extenuate his ſinnes, as
though they were no ſins, becauſe they ſhuld
not trouble him: for this ſinne which Iob calleth
Blaſphemie, which is the higheſt name

of ſinne, the Papiſts call but A veniall ſinne;
that is, but a ſleight ſinne, becauſe it is in the
thought: So Iob & they differ in iudgement.
            Now out of this ſpeech of Iob; It may bee
that my ſonnes haue ſinned, or it may bee that
my ſelfe haue ſinned, which I may properly
and rightly terme the ielouſie of a holy man;
wherein Iob ſheweth in what feare he ſtoode
of his ſonnes ſo long as their feaſts laſted, euen
as a merchaunt doth till his ſhippe come
home. Firſt, wee may ſee this, that the beſt
thinges may ſoone be corrupted, by the wickedneſſe
of men, ſuch is our nature euer ſince
Adam choſe euil before good, good hath bin
turned into euill, Gen. 3. Notwithſtanding,
that our intent and meaning be good. As for
example, when an husband loueth his wife, or
a father loueth his children, theſe are good &
holy, and commendable things, yet there is
no man can be found that doth loue his wife,
or his children with that euenneſſe (as I may
call it) or iuſt proportion, but that there is
ſome oddes in the ballance when his affectiō
is weighed, which may craue pardon like the
feaſts of Iobs children. If this oddes be in all
our meaſures, then it is no ſtrange caſe, that
Iob thought with himſelfe, that his children
might offend God in the thing that of it ſelfe of
fendeth not. Therefore it is good for a man ſo

long as he liueth in this world, to remember
ſtil that he is among temptations, and ſits at
a feaſt like Iobs children, where he may ſoon
take too much. If the fiſh did know the hook,
& the bird had ſeen the net, though they haue
but the vnderſtanding of fiſhes and birds, yet
they would let the hooke alone, and flie ouer
the net, and let the fouler whiſtle to himſelfe:
ſo we muſt looke vpon our riches, as we look
vpon ſnares, and behold our meats, as we behold
baites, & handle our pleaſure as we handle
Bees, that is, pick out the ſting, before we
take the honie, for in Gods giftes Sathan hath
hid his ſnares, and made Gods benefites his
baits, that as Adam ſaid, The womā which thou
hast giuen me, tempted me to ſin, ſo they may
ſay, the riches or the honours, or the liberty, or
the wife, or the ſeruants, or the children, or the
meates, or the wit, or the beauty which thou
haſt giuen me, tempted me to ſinne, ſo many
ſinnes lie in wait for vs, about our meats and
drinks, & beds, & waies, that vnles we watch,
pray, and looke about vs at euery time, it may
be, as Iob ſayth, that we may ſinne in our doings,
or in our ſayings, or at leaſt in our hearts, as he
thought of his ſons. Therefore no doubt but
as Iob thought that his ſonnes might offend
in their feaſtings, ſo hee taught them, euen
when they were feaſting, and when they ſate

at the table, and when they dranke one to another,
to thinke oftentimes we may ſin as our
father tolde vs, which brideled their mirth, &
ſtopt many wordes at the doore, euen when
ſin was at the tongues end: you are not Iobs
ſonnes, but you are come to be Iobs ſchollers,
therefore learne, that which his children learned.
If a man did but carrie this watch-word
with him, whenſoeuer he eateth or ſpeaketh,
or bargaineth, it would cut off a thouſand idle
words, and wicked acts in one yeare for
which he ſhall giue account. The ſecond leſſon
which Iob ſeemes to point vs vnto, is to
prepare our ſelues before we eat the communion,
that is, to ſanctifie our ſelues, & our meats,
as Chriſt did when they had nothing but a
few fiſhes and bare bread, yet there was prayer
before they did eate. For as Paul ſaith, All
the creatures of God are ſanctified vnto vs by
prayer and thanksgiuing. He which doth not
pray to God for his dayly bread, nor thanke
him for it, dooth not receiue the creatures
of God, but ſteale them from him, as a man
which taketh a thing without asking or thanking.
There is a kind of men which I ſpeak of,
which hold it too ſad a matter, to ſay a ſhort
grace before they fal to meate, leaſt it ſhould
forſpeake their mirth, & keepe thē in a ſober
mind til they riſe againe. I haue heard many

ſay, that they cānot be merie, vnles they ſwear
and whoop, & carouſe, & dally, & gibe: therefore
if they can chooſe they will neuer bee a
gueſt where any godly man is preſent, leſt his
countenance or wordes ſhould daſh their
ſport; & if any matter of God happē to come
in while they are in the vaine, it is like a damp
which puts out their lights, and turnes their
mirth into heauineſſe, as the hideous hande
which wrote vpon the wall caſt Baltaſar into
a dumpe. Theſe men had neede to leaue
their feaſting, and go to praying, for they deſerue
to die, like the Iewes with the quailes in
their mouthes. It may be (thought Iob) that
my ſonnes haue a ſpice of this vanitie. If it be ſo
with the godly ſort, as Iobs childrē were, that
they may forget themſelues at ſuch a time, &
ſtep too farre, and ſlip a ſinne, what ſhall wee
ſay of them that driue God out of their company
when they banquet, and ſay that ſcripture
dooth not become the table, as though
we ſhould forget God while wee receiue his
benefits, we need not ſay as Iob ſaide, It may
be that they blaspheme GOD in their hearts,
for they blaſpheme him with their mouthes;
we need not ſay, it may be that they doe ſinne,
for they doe nothing but ſinne? And their
feaſte is a feaſt of ſinnes, as if the Diuelles
ſhould banquet together. But they which

feaſt as Iob would haue his children ſanctifie
themſelues before, & eate as in the preſence
of God, and are merie as it were with the Angels;
when they take their bread, they thinke
with themſelues what a goodnes this is, that
God giueth ſuch vertue to bread, to ſuſtaine
life, which hath no life in it ſelfe; & when they
ſee ſo many things before them prepared for
the fleſh, they conſider with themſelues what
care God hath of my ſoule, which careth ſo
much for my body, which ſhall go
                  •
                to duſt.
There is another leſſō which wil ſtand you in
great ſtead if ye marke it, when Iob ſaith, It
may be that my ſonnes haue ſinned. Hereby hee
teacheth vs to ſuſpect the worſt of the fleſh,
and to liue in a kind of ielouſie of our ſelues,
as he ſaith that his maner was, cap. 9. I feared
al my workes; that is, he did miſtruſt himſelfe,
and waſht his hands, and his feet, and his eies
and his eares, and his tongue, leſt they ſhould
ſin, as a mercer miſtruſts his prentice leſt hee
ſhould filtch: ſo he thought not onely, whether
his ſonnes ſinned but he thought of his
owne ſins too: when thou ſeeſt ſome ſelling
in their ſhops, ſome tipling in the Tauernes,
ſome playing in Theaters, then thinke of this
with thy ſelfe: It is very like that theſe men
ſwallow many ſinnes, for God is neuer ſo forgotten,
as in feaſting, and ſporting, & bargaining,

then turne to thy compaſſions, and pray
for them that God would keepe them from
ſin when temptation is at hand, and that hee
would not impute their ſins to their charge;
ſo we ſhould doe for our brethren as Iob did
for his children. Again, ſo we ought to think
when we our ſelues come from places of tēptation,
which infect like a corrupt ayre; It may
be that I haue ſinned: haue I ſeen and heard al
this, and not ſlipped my foote with them?
Come I home ſound & whole? haue I drawn
none of the infected ayre? Doth none of the
duſt ſticke vpon my garments? Looke about
my ſoule, and if thou remembreſt any ſinne
which ſlipt from thee, then pray for thy ſelf as
Iob did for his children. If thou wilt not pray
for thy ſelfe, who ſhal pray for thee? If thou
wilt not repent thy ſelfe, who ſhall repent for
thee. Looke not for Iob to ſacrifice for thee.
Iob cannot ſacrifice for thee, but thou mayſt
ſacrifice thy ſelfe, and none but thee. This
ſhould be the thought of euery Chriſtian, not
whether we haue pleaſed, nor whether wee
haue reuenged, but whether wee haue
ſinned: for if Iob was ſo zealous
of his children, how zealous
ſhould we be of
our ſelues.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Satans Compaſsing
the Earth.
            
               IOB. 1. 7. 8.
               
                  7 Then the Lord ſayd vnto Satan, Whence
commest thou? And Satan anſwered the Lord
ſaying, From compaſſing the earth too and fro,
and from walking in it.
                  8 And the Lord ſaid vnto Satan, Haſt thou not
conſidered my ſeruant Iob, how none is like
him in earth? an vpright man, one that feareth
God ande ſchueth euill.
               
            
            
               I Haue ſpoken of the queſtion
already, now of the
anſwer: Compaſſing here
doth ſignifie tēpting, &
the earth doth ſignifie al
the people of the earth:
as if he ſhould ſay, I come
from tempting all men. It is ſome vantage vnto
vs to heare that the Spaniards are cōming

                  ••
               fore they com, & what number they haue,

and how they are appointed, that we may leuie
our forces accordingly. But beloued, there
is a greater aduerſary thē the Spaniard, which
brings in the Spaniards, your aduerſary the
Diuell. It is good for vs to heare when hee
comes, that we may be in a readines agaynſt
him, as we prepare againſt them. Therefore
this Scripture, and this time accorde well. In
Reuelation. 12. 10. the diuel is called an accuſer,
and now I am an accuſer of the accuſer: he
accuſeth vs to God, and God accuſeth him to
vs, that when he comes like an Angel, yet we
may ſay to him like Chriſt, Auoyd Satan. Firſt
giue me leaue to ſay vnto you as Chriſt ſayd
vnto his diſciples, Take heed how you heare, for
that which I am to ſpeake vnto you of the diuel,
the diuel would not haue you heare: and
therfore as he is here called a Compaſſer, ſo he
will compaſſe your eyes with ſhewes, & your
eares with ſounds, & your ſences with ſleep,
and your thoughts with fancies, & all to hinder
you from hearing while the articles are againſt
him, and after I haue ſpoken, he will
compaſſe you againe with buſineſſe, & cares,
and pleaſures, and quarrels, to make you forget
that which you haue heard, as hee hath
made you forget that which ye haue heard
before, or els to contēne, as thogh you might
doe well without it: as hee hath compaſſed
them which doe walke in the ſtreetes while

the voice of God ſoundeth in the Churches as
they paſſe by: therfore before euery Sermon,
yee had neede to remember Chriſts leſſon,
Take heede how you heare.
            
            Nowe to the matter. Satan from whence
commeſt thou? I come frō compaſſing the earth.
Here the Diuel is called in like a Iaylor, which
keepes ſome in perpetuall priſon, and ſome
are bayled, and ſome returne to priſon again,
and ſome are executed. They which ſinne
fearfully, ſtay as it were about the priſon, but
are not bound: they which ſinne wittingly,
are vnder locke, they which ſinne greedily, are
vnder lock and bolts, they which dye in their
ſinne, are like them which are condemned:
this is the bondage which we haue brought
our ſelues vnto for a fayre apple. When the
tempter ouercame vs, we were remoued out
of Paradiſe, where we were ſeated: when we
haue ouercome the tempter, we ſhal be tranſlated
into heauen, where he was ſeated: heauen
doore was wide, and the way was broad
before the rebellion: but when we knockt at
the cannell doore, then the good doore was
ſhut: heauen is large, but the way to heauen
muſt be narrow, therefore God hath ſet our
enemies in the gate to fight with vs before we
enter, that this faying might be verified, The
kingdome of heauen is caught by violence: ſo
ſoone as we riſe in the morning we goe forth

to fight with two mightie giants, the World
and the Diuell, and whom doe we take with
vs but a traytor? this brittle fleſh which is readie
to yeeld vs vp to the enemie at euery aſſault,
onely he which ſuffereth Satan to compaſſe
vs, dooth ſtay him from deſtroying vs.
When God asked Cain, where is thy brother?
Cain lyed and ſayd, I cannot tell. When God
asked Sarah why ſhe laughed? Sarah lyed and
ſayd, I laughed not: but when God asked the
diuell from whence he came, he anſwered
truely, I come from compaſſing the earth, & yet
he which ſpeaketh truth himſelf, taught them
to lye, as he is called the father of liers, becauſe
he teacheth all others to lye. How then? Was
Caine worſe then the diuell, becauſe he lyed
and the other told trueth? By this you may ſee
that carnall men doe not knowe ſo much of
God as the very diuell knoweth, for he knewe
that GOD could tell where he had been, but
Caine doubted whether God could tell what
hee had done, and therefore he made a lye.
Thus, thus the Diuell teacheth his ſchollers to
doe worſe ſometimes then hee will doe himſelfe,
euen as he would bring them (if it were
poſsible) into a worſe plight thē he is himſelf.
The diuels faith cannot ſaue vs, no more then
it can ſaue him, the diuels knowledge cannot
conuert vs, no more then it dooth conuert
him, and yet hee would not haue men beleeue,

that which hee bleeueth himſelfe, nor
haue vs vnderſtand ſo much as he vnderſtandeth
himſelfe: for if Caine had vndderſtood ſo
much as he, that God knewe whether he lyed
or no, he would haue anſwered God truely, as
Satan did: but the diuell knew that there was
no diſſembling with God, who knowes what
he asks before he asks, therefore he told troth
to God, though he lye to man: for to lye vnto
him which knoweth, is as if one ſhould lye to
himſelfe, but Cain was not ſo wel learned, he
thought peraduenture yet God might vnderſtand
his murther, as a theefe ſuſpecteth in his
heart that the Iudge may know his theft: but
he doubted whether God did knowe it, and
therefore he denied it like one which is guiltie,
but thinkes that if he confeſſe, he ſhall be
hanged, and therefore though euidence and
witneſſe accuſe them, yet you ſee many will
not accuſe themſelues.
            
               From compaſſing the earth, He which was
called Satan before, which ſignifieth an aduerſarie,
is heere ſayd to compaſſe the earth:
which is to ſay, being put together, an aduerſarie
compaſſeth the earth: and therefore let
the earth beware like a Citie which is beſieged
with the aduerſarie.
            The diuell hath mo names then any Prince
hath titles, ſome God hath giuen to him, and
ſome he hath giuen to himſelfe: but this is to

be noted in the diuels names, that he neuer
called himſelf a lier, nor a tēpter, nor an accuſer,
nor a ſlāderer, nor a deceiuer, nor a deuourer,
nor a murderer, nor a maſter, nor an aduerſarie,
nor a viper, nor a lion, nor a dragon, nor
a woolfe, nor a cockatrice, nor a ſerpent. But
when Chriſt asked him his name, hee calleth
himſelfe Legion, which imports a multitude,
as if he ſhould brag of his number, & here he
calles himſelfe in effect the compaſſer of the
earth, as if he ſhuld brag of his power. And in
the 4. Chapter of Luke & 6. verſe, he calleth
himſelf the poſſeſſer of the earth, as if he ſhuld
brag of his poſſeſſions, and in the ſame he calleth
himſelfe the quier of the earth, as if he
ſhould brag of his liberalitie. Thus he which is
euill it ſelfe, doth ſhun the name, becauſe he
would not be hated: and therefore no maruel
if men call euil good, & would be coūted honeſt,
though they be neuer ſo lewd, for ſo will
the diuell: but as God neuer called the diuell
but by thoſe names which the diuell hated, ſo
he neuer calleth ſinners by thoſe names which
they call themſelues. For if you obſerue the
Scripture, there is no name of the diuel, but in
ſome place of Scripture or other the wicked
are called by the ſame name: he is called a lier,
& they are called liers: he is called a tempter,
& they are called tēpters: he is called a murderer,
& they are called murderers: he is called

a ſlanderer, & they are called ſlanderers: he is
called a viper, and they are called vipers: he is
called a lion, & they are called lions: he is called
a woolfe, and they are called wolues: he is
called a ſerpent, and they are called ſerpents.
Thus God would they that ſhall be damned
ſhould haue the name of him which is dāned,
to put them in mind. Now none of the diuels
names are in the book of life: & therfore liers,
& tempters, & ſlanderers, & murderers, & defamers
are not: therefore theſe are the diuels
names. This I note to ſhewe you how deadly
God doth hate ſin, that neither the diuell nor
his followers could euer get a good name of
him: for al his compaſſing, he could neuer cō
               paſſe
this, to ſhuffle any praiſe of himſelfe into
this booke of life: for he doth not cōpaſſe heauen,
but earth, though he wold cōpaſſe both:
the diuel himſelfe doth tel vs here, that he cō
               paſſeth,
& he telleth vs not why he cōpaſſeth;
but his name Satan that wēt before, which he
ſpake not of, doth tell vs why he compaſſeth.
Becauſe it ſignifies an aduerſarie, it giueth vs
to vnderſtand that hee compaſſeth the earth
like an aduerſarie. God doth cōpaſſe the earth
like a wall to defend it: the diuell compaſſeth
the earth like an enemy to beſiege it. For enemie
is his name, he is enuie euen to the name.
            Three things I note: wherefore the diuell
may be ſayd to compaſſe the earth. Firſt, becauſe

he tempteth all men. Secondly, becauſe
he tempteth to all ſinnes. Thirdly, becauſe he
tempteth by all meanes: So whoſoeuer ſinneth,
wherein ſoeuer he offendeth, whereby
ſoeuer he is allured, the ſinne, and the ſinner,
and the baite, are compaſſed, and contriued
by this Archpolitique, which calles himſelf a
Cōpaſſer. Many haue their names for naught,
becauſe they doe nothing for thē, like Labans
images which were called Gods, though they
were but blocks: but the diuell deſerues his
names, he is not called a tempter, and a lyar,
and a ſlaunderer, and an accuſer, and a deceiuer,
and a murtherer, & a compaſſer in vaine,
like S. George, which is alwaies on horſeback,
and neuer rides: but he would doe more
thē by his office he is bound to. Other are called
officers, becauſe they haue an office: but
he is called an enemy, becauſe he ſheweth his
enuy. Other are called Iuſticers, becauſe they
ſhould doe iuſtice: but he is called a tempter,
becauſe he practiſeth temptations. Other are
called Paſtors, becauſe they ſhould feede: but
he is called a deuourer, becauſe he doth deuour:
& we cal him a Compaſſer, becauſe that
he doth compaſſe. Euer ſince he fel frō heauen
he hath liued like Caine, which cannot reſt in
a place, but is a rūnagate ouer the earth, from
doore to doore, from man to man, begging
for ſinnes as the ſtarued ſoule begs for bread.

He ſhould haue dwelt in heauen, and not bin
compaſſing the earth, hee ſhould haue ſung
with the Angels & not been quarelling with
men, but he hath changed his calling, and is
become a compaſſer, that is, to lay fetters vpō
men, as GOD hath fettered him, leaſt they
ſhould aſcend to the place from whence he is
fallen. Therefore in this the Lyer ſpake truth,
whē he ſaid, I come from compaſſing the earth:
as if hee ſhould ſay to God, I come from the
ſlaughter of thy ſeruants, not to aske forgiuenes
for all the ſoules which he hath ſlaine alreadie,
but to get a commiſſion that GOD
would make him Knight Marſhall ouer the
world, to ſlay and kill as many as hee hated:
like the bramble, which ſet it ſelfe on fire firſt,
and then fiered all the wood.
            Peter deſcribing the diuels walke, ſaith, that
he goeth about: The diuel ſaith, that he goeth
a compaſſing. Peter puts in, ſeeking whom hee
may deuoure: the diuell leaues out deuour, and
ſayth no more, but that he compaſſeth. This
circular walke is peculiar to the diuell, and
therfore may be called the diuels circuite. All
other creatures go forward but the diuell goeth
about, which may well bee applied to the
craftie diuell, becauſe to goe about, is commonly
takē to vndermine: when he meaneth
he will deſtroy you, then we ſay, he will compaſſe
you: ſo when the diuell compaſſeth, then

beware leſt he deuour. For the diuell goeth about
men, as the Fowler goeth about the lark
to ſnare her; as the theefe goeth about the
houſe, to robbe it; as the yuie goeth about the
oake, to kil it. The diuels walk is a ſiege, which
goeth about but to find an iſſue to goe in: for
he goeth about but vntil he can get in to be a
poſſeſſor. He is cōtent to be a compaſſer. The
firſt name the diuell hath in Scripture, is a Serpent,
he is a Serpent, & ſo are his waies like a
Serpent, which windeth himſelf like a circle.
            As GOD is ſayd to make an hedge about
men, ſo here the diuel is ſaid to make an hedg
about men: but this is an hedge of temptations,
and that is an hedge againſt temptatiōs.
As Dauid ſaith, the Angels compaſſe vs, ſo
might hee ſay, the diuels compaſſe vs, Sathan
compaſſeth, and man is compaſſed. Sathan is
like the circumference, and man is, as it were,
the Centre: that is, temptations goe round about
him, and he dwelleth in the middeſt of
them. Thus much of Compaſſing: now what
he doth compaſſe.
            
               I come from Compaſſing the earth. This is
the diuels pilgrimage, from one ende of the
earth to the other, & then to the other againe,
and then backe againe, like a wandring Marchant,
which ſeeketh his trafficke where hee
can ſpeed cheapeſt. I haue heard of ſome trauellers
which haue gone about the earth, but

I neuer heard of any that had ſeene all parts of
the earth but this olde Pilgrime Satan, which
hath been in heauen, and in paradiſe, and in
the earth, and in the ſea, and in hell, and yet
hath not done his walke, but like the Sunne
which courſeth about the earth euery day: ſo
there is no day but Satan ſeeth euery man
vpon earth: as a compaſſe hath no end, ſo hee
makes no ende of compaſſing. Becauſe he is
ſuch a compaſſer of the world, therefore Paul
calleth him The God of this word, not a peece
of the world, as Englād, or Ireland, or France,
or Germanie, or Spayne, but of the world, that
is, of all the countries, and cities, and townes,
and villages, and houſes. The Pope talkes of
his kingdome, how many Prouinces are vnder
his dominiō, but the diuels circuit is greater
then the Popes: one would thinke that he
could neuer tend halfe his flocke, becauſe he
is Vicar of ſo great a Monarchie, and yet he is
neuer non-reſident. You may ſee his ſteppes euery
where ſo brim and freſh, as though they
were printed in aſhes. If God make you ſee
your country naked, your Temples deſolate,
your Cities ruined, your houſes ſpoyled, you
will ſay the Spanyards haue been heere: ſo
when you ſee your mindes corrupted, your
hearts hardened, your willes peruerted, your
charitie cooled, your Iudges bribers, your
Rulers perſecutors, your Lawyers brablers,

your Marchants vſurers, your Landlords extortioners,
your Patrones ſymoniſts, your Paſtors
loyterers, you may ſay the diuell hath
been here. Seeing then theſe weedes growe
in euery ground, you may beare the diuel witneſſe,
that he doth compaſſe all the earth. If a
man loue his friend, he will ſay, I will goe an
hundred miles to doe him good: but if the diuel
hate a man, he wil goe a thouſand miles to
doe him hurt▪ The diuel doth not goe his progreſſe
like a King, only for delight, but all the
way as he goeth, Peter ſaith, He ſeeketh whom
he may deuoure. The diuel goeth a viſiting, he
will teach the ſicke how they ſhall recouer
their health, hee will whiſper the poore how
they ſhall come by riches, he will tell the captiues
how they ſhall redeeme their libertie:
but to deuoure is the ende of his viſitation.
Therefore Peter called him a Lyon, and ſaid,
that he went about: and told vs that he ſought
as he went: at laſt he ſaith, to deuour, & there
he ends, ſhewing that deuouring is his ende.
Now you ſhall heare whom hee compaſſeth,
and to what he compaſſeth, and how he compaſſeth.
When it is ſaid, that the diuell compaſſeth
the earth, it is meant, that he compaſſeth
the men of the earth: out of which I gather,
firſt of all creatures he compaſſeth men:
ſecondly, that he compaſſeth all men, and by
conſequence, that he compaſſeth good men.

The diuell is like an Archer, and man is his
marke, and temptations are his arrowes. As
Peter is called a fiſher of mē, ſo the diuell may
be called a hunter of men: for of all creatures
his enuie is onely to men, becauſe man was
made to ſerue GOD, and inherite the ioyes
which hee hath loſt: therefore he is called no
ſlear, but a manſlear. When there are no men
vpon earth, then the diuell will compaſſe the
earth no more.
            Secondly, he aſſaulteth all men, like Iſmael,
which was againſt al. It is ſaid of Saul and Dauid,
Saul hath ſlaine his thouſand, and Dauid
his tenne thouſand: but if you put in Satan, you
may ſet vp the number, and ſay, Satan hath
ſlaine his hundred thouſand. As there is a legion
of men, ſo there is a legion of diuels: that
as they ſaid Peters angell, ſo they may ſay Peters
diuell: for Chriſt would not haue called
Peter Satan, if Satan had not backed him: as
death killeth all, ſo the diuell tempteth all:
when hee hath Eue, hee hunteth for Adam:
when he hath Adam, he hunteth for Caine: as
the father was tempted, ſo muſt the ſonnes: as
the mother was tempted, ſo muſt her daughters.
Euery man but Chriſt may ſay, I haue
been ouercome, but Chriſt himſelfe cannot
ſay, I haue not been tempted. In the Spaniſh
Inquiſition the Proteſtants are examined, but
the Papiſts ſlip by: but in the diuels Inquiſitiō
               
Papiſt, and Proteſtant, and Atheiſt, and Puritane,
& all are examined. He is not a captaine
of forties, nor of fifties, nor of ſixties, nor of
hundreds, but hee is Generall ouer all which
fight not vnder Chriſts banner: he poſſeſſed
the two Gergeſites, which were men, he poſſeſſed
Mary, which was a woman: he poſſeſſed
the mās ſon, which was a child. Nimrod is called
a mightie Hunter which killed beaſts, but
this is a mighty hunter which killed Nimrod
himſelf, God keep vs out of his chaſe. Thirdly,
he warreth againſt the righteous, euē becauſe
they are righteous: as God makes the barren
fruitfull, & the fruitfull to beare more fruite, ſo
the diuell would haue them ſerue him, which
ſerue him not, and they which ſerue him to
ſerue him more: & therfore as the Grāt encoū
               tred
with Dauid, ſo the diuel encoūtred with
Dauid, and with Dauids Lord: he which gaue
him leaue here to tempt Iob, was after tēpted
himſelfe, although the net brake, and the bird
eſcaped: yet as he tempted Chriſt thriſe together,
and as he deſired to ſift Peter more then
other, ſo they that follow Chriſt, and are like
Peter, are ſifted more then other. For this viper
is like the viper which ſeaſed vpon Paul.
Among many which ſtood by the fire, the viper
choſe out Paul, and lighted vpon him before
all the reſt: ſo if one bee holier then another,
this viper will battaile with him, and

there is great reaſon why the godly are tempted
more then the wicked; becauſe the wicked
are his ſeruants, and doe tempt others.
            As he tempteth all men, ſo he tempteth to
all ſinnes: for hell and the diuell, are alike:
therefore as hel is neuer filled with ſinners, ſo
the diuell is neuer filled with ſinnes: and therfore
when he had made Peter deny his maſter
once, he made him deny him twiſe, and when
he had made him denie him twiſe, hee made
him deny him thriſe. For this cauſe our ſinnes
are counted amongſt thoſe things which are
infinite, becauſe the diuell and our fleſh meet
together euery day to ingender newe ſinnes.
All the diuels riches is in baytes, hee hath a
packe full of othes for euery one which will
ſweare, a pack full of lyes for euery one which
will deceiue, a pack full of excuſes for euery
one which will diſſemble. As he dooth goe
through the ſtreetes, into euery ſhoppe he
caſts a ſhort meaſure, or a falſe balance: as
hee paſſeth by the Tauernes hee ſets diſſention
betwixt friends: as he paſſeth by euerie
Inne, hee caſts a payre of Cardes, and a payre
of Dice, and a payre of Tables: as hee paſſeth
by the Courtes, and findes the Lawyers at
the barre, hee caſts among them falſe euidences,
forged writings, and counterfeite
ſeales.
            Thus in euery place where he comes (like a

foggie miſt) he leaues an euill ſauour behinde
him. The murmuring of Moſes, the diſſimulation
of Abraham, the idolatrie of Aaron, the
inceſt of Lot, the dronkennes of Noah, the adulterie
of Dauid, the flight of Ionah, the deniall
of Peter, name Satan, & thou haſt named
the very ſpawne of all ſinnes, which with his
taile plucked downe the ſtarres from heauen.
How many hate their enemies, & friends too,
and yet imbrace this enemie, becauſe he kiſſeth
when he betrayeth, as though he would
not betray. Auarice ſaith, I will make thee amiable:
tyrannie ſaith, I will make thee dreadfull:
ſloth ſaith, I will make thee beautifull: vanitie
ſaith, I will make thee merrie: prodigalitie
ſayth, I will make thee beloued: So the
poore ſinner ſtands diſtract how he may follow
all ſins at once, ſeeking grapes of thiſtles,
and roſes of thornes.
            As he tempteth to all ſinnes, ſo he tempteth
by all meanes: for the name of a compaſſer
doth import a cunning tempter. There is craft
in compaſſing: the Hunter maketh a raile about
the Deere, as though he would gard thē,
when he meaneth to take ſome of them: the
Fowler goeth about the bird as if he did not
ſee her, when he comes to ſnare her. If men
haue ſo many ſleights to compaſſe their matters,
how can the compaſſer himſelfe hold his

fingers? if the Serpents ſeed be ſo ſubtil, what
doe you thinke of the old ſerpent, who hath
been learning his trade euer ſince the creation?
If mens trades may be called crafts, the
diuels trade may be called craft? Herod is called
a fox, but this fox taught him his ſubtiltie:
this is he that prepared flatterers for Rehoboam,
which prepared lyers for Ahab, which
prepared concubines for Salomō, which prepared
Sorcerers for Pharao, which prepared
witches for Saul, which prepared wine for
Benhadab, which prepared gold for Achan,
which prepared a ſhip for Ionas, which prepared
a rope for Haman, he goeth not about
for nothing. But this is the firſt tricke of his
compaſsing, he marks how euery man is inclined,
what he loues, what he hateth, what
he feares, & what he wants: & when he hath
the meaſure of his foot, then he fits him. Aske
what you will, heere is he which offered the
whole world. What? ſhall Ionah ſtay for want
of a ſhip? nay here is a ſhip, go & flie from the
Lord: ſhall Eſau ſtay for want of broth? nay
here is a meſſe of broth, go and ſell thy birthright:
ſhal Iudas ſtay for want of thirty pence?
nay here are thirtie pence, goe and betray thy
maſter: ſhall Pilate ſtay for want of an halter?
nay here is an halter, goe and hang thy ſelfe.
            The Tyrant ſhall not want a flatterer, the

                  〈13 pages missing〉
               
               
and Apoſtles, as they followed Chriſt,
leſt following that which they repented, wee
ſustaine or ſuffer that which they eſcaped.
This is a leſſon for all but Chriſt, Let him which
thinketh he ſtande, take heed leſt he fall. When
Paul had diſtilled the capital ſinnes of the Iſraelites,
this is the quinteſcence, that is, all the
profit which he could wring out of them, Let
them that thinke they ſtand, take heed leſt they
fall. Who would haue ſayd that Ieruſalem
would haue become an harlot? that the choſen
people ſhould become the curſedſt vpon
the earth? yet ſo it is, ſaith Paul, thus & thus
they haue done, and thus hath God forſaken
them, that all the world may take heede how
they ſtirre vp the lion of Iudah, which deuoueth
the wicked like bread. Who would haue
thought when Lot was grieued with the ſins
of Sodome that he would haue committed a
worſe ſinne himſelfe, firſt to drinke til he was
drunken, then to lie with his own daughters?
yet he did ſo. Who would haue thought that
Noah when he builded the Arke, becauſe he
beleeued in God, and gaue example to all the
world how they ſhould ſaue themſelues, whē
the flood was paſt, would haue giuen the firſt
example of ſinne to his owne ſonnes? Whe
would haue thought that when he was perſecuted
for his godlines in the deſart, hee would
haue ſlain the husband for the luſt of the wife,

when the bleſſings of God did call him to
thankfulnes? Who would haue thought that
Salomon when he prayed in the temple, and
was tearmed by God the wiſeſt man in the
world, would haue taken mo concubines vnto
him than any heathen in the world? How
are the mightie ouerthrowen ſaith Dauid?
2. Sam. 1. Like Peter which ſaid he would neuer
forſake Chriſt: and forſook him firſt. The
ſtrong men are fallen. Euen Salomon himſelfe,
and Dauid, and Noah, and Lot, and
Sampſon, & Peter, the light of the world, fell
like the ſtarres of heauen: theſe tall ſouldiers,
ſtrong oaks, faire pillers lie in the duſt, whoſe
toppes glittered in the aire, that they which
thinke they ſtand may take heed leſt they fall.
Can I looke vpon theſe ruines without compaſſion,
or remember them without feare, vnles
Ibe a reprobate, & my heart of flint? Who
am I that I ſhould ſtand like a ſhrubbe, when
theſe Caedars are blowen down to the groūd,
& ſhewed themſelues but men? the beſt man
is but a man, the worſt are worſe then beaſts,
no man is vntainted but Chriſt, they which
had greater gifts thē we, they which had deeper
rootes then we, they which had ſtronger
hearts then we, they which had more props
then wee, are fallen like a birde which is
wearie of her flight, and turned back like the
wind in the twinckling of an eie. 2. Kin. 8. 13.

Who would haue mocked him, that ſhould
haue ſaid ſometime as Eliſha ſayd to Hazael,
what wickedneſſe hee ſhould doe in time to
come, that he ſhould ſlay and trample men,
women and children, Hazael bluſht to heare
thus of him, and ſaid, Am I a dog that I ſhould
doe this? as if he would neuer doe it while he
were a man, but count him a dogge when he
comes to that: ſo they which are chaunged
like Hazael, bluſh to heare thus of him, and
would haue ſcorned ſometime at him which
ſhould once haue ſayd, when they were zealous
and ſtudious preachers, and perſecuted
for their preaching, that the time would come
when they ſhould be loyterers, time-ſeruers,
louers of the world, and greedie woolues, deuourers
of their flockes, and perſecutors, they
would haue ſayd, Am I a dog? Am I a beaſt?
Am I a reprobate, that I ſhould doe this? they
would neuer beleeue this till it came to paſſe,
and being fallen, they ſay they ſinned like Hazael,
which bluſht before he ſinned, and was
impudent after. Therfore let no man ſay what
he will be, before he haue examined what hee
is, but runne his courſe with a trembling feare,
alwaies looking downe to the rubs which lye
before him, and the worthies which are ſlaine
alreadie, and remember when any ſpectacle
of frailtie is in thine eie, this is my warning,
for no mā hath more priuiledge thē another.

This is the profite wee ſhould make of other
mens faults, like a pearle which is taken out of
the ſerpent: when we ſee our brothers nakednes,
it ſhould moue vs to compaſſion of him,
and a feare of our ſelues, for when we reioyce
at others fall, like Cham, as the leproſie went
from Naamā to Gehezie, ſo God turneth his
wrath from them, and it lighteth vppon vs,
Prou. 24. 18. and ſuch as haue deſpiſed others
without remorſe, haue fallen in the like, or
more ſhamefully themſelues, and neuer roſe
againe. What ſhall wee doe then when wee
heare of other mens faults? not talke as wee
doe, but beware by them, and thinke, Am I
better then he? Am I ſtronger then Sampſon?
Am I wiſer then Salomon? Am I chaſter then
Dauid? Am I ſoberer then Noah? Am I firmer
then Peter, if God ſhould leaue me to my ſelf?
if he ſhould withdrawe his hand which holds
me? Into how many gulfes haue I beene falling,
when God hath preſerued me of occaſion,
or delayed the temptation, or wonderfully
kept me from it, I know not how, for hee
deliuereth me from euil as he deliuered Dauid
frō the blood of Nabal, by Abigail, which
came vnlooked for: So he hath preuented many
wonderfully, when they were aſſaulted ſo
hardly, that they had thought to haue yeelded
to the enemie. Sometime I may ſay there
wanted a tempter, ſometime I may ſay there

wanted time, ſometime I may ſay there wanted
place, ſometime the temper was preſent,
and there wanted neither time nor place, but
God held me backe that I ſhould not cōſent:
ſo neere we haue glided by ſinne, like a ſhippe
which rides vpon a rocke, and ſlips away, or a
bird which ſcapes from the Fowler when the
net is vpon her. There is no ſalt but may loſe
his ſaltnes, no wine but may loſe his ſtrenght,
no flower but may loſe his ſent, no light but
may be eclipſed, no beautie but may bee ſtayned,
no fruit but may be blaſted, nor ſoule but
may be corrupted▪ we ſtand all in a ſlipperie
place, where it is eaſie to ſlide, and hard to get
vp, like little children which ouerthrow themſelues
with their clothes, now vp, now downe
at a ſtrawe, ſo ſoone we fall from God, & ſlide
from his word, and forget our reſolutions, as
though wee had neuer reſolued. Man goeth
forth in the morning, weake, naked, and vnarmed,
to fight with powers, and principalities,
the diuell, the world, and all their adherents,
and whome doth hee take with him but this
fleſh, a traytor, ready to yeeld him vp at euery
aſſault vnto the enemie. Thus man is ſet vpon
the ſide of a hill, alwaies declining, and ſlipping:
the fleſh muffleth him to make him
ſtumble, the world catcheth at him to make
him fall, the diuell vndermineth him to make
him ſinke, and crieth ſtil, Caſt thy ſelf downe,

and when he falleth, he goeth apace, as Peter,
who denied thriſe together; and when hee is
fallen is like a ſtumbling ſtone in the way for
other, that they may fall too. Therefore, Let
him that thinketh he ſtandeth, take heede leſt he
fall.
            
            So earneſtly muſt we call vpon our ſoules,
that we be not wearie of well doing: for happier
are the children that neuer began, then
Iudas, whoſe ende was worſe then his beginning.
Wiſedome and Righteouſneſſe are angrie
with him that leaueth his goodneſſe to
become worſe: if thy ſpouſe had committed
fornication thou mighteſt haue diuorſed her,
but he which leaueth his righteouſnes to liue
in wickednes, forſakes his ſpouſe to commit
fornication, and is diuorſed from Chriſt himſelfe.
If thou wert like the Vine, or the Oliue,
or the Figge tree, they would not leaue their
grapes, or their fatneſſe, or their ſweetneſſe, to
get a kingdome; but the Bramble did: If thou
be like the Bramble, what wilt thou doe when
the fire comes? As this is a memorandum to
all, ſo eſpecially let him that ruleth, and him
that teacheth, take heede leſt he fal: for if the
Pillers ſhrinke the Temple ſhakes, as when a
great Tree is hewen downe, which is a ſhadowe
to the beaſts, and a neſt to the birdes,
many leaues, and bowes, and twiggs fall with
it: ſo many ſtande, and fall with them, whoſe

lampes giue light to others: Euen as Ieroboams
ſinne made Iſrael to ſinne: therefore Paul
hath giuen you a watchword, which euery
one ſhould write vpon his table, vpon his bed
& vpon his nayles, leſt he forget in one houre:
for he which ſtandes now, may fall before
night. Sinne is not long in comming, nor
quickly gone, vnles God ſtop vs, as he mette
Balaam in his way, & ſtay vs; as he ſtaied the
womans ſonne, when he was a bearing to his
graue: we runne ouer Reaſon, and tread vpon
Conſcience, and fling by Counſel, and goe by
the Word, and poaſt to Death, as though we
ran for a kingdome, like a Larke, that falles to
the ground ſooner then ſhe mounted vp: at
firſt ſhe retires, as it were by ſteps, but when
ſhe commeth neerer the ground, ſhe falles
downe with a iumpe: ſo wee decline at firſt
and wauer lower and lower, till we be almoſt
at the worſt, and then we runne headlong, as
though wee were ſent poaſt to hell, from hot
to luke-warme, from luke-warme to key cold,
from key cold to ſtarke dead: ſo the languiſhing
ſoule bleedes to death, and ſeeth not his
life goe till he be at the very laſt gaſpe. Woe
bee vnto him that is guilty of this murther: if
the bloud of Abel cried for vengeance againſt
his brother Caine which ſlew his bodie, ſhall
not GOD bee reuenged for the death of the
Soule? where is thy brother (ſaith God?) Nay

where is thy ſoule? haſt thou ſlaine it, which
was my ſpouſe, my temple, mine owne Image?
If the ſeruāt which hid his Talent was
caſt into darkneſſe, what ſhall be done vnto
thee which haſt loſt thy Talent? For he which
falles from his righteouſneſſe, dooth not hide
his Talent, but more, he doth loſe it.
            Thus if you neuer knewe what good to
make of euill, this you may learne in the ſinners
Schoole: let them which thinke they
ſtand, take heed leſt they fall, and let
them which are downe, care to
riſe, and the Lord ſo direct
our ſteppes, that wee
may riſe againe.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            THREE PRAYERS: ONE
FOR THE MORNING, ANother
for the Euening, the third
for a ſicke man.
            Whereunto is annexed a godly Letter to a ſicke
friend: and a comfortable ſpeech of a Preacher
vpon his death bed. Anno. 1591.
            
               A Morning Prayer.
               O Lord prepare our hearts to praye.
               
                  ETernall God, giuer to them
which want, Comforter to
them wich ſuffer, and forgiuer
to them which repent:
we haue nothing to render
thee but thine owne. If we
could giue thee our bodies and ſoules, they
ſhould be ſaued by it: but thou wert neuer the
richer for them. Al is our duetie, & al of vs cannot
performe it: therefore thy ſon died, & thy
ſpirite deſcended, and thy Angels guide, and
thy Miniſters teach, to helpe the weakenes of
men. All things cal vpon vs, to cal vpon thee,
and we are proſtrate before thee, before wee
know how to worſhip thee: euē ſince we roſe,
we haue taſted many of thy bleſſings, & thou
haſt begun to ſerue vs, before wee begin to
ſerue thee. Why ſhouldſt thou beſtow thy

health and wealth, and reſt, and libertie vpon
vs more then other? we can giue no reaſon for
it, but that thou art mercifull. And if thou
ſhouldſt drawe all backe againe, we haue nothing
to ſay, but that thou art iuſt. Our ſinnes
are ſo grieuous and infinite, that we are faine
to ſay with Iudas, I haue ſinned and there ſtop,
becauſe we cannot reckon them. All things
ſerue thee, as they did at firſt, onely men are
the ſinners in this world.
               Our heart is a roote of corruption, our eies
are the eyes of vanitie, our eares are the eares
of follie, our mouthes are the mouthes of deceipt,
our hands are the hands of iniquitie, and
euery part doth diſhonour thee, which would
be glorified of thee. The vnderſtanding
which was giuen vs to learne vertue, is apt
now to apprehend nothing but ſinne: the will
which was giuen vs to affect righteouſnes, is
apt now to loue nothing but wickednes.
               The memorie which was giuen vs to remember
good things, is apt now to keep nothing
but euill things. There is no difference
betweene vs and the wicked, we haue doone
more againſt thee this weeke, then we haue
doone for thee ſince we were borne, and yet
we haue not reſolued to amende: but this is
the courſe of our whole life, firſt we ſinne, and
then we pray thee to forgiue it, and then to
our ſinnes againe, as though we came to thee

for leaue to offend thee.
               And that which ſhould get pardon at thy
hands for all the reſt, that is, (our prayer) is ſo
full of toyes and fancies, for want of faith and
reuerence, that when we haue praied, we had
need to praie againe that thou wouldeſt forgiue
our prayers, becauſe wee thinke leaſt of
thee when wee pray vnto thee: what Father
but thou, could ſuffer this contempt, and bee
contemned ſtill? Yet when we thinke vpon
thy ſonne, all our feare is turned into ioye, becauſe
his righteouſneſſe for vs, is more then
our wickedneſſe againſt our ſelues. Settle our
faith in thy beloued, and it ſufficeth for all our
iniquities, neceſſities, and infirmities.
               Now Lord we goe foorth to fight againſt
the world, the fleſh, and the diuell, and the
weakeſt of our enemies, is ſtronger than wee:
therefore wee come vnto thee, for thy holy
ſpirite to take our part; that is, to change our
mindes and wils, and affections, which wee
haue corrupted, to remooue all the hindrances
which lets vs to ſerue thee; and to direct
all our thaughts, ſpeeches, and actions, to thy
glorie, as thou haſt directed thy glorie vnto
our ſaluation. Although we be ſinners (O
Lord) yet we are thine, and therefore we beſeech
thee to ſeparate our ſins from vs, which
would ſeparate vs from thee, that we may be
ready to euery good, as we are to euill. Teach

vs to remember our ſinnes, that thou maieſt
forget them, and let our ſorrowe here, preuent
the ſorrowe to come. Wee were made
like thee, let not fleſh and bloud turne the image
of God to the image of Satan: our foes
are thy foes, let not thine enemies preuaile againſt
thee to take vs from thee; but make
thy word vnto vs, like the ſtarre which led vnto
Chriſt: make thy benefites like the pillar
which brought to the land of promiſe: make
thy croſſe, like the meſſenger which compelled
gueſts vnto the banquet; that wee may
walke before men like examples, and alway
looke vpon thy ſonne, how he would ſpeake
and doe, before we ſpeake or do any thing.
               Keepe vs in that feare of thy Maieſtie that
we may make conſcience of all that we doe,
and that wee may count no ſinne ſmall, but
leaue our lying, and ſwearing, and ſurfetting,
and coueting, and boaſting, and flanting, and
inordinate gaming, and wanton ſporting, becauſe
they drawe vs to other ſinnes, and are
forbidden as ſtraightly as other. Let not our
hearts at any time be so dazled, but that in all
temptations, we may diſcerne between good
and euill, between right and wrong, between
trueth and errour: and that we may iudge of
all things as they are, and not as they ſeeme
to bee: let our mindes bee alwaies ſo occupied,
that wee may learne ſome thing of euerie

thing, and vſe all thoſe creatures as
meanes and helpes prepared for vs to ſerue
thee. Let our affections growe ſo towarde
one another, that wee may loue thee aſmuch
for the proſperitie of other, as if it were our
owne: let our faith, and loue, and prayer be alway
ſo readie to goe vnto thee for our helpe,
that in ſicknes we may finde patience, in priſon
wee may finde ioy, in pouertie wee may
find contentment, and in all troubles we may
finde hope. Turne all our ioyes to the ioye
of the holy Ghoſt, and all our peace to the
peace of conſcience, and all our feares to the
feare of ſin, that we may loue righteouſneſſe,
with as great good will as euer we loued wickednes:
and goe before other in thankfulnes
towards thee, as farre as thou goeſt in mercie
towards vs before them, taking all that thou
ſendeſt as a gift, and leauing our pleaſures before
they leaue vs, that our time to come, may
be a repentance of the time paſt, thinking alway
of the ioyes of heauen, the paines of hell,
our owne death, and the death of thy ſonne
for vs. Yet Lord let vs ſpeake once again like
Abraham, one thing more we will beg at thy
hands, our reſolutions are variable, & we can
not performe our promiſes to thee: therefore
ſettle vs in a conſtant forme of obedience,
that we may ſerue thee from this houre, with
thoſe dueties which the world, the diuell, and
the fleſh, woulde haue vs deferre vntill the

point of death.
               Lord we are vnworthie to aske any thing
for our ſelues, yet thy fauor hath preferred vs
to be petitioners for other. Therefore wee
beſeech thee to heare vs for them, and them
for vs, and thy ſonne for all. Bleſſe the vniuerſall
Church, with truth, with peace, and
thy holie Diſcipline. Strengthen all them
which ſuffer for thy cauſe, and let them ſee
the ſpirite of comfort comming towardes
them, as thy Angels came to thy ſonne, when
he was hungrie.
               Be mercifull vnto all thoſe which lie in anguiſh
of conſcience, for remorſe of their
ſinnes: as thou haſt made them examples, ſo
teach vs to take example by them, that wee
may looke vpon thy Goſpel to keepe vs from
deſpaire, and vpon thy lawe, to keep vs from
preſumption. Proſper the armies which fight
thy battailes, and ſhew a difference betweene
thy ſeruantes and thy enemies, as thou didſt
betweene the Iſraelits and the Aegyptians,
that they which ſerue thee not, may come to
thy ſeruice, ſeeing that no God dooth bleſſe
beſides thee. Make vs thankefull for our
peace, whome thou haſt ſet at libertie, while
thou haſt laid our dangers vpon others which
mighteſt haue laide their dangers vpon vs:
And teach vs to build thy Church in our reſt,
as Salomon builte thy temple in his peace.

Haue mercie vpon this ſinfull Lande, which
is ſicke of long proſperitie: Let not thy bleſſings
riſe vp againſt vs, but indue vs with
grace as thou haſt with riches, that wee may
goe before other nations in religion, as wee
goe before them in plentie: giue vs ſuch harts
as thy ſeruants ſhould haue: that thy will may
be our will; that thy Law may be our Lawe;
and that we may ſeeke our kingdome in thy
kingdome. Giue vnto our Prince a Princely
heart, vnto our counſellers, the ſpirit of counſel,
vnto our Iudges, the ſpirite of Iudgement,
vnto our Miniſters the ſpirite of doctrine,
vnto our people, the ſpirite of obedience:
that wee may all retaine that communion
here, that we may enioy the communion of
Saints hereafter.
               Bleſſe this familie with thy grace and
peace, that the Rulers thereof may gouerne
according to thy word, that the ſeruants obey
like the ſeruants of God, and that wee may
all be loued of thee. Now Lorde wee haue
commenced our ſuite, our vnderſtanding is
weake, and our memorie ſhort, and wee vnworthie
to pray vnto thee, more vnworthie to
receiue the things which we praye for. Therefore
we commend our prayers and our ſelues
vnto thy mercie in the name of thy beloued
ſon our louing Sauiour, whoſe righteouſneſſe
pleadeth for our vnrighteouſnes.
               Our father which art in heauen, &c.
               
                  〈1… pages missing〉
               
               
                  
ruption, as though wee were made to ſinne:
indeede, or in worde, or in thought, wee
haue broken all thy Commandements, that
wee might ſee what good is in euill, which
hath lefte nothing but guilt, and ſhame, and
expectation of iudgement, while we might
haue had peace of conſcience, ioye of heart,
and all the graces which come with the holie
ſpirite. Some haue been wonne by the
word, but we would not ſuffer it to change
vs: ſome haue been reformed by thy croſſe,
but wee woulde not ſuffer it to purge vs:
ſome haue been mooued by thy benefites,
but wee would not ſuffer them to perſwade
vs: nay, we haue giuen conſent to the Diuell,
that wee will abuſe all thy gifts, ſo faſt as
they come: and therefore thy bleſſings make
vs proude, thy riches couetous, thy peace
wanton, thy meates intemperate, thy mercie
ſecure, and all thy benefites are weapons to
rebell againſt thee, that if thou looke into
our hearts, thou maiſt ſaye our Religion is
hypocriſie, our zeale enuie, our wiſedome
pollicie, our peace ſecuritie, our life rebellion:
our deuotion ends with our prayers, and
wee liue, as though wee had no ſoules to
ſaue.
               What ſhall wee anſwer for that which our
conſcience condemnes? Wee are one daye
neerer to death ſince we roſe, when we ſhall

giue account how euery day hath been ſpent,
and how we haue got thoſe things which other
will conſume when we are gone. And if
thou ſhouldeſt aske vs now, what luſt aſſwaged,
what affection qualified, what paſsion
expelled, what ſin repented, what good performed,
ſince we began to receiue thy benefites
this day, wee muſt confeſſe againſt our
ſelues, that all our works, words, & thoughts,
haue been the ſeruice of the world, the fleſh
and the diuell: we haue offended thee, and
contemned thee all the day, and at night wee
pray vnto thee: Father, forgiue vs all our ſins,
which haue diſhonored thee, while thou diddeſt
ſerue vs: run from thee while thou didſt
call vs: and forgotten thee whileſt thou didſt
feede vs, ſo thou ſpareſt vs, ſo we ſleepe, and
to morrow we ſinne againe: this is the courſe
of al our pilgrimage, to leaue that which thou
commandeſt, and doe that which thou forbiddeſt.
Therefore thou mighteſt iuſtly forſake
vs, as we forſake thee, and condemne vs,
whoſe conſcience condemnes our ſelues: but
who can meaſure thy goodneſſe which giueſt
all, and forgiueſt all? Though we are ſinfull,
yet thou loueſt vs: though wee knocke
not, yet thou openeſt: though we aske not, yet
thou giueſt: what ſhould wee haue if wee did
ſerue thee, which haſt done all theſe things
for thine enemies? Therefore thou which haſt
giuen vs al things for thy ſeruice, O Lord giue

vs a heart to ſerue thee, & let this be the houre
of our conuerſion, let not euill ouercome
good, let not thine enemie haue his will, but
giue vs ſtrength to reſiſt, patience to endure,
and conſtancie to perſeuere vnto the end.
               Inſtruct vs by thy word, guide vs by thy
ſpirite, mollifie vs by thy grace, humble vs by
thy corrections, winne vs by thy benefites, reconcile
our nature to thy will, and teach vs
to make profite of euery thing, that wee may
ſee thee in all things, and all things in thee:
& becauſe (O moſt mercifull father) we walk
between thy mercie and iuſtice, through many
temptations, gouerne our ſteps with ſuch
diſcretion, that the hope of mercie may preuent
diſpaire, & the feare of iuſtice may keepe
vs from preſumption: that in mirth wee bee
not vaine, in knowledge we be not proude, in
zeale we bee not bitter, but as the tree bringeth
foorth firſt leaues, then bloſſomes, and
then fruit, ſo firſt wee may bring foorth good
thoughts, then good ſpeeches, and after a
good life, to the honor of thy name, the good
of thy children, & the ſaluation of our ſoules,
remembring the time when we ſhall ſleepe
in the graue, and the day when wee ſhall awake
to iudgement. Now the time is come
(O Lord) which thou haſt appointed for reſt,
and without thee wee can neither wake nor
ſleepe, which haſt made the day and night,
and ruleſt both: therefore into thy hands we

commend our ſoules and bodies that thou
haſt bought, that they may ſerue thee: reſtore
them O Lorde to their firſt Image, and
keepe them to thy ſeruice, and reſigne vs not
to our ſelues againe, but finiſh thy work, that
we may euery day come neerer and neerer to
thy kingdome, till we hate the way to hell, as
much as hell it ſelfe, and euery cogitation, and
ſpeech, and action, be ſo many ſteps to heauen.
For thy names ſake, for thy promiſe ſake,
for thy ſonnes ſake O Lord, wee lift vp our
hearts, hands & voyce vnto thee in his name,
which ſuffered for ſinne, and ſinned not. Our
Father &c.
               
            
            
               A Prayer for a ſicke man.
               ALmightie God and all mercifull Father,
which art the Phiſition of our bodies and
ſoules, in thy hands are life and death, thou
bringeſt to the graue, and pulleſt backe againe:
we came into this world vpon condition,
to forſake it whenſoeuer thou wouldeſt
call vs, and now the Somners are come, thy

                     •
                  etters hold me, and none can looſe me but
he which bound me. I am ſicke in bodie and
ſoule, but he hath ſtroken me which in iudgment
ſheweth mercie. I deſerued to dye ſo
ſoone as I came to life: but thou haſt preſerued
me till now, and ſhall this mercie bee in
vaine as though wee were preſerued for nothing?

Who can praiſe thee in the graue? I
haue done thee no ſeruice ſince I was borne,
but my goodneſſe is to come, and ſhall I dye
before I begin to liue? but Lord thou knoweſt
what is beſt of all, and if thou conuert me,
I ſhall be conuerted in an houre: and as thou
acceptedſt the will of Dauid as well as the
act of Salomon: ſo thou wilt accept my deſire
to ſerue thee, as well as if I did liue to glorifie
thee. The ſpirit is willing, but the fleſh
is fraile, and as I did liue ſinfullie, whenſoeuer
thy ſpirite was from mee, ſo I ſhall dye
vnwillingly vnleſſe thy ſpirite prepare mee:
therefore deare father, giue mee that minde
which a ſicke man ſhould haue, and increaſe
my patience with my payne, and call vnto
my remembrance, all which I haue heard or
read, or felt, or meditated to ſtrengthen mee
in this houre of my triall, that I which neuer
taught any good while I liued, maye nowe
teach other how to dye, and to beare theyr
ſicknes patiently: apply vnto me all the mercies
and merites of thy beloued ſonne, as if he
had dyed for me alone. Be not from me when
the enemie comes; but when the tempter is
buſieſt, let thy ſpirite bee buſieſt too: and if it
pleaſe thee to looſe me out of this priſon, whē
I ſhal leaue my earth to earth, let thine Angel
carrie vp my ſoule to heauen, as they did Lazarus,
and place me in one of thoſe manſions

which thy ſonne is gone to prepare for me.
This is my mediator which hath reconciled
me and thee, when thou didſt abhorre mee
for my ſinnes, and thou didſt ſend him from
heauen to vs, to ſhew that thou art bound to
heare him for vs. Therfore in him I come vnto
thee, in him I call vpon thee. O my redeemer,
my preſeruer, and my ſauiour, to thee be
all prayſe with thy father and the holy ſpirite
for euer. Amen.
               
                  What ſhall ſtay me from my Father, my
brother, and my Comforter.
               
            
            
               A comfortable ſpeech, taken from a godly Preacher,
lying vpon his death-bed: written for
the ſicke.
               I Owe to God a death, as his Sonne died for
me. Euer ſince I was borne I haue been ſailing
to this hauen, and gathering patience
to comfort this houre, therefore ſhal I be one
of thoſe gueſtes nowe, that would not come
to the banquet whē they were inuited? what
hurt is in going to Paradiſe? I ſhal looſe nothing
but the ſence of euil: and anon I ſhall
haue greater ioyes then I feele paines? For
my head is in heauen already, to aſſure mee
that my ſoule and body ſhall follow after. O
death where is thy ſting? why ſhould I feare
that which I would not eſcape, becauſe my
chiefeſt happineſſe is behinde, and I cannot
haue it vnles I go vnto it? I would go through

hell to heauen, and therefore, If I martch but
through death, I ſuffer leſſe then I would ſuffer
for God. My paines doe not diſmay mee,
becauſe I trauaile to bring forth eternall life,
my ſinnes doe not fright me, becauſe I haue
Chriſt my redeemer, the iudge doth not aſtoniſh
me, becauſe the Iudges ſonne is my aduocate,
the diuel doth not amaze me, becauſe
the Angels pitch about me. The graue doth
not grieue me, becauſe it was my Lords bed.
Oh that Gods mercy to me, might mooue other
to loue him! for the leſſe I can expreſſe
it, the more it is. The Prophets and Apoſtles
are my fore-runners, euery man is gone before
me, or elſe he will follow after mee, if it
pleaſe God to receiue me into heauen before
them which haue ſerued him better, I owe
more thankefulnes vnto him. And becauſe I
haue deferred my repentance till this houre,
whereby my ſaluation is cut off, if I ſhould
die ſodainly: Lo, how my God in his merciful
prouidence, to preuent my deſtruction,
calleth me by a lingering ſicknes, which ſtaieth
till I be ready and prepareth mee to my
end, like a preacher, and makes me by wholeſome
paines, weary of this beloued worlde,
leaſt I ſhould depart vnwilling, like them
whoſe death is their damnation. So he loueth
me while he beateth me, that his ſtripes are
plaſters to ſalue me, therefore who ſhall loue
him if I deſpiſe him? This is my whole office

now, to ſtrengthen my body with my heart,
and be contented as God hath appointed, vntill
I can glorifie him, or vntil he glorifie me.
If I liue, I liue to ſacrifice; and if I die, I die a

                     •
                  acrifice, for his mercy is aboue mine iniquitie.
Therefore if I ſhould feare death, it were
a ſigne that I had not faith nor hope, as I profeſſed,
but that I doubted of Gods truth in his
promiſe, whether he will forgiue his penitent
ſinner or no. It is my father, let him doe what
ſeemeth good in his ſight: Come Lord Ieſus,
for thy ſeruant commeth, I am willing, helpe
my vnwillingnes.
               
                  Thus the faythful departe in another ſort, with
ſuch peace and ioy round about them, that all
which ſee, wiſh that their ſoules may followe
theirs.
               
            
            
               A Letter written to ones friend
in his ſicknes.
               BEloued, I maruel not that you haue paine,
for you are ſicke: but I maruel that you
couer it not for offence, becauſe the wiſdome
of a man is to bite in his griefe, & alwaies to
ſhew more comfort in God, than pain in ſuffering.
Now God calleth to repetitions, to ſee
whether you haue learned more conſtancie
than others: if ſicknes be ſharpe, make it not
ſharper with frowardnes, but know this is a
great fauour to vs when we die by ſicknes,
which maketh vs ready for him that calleth

vs: 
                     •
                  ow you haue nothing to think vpon but
God, & you cannot think vpon him without
ioy: your griefe paſſeth, but your ioy will neuer
paſſe. Tell me (patient) how many ſtripes
is heauen worth? Is my friend onely ſicke it
the world, or his fayth weaker than others▪
You haue alwayes prayed Thy will be done, &
now are you offended that Gods wil is done?
How hath the faithful man forgotten that all
things (euen death) turne to the beſt, to them
that loue God? Teach the happy (O Lord) to
ſee his happines through troubles. Euery pain
is a preuention of the paines of hell, and euery
ease in paine, is a fore-taſte of the eaſe, and
peace, and ioyes in heauen.
               Therfore remember your own comforts
to others before, and be not impatient, when
there is moſt neede of patience, but as you
haue euer taught vs to liue, ſo nowe
giue vs an example to die, and
deceiue Satan as
Iob did.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   