
      
         
            
            
            NEW
ENGLANDS
TRIALS.
            Declaring the succeſſe of 26. Ships
employed thither within theſe sixe yeares:
with the benefit of that Countrey by ſea and
land: and how to build threeſcore sayle
of good Ships, to make a little
Navie Royall.
            Written by Captaine
Iohn Smith.
            
            LONDON,
Printed by VVilliam Iones.
1620.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
WORSHIPFVL THE
Maiſter, the Wardens, and
the Companie of the
Fiſh-mongers.
            
               TO the conſideration of your
fauourable conſtructions I
preſent theſe ſixe yeares continued
trials from New England:
if you pleaſe to peruſe
them, and make vſe of them,
I am richly rewarded. The ſubiect deſerueth a
farre better habit, but it is as good as the father
can giue it. Let not therefore a ſouldiers plainneſſe
cauſe you refuſe to accept it, how euer you
pleaſe to diſpoſe of him, that humbly ſacreth himſelfe
and beſt abilities to his Countries good, and
the exquiſite iudgement of your renowned perfections.
            
               Yours to command,
Iohn Smith.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            NEVV ENGLANDS
Trials.
            
               NEw England is a part of America
betwixt the degrees of 41.
and 45. the very meane betwixt
the North Pole and the
Line: From 43. to 45. the coaſt
is mountainous, rockie, barren
and broken Iles that make many
good harbours. The water
is deepe cloſe to the shoare; there are many riuers
and freſh springs: few Saluages, but an incredible
aboundan
                  •
               e of fiſh, fowle, wilde fruites, and good
timber. From 43. to 41. and halfe, an excellent
mixed coaſt of stone, sand, and clay: much corne,
many people, some Iles, many good harbours, a
temperate ayre, and therein all things neceſſarie;
for the building ships of any proportion, and good
merchandize for their fraughts; within a square of
twelue leagues 25. harbours I ſounded, thirtie seuerall
Lordſhips I sawe, and so neare as I could imagine,
three thouſand men. I was vp one riuer fortie
miles, croſſed the mouths of many, whoſe heads
are reported to be great Lakes; where they kill their

Beuers; inhabited with many people, who trade
with thoſe of New England, and them of Cannada.
            
            
               The benefite of Fiſhing, as that famous Philoſopher
Maſter Dee reporteth in his Brittiſh
Monarchie.
               He saith, that more then forty foure yeares agoe,
the Herring Buſſes out of the Low-countries, vnder
the King of Spaine, were fiue hundred, beſides
one hundred Frenchmen, and three or foure hundred
ſaile of Flemings.
               The coaſts of Wales and Lankaſhire was vſed by
three hundred sayle of strangers.
               
                  Ireland at Baltemore fraughted yerely three hundred
ſayle of Spaniards, where King Edward the
ſixt intended to haue made a strong Caſtell, becauſe
of the straite, to haue tribute for fiſhing.
               
                  Blacke Rocke was yearely fiſhed by three or foure
hundred sayle of Spaniards, Portugalls, and Biskiners.
            
            
               Mr. Gentleman and many Fiſher-men and Fiſhmongers,
with whom I haue conferred, report:
               The Hollanders raiſe yearely by Herrings, Cod,
and Ling, 3000000. pounds.
               Engliſh, and French by Salt-fiſh, poore Iohn,
Salmons, and Pilchards, 300000. pounds.
               
                  Hambrough and the Sound, for Sturgion, Lobsters,
and Eeles, 100000. pounds.
               Cape Blanke, Tunny and Mullit, by the Biskinners
and Spaniards. 30000. pounds.
            
            
               
               But diuers other learned experienced Obſeruers
ſay, though it may ſeeme incredible:
               That the Duke of Medina receiueth yearely tribute,S.
of the Fiſhers of Tunny, Mullit, and Purgos,
more then 10000. pounds.
               
                  Lubeck hath ſeuen hundred ſhippes: Hambrough
ſixe hundred: Embden lately a fiſher towne, 1400,
whoſe cuſtomes by the profit of fiſhing hath made
them ſo powerfull as they be.
               
                  Holland and Zeland, not much greater then Yorkeſhire,
hath thirty walled townes, 400. villages, and
20000. ſayle of ſhips and hoyes; 3600. are fiſhermen,
whereof 100. are Dogers, 700. Pinckes and
Welbotes, 700. frand botes, 400. Enaces, 400. galbotes,
Britters and Todebotes, with 1300. Buſſes;
beſides three hundred that yearely fiſh about Yarmouth,
where they ſell their fiſh for gold; and 15.
yeares agoe they had more then 116000. Sea-faring
men.
               Theſe fiſhing ſhips do take yearely 200000. Laſt
of fiſh, 12. barrells to a Laſt; which amounteth to
3000000. pounds by the Fiſhermens price that 14.
yeres agoe did pay for their tenths 300000. pound;
which venting in Pomerland, Spruſland, Denmarke,
Leſland, Ruſsia, Suethland, Germany, Netherlands,
England, or e
                     •
                  ſewhere, &c. make their returnes in
a yeare about 7000000. pounds; and yet in Holland
they haue neither matter to build shippes, nor
merchandize to set them foorth, yet they aſmuch
encreaſe as other Nations decay. But leauing th
                     •
                  se
vncertainties as they are, of this I am certaine:
               
                  
That the coaſt of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, the north Sea, with Iſland,
and the Sound, New-foundland, and
Cape Blancke, doe ſerue all Europe, as
well the land Townes as Portes, and
all the Chriſtian ſhipping, with theſe
ſorts of Staple fiſh which is tranſported;
from whence it is taken, many
a thouſand mile, viz.
                  
                     Herring:
                     Salt-fiſh.
                     poore Iohn.
                     Sturgion.
                     Mullit.
                     Tunny.
                     Porgos.
                     Caviare.
                     Buttargo.
                  
               
               Now seeing all theſe ſorts of fiſh, or the moſt part
of them, may be had in a land more fertile, temperate,
and plentifull of all neceſſaries for the building
of ſhips, boates and houſes; and the nouriſhment
of man: the ſeaſons are ſo proper, and the fiſhings
ſo neare the habitations wee may there make, that
New England hath much aduantage of the moſt of
thoſe parts, to serue all Europe farre cheaper then
they can, who at home haue neither wood, salt, nor
food, but at great rates; at Sea, nothing but what
they carry in their ſhippes, an hundred or two hundred
leagues from their habitation.
               But New Englands fiſhings neare land, where is
helpe of wood, water, fruites, fowles, corne, or other
refreſhings needefull; and the Terceras, Mederas,
Canaries, Spaine, Portugall, Prouance, Sauoy, Sicilia,
and ali Italy, as conuenſent markets for our dry
Fiſh, greene Fiſh, Sturgion, Mullit, Caviare, and
Buttargo, as Norway, Swethland, Littuania, or Germany,
for their Herring, (which is here alſo in aboundance,
for taking;) They returning but wood,
pitch, tarre, soape-aſhes, cordage, flaxe, waxe
and such like commodities: We, wines, oyles, sugars,

ſilkes, and such merchandizes as the Straites
affoord, whereby our profites may equalize theirs;
beſides the increaſe of Shipping and Mariners. And
for proofe hereof:
               With two ſhippes I went from the Downes,Proofe 1. 1614. the third
of March, and arriued in New England, the laſt of Aprill.
I had but fortie fiue men and boyes, we built ſeuen
boates, 37. did fiſh; my ſelfe with eight Bthers ranging
the coaſt, I tooke a plot of what I could ſee, got acquaintance
of the inhabitants, eleuen hundred beuer skinnes,
one hundred Martins, and as many Otters: fortie thouſand
of dry fiſh we ſent for Spaine, with the ſalt-fiſh,
treine oyle and furres, I returned for England the 18.
of Iuly, and arriued ſafe with my company the latter end
of Auguſt. Thus in ſixe moneths I made my voyage,
out and home, and by the labour of 45. got neare the
valew of fifteene hundred pounds in thoſe groſſe commodities.
This yeare alſo one went from Plimmouth,
ſpent his victuall, and returned with nothing.
               The Londoners,Proofe 2. 1615. vpon this, ſent foure good ſhippes,
and becauſe I would not vndertake it for them, hauing
ingaged my ſelfe to them of the Weſt, the L
                     •
                  ndoners
entertained the men that came home with me; They ſet
ſayle in Ianuary, and arriued there in March: they found
fiſh enough vntill halfe Iune, fraughted a ſhippe of three
hundred Tunnes; went for Spaine with drie fiſh, which
was taken by the Turkes; one went to Virginia, to relieue
that Collony; and two came for Eng
                        •
                     and, with
the greene fiſh, treine oyle, and f
                     •
                  rres, within ſixe moneths.
               With a labyrinth of trouble I went from Plimmouth
with a ſhippe of two hundred Tunnes,Proofe 3. 1615. and one of fiftie;

but ill weather breaking all my maſtes, I was forced to
returne to Plimmouth, where re-imbarking my ſelfe
in a ship of three ſcore tunnes, how I eſcaped the Engliſh

                     〈◊〉
                  , and the French, and was betrayed by foure
Frenchmen of warre, I referre you to the Deſcription of
New England; but my Vice-admirall, notwithſtanding
the lateneſſe of the yeare, ſetting forth with me in
March, the Londoners in Ianuary, ſhe arriued in May,
they in March, yet came home well fraught in Auguſt,
and all her men well, within fiue moneths odde dayes.
               The Londoners,Proofe. 4. 1616. ere I returned from France, for all
their loſſe by the Turkes, which was valewed about
foure thouſand pounds, ſent two more in Iuly: but ſuch
courſes they tooke by the Canaries to the weſt Indies; it
was ten months ere they arriued in New England: waſting
in that time, their ſeaſons, victuall, and healths;
yet there they found meanes to refreſh themſelues, and
the one returned, neere fraught with fiſh and traine,
within two moneths after.
               From Plimmouth went foure ſhips,Proofe 5. 1616. onely to fiſh and
trade, ſome in February, ſome in March; one of two
hundred tunnes, got thith
                     •
                  r in a moneth, and went full
fraught for Spaine, the reſt returnd to Plimouth well
fraught, & their men well, within 5 months odde daies.
               From London went two more,Proofe 6. 1616. one of 220. tunnes,
got thither in ſixe weekes; and within ſixe weekes after,
with fortie foure men and boyes, was full fraught, and
returned againe into England within fiue months and a
few dayes; the other went to the Canaries with dry fiſh,
which they ſolde at a great rate, for royalls of eight, and
(as I heard) turned Pirates.
               I being at Plimouth,
                  Proofe 7. 1617 prouided with three good ſhips,

was wind-bound three months, as was many a hundred
ſayle more; ſo that the ſeaſon being paſt, the ſhippes
went for New-found-land, whereby my deſſeigne was
fruſtrate, which was to me and my friends, no ſmall
loſſe.
               There was foure good ſhippes prepared at Plimouth;
                  Proofe 8. 1618.
but by reaſon of their diſagreement, the ſeaſon ſo waſted,
as onely two went forward, the one being of two
hundred tunnes, returned well fraught to Plimouth,
and her men in health, within fiue moneths; the other of
foure ſcore, went for Bilbow with dry fiſh, and made a
good returne.
               This yeare againe,Proofe 9. 1619. diuers ſhippes intending to go from
Plimmouth, ſo diſagreed, as there went but one of 200.
tuns, who ſtayed in the Countrey about ſixe weekes, with
thirty eight men & boyes, had her fraght, which ſhe ſold
at the firſt penny for 2100. pounds, beſides the furres;
ſo that euery poore Sayler, that had but a ſingle ſhare, had
his charges and ſixteene pound ten ſhiltings for his ſeuen
moneths worke: but ſome of the company ſay, for ſixe
months in the Hercules, they receeued ſeuenteene pound
two ſhillings a ſhare.
               For to make triall this yeare there is gone ſix or ſeuen
ſayle from the weſt Country,Proofe 10. 1620. onely to fiſh, three of which
are returned; and (as I am certainely informed) haue
made ſo good a voyage, that euery Sayler for a ſingle
ſhare had twenty pounds for his ſeuen moneths worke,
which is more then in twenty moneths he ſhould haue
gotten, had he gone for wages any where. Now though all
the former ſhips haue not made ſuch good vyages as they
expected, by ſending opinionated vnſkilfull men, that
had not experienced diligence, to ſaue that they tooke;

nor take that there was; which now patience and pract
                     •
                  ſe
hath brought to a reaſonable kinde of perfection in
d
                     •
                  ſp
                     •
                  te of all D
                     •
                  tractors,For this next yeare 1621. it is reported 12. or 20. ſaile is a preparing. and Calumniations, the Countrey
yet hath ſatiſfied all, the defect hath beene in their
vſ
                     •
                  ng or abuſing it, not in it ſelfe, nor me.
               Heere I entreate your Honourable leaues to answer
ſome obiections. Many do thinke it ſtrange,
if this be true, I haue made no more vſe of it, and
reſt ſo long without employment. And I thinke it
more ſtrange they ſhould tax me before they haue
tried what I haue done, both by Sea and Land, as
well in Aſia, and Affrica, as Europe and America.
Theſe fourteene yeres I haue ſpared neither pains,
nor money, according to my abilitie, in the diſcouery
of Norumbega, where with some thirty ſeauen
men and boyes, the remainder of an hundred and
fiue, againſt the fury of the Saluages, I began that
plantation now in Virginia; which beginning (here
and there) coſt mee neare fiue yeares worke, and
more then fiue hundred pound of my owne eſtate;
beſide all the dangers, miſeries and incomberances,
and loſse of other imployments I endured gratìs.
From which bleſſed Virgin, where I stayed till I left
fiue hundred Engliſh, better prouided then euer I
was (ere I returned) sprung the fortunate habitation
of Somer Iles.
                  Burmudos.
               
               This Virgins siſter (called New-England, An. 1616
at my humble ſuite, by our moſt gracious Prince
Charles) hath bene neare as chargeable to mee and
my friends; from all which, although I neuer got
ſhilling, but it coſt mee a pound, yet I thinke my

selfe happy to see their proſperities.
               If it yet trouble a multitude to proceede vppon
theſe certainties, what thinke you I vndertooke,
when nothing was knowne, but that there was a
vaſt Land? I neuer had power and meanes to do
any thing (though more hath beene ſpent in formall
delayes then would haue done the buſineſſe)
but in such a penurious and miſerable maner, as
if I had gone a begging to builde an Vniuerſity;
where, had men bin as forward to aduenture their
purſes, as to crop the fruites of my Labours, thouſands
ere this, had been bettered by theſe deſignes.
Thus betwixt the ſpurte of Deſire, and the bridle
of Reaſon, I am neare ridden to death in a ring of
Deſpaire; the reines are in your hands, therefore
I entreate you to eaſe mee: and thoſe blame mee
(beleeue) this little may haue taught me, not to be
ſo forward againe at euery motion, vnleſſe I intended
nothing but to carry newes. For now they
dare aduenture a ſhippe, that, when I went firſt,
would not aduenture a groat, ſo they may be at
home againe by Michaelmaſſe; but to the purpoſe.
               By this all men may perceiue the ordinary performance
of this voyage in fiue or ſixe moneths,
the plenty of fiſh is moſt certainely approoued;
and it is certaine from Cannada and New England
hath come neare twenty thouſand Beuer skinnes,
within theſe fiue yeares. Now, had each of thoſe
ſhippes tranſported but sixe, or three pigs, as many
goates and hens, fruits, plants and ſeeds as I proiected▪
by this time there might haue beene victuall
for a thouſand men. But the deſire of preſent

gaine (in many) is ſo violent, and the indeuours of
many vndertakers ſo negligent, euery one so regarding
his priuate, that it is hard to effect any publique
good, and impoſſible to bring them into a
body, rule, or order, vnleſſe both Authoritie and
Mony aſſiſt experiences: it is not a worke for euery
one to plant a Colonie (but when a houſe is built,
it is no hard matter to dwell in it.) This requireth
all the beſt pars of art, iudgement, courage, honeſtie,
conſtancy, diligence and experience to doe
but neare well: and there is a great difference betwixt
Saying and Doing. But to conclude, the fiſhing
will go forward if you plant it or no; whereby
you may tranſport a colony for no great charge,
that in a ſhort time, might prouide ſuch fraughts,
to buy of vs their dwelling, as I would hope no
ſhip could goe or come emptie from New England.
               
               The charge of this is onely ſalt, nettes, hookes,
lines, kniues, Iriſh rugges, courſe cloth, beads, hatchets,
glaſſe and ſuch traſh, onely for fiſhing and
trade with the Saluages, beſides our owne neceſſarie
prouiſions, whoſe indeuours will quickely deſray
all this charge; and the Saluages haue intreated
me to inhabit where I will. Now all thoſe ſhips
haue bin fiſhed within a ſquare of two leagues, &
not one ſhip of all theſe, would yet aduenture further,
where queſtionleſſe 500. ſaile may haue their
fraught, better then in Iſland, Newfoundland, or elſewhere,
and be in their markets before the other can
haue their fiſh in their ſhips. Becauſe New Englands
fiſhing beginneth in mid-February, the other
not till mid-Maie, the progreſſion heereof tends

much to the aduancement of Virginia, and the Burmudas:
and will be a good friend in time of need to
the Inhabitants in New-found-land.
               
               The returnes made by the Weſterne ſhippes are
commonly divided into 3. parts; one for the owners
of the ſhippe, another for the maiſter and his
company, the third for the victulers; which courſe
being ſtill permitted, will be no hinderance to the
plantation, goe there neuer ſo many, but a meanes
of tranſporting that yearely for little or nothing,
which otherwiſe will coſt many a hundred of
pounds.
               If a Ship can gaine, twenty, thirty, fifty in the
hundred, nay neare three hundred for 100. in ſeuen
moneths, as you ſee they haue doone, ſpending
twice so much time in going and coming as in staying
there; were I there planted, ſeeing the varietie
of the fiſhings in their ſeaſons, ſerueth the moſt
part of the yeare; and with a little labour we might
make all the ſalt we neede vſe. I can conceiue no
reaſon to diſtruſt, but the doubling and trebling
their gaines that are at all the former charge, and
can fiſh but two months in a yeare: and if thoſe do
giue twenty, thirty, or forty ſhillings for an acre of
land, or ſhip Carpenters, Forgers of yron &c. that
buy all things at a deare rate, grow rich, when they
may haue as good of all needfull neceſſaries for taking
(in my opinion) should not grow poore; and
no commoditie in Europe doth more decay then
wood.
               Maiſter Dee recordeth in his Brittiſh Monarchie,
that King Edgar had a nauie of foure thouſand saile,

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
with which he yearely made his progreſſe about
this famous Monarchy of Great Brittany, largely
declaring the benefit thereof: whereupon it ſeems
he protected to our moſt memorable Queene Elizabeth,
the erecting of a Fleete of three ſcore ſaile,
he called a little Nauy Royall; immitating the admired
Pericles prince of Athens, that could neuer ſecure
that tormented eſtate, vntill he was Lord and
Captaine of the Sea.
               At this none neede wonder, for who knowes
not, her Royall Maieſtie during her life, by the incredible
aduentures of her Royall Nauy and valiant
Souldiers aud Sea-men; notwithſtanding all
treacheries at home, the protecting and defending
France and Holland, and re-conquering Ireland, yet
all the world, by Sea or Land, both feared, loued,
and admired good Queene Elizabeth.
               
               Both to maintaine and increaſe that incomparable
honour (God be thanked) to her incomparable
Succeſsour, our moſt Royall Lord and Soueraigne
King Iames, &c. this great Philoſopher hath
left this to his Maieſty and his kingdomes conſiderations.
               That if the Tenths of the Earth be proper to
God, it is alſo due by Sea, the Kings highwayes are
common to paſſe, but not to digge for mines or anie
thing, ſo Englands coaſts are free to paſſe, but
not to fiſh, but by his Maieſties prerogatiue.
               His Maieſtie of Spaine, permits none to paſſe the
Popes order for the Eaſt and Weſt Indies, but by his
permiſſion, or at their perills. If all that world be
ſo iuſtly theirs, it is no iniuſtice for England to make

as much vſe of her owne, as ſtrangers doe, that pay
to their owne Lords the tenth, and not to the owners
of thoſe Liberties any thing, whoſe ſubiects
may neither take nor ſell any in their territories;
which ſmall tribute, would maintaine his little Nauy
Royall, and not coſt his Maieſty a penny; and
yet maintaine peace with all forrainers, and allow
them more curteſie, then any Nation in the world
affords to England.
               
               It were a ſhame to alledge, that Holland is more
worthy to enioy our fiſhings as Lords thereof, becauſe
they haue more skill to handle it then we, as
they can our wooll, and vndreſſed cloth, notwithſtanding
all their wars and trouble some diſorders.
               To get mony to build this Nauy he ſaith, Who
would not ſpare the hundred penny of his Rents,
and the 500. penny of his goods; each ſeruant that
taketh 33. s. 4. d. wages, 4. pence, and euery forrainer
ſeuen yeares of age, 4. pence yearely for 7. yeares 3▪
not any of theſe but yearely they will ſpend 3. times
ſo much in pride, wantonneſſe or ſome ſuperfluity.
And doe any men loue the ſecurity of their eſtates
that are true ſubiects, would not of themſelues be
humble ſuters to his Maieſtie, to do this of free will
as a voluntary beneuolence, ſo it may be as honeſtly
and truly imployed as it is proiected, the pooreſt
mechanicke in this kingdome will gaine by it.
               If this be too much, would the honorable Aduenturers
be pleaſed to moue his Maieſtie, that but
the 200. penny of Rents, and the thouſandth peny
of Goodes might bee thus collected, to plant New
England, and but the tenth fiſh there taken, leauing

ſtrangers as they are. You might build ſhips of any
burden and numbers you pleaſe, fiue times
cheaper then you can doe heere, and haue good
marchandize for their fraught in this vnknowne
Land, to the aduauncement of Gods glorie, his
Church and Goſpel, and the ſtrengthening and reliefe
of a great part of Chriſtendome, without hurt
to any: 
                     •
                  o the terror of Pirates, the amazement of
enemies, the aſſiſtance of friends, the ſecuring
merchants, and ſo much increaſe of Nauigation, to
make Englands Trade and Shipping, as much as
any Nation in the world, beſides a hundred other
benefits, to the generall good of all true ſubiects,
and would cauſe thouſands yet ſnborne, bleſſe the
time, and all them that firſt put it in practiſe.
               Now, leſt it ſhould be obſcured, as it hath bene,
to private ends; or ſo weakely vndertaken, by our
ouer-weening incredulitie, that ſtrangers may poſſeſſe
it, whilſt we contend for New Englands goods,
but not Englands good. I preſent this vnto your
Lordſhip, and to all the Lords in England, hoping
(by your honorable good liking and approbation,)
to moue all the worthy Companies of this noble
City, and all the cities and Countries in the whole
Land to conſider of it, since I can find them wood,
and halfe victuall with the aforeſaide aduantages,
with what facility they may build and maintaine
this little Nauy Royall, both with honour, profite
and content, and inhabit as good a countrey as any
in the world, within that parallell, which with my
life, and what I haue, I will indeuour to effect, if
God pleaſe, and you permit.
               
                  
As for them whom pride or couetouſnes lulleth
aſleepe in a Cradle of ſlouthfull careleſneſſe; would
they but conſider, how all the great Monarchies of
the Earth haue bene brought to confuſion: or but
remember the late lamentable experience of Conſtantinople;
and how many Cities, Townes, and
Provinces, in the faire rich kingdomes of Hungaria,
Tranſilvania, and Wallachi; and how many thousands
of Princes, Earles, Barons, Knights, and
Merchants, haue in one day, loſt goods, liues, and
honours: or ſolde for ſlaues, like beaſts in a market
place; their wiues, children & ſeruants ſlain, or wandering
they knew not whither: dying, or liuing in
all extreamities of extreame miſeries and calamities.
Surely, they would not onely doe this, but
giue all they haue, to enioy peace and libertie at
home; or but adventure their perſons abroade, to
prevent the concluſions of a conquering foe, who
commonly aſſaulteth, and beſt prevaileth, where he
findeth wealth and plenty (moſt armed) with ignorance
and securitie.
               Much more I could ſay, but leſt I should be too
tedious to your more ſerious affaires, I humbly
craue your honorable and favorable conſtructions
and pardons, if any thing be amiſſe.
               If any deſire to bee further ſatiſfied, they may
reade my Deſcription of Virginia, and New England,
and peruſe them with their ſeuerall Mappes; what
defect you finde in them, they ſhall finde ſupplied
in mee, or in my Authors, that thus freely haue
throwne my ſelfe, with my Mite into the Treaſury
of my Countries good, not doubting but God will

ſhirre vp ſome noble ſpirits, to conſider and examine
it worthy Collumbus could giue the Spaniards
any ſuch certainties for his deſſigne, when Queene
Iſabell of Spayne ſet him forth with fifteene ſaile:
And though I can promiſe no mines of golde, yet
the warrelike Hollanders let vs immitate, but not
hate, whoſe wealth and ſtrength are good teſtimonies
of their treaſure gotten by fiſhing. Therefore
(honourable and worthy Countrymen) let not the
meanneſſe of the word Fiſh diſtaſte you, for it will
afford as good golde as the mines of Guiana, or Tubatu,
with leſſe hazard and charge, and more certaintie
and facilitie: and so I humbly reſt.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   