
      
         
            
            
            A BRIEFE AND LEARNED TREATISE, conteining a true deſcription of the Antichriſt, who was foretold by the Prophets and Apoſtles.
            AND AN EVIDENT PROOFE that the ſame agreeth vnto the Pope.
            
            WRITTEN IN LATIN BY M. George Sohn Doctor of Diuinitie, and publike profeſſor thereof at Heidelberg, And tranſlated into engliſh.
            Printed at Cambridge by IOHN LEGATE.
            1592
         
         
            
            
               
                  coat of arms or blazon
               
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ 
               TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND VERTVOVS Ladie, Katharine Counteſſe of Huntingdon, his especiall good Ladie, Grace and peace in Chriſt Ieſus.
            
            
               RIght Honourable Ladie: whoſoeuer is engraffed into the bodie of Chriſt, and duely conſidereth the manifold ſtratagems of the olde ſerpent, and his wicked inſtruments, muſt needs be mooued with mutuall compaſſion, to pitie their eſtate, and with all abilitie receiued from God, to preuent their ſubtilties, and to hinder their malicious proceedings. For if Sathan continually doe compaſſe the earth like a roaring lyon, ſeeking to deuoure: if

his children (hauing their fathers nature) doe compaſſe ſea & land, to withdraw from the faith: if both children and father, with all his angels of darkeneſſe, doe transforme them ſelues into Angels of light, to deceiue ifit were poſſible, he very elect: how much more ought wee to regarde our brethren, the children of God, leaſt they become the children of Hell, be deuoured of the great àragon, and be drawne to haue pleaſure in vnrighteouſneſſe, and to worſhip the beaſt. Beholde howe they hazard their goods, their landes, their libertie, and their liues, and being, as it were, inflamed with the fire of hell, they come amongst vs to ſet on fire the Temple and citie of our God, to burne vp the corne, the oliues, and the vineyard of the Lord of hoſts; that is to ſay, more plainly; theſe Romiſh and Rhemiſh foxes endevour by all means to poyſon our youth with the leauen of popiſh opinions, to confirme the aged in their olde ſuperſtitions, and to withdraw all men as well from the holy ſeruice of Chriſt, as from their loyal obedience to their gracious ſoueraigne. Therefore it is full time, that wee ſhould all ſay with the ſpouſe in the Can. Take vs the foxes, not only the greateſt, but euē the litle foxes which deſtroy our vines: and further to afford all

that litle helpe we can, for the quenching of theſe Antichriſtian firebrands. This mooued the author of this treatiſe, * 
                  Doctor Sohn publike profeſſor of Diuinitie at Heidelberg. The matter of this booke.
                as diuers other very godly and learned men, to write diuers books for the benefit of the Church: amongst which, this ſeemeth very worthie both his paines of writing, and our deligence in reading thereof. For here is deliuered a aplain and ſound deſcription of Antichriſt, and the ſame ſo mightily applied and ſurely faſtned vpon the Pope, that he muſt either change his nature, which is vnpoſſible, or elſe be enfolded within this concluſion, The Pope is Antichriſt. Here he is moſt liuely painted foorth vnto you by his name, qualities, and progenie: by his doctrine, miracles, and authoritie: by his life, his habitation, and the time of his reuelation, continuance, and vtter deſtruction: here the doctrine of Chriſt is oppoſed to that of Antichriſt, and ſoundly confirmed, not with the weake reede of humane conſtitutions, nor with the ſand of mans traditions and authoritie, but with the ſacred rock of Chriſt, his Apoſtles, Euangeliſts, and Prophets: ſo that though the windes blowe, and the raine fall, and the floods be at, and the gates of hell be opened againſt the ſame, yet it ſhall not fall: for it

is grounded vpon this rocke, The word of the Lord endureth for euer.
            
            Therefore who ſoeuer pleaſeth to ſee the truth of this great controuerſie, may within fewe houres know (and that out of the word of God) what we ought to iudge concerning the Pope; namely that hee is Antichriſt. Whereupon it will follow, that as the Babylon of Antichriſt is not the Ieruſalem of Chriſt, nor the religion of the beaſt, the worſhip of the Lamb: ſo the Popiſh Church is not Bethel but Beth-auen, not the Church of Chriſt but the ſynagogue of Satan: and the religion of the Pope, is not the religion of Chriſt, but the ſuperſtitious homage of the curſed beaſt. So that it cānot be but a lewde practiſe of them, who endeuour to make an vnion of two religions, No vnion of the two religions. which differ in them ſelues as light and darkeneſſe, who doe altogether forget that heauenly voyce, Reuel. 18. 4. Goe out of her my people, that ye be not partakers in her ſinnes, and that ye receiue not of her plagues.
            Nowe that many may be benefited by this learned treatiſe, beeing earneſtly entreated and greatly vrged by a good friende of mine: I haue aduentured to expreſſe

my authors meaning, after a plaine manner in our owne language, and to commit the ſame to the bleſſing of God, and the friendly acceptation of the Chriſtian Reader.
            And theſe my firſt fruits of this kinde, I am bolde to dedicate vnto your Honour, moſt Honourable Ladie, beſeeching you to accept of this as of a ſmall, yet a publike teſtimonie of my bounden duetie, thankefull remembrance, and heartie affection, which I can not any way expreſſe, but doe entirely beare toward your Honour, and the reſt of your moſt Honourable name and alliance. Whoſe Honourable fauour and goodneſſe, (the fruit of true faith, ſyncere loue, and pure religion) as it hath beene comfortable to many of Gods children, and especially vouchfafed to my Father, my ſelfe, and other friendes, ſo is it a worke which God him ſelfe will regard and reward in mercy, with an immortall crowne of euerlaſting glorie: Who keepe, direct, and bleſſe your Honour, with the right Honourable my good Lorde, and all yours in Chriſt Ieſus, that beeing furniſhed with all spirituall graces and temporarie benefits, needefull for this life and the life to come, you may continually walke in the waies of righteouſnes,

and enioye at the length the incomprehenſible ioyes of the kingdome of heauen, the end of your hope, the ſaluation of your ſoules, through Christ Ieſus.
            Amen.
            
               Your Honours
moſt humble bounden in the Lord.
N. G.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               THE POPE OF Rome is that Antichriſt OF VVHOME THE Prophets and Apoſtles haue Prophecied.
            
               HAuing heretofore diſcourſed concerning Chriſt, that is, the perſon, the office, and the eſtate of Chriſt; we will now entreate concerning Antichriſt: that the glorie of Chriſt maie be ſomewhat the better vnderſtood: becauſe, that (according to the common ſaying) Things contrarie appeare more euidently by their compariſon.
            
            
               
               Antichriſt in generall is hee, who The definitiō of Antichriſt in generall. doeth any waie oppoſe him ſelfe to the

doctrine of Chriſt, whome in word he profeſſeth to follow: or, who doeth oppugne Chriſt, vnder the name and pretence of Chriſt: for thus he is deſcribed vnto vs, 1. Ioh. 2. 18. & v. 22. Chap. 4. v. 3. & 2. Ioh. 7.
            
               
               Antichriſt is of two kindes: for There be two kinds of Antichriſtes. either hee is aduerſarie onelie to one parte of the doctrine of Chriſt, or elſe almoſt to the wholl bodie thereof.
            
                Of the firſt ſorte are all heretikes, which haue beene euer ſince the Apoſtles 1 times, and yet continue vnto this daie: as were Cerinthus, Ʋalentinus, Marcion, Sabellius, Arius, Neſtorius, Eutiches, Pelagius, and the reſt: who haue oppoſed themſelues againſt either the perſon, or office of Chriſt: and of this kinde ſpeaketh 1. Ioh. 1. 2, 18.
            
                Of the ſecond kinde is ſome one 2 notable and principall aduerſarie of Chriſt, who is called Antichriſt, by way of primacie, ſuperioritie, or principalitie: and vnto whome the Antichriſtes, which are of the former ſorte, haue onely (as it were his forerunners) paued and prepared the way 2. Theſ. 2. 7. 1. Ioh. 4. 3.
            
               
               
6 And what this Antichrist is, and who hee ſhould be, is now chiefelie to be enquired, becauſe at this preſent, the controuerſie betwixt vs and the Papiſts concerneth him: wherein we will eſpeciallie declare, what is that which wee defend.
            
                Now let it not ſeeme ſtrange to any, that we doe ſomwhat diſſent from ſome of the ancient fathers in former times. For before ſuch time, as Antichriſt was come into the world, and before hee was reueiled: the interpretation of that prophecie, which was not then fulfilled, was verie hard. But now ſeeing he is come into the worlde, and remaineth and reigneth in the ſame: in ſo much, that the euent & the experience of the thing it ſelfe, is verie anſwerable to the prophecies of the Prophets and Apoſtles: it is more eaſie to determine thereof.
            
                Firſt therfore, this Antichriſt (who is ſo termed by the way of excellencie, both in the ſcripture and in the writings of the fathers) is alſo called by other The names of Antichriſt. names in the holie ſcripture: namelie, The man of ſinne, the ſonne of perdition,
               
               the Adverſarie: Abaddon, Apollyon 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : the king of Locuſts: the beast: the whore: the dragon: the falſe prophet: the Angell of the deepe, and ſuch like, as ye maie find in the 2. Theſſalonians and the ſecond chapter: as alſo in the Reuelation. Furthermore, there haue beene, as it were, certaine Types or figures of him in the olde Teſtament: The types. as namely, Antiochus Epiphanes, by whome Daniel deſcribeth Antichriſt (whoſe Prophecie extendeth euen to theſe laſt daies) and diuers other, who were the principall and capitall enemies of the auncient Church, and people of God, Zachar. 11. v. 15, 16, 17, &c.
            
                But thus hee is defined in the Scripure: to witte, that hee is a man, The deſcription of Antichriſt in speciall. who vſurpeth a kingdome, who profeſſeth the name of Chriſt, but yet oppoſeth him ſelfe vnto Chriſt, and to the doctrine of Chriſt, who hath a double authoritie, and both of them ſupreme: the one ſpirituall or eccleſiaſticall, the other ciuill or ſecular, who vaunteth of himſelfe as God, with ſignes, and miracles, (though

altogether falſe and deceitfull) hee is an idolater, an hypocrite, a blaſphemer, hee is ambitious, proude, and not vnder lawe, hee is a ſingle man, and vnmarried, but yet a filthie fornicator: hee refraineth from certaine meates, but yet aboundeth with all exceſſe, riotte, and deliciouſneſſe: hee is couetous, craftie, vaine, falſe, and cruell: who after the ruine and deuiſion of the fourth I meane the Romane) Monarchie, by little and little ariſing, euen out of the rubbiſh and reliques thereof, is to bee ſituated at Rome, euen in the Temple of God (that is, in the Church) by the power and effectuall operation of Sathan: finallie, he is to be reueiled in the laſt times of the worlde, and at the length to be vtterlie aboliſhed at the glorious comming and appearance The declaration of the deſcription. of Chriſt Ieſus.  This is the definition or deſcription of that Antichriſt: which wee will briefelie declare by teſtimonie of the ſcriptures.
            
                Wherefore to proue that this Antichriſt is a man, the ſcripture witneſſeth it, 2. Theſ. 2. 3. Dan. 7. 6. where

he is verie expreſſelie called a man. A man.
            
            
                And that he is not ſimplie any one perſon alone, nor any particular or ſingular man, but one ſort or kinde of men, which (as one man, or as a certaine order, or companie and ſtate of A kingdome or ſtate. men) gouerneth and executeth the authoritie of the kingdome, it appeareth plainelie in the 2. Theſſ. 2. 3. Dan. 7. 8. Revel. 17. 1. & 18. 3. In which places in truth, this Antichriſt is deſcribed, not as any one perſon or particular man, & (as the Logitians ſpeake) an Individuum: but as a corporation of men, and That is, a proper and ſingular perſon, as Leo, Pius, Iohn, Gregorie. as it were, a certaine kingdome: wherein yet, there is alwaie ſome one, who excelleth and ruleth ouer the reſt, who ſetteth his owne marke vpon them, Reuel. 13. 17. For firſt Paul mencioneth an Apostacie, that is, a generall departure, & reuolting from the faith, which indeed maketh one bodie or corporation, and one kingdome: this is a matter which can not be effected ſuddenlie, but requireth many yeeres thereunto. Further he proueth verie clearely, that the miſterie of iniquitie, ſhould be compounded and conſiſt of manie errours,

& grow by little and little. Thirdlie he affirmeth, that the kingdome ſhould continue and endure a long ſpace, to wit, vntill it ſhould be vtterlie aboliſhed, by the comming of the Lorde at the end of the world.
            This kingdome is ſignified by the cruell beaſt and by Babylon, Reuel. 13. 11. & 18 Chapter, as Irenaeus witneſſeth in his fift booke, and the thirteenth chapter: and Ierome is of the ſame minde; and Auguſtine in his 20 booke De Civitate Dei, and the 19 chapter. Beda alſo and diuers others did ſee the ſame. Further it is ſignified by manie waters, Reuel. 17. 1. And Iohn ſpeaketh of the chiefe and principall citizens, and ſubiects of his kingdome, ſaying after this maner, There ſhalbe Locuſts, having vpon their heades crownes like to gold. Reuel. 9. 3, 7. And againe, there ſhall be three vncleane ſpirites proceeding out of his mouth. Reuel. 16. 13. Finally, all both great ond ſmall, rich and poore, bonde and free, ſhall receiue the marke of the beaſt in their right handes, and in their foreheads, Reuel. 13. 16.
            
                Further, that which followeth,

that he is aduerſarie to Chriſt, that hee Aduerſarie to Chriſt. denieth him in deed, whome in worde hee profeſſeth, and that he corrupteth almoſt all the doctrine of Chriſt, or at the leaſt defendeth very ſtoutly the reuolting from the doctrine of Chriſt, (for which verie cauſe he is an Arch-hereticke, or rather, the Patriarke and prince of heretiques) is witneſſed by the Prophet Daniel chap. 7. ver. 25. ſaying, Hee ſhall speake wordes againſt the moſt High. And by Saint Paul 1. Theſſ. 2. 3. Where he foretelleth, that there ſhuld be firſt are volting before that the Antichriſt ſhould come: Adding further, that Antichrist ſhould ſit in the temple of God: that is, in the Chriſtian Church. For although Antichriſt profeſſe himſelfe a friend and diſciple vnto Chriſt, yet ſhall hee ſet him ſelfe againſt Chriſt, as it were in the name of Chriſt, or vnder colour and pretence of the profeſſion of Chriſtianitie: That is more plainelie thus: Though he doe not openlie oppugne and reſiſt the doctrine of Chriſt, but maketh profeſſion thereof, reſeruing both the titles and names: yet ſhall he bring impietie into the roome

of the doctrine of pietie, which hee diſſembleth, and ſhall drawe men by little and little, out of the Kings high waie of faith, by his ordinations and traditions. And of this iudgement is Hilarie, who thus writeth againſt Auxentius: Hee ſhalbe contrarie vnto Chriſt, vnder the ſhowe of preaching the Goſpell: that our Lord Ieſus Chriſt may then be denied, when men ſuppoſe that he is preached. And Chriſoſtome alſo is of the ſame minde, in his 49. Homilie vpon Matthew.
            
            
                As for his double authoritie, Spirituall 
               Twofold authoritie. and Temporall, it appeareth by the two kinds of his names: as, firſt that he is called a king by Daniel, and is reckoned amongſt thoſe ten earthlie kings (of whome conſiſteth the Romane Monarchie) and muſt ſpring vp in the midſt of them, ariſing vp frō a very low degreee, till at length hee ſubdue all the other kings vnto him ſelfe, Dan. 7. 24. & cap. 8. 11. & cap. 11. 36. Secondly, this is he whom Zacharie calleth the fooliſh ſhepheard, cap 11. 15. And whome Iohn nameth a falſe prophet, Reuel. 16. 13. &c. 19. 20. & chap. 20. 10.
            
                Touching his ſignes and miracles, 
               Miracles.
               
the Apoſtle Paul is witnes, 2. Theſ. 2. 9. & Chriſt, Mat. 7. 22. & Iohn, Reuel. 13. 13. & 16. 14.
            
                And that he vaunteth himſelfe as A vaunt as God. God, it is taught vnto vs, Dan. 7. 8. The mouth speaking preſumptuous words: &c. 11. 36. He ſhal aduance & extoll himſelfe aboue euery God. & 2. Th. 2. 4. He ſhal exalt himſelf aboue al that is called God, or is worſhipped. And to conclude, in Dan. 7. 25. He ſhall imagin that he is able to chāge both times and lawes, at his owne pleaſure.
            
            
                For his idolatrie, it is taught by Dan. 11. 36. He ſhall doe worſhip vnto the 
               His Idolatry. 
               god Maozim, that is, the god of defences, &c: as alſo Reuel. 17. 2. & 18. 3. 9.
            
                What his hypocriſie is, we learne Hypocriſie. Dā. 7. 8. His eyes are as the eyes of a mā: & v. 25. He ſhal speake words againſt the moſt high: & Reuel. 13. 11. He ſhall haue two hornes of a lamb, but ſhal speake like a dragon: that is, he ſhal couer a woolfe vnder a ſheeps skinne: & 2. Tim. 3. 5. Hauing a forme or ſhew of godlines, &c.
            
            
                Further, his pride & ambition is Pride. manifeſt, Dan. 7. 20. He had a mouth ſpeaking preſumptuouſly: & ch. 8. 25. He ſhall extoll himſelfe, &c. 1. Tim. 3. 2. There ſhal
               
               be men both arrogant and proud: & 2. Pet. 2. 10. They ſhall deſpiſe gouernment (that is, the ciuill magiſtrate, ordeined by God) bold, and preſumptuous, and ſuch as ſtande in their conceit: in which manner alſo Iude writeth, verſ. 8.
            
                His blaſphemie: that is to ſay, that Blaſphemie. he ſhould be a blaſphemer & anatheiſt; we ſee it, Dan. 11. 39. He ſhall speake againſt the God of gods: & Reuel. 13. 6. He ſhall ſpeake blasphemie againſt God.
            
            
                His licentiouſnes, to wit, that hee Licentiouſnes. ſhould be aboue all, lawleſſe, making & breaking lawes at his pleaſure, is taught vs, 2. Theſ. 2. 4. Dan. 7. 25. He ſhal ſuppoſe that he is able to change both times & laws: & chap. 11. 3. He ſhall doe euen what he list.
            
            
                His ſingle life is ſetdown, Dan. 11. 37. Single life. 
               He ſhall not regard nor vnderſtand the deſires of women: where is ment, as Ierome ſaith, that vnder pretence of holines, he ſhould be an enemie vnto marriage: ſo in the 1. to Tim. 4. 3. He ſhal forbid to make marriages. As for his filthie fornication, and licences to vſe and follow outragious and diſſolute luſts, wee finde it, 2. Pet. 2. 10, 14.
            
               
               
24 Concerning his abſtinence from certaine meats, and his faſts, wee haue Abſtinence. that alſo, 1. Tim. 4. 3. They ſhall command to abſteine frō meats. Where the meaning is not ſimplie to be vnderſtood of abſtiſtinence from all kind of meats: (for this would neuer haue beene effected, nor yet could poſſiblie be obſerued) but onely of making ſome choice and difference of meates. Yet of his exceſſe and effeminate and daintie life, wee are taught, Reuel. 18. 3, 9. and in 2. Pet. 10. and in the Epiſtle of Iude and the 8. verſ.
            
                Touching his couetouſnes and his riches, we may read Dan. 1. 1. 39. He ſhall deuide the earth for gaine: as alſo Reuel. 18. 3. 2. Couetouſnes. Pet. 2. 3. 14.
            
                Of his craftines, vanitie, lying, and impudencie, is mention made in the 8. of Dan. 25. Deceit ſhal proſper in his hand, 
               Craft. 
               and hee ſhall extoll him ſelfe in his heart: and in the 23. verſe of the ſame, it is ſaid that he is of a fierce, impudent, and ſhameleſſe countenance.
            
            
                His crueltie (which is eſpecially bent againſt the Saints) is taught, Dan. 7. 21. I ſaw that horne make warre againſt 
               Crueltie. 
               the Saints: and in the 25. verſe. Hee ſhall
               
               grind to powder the Saints of the moſt high: and chap. 8. 24. & 11. Reuel. 11. 7. &c. and chap. 17. 6. & the 19. 19.
            
                Concerning his founder & principall author, to wit, that he was to appeare by little & little, by the craft of Satan; His author. who hath thought of this myſterie, and hath had it in hande, euer ſince the Apoſtles time, we doe learne in the 2. to the Theſſ. 2. where it is ſaid, Whoſe comming is by the operation and working of Sathan: and in the 1. Tim. 41. where the doctrine of Antichriſt is called the doctrine of deuils: and in the 13. of the Reuel. 4. where the dragon is called author and cauſe of the whole ſtate of Antichriſt, which is conueyed into the Romane Empire: and in the 18. where Babylon, that is, the ſeat and kingdome of Antichriſt, is called the habitation of deuils, the houſe of foule spirits, and a cage of euery vncleane and foule bird, chap. 18. 2. The which the Lord will ſuffer and permit ſo to be, till his wrath be accompliſhed, Dan. 11. 36. The faithfull be tried, and they which are tried, be made manifeſt, Dan. 12. 10. & 1. Ioh. 2. 19. and that the contempt of the earth may thus be puniſhed,

according to that of S. Paul, 2. Theſ. 2. 10, 11.
            
                Now for the time, to wit, that he ſhould then appeare, whē the Romane The time of his appearāce Empire ſhould be diſtracted & diſmembred, it is taught, Dan. 7. 8. 24. & 2. Theſ. 2. 7. For both Tertul. & Ierome, & others more, doe interpret that place of Paul of the diuiſion and ruine of the Romane Empire: as alſo Reuel. 13. 11. 12. For although the myſterie of iniquitie began to worke, as yet ſecretly vnder-hand, &, as it were, by vndermining, euen from the daies of the Apoſtles, 2. Theſ. 2. 7. 1. Ioh. 2. 18. yet afterwards Antichriſt was to iſſue & break forth with full ſtreame, & euidently to ſhew himſelfe, as it were, proceeding out of the ruines of the Romane Empire, 2. Theſ. 2. 7. And this time Iohn ſeemeth to note, Reuel. 13. 18. whē hee faith, that Antichriſt ſhould come 666 yeeres after, to wit, after the birth of Chriſt: His words are theſe, Let him that hath wiſdom count the number of the yeres: for it is the number of a man, & it is 666.
            
                Concerning the place, that he was His place. to ſpring out of the ruines of the Romane Monarchie, & ſo ſhould appeare in the Romane Empire; it appeareth alſo by Daniel & Paul, as we haue touched

heretofore: as alſo by the 17. of the Reue. 3. where the purple whore, who deceiueth the people, is ſaide, to ſit vpon the beaſt with ten hornes. For that beaſt with ten hornes ſignifieth the fourth Monarchie, to wit, that of Rome, Dan. 7.
            
                As for his throne & ſeat, to wit, that His throne. he ſhal ſit in the city of Rome: firſt, Daniel witneſſeth the ſame, when as he placeth this ſeat betwixt 2. ſeas, (for Rome & Italy are ſituated twixt 2. ſeas) Adriaticū
                & Tyrrhenū. Secōdly Iohn, whē he maketh mentiō of Babylō, as Rev. 14. 8. & 16. 19. & 18. 2. By which places the anciēt doctors of the Church (& eſpecially Ierome) do vnderſtand Rome, as alſo by that place, 1. Pet. 5. 13. & further, whē 
               Iohn doth cal it the citie with 7. hils, & the queen of al, as it is Rev. 17. 9. 18. For Rome was thē called by thoſe names, euen by profane writers. Finally, whē as he ſaith, Rev. 17. 1. that the whore ſhal ſit vpō many waters (that is, aboue much people & many nations, as him ſelfe in the 15. verſe expoūdeth hīſelf) & in the great city which hath the rule ouer the kings of the earth.
            
            
                Now that he ſhould ſit in the tēple of 
               He ſits in the Church. 
               God, that is, in the Church, it is taught vs, 2. Th. 2. 4. for by this ſittīg here, is not mēt corporal & bodily placing, but a certain

dominion: and by temple is ment, neither that of Ieruſalem (which long ago was ouerthrown & raſed, & which is neuer again to be repaired, according to that prophecie in the 9. of Dan. 27.) nor yet any other externall building, but onely the Church, which is the temple & houſe of God. 1. Tim. 3. 15. And therefore herby is ſignified, that Antichriſt ſhould publikely vſurp the chiefe juriſdiction & authority in the Church of God; yet ſhuld he not profeſſe any open & flat denial of Chriſt, but onely he ſhould bring in extreame impietie, vnder the pretence of the doctrine of Chriſt.
            
                Further, that he is to continue vntil His continuance. the very laſt end & day of the world, it is taught 7. Dan. 26. & 8. 25. & 11. 45. & 12. 1, 2. Rev. 19. 21. & 20. 10. In which places ſo ſoone as the end of Antichriſt is rehearſed, immediatly followeth mē
               tion of the laſt reſurrection, and not a word of any other worldly kingdome.
            
                Cōcerning the euēt or iſſue, to wit, The event or his reuelation that he ſhould be reueled & diſcouered in the laſt times of the world, & that his kingdō is to be battred & thrown down by the preaching of the Goſpell, the Apoſtle

witneſſeth 2. Th. 2. 3. & Iohn meaneth the ſame thing, by the ruine & fall of Babylō, Reuel. 14. 8. & 16. 19. & 18. 2. And to cōclude, Iohn prophecied the ſame of him, Reu. 14. where three Angels, that is, three Teachers, are appointed to reueile Antichriſt, to whome are added other two in the 18 of the Reuelation, as alſo in the 17. verſ. 16. 17. where he ſaieth, The tenne hornes which thou ſaweſt &c. that is, manie Princes and Eſtates of the Romane Empire, ſhall reuolt from the whore, and ſhall giue her kingdome vnto the beaſt.
            
                For although at all times, there ſhall alwaies be ſome, who ſhall oppoſe themſelues to Antichriſt, to his corruptions and idolatrie, and ſpeake againſt the ſame, Reuel. 10. 11. & 11. 3. & 12. 7. Yet here by is inſinuated, that in this laſt time of the worlde Antichriſt was more fullie and clearelie to be reueiled by the great and ſingular goodneſſe of God: by men endued with the ſpirit of Elias and Enoch: and that the doctrine of Chriſt ſhould be brought to light, and Antichriſt grieuouſly tormented.
            
               
               
36 Finally, touching his deſtruction His deſtruction. and ende, that is, that he ſhould bee vtterly aboliſhed by Chriſt himſelfe at the laſt day, at his glorious and royall appearance, (who is now indeede reueiled to be the Antichriſt) and be puniſhed eternallie, is taught vs, 2. Theſſ. 2. 8. and may be gathered out of the 7. chap. of Dan. 26. & 8. 25. & 11. 45. and 12. 1. and out of the Reuelat. chap. 19. 20, 21. & 20. 10. as we alſo ſpake a little before, touching the continuance of the kingdome of Antichriſt.
            
                For although the kingdome of Antichriſt ſhalbe ſhaken before the laſt day and comming of Chriſt, and ſhall be pulled downe, as it were, by piecemeale, by reaſon of thereuolting of Prouinces: yet there ſhall alwaie remaine a ſtate and forme thereof: but euen this alſo ſhall be vtterly aboliſhed, in the laſt time of the worlde.
            
                This is our definition of Antichriſt, and the declaration of the ſame definition out of the old & new Teſtament. But the Papiſtes define it after a The Papiſtes deſcription of Antichriſt. farre other manner: to wit, that Antichriſt is one ſingular & particular man,

who ſhoulde ariſe of the Tribe of Dan, and be circumciſed: who (being accepted of the Iewes for the Meſſias) ſhould reigne and tyrannize at Ieruſalem the ſpace of three yeeres and ſixe moneths, and whome Chriſt ſhould at the length kill in mount Oliuet, whileſt he entendeth to aſcend vp into heauen: Which definition of theirs will be more examined in our diſputations.
            
               That the Pope is Antichriſt.
            
            
                HItherto wee haue declared, what Antichriſt is: now wee will ſhewe who he is, and to whome this definition before ſet downe will beſt agree.
            
                Therefore wee affirme, that the Pope of Rome is that Antichriſt: & thus The proofe that the Pope is Antichriſt. we prooue it. For to whomſoeuer the definition of Antichriſt doeth agree, it neceſſarily followeth, that hee is Antichriſt: but this definition of Antichriſt hath agreed fitly to the Pope of Rome, euer ſince the death of Gregorie the great, and the ſlaughter of the Emperour Mauritius.
            
            
               
               
41. For the Pope of Rome (euer ſince the death of Gregorie and Mauricius) is the man, who by continuall ſucceſſion and ſet order, hath bene preſident 
                  The proofe of the aſſumption by view in particular. 1 Aman, 2 Whoruleth a ſtate.
                to a certaine bodie or ſtate of men, and hath giuen them his marke: wherein the Monkes and Cleargie ſhauelings, (like vnto the crowned locuſtes) haue their ſhauing as crownes vpon their heads, that they might ſignifie thereby, that they are kings and prieſtes, and their routes diſperſed and ſpread in all places of Chriſtendome, and thoſe many waters, vpon which the great whore the mother of the fornications of the earth, ſeemeth both to ſit and reigne, Reuel. 18.
            
                The Pope alſo profeſſeth Chriſtianitie, 3 The Popes profeſſion of Chriſtianitie, to which hee is indeede an aduerſarie.
                ſaying, that he is the follower and the Vicar of Chriſt: as doe alſo his chiefe ſeruants at this day, who giue themſelues a newe name, Ieſuites: hee alſo retaineth the Bible, that is, the ſcriptures written by the Prophets and Apoſtles; and the Sacraments alſo inſtituted by Chriſt, and yet hee is an aduerſarie to Chriſt and to his doctrine.
            
               
               
43 For though Chriſt alone be the heade of the Catholique or vniuerſall 1 He challengeth the offices of Chriſt.
                Church, beeing alwaies preſent to gouerne the ſame, Epheſ. 1 21, 22. & 4. 15▪ & 5, 23. Coloſſ. 1. 8, Though he be alſo the onely ſpouſe of the Church. 2. Cor. 11, 2. Epheſ, 5. 29, Finally, though hee bee alſo the onely prince, the chiefe ſhephearde, and the high prieſt vnto his Church. 1. Pet. 2. 5. and chap. 5. 4. Heb. 6. 20. & chap. 7. 26. & chapt. 9. 11. Alway liuing to make interceſſion for vs. Rom. 8. 34. Heb. 7. 25. Yet notwithſtanding the Pope of Rome doeth arrogate this office, and theſe properties vnto himſelfe, and vaunteth himſelfe, that hee is the chiefe head, high prieſt, and ſacrificer, and the Oecumenicall and generall Biſhop, Paſtour and doctour of the whole Church here vpon earth. For ſo ſaith Clement, Paſtoralis, de Sentent. & re Iudic. A paſtorall charge is enioyned to vs of God over all Nations of Chriſtendome, &c. C. 1. extravag. de empt, & vend. We being governers of the vniuerſall Church by the Lords appointment &c. &c. reg. extravag. de prebend. Beeing called to the gouernment
               
               of the vniuerſall Church by heauenlie ordinance. &C. 1 de treuga & pace. Being called to the gouernment of the vniuerſall Church by the mercy of God, ſo dispoſing it. C. 3. de Elect. The holy Church of Rome, which (by the Lords appointment, being as it were the mother and mistreſſe of all the faithfull, which belong to Christ) hath obtained of God ſuperioritie ouer the reſt. & diſtinct. 22. Sacroſancta. This Apoſtolicallchayre, to wit, Rome, is appointed the head and principall, and as it were, the Hinge: for as the doore is turned and gouerned vpon the hinge; ſo all Churches are to bee ruled by the authoritie of this. & Cap. Ʋnam ſanctam, extravag. de mator. & obed. Therefore there is one bodie of one and the ſame onely Church, & one bead, not two, far that were monſtrous, to wit, Chriſt and the vicar of Chriſt, Peter and Peters ſucceſſour. & Cap. fundament. de elect. 6. So likewiſe at this day, the Pope in his bulles challengeth authoritie ouer all Churches of euerie people and nation. So alſo doeth hee call the Church his ſpouſe and bride. C. quoniā de imminut. in 6. ſaying after this manner, Wee being loth to neglect the
               
               righteouſneſſe of our ſelues, & the Church our ſpouſe. In like maner alſo hee ſpeaketh, cap. inter corporalia &c. licet in tantum de tranſlat. Epiſc.
            
            
                Secondly, the Pope hath violated and corrupted almoſt all the doctrine 2. The Pope hath corrupted the doctrine of Chriſt, as appeareth by the oppoſition of theſe particulars.
                of Chriſt, ſo that he is not onely an heretike, but an Archheretique, the ringleader, and the Patriarke of heretikes: for hee hath not onelie maintained one errour onely againſt the foundation, but hath heaped vp manie one vpon the necke of another, and defended them with might and maine, as may bee plainely vnderſtoode by this compariſon and oppoſition of the doctrine of Chriſt and the Pope.
            
                The ſcripture, or rather Chriſt Voluntarie worſhip. in the ſcripture teacheth, that God is in vaine worſhipped with the precepts of men, Matth. 15. It condemneth voluntarie ſeruice. Col. 2. 2, 3. Further it declareth, that al things neceſſary to ſaluation, are committed to writing by the Apoſtles, & are to be ſought for in theit writings, 2. Tim. 3. 6. & that he is Anathema, that is, accurſed, who teacheth or bringeth any other doctrine. Gal. 18. But the Pope
               
doeth vrge the traditions of men, bringeth in a will-worſhip, and letteth not to ſay, that the ſcripture is obſcure, maimed, and imperfect: as it is in the counſell of Trident. Seſſ. 4. 1. and elſe where.
            
                The ſcripture teacheth, that there 2. One God.
                is but one onely God, who knoweth all things, is almightie. and the gouernour of the worlde, and all thinges therein, Deut. 6. 4. Mark. 12. 29. 1. Kings 8. 39. 2. Cron. 6. 30. Eſa. 40. 13. Rom. 16. 27. 1. Tim. 6. 15. and in other places beſides. But the Pope, making as it were, a diuiſion of the diuine Maieſtie, doeth transferre the ſame vnto certaine petie gods, and aſſociates vnto him. For looke how many he hath canonized for ſaintes, ſo manie hath he erected to bee gods, and lordes, and rulers of the worlde. Amongſt which, one is ouer the raine, another is for faire weather: one for diſeaſes, another for health: finallie, one for this cauſe, another for that, they hauing their taskes and offices aſſigned ſeuerally vnto them.
            
                The ſcripture teacheth, that God

alone is to be called vpon, Deut. 6. 13. 3. Invocation of God.
                Math. 4. 10. Act. 10. 25. & 14. 11. Reuel. 19. 10. & 22. 9. But the Pope, hee prayeth vnto the deade, and teacheth that they are to be prayed vnto.
            
                The Scripture teacheth, that we 4. Idols.
                ſhould abhorte idols, Exod. 20. 4. Deut. 4. 23. 1. Ioh. 5. 21. Reuel. 18. 4. But the Pope doeth erect and ſet vp idols euery where to be worſhipped.
            
                The Scripture teacheth, that 5. One high Prieſt.
                now there is one onely high Prieſt and Sacrificer, to wit, Chriſt; and that there is but one onely Oblation, Heb. 6. 20. and 9. 26, 28. and chap. 10. 12. But the Pope hath ſubſtituted an infinite number in ſtead of Chriſt, who doe euerie day offer to God a reall and propitiatorie ſacrifice, to wit, the bodie and bloode of Chriſt in the Maſſe.
            
                The Scripture teacheth, that 6. One Mediatour.
                there is one onely Mediatour and Interceſſour betwixt God and man, to wit, the man Ieſus Chriſt, 1. Tim. 2. 5. 1. Ioh. 2. 1. Rom. 8. 34. Heb. 7. 24. and 9. 24. But the Pope hath ſuborned almoſt an infinite number of dead men, to be mediatours, interceſſours, and ſpokeſmen, and

eſpecially the Virgine Marie in ſtead of Chriſt, as is in the Councill of Trident.
            
            
                The Scripture teacheth, that all 7. Chriſts power.
                power in heauen and earth is giuen and graunted vnto Chriſt, and that he is exalted aboue all principalities, and is appointed Lord of all things, Math. 28. 18. Act. 2. 36. Epheſ. 1. 21. Further, that he is the head of the militāt Church here vpon earth, as was ſaide before. Whereupon Gregorie the great ſaith, That he is the forerunner of Antichriſt, who ſoeuer ſhould challenge vnto him ſelfe the title of generall Biſhop: who (that hee might leaue vnto his ſucceſſours an example of humilitie) was the firſt that called him ſelfe the ſeruant of the ſeruants of God.
            
            And likewiſe the Councill of Carthage, and Pelagius the Pope, were of the mind, diſt. 96. can. Nullus. But the Pope, he placeth Chriſt (who is now in heauen exalted vnto the right-hand of his Father) not onely inferiour to his Father (with the Arrians) but alſo ſomewhat inferiour to his mother, and willeth that ſhee ſhould by her mortherly authoritie

and priuiledge, to commaund her Sonne, &c. And for him ſelfe hee ſtandeth vpon it, that he is the vniuerſall Biſhop here vpon earth, and the head of the whole Church.
            
                The Scripture teacheth, that a 8. Free-will.
                man beeing deade in his ſinnes, is not able ſo much, as to vnderſtande any thing of him ſelfe, that is, hath no free-will in thoſe matters that be ſpirituall, and appertaine to ſaluation, Epheſ. 2. 1. Coloſ. 2. 13. Roman. 8. 6. 1. Corinth. 2. 14. 2. Corinth. 3. 5. 2. Tim. 2. 15. 1. Ioh. 13. But the Pope, he attributeth ſo much vnto free-will, that he ſeemeth to come very high to the hereſie of Pelagius; as may be gathered out of the 28. chap. of Auguſtins booke, de Hereſibus.
            
            
                The Scriptures teach, that Chriſt 9. Satisfaction.
                onely hath ſatisfied for our ſinne. 1. Ioh. 2. Roman. 3. 25. and 5. 8. Ioh. 1. 29. Math. 20. 28. Hebr. 10. 14. But the Pope teacheth, that wee muſt by our abilitie, merite, ſatisfie, and anſwer the iuſtice of God.
            
                The Scripture teacheth, that

we are onely iuſtified by faith in Chriſt, and that freely, vnto life eternall, and that our ſaluation is to be accounted and eſteemed as obtained by the onely mercie of God, Eſay 43. 25. Ioh. 3. 6. Act. 10. Eph. 2. 8. Heb. 24. But the Pope, hee teacheth that wee not onely haue not our ſaluation by faith alone, but that wee may merit and deſerue euerlaſting life by our workes and demerits.
            Further, that there is in the maſſe application 10. Juſtification.
                made of all Chriſtes benefits, ex opere operato, that is, by the deede done, or for the workes ſake. Finally, that the maſſe beeing applied in the behalf of others though they be vnrighteous perſons (ſo that them ſelues put no barre, and be no hinderance of the ſame) doeth merite the remiſſion both of the guilt, and of the puniſhment thereof.
            
                The Scripture teacheth, that iuſtifying 11. Iuſtifying faith.
                faith is a ſure confidence repoſed in Chriſt, or els thus, a ſure confidēce of the remiſſion of our ſinnes, for Chriſts ſake, Rom. 4. 19. &c. But the Pope, he teacheth that faith is nothing, but a knowledge

of the hiſtorie, and a doubtfulnes of the remiſſion of ſinnes.
            
                The Scripture teacheth, that euen 12. Obſeruation of the law.
                the regenerate man, whileſt he is in this life, can not perfectly obſerue and fulfill the Lawe of God, Roman. 7. Luk. 17. 10. Philippian. 3. 12. Act. 15. 10. But the Pope affirmeth, that hee is able: conſenting with the Pelagians.
            
            
                The Scripture teacheth, that 13. The kingdome of Chriſt.
                the kingdome of Chriſt is not of this world. Further, that the miniſterie of the Apoſtles and their calling, is not ciuill and worldly, Ioh. 18. 36. Mark. 20. 25. Luk. 22. 25, 27. In like manner the Canons of the Apoſtles commaund, that hee ſhould be remooued and depoſed from his office, who ſo euer ſhould beare both ciuill and eccleſiaſtical iuriſdiction. But the Pope who boaſteth that he is the Vicar of Chriſt, and the Succeſſour of Peter, doth arrogate to him ſelfe both ciuill and eccleſiaſticall authority, as hereafter we will ſhew more at large.
            
                The Scripture ſaith, there are 15. The two Sacraments.
                onely two Sacraments of the new Teſtament, properly ſo called: Baptiſme,

and the Supper of the Lord: of which the one is ordained, Math. 28. and Mark. 16. The other, Math. 26. Mark. 14. Luk. 22. 1. Cor. 11. But the Pope holdeth that they be ſeuen.
            
                The Scripture teacheth, that 15. The vulgar tongue to be vſed in the Church.
                the vulgar tongue with an euident, ſignificant, a loud and diſtinct pronuntiation is to be vſed in the Church, or the meetings of the godly, that whatſoeuer is ſpokē, might be eaſily vnderſtood, and approoued by the people. 1. Cor. 14. 9. And Luſtinian doeth make a decree very agreeable to the Scripture in this behalfe, in Conſtit. 123. & 146. But the Pope will haue all things read in the latine tongue.
            
                The Scripture teacheth, that men 16. Who are to be baptized
                are to be baptized for the remiſſion of ſinnes. Mat. 28. 19. not bruit creatures, and things without life. But the Pope doeth not onely baptize men, but alſo wood, and ſtones, and bells, &c.
            
                The Scripture teacheth, that the bread both is, & remaineth in the Lords 17. the bread in the Lordes Supper.
                Supper. 1. Cor. 10. 16. & 11. 26, &c. But the Pope teacheth, that it is tranſubſtantiated, and chaunged into the bodie

of Chriſt.
            
            
                The Scripture teacheth, that 18. The lords ſupper is no ſacrifice.
                bread in the Lords Supper is a token of remembrance, or a ſigne of the bodie of Chriſt, once offred vp as a ſacrifice for vs, and that the body of Chriſt once giuen for vs, and his blood ſhed, is not offered againe vpon the alter by vs in the ſupper, but is eaten and drunken for the confirmation of our faith in Chriſt, and for to ſtirre vp thankeſgiuing in vs, Hebr. 9. 28. and 10. 12. Make 26. 26. Luke 22. 19. But the Pope conuerteth this Sacrament into a ſacrifice, externall, reall, and propitiatorie: And hee daylie in his maſſe offereth vp this breade, turned into the bodie of Chriſt vpon the alter, for the quicke and the deade: and beeing offered, hee ſhuts it vp in a boxe, and carrieth it about and worſhippeth it. Cap. peract. diſt. 2. de Conſecrat. and as in the Councill of Trident, and the Ieſuites Catechiſme is to be ſeene. Further, hee offereth this ſacrifice, or permitteth it to be offered for corporall neceſſities: Whereupon it is, that there bee Maſſes for them that

ſayle vpon the ſea, or trauell vpon the lande, either on foote, or horſebacke, women with childe and in trauell, for them which are barren, or are ſicke of tertian or quartern agues, for marchants that they may haue proſperous traffique.
            
                The Scripture teacheth, that Chriſt in the inſtitution and celebration 19. Chriſts bodie.
                of the holie Supper, had and retained, and ſtill hath and retaineth, a true bodie of the ſame ſubſtance with ours, Matth. 26. 26. Luk. 24. 39. 1. Cor. 11. 26. But the Pope feigneth, that the bodie of Chriſt is inuiſible, and inſenſible, and ſo altogether diuerſe and vnlike vnto ours, and ſuch a one as may be in many places at one time, that is to ſay, that a bodie is preſent, but not as a bodie in deede.
            
                The Scripture teacheth, that not 20. All ought to take, eate, and drinke.
                onely the Miniſters of the worde, but others alſo which be faithfull, ought to take, eate, and drinke, the breade and wine in the Lordes Supper, Luk. 22. 17. 1. Corinth. 11. 20. But the Pope will, that onely the Prieſtes ſhall take, eate, and drinke, the reſt are

onely to be ſpectatours, and to looke on; as in the priuate Maſſe.
            
                The Scripture teacheth, that in the Lords ſupper the wine as well as the 21 The bread and wine are to be diſtributed to all.
                bread is to be adminiſtred and diſtributed, 1. Cor. 11. 26. But the Pope barreth the laytie from the vſe of the Chalice, and of the wine, as in the Councill of Conſt. 13.
            
                The ſcripture teacheth, that there be onely two places appointed for the 22 Two places for the ſoules,
                ſoules of the dead after this life: to wit, heauen for the faithfull, hell for the vnbeleeuers. Mark. 16. 16. Luc. 16. 22. Ioh. 3. 18. & 4. 36. & 5. 24. &c. But the Pope hee feigneth a thirde place, where the ſoules of them that are defiled with veniall, that is, with ſmall ſinnes, are to be purged before they aſcende vp into heauen: which for this cauſe he calleth the fire of purgatorie. Concil. Trident. Seſſ. 6. cap. 30. & Seſſ. 22. cap. 2. & cap. 3. & Seſſ. 25.
            
                The ſcripture teacheth, that mariage 23. Mariage honourable for all men.
                is not onely ſeemely and honourable for all ſorts of men; but alſo euen almoſt neceſſarie for the auoiding of fornication. Heb. 13. 4. 1. Cor. 7. 2. & 9.

Againe, it woulde haue a Biſhop to be the husband of one lawfull wife & not to haue concubines. 1. Tim. 3. 2. But the Pope forbiddeth mariage to his clergie & Nuns, & bindeth them with an othe vnto perpetuall ſingle life.
            
                The ſcripture teacheth, that the vſe of all meates is now free, Col. 2. 16. 24. Meates are free.
                Rom. 14. 1. Tim. 4. 3. &c. and that alſo there is fleſh of fiſhes, 1. Corinth. 15. 39. But the Pope teacheth that the eating fleſh vpon certaine daies is forbidden ſince the comming of Chriſt. Diſt. 35. And that they doe not eate fleſh who doe eate fiſh. Further he doeth (as did Montanus the heretique) appoint lawes concerning certaine faſting daies, and that without eyther prayer or repentance.
            
                To conclude, hiſtories doe record, Popes haue erred. that Pope Honorius fell into the hereſie of the Monothelites. 2. Tom. Con. 8. Syn. Conſtant. act. 17. that Gregorie the ſeuenth fell from the true faith. Lib. 1 Alphonſi de Caſtro Minonta contra Hereſ. in the Cronicle of Abbas Vrbergenſ. that Pope Liberius was an Arrian. And that Pope Anaſtaſius
               
fauoured the Neſtorians, and erred from the faith. Lib. 1. Alphonſi de Caſtro. Minonta contra Hereſ. That Iohn the 22 helde and maintained that the ſoules were mortall, and died with the bodies, vntill the daie of the reſurrection, in Sermone quodam paſcali Ioh. Gerſon. For which cauſe that Pope is called a deuill incarnate. In Concil. Constant. Seſſ. 7. Laſtly, that Marcellinus the Pope ſacrificed vnto Idols. C. nunc autem. diſt. 21.
            
                Furthermore, the Pope is the 4. The Pope hath two ſwordes.
                man who vaunteth vpon his twofolde ſupreme authoritie, ſpirituall and temporall, and of both his ſwords, ſpirituall and temporall or materiall: and doeth arrogate vnto himſelfe both Iuriſdictions. As touching them both, thus they are ioyntly proued by that which is ſaid. C. vnam ſanctam extra vag. de maior & obed. Wee are instructed by the worde of the Goſpell that there be two ſwordes, the one spirituall, the other temporall; in this power and authoritie of the Pope. Againe, therefore both the ſwords are in the power of the Church, that is, both the ſpirituall and the materiall
               
               ſword, &c. Fundament. de elect in 6. The Pope of Rome hath the Monarchie or ſole gouernment of both the Iuriſdictions spirituall and temporall. Whereof wee haue a notable example in Boniface the 8. who in the firſt yere of his Iubile in the yere of our Lorde 1300, hauing vpon him both the Emperours robe, and the Prieſtes attyre, and ſhewing himſelfe openly in the Church of Peter and Paul, and hauing both a key and a ſword, hee cried as loude as he coulde, Beholde, here bee two ſwordes. c. vnam ſanct. Extravag. de maiorit. & obed. as alſo in Iulius the ſecond, who was a better ſouldier then a Prieſt, and of whom Mantuan writeth thus:
            
               Enſepotens gemino, cuius veſtigia adorāt
               Caeſar, & aurato veſtiti muricereges.
            
            which is in Engliſh.
            
               He powrefull is by twofold ſword,
               to him all men doe ſtoupe;
               Both Emperour and ſtately kings,
               with all their glorious troupe.
            
            Concerning his ſpirituall authoritie, Spirituall. are theſe teſtimonies, Clement. in Paſtoral. deſent. & re Iud. &c. Primum extravag.
               
               de empt. & vend. and others, of which we ſpake before: & for the temporall Iuriſdictions, theſe are witneſſes Temporall. ſufficient, as Cap. Conſtan. diſt. 96. where the enſignes, titles, pallace, citie, prouince, right and power of the Emperours are beſtowed vpon the Pope of Rome: that hee hath the rule of all the Weſt partes. Et cap. 1. in fine extravag. de matorit. & obed. Where it is ſaid without doubt, whoſoeuer denieth that the temporall ſword is in the power of Peter, doeth giue ſmall heede vnto the word of the Lord, which ſaith, Put vp thy ſword into the ſheath.
            
            
                Hee alſo vaunteth of himſelfe, with ſignes and miracles, as is well 5. The Popes miracles.
                knowne both by the bookes and practiſe of the Papiſtes, but they are lying & deceitfull, as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, and are wrought to ſeduce and drawe men into errour and ſuperſtition: and further they are either meere fables, or elſe, iuggling ſleights: Fables, as thoſe which are reported of Mary of Lauritane, as they call her, which a certaine Ieſuite hath declared to bee falſe and feigned in a certaine booke, ſet foorth

at Lipſia after that hee had denounced Ieſuitiſme: ſo alſo they which are recited in the bookes of the Franciſcans & Dominicans, & eſpecially in the bookes which are of the conformities of the Franciſcans. Iuggling ſleights; as thoſe which are wrought, either by the deluſion of Sathan, or by the cloſe and craftie conueyances of the Monkes: as in the apparitions of ſoules, which made report of purgatorie, and deſired that Maſſes might be ſaid and celebrated for them, and in the healing of diſeaſes at the Chappels I or images of ſaintes, and in coniurations. For Sathan (God in his iuſt iudgement ſo permitting it to be) afflicted men with peculiar diſeaſes, and againe ceaſed to afflict them, when they were making their vowes at the Chappels or images of ſaintes, ſo that they were ſuppoſed to bee cured by the making of their vowes, and deliuered by the helpe of the ſaintes. And thus hee, playing with the exorciſtes, doeth voluntarilie yeeld vnto them, though he ſeeme to be caſt out by force, and hee ceaſeth to torment a man, who is bodily poſſeſſed,

that by this meanes (theſe errours beeing confirmed) he may inſtead of their bodies beſiege, win, and poſſeſſe their ſoules.
            
                He boaſteth himſelfe as God, 6. The Pope as God.
                whileſt that hee chalengeth vnto him ſelfe the name and authoritie and the workes which are proper vnto God.
            
                Hee arrogateth to himſelfe the He chalengeth Gods owne name. name of God, Cap. ſatisf. diſt. 96. where he ſaieth, It is euident enough that the Pope neither is as all, neither can be either freed or bounde by any temporall authoritie, who (as it is verie manifeſt) was caled God by the godly prince Conſtantine: Sith that it is euident, that God can not bee iudged of men. Et cap. quanto. & ſeq. extr. de tranſlat. Epiſcopi. For no man but God doeth ſeparate them, whome the Pope of Rome doeth ſeparate, not by humane, but rather by diuine authoritie. So likewiſe the Pope is God on earth, according as Baldus hath it, hee is a certaine diuine power, and hath, as it were, the reſemblance of a viſible God; and what he doeth, he doeth it as God, not as man according to

               Gomazius: of which there is a more large diſcourſe in the booke which is called Recuſatio concilij Trident. publiſhed in the name of the proteſtant princes and ſtates. Anno 64.
            
                Furthermare, he doeth chalenge the power and the workes of God: as 2. Gods power and authoritie.
                he will be both indeed and eſtimation as hee is alſo accounted of verie many, not only the head of the whole Church as was before ſaide: but alſo the head and lord of all kings and Monarches Head of the Church. of the worlde. Extravag. de maiorit. & obed. in the end. Moreouer, we declare to euerie humane creature, that hee is ſubiect to the Pope of Rome: this wee doe profeſſe, determine, & pronounce, that it is altogether a matter neceſſarie to ſaluation. Cap. ſuper gentes extra. de conſuet. The Biſhop of Rome is appointed by the Lorde aboue all nations and kingdomes. Cap. ſi Imperatore diſt. 96. Gods will is, that the powers ſecular ſhould be ſubiect vnto the Church, or the Prieſts. Cap. nunquam eadem. diſt. 96. It is a cuſtome, that princes ſhoulde ſubmit their heads vnto the Biſhops girdle, and not iudge of their liues. Cap.
               
               ſolita. de maiorit. & obed. God made two great lights in the firmamēt, the greater light to rule the day, & the leſſe light to rule the night: both of thē great, but the one greater. Therefore hath God made two great lightes for the firmament of heauen, that is, the vniuerſall Church, to wit, he hath appointed two high ſtates or dignities, which are theſe, the authority of the Pope, & the power of the king. But that which ruleth the day, that is, in matters ſpiritual, is the greater: that which gouerneth carnall affaires, that is, the leſſe: That it may appeare, that looke what difference there is betwixt the ſunne & the moone, ſo great oddes there is betwixt Popes & Kings. C. fundament. de elect. in 6. Papa nulli homini ſubeſt. Finally, the Emperour is bound to take an oath of alegiance & obedience vnto the Pope: the forme whereof is extant, cap. 1. de jurejurando. &c. tibi domino. deſt. 63. & clement. vnica. de jurejurando. And ſo it is ſaid lib. 1. ceremoniarum Pontificialium. cap. 7. The Pope in the night of the birth of our Lorde doeth hallowe the ſword, which he afterward giueth vnto ſome Prince, in token of the infinite

power which is giuen vnto the Pope, according to that ſaying, All power is giuen vnto me in heauen & in earth: & that alſo, He ſhal rule frō ſeato ſea, & frō the riuer to the ende of the earth. So it is alſo in the Gloſſe of the Canon law, to wit, that the Pope is al things, & aboue all thīgs: that he is the lord of lords, & hath the right of the king of kīgs ouer his ſubiects: that he may turn roūd into ſquare: that he is the cauſe of cauſes; & therfore no inquirie is to be made into his authoritie, becauſe there is no cauſe of the firſt cauſe, that the whole world is the Popes dioceſſe: that his authority extēdeth vnto things in heauen & earth, and vnder the earth: that he may command the Angels: that he hath ſo great power both in Purgatorie & alſo in hell: that hee can by his pardons, deliuer as many ſoules as hee will which are in thoſe places, & place them preſently in heauen, & in the ſeats of them which be bleſſed: as it is ſaide in the Bull of Clement the ſixt: that hee hath ſuch power in heauen, that hee may canonize whome hee will that is dead for a ſaint, though all Byſhops and Cardinals were againſt it. And who can

recken vp all his blaſphemies? To conclude, Sixtus quintus, to omit the reſt, doth at this day thus begin in one of his Bulles. The authoritie graunted to bleſſed Peter, and to all his ſucceſſours, by the infinite power of the everlaſting King, excelleth the power of all earthly kings and Princes.
            
            
                Secondly, for that he will be accounted the higheſt iudge, who neither 2 The Pope the higheſt Iudge.
                can erre in making decrees concerning faith, or lawes concerning manners: neither yet ought to be iudged of any. And for that hee ſetteth vp himſelfe aboue all euen the generall councels, and ordaineth new ſacraments, and transformeth and altereth thoſe which Chriſt did inſtitute. He impoſeth new lawes vpon mens conſcienees, as for thoſe which Chriſt made, hee doeth ratifie and repeale at his pleaſure. as Cap. nunc autem. diſt. 21. The chiefe ſeate, that is, the chayre of Rome, is not indeede of any. Can. ſi Papa. diſt. 40. If the Pope ſhould drawe by heapes innumerable people with him into hell, no mortall man preſumeth or taketh vpon him to reprehend his faults:

for that he is to iudge all men, and himſelfe to be iudged of none. Can. cuncta. & ſeq. 9. q. 3. Euery Church in the worlde knoweth, that the holy Church of Rome hath authoritie to iudge of all perſons, & no man may cenſure her iudgement. Can. nemini. 17. 4. It is permitted to no man to iudge of the Apoſtolicall ſeat, or to retract that ſentence, becauſe of the primacie of the Church of Rome. cap. propoſuit. de concept. praebend. According to the largenes of our authority, we may diſpenſe with & aboue law. cap. ſignificaſti. de elect. & elect. poteſt. Al councils both are called, & haue their ſtrength by the authoritie of the Church of Rome: & the authoritie of the Biſhop of Rome is manifeſtly excepted in their cōſtitutiōs. cap. regula. diſt. 17. No council is, or ſhal euer be eſtabliſhed, which ſhall not be cōfirmed & ſupported by the Popes authority. And ſo the Gloſſe ſaith again, that the Popes pleaſure is heauenly: and for this cauſe, he may chāge the nature of thigs, by applying thoſe things which are ſubſtantial in one thing, vnto another. That he hath allaws in the cloſet of his breſt: that he hath the ſame conſiſtory, which

God hath, and the ſame iudgement ſeat with Chriſt: that he can make any thing of nothing, and make that to be a ſentence or iudgement, which is none: that in what ſo euer he pleaſeth, his will is to him in ſteade of reaſon, and yet no man may ſay: Why doſt thou thus? that he may diſpenſe beyond law, & make iuſtice of iniuſtice, by concealing and altering the laws: that he can do all things (ſinne excepted) whatſoeuer God himſelf cā do: that he muſt be iudged of none: that if he ſhould throw downe heaps of ſoules into the hels, yet none may demand of him, Why doeſt thou it? that he may diſpenſe againſt both Apoſtle, and Apoſtolicall Canon: that he is aboue lawe: that what ſoeuer is done of the Pope, is to be ſuppoſed is done of God: that he is all, and aboue all: that hee may doe all things aboue law, contrarie to law, and without lawe. ad cap. quanto de tranſlat. Epiſcopi, & cap. propoſuit. de conceſſ. praeb. and elſe where, &c.
            
                Thirdly, for that he taketh and vſurpeth 3. He diſpoſeth kingdomes.
                power & authoritie, to transferre kingdoms, which is the onely worke of God as Clement. vnica de jureiur ando, in priu. The Romane Emperours haue the

approbation of the B. of Rome, for the perſon which is to be preferred vnto the dignity of the Emperiall Mie: as alſo the anointing, cōſecratiō, & the crown of the Empire. Clem. Past. de ſent. & re iudic. in fine. The Pope hath ſuperiority ouer the Empire, & whē the Empire is void ſuccee deth the Emperour. C. venerabilē de elect. The right & authoritie to chooſe a king to be Emperor, appertaineth vnto the Biſhop of Rome. & cap. 2. de ſent. & re iudic. in 6. The Pope may depoſe the Emperour. Can. alius 15. quaeſt. 6. Zacharie the Pope depoſed the French king from his kingdome, & ſubſtituted Papin into his roome. So Pope Hadrian ſaith as Arentinus reporteth, Lib. 6. in Epiſt. ad Archiepiſc. Trevicenſ. Mogunt. & Colonienſ. From whence hath the Emperour his Empire vnleſſe it be frō vs? therefore he ruleth by vs. Againe, whatſoeuer the Emp. hath, he hath it wholly frō vs. Further, behold, the Empire is in our power to giue it, to whōſoeuer we wil. Therefore are we appointed of God, aboue nations & kingdoms, that we may deſtroy & pull down, build & plant. And thus ſay the Canoniſts, that the Emp. is the Popes vaſſall, and that hee hath the

Empire of him in name of Homage.
            The acts of the Biſhops of Rome afford vs plentifull exāples; who haue either proclaimed as depoſed & at their Examples. pleaſure tūbled them frō their thrones, or elſe crowned Emperors, & kings, and princes. So dealt Innocentius with Otho the 4 Emperour of that name: Gregorie the 7 with Henry the 4. Paſchalis the 2 with Henry the fift: Hadrian the 4 and Alexander the 3, with Frederick the firſt: Innocentius the 3 with Philip the ſon of Frederick: Gregory the 9 with Frederick the 2: Innocentius the 4 with Conrad the 4: Alexander the 2 with W. king of Englād: Boniface the 8 with Philip Pulcher the K. of France: whom they did excommunicate, & either did depoſe, or labored to depoſe them frō their Empire & kingdoms. And at this day Sixtus the 5 doeth depriue the king of Navar and prince of Condie of their kingdome, prerogatiue, & all hope of ſucceſſiō, & abſolueth the ſubiects from the oth of allegiāce & obediēce, & inciteth the French king to perſecute them with violence, fire, and ſworde. So Leo the third created Charles the great Emperour, hee annointed him, and ſate the diademe

vpon his head, & ſo transferred the Empire vnto the Frenchmē
                frō the Grecians, among whō it had cōtinued 500 yeres. Iohn the ninth, made three Emperours one after another, & gaue the Emperiall crown vnto Carolous, Calons, to Ludovicus Bulbus his ſonne, and to Charles the third, ſonne to Ludovicus Germanicus. Iohn the thirteenth, created Otto; and Clement the fift created Henry Emperour & called him Auguſtus. But aboue all, the acte of Gregorie is famous, who tooke away the Empire from Henricus the Emperour, & gaue it to Rodolphus, adding this verſe,
            
               Petra dedit Patro, Petrus diadema Rodolpho.
               This diademe the Rocke to Peter gaue,
               And Peter graunts that Rodolph ſhall it haue.
            
            
                The ſame Pope is an idolatour, He is an idolatour. worſhipping ſtrange gods, that is, ſuch a thing for God, which is no God. Firſt, in the bread of the Euchariſt: where Innocentius the fourth, was the firſt who eſtabliſhed tranſubſtantiatiō, & the worſhip of that bread. Honorious the 3, vouchſafed it a peculiar place where it ſhould be ſet, that the God of bread might haue a Breaden God. temple & palace. To conclude, leaſt any thing ſhould be wanting vnto idolatrie, 
                  Ʋrbanus the fourth, Anno Chriſt. 1263.

appointed a feaſt vnto the body of Chriſt, and the carying about of the Euchariſt in proceſſion, and gaue verie large indulgences there withal. Secondly, in the calling vpon the ſaintes departed. For he perſecuteth the ſaintes whileſt they liue on earth, and killeth them, whom being dead, hee worſhippeth in heauen. Wherein he is like vnto hunters, who do therefore hunt that they may kill and eate, and eating doe commend the meate, and are encouraged to follow their game againe. And alſo he is like to eraftie and cloſe marchants, who whileſt they are to buy, diſpraiſe that which afterward they do commend, when they haue bought it, according as it is ſaid, Prov. 20. 14. It is nought, it is nought, ſaith euery buyer. Finally, he is like to the Scribes and Phariſes of whome mention is made, Mat. 23. 29. 30. Thirdly, in the worſhip of images and monuments & relikes of Chriſt, and the ſaintes, in that which they call holy water: in the hallowed and conſecrated oyle, and waxe candles: in the ſigne of the croſſe: in the baptizing of belles: in Amulets

& Pomanders, & ſuch like. The which Idolatrie is gone ſo farre, that there hath not bin greater, no not amōg the heathē
            
            
                The Pope is alſo an hypocrite, worſhipping the true God indeed; but His hypocriſy onely in externall rites, perfourmed ex opere operato, by the worke done, and inſtituting new kinds of worſhip: as in the ſacraments, in the ſacrifice of the Maſſe, in the vigils or ſaintes euens, in Canonicall houres, in chaunting in the Church, in faſtes, in choice of meates, ſingle life, religious pilgrimages, anointing, the order of Monaſticall life, (whereof there be more kindes (if they were tolde) then there are of fowles (which yet alſo haue differēce by their colours, & ſo great multitudes (if they were muſtered together) that they wold ſeeme to bee the armie of Xerxes) In workes of ſupererrogation, in almes, in mumbling of praiers, and in the number of them, in their apparell, or holy habites, in the ſhauing their haire, their burning tapers, the ornaments of the Churches, the multitude of feaſts, wherof there is neither meaſure nor end. But yet he is indeed prophane, wicked, & an Atheiſt, becauſe he getteth this kingdome

by magique or Symonie, or elſe by threats, ſedition, and tumult, & both he himſelfe beareth & alſo ſuffereth others to beare the titles & names of holy offices, without the thing itſelfe. For if you do take a view either of the miniſterie of the word & ſacraments, or of the whole gouernmēt of the Church, it appeareth that the biſhops & others beſides, doe not execute any part of their owne function, but are wholly emploied about temporall affaires, contrarie to the word of God & the ancient canons.
            We haue exāples herof in Gregory the 5, who being caried with a deuiliſh deſire of authority, did firſt by bribes obtain the Archbiſhoprick of Rhenes, and afterwarde got by the deuils aſſiſtance the Popedome itſelfe: on this cōdition, that after his death the deuil ſhoulde wholly haue him, as Platina recordeth. In Gregory the 7, who being a Magitiā, cauſed that ſtones fell downe frō aboue when Henry the 3 Emperor was praying in the tēple: & whē he was ſeeking anſwers from God againſt the Emp. he caſt the ſacramēt of the body of the lord into the fire, as Platina doeth witneſſe.

In Iohn the eight, or rather Ione, a woman, who diſſembling her ſexe, obtained and exerciſed the Popedome, vntil ſuch time, as her tranell did bewray what ſhee was: as againe Platina and verie manie others doe witneſſe. In Iohn the thirteene who gaue himſelfe vnto Sathan corporally, as it is regiſtred in Faſciculo Temporum. In Sylvester the ſecond, of whome Iohannes Stella the Venetian writeth, that hee was appointed Pope by the aſſiſtance of the deuill, on this condition, that after his death hee might haue him whollie, both ſoule & bodie, by whoſe ſubtiltie he attained to ſo great promotion. In Benedictus the ninth and Gregorie the ſixt: and moreouer in Sixtus the fourth (as the ſaid Cardinall Benno witneſſeth) who being at Florence in the Church, when (after a watch word giuen) the Euchariſt was taken away, hee would (by his conſpiratours) haue killed the two brethren Iulianus and Laurentius Medices: and did indeede ſlay the one and wound the other: as Raphael Volateran recordeth in the 5 of his Geographie. In Leo the tenth, who is reported to haue

anſwered vnto Peter Bembus, when hee alledged a ſaying out of the Goſpell: What doeſt thou alledge or tell me of that fable?
            
                Hee is alſo blaſphemous, in that he claimeth for his owne that which His blaſphemie. is Gods, doeth ſpeake againſt God: namely, when he ſaieth, that he is God, and of equall power with Chriſt, & the head and ſpouſe of the Church: the which we haue more fully opened before Further, when he affirmeth that the Scripture is obſcure, and imperfect, and doubtfull: and that hee may interprete it as he liſteth, and may make new articles of faith, and yet he neither erreth herein nor is to be controlled by any, As alſo when he boaſteth, that he can graunt indulgences and pardons, and remiſſion of all ſinnes to whom ſoeuer he will.
            
                He is alſo ambitious and proud, both in his wordes and deedes, becauſe His ambitiō. hee, beeing euen ſicke of an vnſaciable thirſt after honour, and vnlawfull deſire of lordlineſſe, doeth ſet vp himſelfe aboue the Church, aboue councils, aboue all magiſtrates, and accounteth

all Emperours, kings and princes which are in Europe, to be but his vaſſals, his tenauntes, and almoſt his ſlaues and drudges hee treadeth them vnder his feete. Of which pride and arrogancie of his, we before brought teſtimonies euen out of the Canon lawe: but nowe wee will bring others like vnto them, out of the booke which is called Liber ceremoniarum Romanae curiae: Where it is ſaide, that all men of what honour or preheminence ſoeuer they be, ſo ſoone as they come within the ſight of the Pope, ought to bowe their knees thriſe, obſeruing equall diſtance of pace, and to kiſſe his feete. Further, when the Pope doeth get vp on horſe-backe, the greateſt prince of them which be preſent though he be a king or Emperour muſt hold the Popes ſtirrup, & then lead the horſe by the bridle a little on the way. But if that the Pope be not carried on horſebacke but on his chaire, whether hee be king or Emperour that is preſent it skilleth not, they muſt cary the ſeate it ſelfe with the Pope in it, a while vpon their ſhoulders. Againe, that the prince of the city (into

which the Pope ſhall enter) though he be a king, ſhall leade the popes horſe by the bridle: or if the pope be caried in his chaire, ſhall (together with the chiefe of his Nobles) carry the ſame a good way: then, when the pope commandeth him, the king ſhall take his horſe & ride according vnto his place. Further, the Emperor muſt at the baket holde water for the pope to waſh his hands. And moreouer, when the pope hath a feaſt, the Emperor or els the king of the Romans muſt cary the firſt meſſe or ſeruice. And to conclude, the pope doth no reuerence at all to any mā, only he raiſeth vp himſelfe when the Emperour kiſſeth him. For examples theſe are chiefly to be noted: firſt of the pope in generall, who offreth his feet to be kiſſed of the Emperor, kings princes, Cardinals, Examples of his ambition. biſhops, & the reſt. Then ſpecially of pope Sylveſter of whome it is reported that (for the honour of S. Peter) Pſeudoconſtantinus or that feigned Conſtātine helde his horſe bridle in his hād when he tooke horſe and plaid the gentleman vſher or ſergeant before him. Diſt. 96. Thirdly of pope Hadrian the fourth, who was very angry with

               Fredericke the Emperour, and did in reproch obiect vnto him, that when as hee woulde haue helde his ſtirrup at his lighting downe from his horſe, he came and helde not the further ſtirrup as hee ſhould, but the other. And that he alſo had ſet the Emperours name before the popes in certain letters which were ſent vnto him. Fourthly of Alexander the third, who ſet one foote in the necke of Fredericke the Emperour, when he was proſtrate and ſuppliant at his feet in the Cathedrall Church of 
                  Ʋenice, that he might haue his excommunication releaſed, and commanding, that the verſe of Pſalme ſhould be ſong of his prieſts, Thou ſhult walke vpon the Serpent, and the Baſiliske: thou ſhalt tread vnder foote the Lyon and the Dragon. Fiftly, of Boniface the eight, Anno 1300, who ſhewed himſelfe at Rome in a great aſſembly of the people (by reaſon of a Iubile then ſolemnized) the firſt day of the ſolemnitie with all the ornaments of the Pope, and the next day hee came foorth clad with the Emperours robe, or coate armour, and commaunded a drawne ſword to be caried before him,

himſelfe crying with a loud voice, I am both Pope, & Emperor, & haue authoritie both in heauen & earth: & within few dayes after did proudly reiect Albertus, who was created Emp. by the electours of the Empire, & deſired to be confirmed by him: Affirming moreouer that no election could be authenticall, which was made without his authority, ſith that he alone had the authoritie of both the ſwords, which when Albertus Crautzius ſuperintendent of the church of Hanburgh reciteth, hee maketh this exclamation; O Peter, behold thy ſucceſſour, &, O Sauiour Chriſt, behold thy Vicar: beholde the pride of the feruant of thy ſeruants, vnto what height he is now come.
            
                He is alſo lawleſſe, becauſe hee doeth what he liſteth, he aboliſheth the The Pope is lawleſſe. lawes which Chriſt hath made, & maketh new at his owne pleaſure: and becauſe he will be iudged of no man but aduanceth himſelfe aboue lawe, as wee ſhewed heretofore. Whereof we haue example in the forbidding of the mariage of Prieſtes, and certaine meats, & of the chalice in the Lords ſupper, which

is contrary vnto the reuealed will of God and of Chriſt our Lord. Further, in diſpenſing with degrees contrarie to the lawe of God and nature: as that Pope Martin the fift gaue diſpenſation that a man might take his owne ſiſter to wife: And that others haue diſpenſed, that any man might mary two ſiſters, his fathers ſiſter, or his mothers, or any woman two brethren, her vncle by her fathers ſide or by her mothers, and that (which ſome alſo of the ſchoolemen doe teach vpon the 4. ſent. diſt. 34. & Caietan ſecunda ſecundae. Thomae. quaeſt. 154 Art. 9. (to wit that the Pope may diſpenſe with all degrees, excepting the mariage of the father and the ſonne, with the daughter and the mother.
            
                He is alſo a ſingle man but yet a filthy fornicatour, becauſe that, hee in forbidding mariage vnto his clergie, & the Nuns, commandeth ſingle life. The authous & defenders of the which law, are theſe eſpecially. Siricius the pope. C. plurimos. diſt. 82. Greg. 7. Calixtus 6. Presbyteris. diſt. 27. Leo. diſt. 32. per totū. Innocentius c. propoſuiſti. diſt. 82. &c. Sacerdoticus.
               
               & ſeq. diſt. 31. Leo the tenth & other more. But on the contrary, hee permitteth concubines, brothel houſes, whoredomes, & filthie luſtes, or at leaſt doeth tollerate them, & filleth all Chriſtendome with whores, with Baſtards, with buggerers, and others more of the ſame ſtampe, as it is knowne full well, and yet further by giuing diſpenſation, he permitteth inceſtuous mariages: and that which is more then all the reſt, he maketh a gaine and raiſeth a yerely rent of the common ſtewes.
            So Iohn 13 being found with a queane was run through of the husband of the ſame harlotte. Further, how great was the chaſtitie and honeſtie of Alexander the ſixt, it appeareth by this epitaph made for his daughter.
            
               
                  Hic iacet in tumulo Lucretia nomine, ſedre
               
               
                  Thaïs, Alexandri ſilia, ſponſa, nurus.
               
               Here lyes entombd Lucretia
               
               by name: but wee her ſawe
               
                  Thais in life; Alexanders
               
               childe, ſpouſe, daughter in lawe.
            
            So Iohn Caſus Archbiſhop of Beneventum the popes legate among the Venetians, hath cōmended & publiſhed in print that horrible kind of luſt and venerie,

which is not at all to be reported: yea, & that who is called P. Iohn the 8, was both a woman and an harlot, & as ſhe went to the palace of Laterane, ſhee traueiled in the third yere of the Popedome, & died of that trauell in the ſame place, whereupon Mantuan in his time writeth after this maner:
            
               Jpudor in villas, ſi non patiantur eaſdem
               & villae vomicas, Roma eſt iam tota lupanar.
               O ſhame to village packe away
               If it may be found deere,
               Rome is a stewes: now chaſtitie
               hath no abiding there. His abſtinēce and riot.
               
            
            
                He alſo abſtaineth from certain meates, & yet exceedeth in all kinde of exceſſe: becauſe he forbiddeth fleſh & all things which haue generation by ſeede, or doe ſauour of fleſh, as milke, cheeſe & egges to be eaten on ſet daies, vnderpain of deadly ſinne, to ſatisfie for ſinne, & to deſerue the grace of God, & life euerlaſting: but he granteth all the dainties & delicates whatſoeuer, de conſec. diſt. 3. de eſu carnium. & diſt. quia. & eadem diſt. 5. quadr. & diſt. 4. c. deni
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   &c. & 13. quaeſt. 2. animae. And yet he will for mony diſpēſe for the ſelf ſamething.
            
                He is couetous, becauſe he vſeth He is covetous.
               
Symonie, that is, buying, ſelling, & making a marchaudiſe of things ſpirituall: he giueth nothing, but ſelleth al things, as, the grace of God, the ſacraments, good works, heauen, & life euerlaſting, & out of all of them he piketh out gold and ſiluer, and raiſeth his gaine for heauen, hell, the earth, yea time itſelfe, and all creatures whether they haue life or be without life, as wine, bread, oyle, linnen, milke, butter, cheeſe, water, ſalt, fire, perfumes, the ſtewes, &c. So that, there was neuer hearde of either any greater, or more abominable marchandiſe. Whereupon his marchants & brokers, that is, the Monkes, the Biſhops, & Cardinals, are not onely become rich, but are euen princes vpon the earth. So likewiſe doeth he make a gaine of Maſſes, ſatisfactions, pardons, burials, and Church liuings: to wit, by ſelling of benefices, annats, or vacations: preuentions, reſignations for fauour, commendatus, diſpenſations for age, for orders, for irregularity, for blemiſh of body, for redemptions of the Biſhops pall and the Bulls. Further, by reſeruation of caſes, by mariage cauſes, by ſinnes and offences,

to wit, when as licenſe for ſinnes and all kind of miſchiefes are bought and ſold after a certaine price and rate: and by other caſes and cauſes of the like nature: which, if wee ſhoulde recken vp one by one, would be very tedious, becauſe they want both meaſure and modeſtie: and there is no great neceſſitie ſo to doe: for that there is a booke extant of theſe things, which hath this title. Taxae Cancellariae Apostolicae, & Taxae ſacrae Poenitentiariae, itidem Apoſtolicae cum not abilibus iuxta ſtylum hodiernum curiae Romanae. In which book thus there is a ſentence worthy the remembrance ſet downe in theſe wordes. And marke this diligently, that ſuch immunities and dispenſations are not graunted vnto them which be poore: For they, becauſe they bee not rich, can not be comforted. Hereof commeth it to paſſe, that an infinite maſſe of gold and ſiluer is brought vnto Rome, which afterward the Pope, Cardinals, and the reſt of the ſame rable do conſume in their ſtewes and brothelhouſes, and doe riotouſlie ſpend, as it were in the bottomles gulfe of their vnſaciable gluttonie & ſenſualitie, to the

great ſhame & ignominie of Chriſtianitie: So Franciſcus Petrarch hath left it in record, that in the treaſure houſe of Pope Iohn the 22, there was founde (when hee was dead) by his heires, 25 thouſand thouſand crownes, that is, 250 tunne of gold. And of Boniface the eight (who was taken priſoner & ſpoiled at the commandement of Philippus Pulcher, the French King) wee finde it regiſtred, that all the kings of the world were not able to disburſe ſo much out of their treaſurie within the compaſſe of one yere, as was taken and caried out of the Popes palace: wherefore there haue alwaies beene ſome at all times, who both deteſted that in ſatiable hunger, and vncontented deſire, and greedines of riches, and alſo lotted not to enueigh againſt the ſame: hereupon Mantuan ſaith thus:
            
               —venalia Romae.
               Templa, Sacerdotes, Altario, Sacra, Corona,
               Jgni
                     •
                  , thura, preces, Coelum eſt venale, Deuſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  .
            
            which is in Engliſh thus.
            
               
                  Churches and Prieſtes, Altars and Princes
               
               
                  at Rome are to be ſolde.
               
               
                  Kingdomes and rites, incenſe and heauen.
               
               
                  yea, God, Rome is ſo bolde.
               
            
            
               
And another thus.
            
               Curia Romana non carpit ovem ſine lana
               Dantes exaudit, nō dantibus oſtia claudit.
            
            which may be thus tranſlated.
            
               The Romiſh court doeth make no pay
               Of ſheepe that fleece doe want:
               No man can ſpeed vnleſſe he pray,
               Bring giftes and take our graunt.
            
            And againe another ſpeaketh after this manner: The treaſure houſe Apoſtolicall is like vnto the ſea, into which all flouds doe runne, and yet it doeth not ouerflowe: for euen ſo thouſand waightes of golde are brought into this out of diuers partes of the worlde, and yet it is not filled.
            
                Hee is alſo craftie, deceitfull, His craftines and falſe dealing. falſe, and giuen to lying: craftie hee is, for that hee blindeth trueth and falſhoode together: deceitfull and a lyar hee is, in that his feigned ſeruice, to witte, when as hee entituleth his lordlineſſe with a name of ſeruice, (that is, when hee calleth himſelfe the ſeruant of ſeruants) vnder pretence of humilitie, according to the example

of Gregorie the great, who for this ende called himſelfe the ſeruant of the ſeruants of God, that hee might giue his ſucceſſours a patterne of lowlineſſe: and yet in words and deede, hee proudely exalteth himſelfe aboue all kings and princes, deſiring to bee the lorde of lordes, as wee declared at large heretofore: in ſo much, that hee indeede retaineth the bare name and title, but vſurpeth a ſtatelineſſe, altogether diſagreeing from the title: ſo further in the fained donation of Conſtantine, as is mentioned in Cap. Constantinus, diſt. 96. hee produceth a forged inſtrument of Conſtantine his deede of gift, in which hee affirmeth, that the citie of Rome, with Italie, Sicilie, Sardinia, Spaine, Germanie, and Britaine, were giuen vnto him by that Emperour.
            Againe, he is taken in manifeſt contradictions, in that hee ſometime affirmeth, His lying and contradictiōs The deede of gift for his Iuriſdiction and authoritie. that the ſame deed of gift was made vnto Sylvester the Pope by Conſtantine, ſometime before Sylveſter by the ſame Conſtantine, ſometime by Ludovicus Pius ſonne to Charles the great,

               cap. Conſtantinus. diſt. 96. & cano. futura 12. quaeſt.
            
            In that he ſaith, ſometime that Conſtantine, ſometime that Chriſt, ſometime that Peter, gaue vnto him that power and authoritie, as in the ſame place. cap. Constant. diſt. 96. & cap. ſacroſancta. diſt. 22. &c. vnam ſanctam. extrav. de maiorit, & obed.
            
            In that ſometime he auoucheth, that principalitie is graunted vnto him by Primatie. 
               Conſtantine, that he ſhould be the head ouer all Churches and Prieſtes: cap. Conſtantinus. diſt. 96. Sometime hee affirmeth, that no man is to be called the prince of the Prieſts, or high prieſt, or vniuerſall biſhop. Cap. multi diſt. 40. & cap. primae ſedis, & duobus. ce. ſeqq. diſt. 99. In that ſomtime he ſaith, that Apoſtles, and eſpecially Peter and Paul are equall and alike, 2. q. 7. Can. 33. & can. 37. & 24. q. 1. can. 18. Sometime that both he preferreth Peter before the reſt of the Apoſtles, and aſcribeth the primacie to him alone, & cap. ſacroſancta. diſt. 22. and elſe where.
            In that hee ſaieth, that the election Dignitie. of the Pope ought to be made by the

conſent and approbation of the Emperour, and that the Pope is in ſubiection to the Emperours lawes and ſtatutes, and that the Emperour excelleth him in temporalities, c. 22. & 22. diſt. 63. &c. 9. & 3. diſt. 10. & 2. q. 7. can. 1. Nos ſi incompetenter, & 25. q. 1. ſat agendum, & c. ſolitae de mai orit. & obeà. Sometime he ſubiecteth the Emperour vnto himſelfe, aduanceth himſelfe aboue him, & aboue all kings, & exempteth himſelfe from all iudgement of men, as was ſaid before.
            In that hee ſometime denieth, that Succeſſion. ſucceſſion is ordinarie & tyed to a certaine place, bringing this place out of Ierome: They are not the ſonnes of the ſaintes, who poſſeſſe the places of the ſaintes, but they which doe the workes of the ſaintes, &c. c. 1, 3, & 4. diſt. 40. &c. 2. Sometime he auoucheth the contrarie, as c. 2. diſt. 40.
            In that ſomtime he wils, that prieſts & biſhops ſhuld only be occupied in matters The matters in which hee dealeth. ſpiritual, not tēporal. diſt. 36. & 38. cōmanding alſo, that he ſhuld be remoued frō his functiō, who bereth both ciuil & Eccleſiaſtical magiſtracy, at one &

the ſame time in Can. Ap. quos approbat, Can. 8. Sometime he chalengeth both the powers, and both the ſwordes vnto himſelfe and to his Biſhoppes, as was ſhewed heretofore.
            In that he graunteth ſometimes, yea commaundeth mariage vnto Prieſtes. Mariage of Prieſtes. 
               C. ſi quis docuerit. diſt. 28. &C. quoniam Diſt. 31. &C. ſi quis nuptias. dist. 3 Somtimes hee doth altogether forbid them mariage, as we ſhewed before.
            In that ſometime hee commandeth the entire and perfite vſe of the Sacrament Vſe of the ſacrament in both kinds. of the ſupper of the Lord: excommunicating them alſo which otherwiſe ſhall doe. De Conſec. c. comperimus. diſt. 2. Sometimes hee forbiddeth the people to receiue the Cuppe. In Concil. Conſtant. ſeſſ. 13.
            In that he willeth ſometime, that all Communication. ſhould communicate in the ſupper of the Lorde, that is, ſhould take, eate, and drinke, and doeth excommunicate them who doe otherwiſe. De conſecrat. c. per Acta diſt. 2. ſometimes hee debarreth the Laity, and defendeth, that this is onely lawfull for the prieſts, vt inprivata Miſſa.
            
            
               
In that he ſaith, that the Pope is to be iudged of no man, vnleſſe he be founde The Pope not to be iudged. to erre from the faith. c. ſi papa. diſt. 40. Sometimes he ſaith, that the Pope Diſcorus is excommunicate, though hee hath not erred in the faith. Quaeſt. 2. Can. ſane profertur. verſ. item Romanorū. Furthermore, in that hee maketh his Promiſe breaking. promiſe, but keepeth it not: ſaying, that promiſe is not to bee kept with heretikes, as in concil. Conſtant.
            
            In that he ſometime affirmeth, nowe Of Pope Ioan denieth verie impudently by the Ieſuites and others, that Pope Iohn the eight was a woman, & that the chaire of inquirie, (by which the Pope created is Sedes teſticulatrix. pronoūced capable or vncapable) was vſed ſince that time, which is contrarie vnto ſo many euident teſtimonies of Hyſtoriographers, (and euen of them who haue bene Papiſts) both olde and newe: as Marianus Scotus, Anno 1080 orthereabout, Sigebert the Monke. anno 1110. Martinus ſurnamed Polonus, Anno 1278. Martinus Minorit. Anno 1350. Franciſcus Petrarch, Anno 1370. Iohannes Bocatius, who liued at the ſame time. Raphael Ʋolateran. Anno 1490

or there abouts. Further, of Platina, Sabellicus, Aeneid. 9. Tritem. in hiſt. Monaſter. Hirſaugienſis. Iohan. Stella of Venice, Nauclerus, Albertus, Crantzius, and the authour of Faſciculus Temporum. Baptiſta, Mantuan, Caelius Rhodignius, and of others, who doe beare witneſſe of this feminine or woman Pope, whoſe entire recordes are not long ſince put forth into print.
            In that he hath not onely put counterfeits in ſtead of the right bookes (eſpecially in the Monuments of the Fathers) but doeth alſo corrupt, cancell, chop and change them, as may appeare both in that hee corrupteth the Latine Bible, and obſtinately defendeth the corruptions: which do many times diſagree from the Hebrewe and Greeke copies: and in that he now altereth and changeth the writings of the fathers, which being thus made vnperfect, hee ſetteth foorth, and alledgeth them as they are ſet forth according to theſe Editions. Example wherof (to omit others, which might plentifully be brought in this place, and haue bene alſo alledged by others heretofore) wee haue afforded

vnto vs by Iohn Gibbons an Engliſh Ieſuite doctour of diuinitie, and profeſſour at Triens, in diſputatione de ſanctis. Theſ. 207. alledging a place out of Auguſtine, Lib. 8. cap. 27. de civitate Dei. for his owne purpoſe, but as it ſeemeth out of an imperfect and counterfeit copie: in this manner. Wee appoint Churches, and orders of Prieſtes, and holy rites, and ſacrifices vnto the martyrs, not for that they be good, but becauſe their God is ours, &c. Whereas other editions are thus. Yet doe not wee appoint temples, orders of Prieſtes, holy rites, and ſacrifices vnto the ſaintes, &c. And the ſcope and drift of Auguſtine will not admit of that ſenſe which the Ieſuite woulde haue: but doeth neceſſarily require this which is all in all our Copies.
            Further, in that hee feigneth many reliques of the ſaintes, which neither are nor poſſibly can be true, vnleſſe we would graunt that there be many bodies, many heades, many armes, of one ſaint or holie man. For if ſo bee that all the reliques of the Saintes

were brought together, the bodies of the ſaintes would not be onely verie vaſte for their quantitie of huge bigneſſe, and verie monſtrous for the number of the members: but alſo oftentimes there woulde bee more bodies then one of one and the ſame Saint.
            In that hee counterfaiteth miracles, which neither are, nor haue beene wrought, as was ſhewed before.
            In that hee pretendeth the name of Chriſt & the ſaluation of the Church: But indeede doeth ſeeke his owne honour and commoditie. For he calleth them the Riches of the Church, and Patrimonie of Chriſt. But did Chriſt poſſeſſe any ſuch things? Thou beareſt the name and title of Biſhops, but altogether voide of the ſubſtance. Thou heareſt the name of Patriarkes, Superintendentes, Abbats: but if thou take away the outwarde viſard and ceremonie, what will remaine? Thou heareſt the names of the Fraternities: and they are ſchiſmes or diuiſions. Thou heareſt of the orders and contemplatiue life: what is it but confuſion and ſenſeleſneſſe? Thou heareſt of continencie:

and it is nothing but riotouſneſſe. Thou heareſt of the pouertie, eſpecially of the Monkes, and what is it but deliciouſnes? Thou heareſt of chaſtitie and ſingle life, and what is this but filthie lecherie? Thou heareſt of humilitie, and it is pride and arrogancie. Finally thou ſeeſt the ſheepes skinne, but there is a wolfe lurking within it. For hee indeed profeſſeth humilitie, but exalteth himſelfe aboue all others: hee voweth chaſtitie, but vſeth adulterie: yea and more is further from all honeſtie: no man (as it is full well knowne vnto all men) doth more defile himſelfe with all kinde of villanie: hee celebrateth a feaſt, and yet he playeth the glutton in the ſame.
            
                Againe, hee is cruell, as thoſe terrible excommunications and edicts do ſhew, which His crueltie. he maketh againſt Emperors, kings, & others: as do alſo his factions, his warres, his butcherly maſſacres, with the perſecutions and moſt extreme torments of the faithfull: which are in truth more then I am able to rehearſe in any ſhort ſpace. For how many factions, warres, & maſſacres hath the Pope of Rome cauſed among Chriſtian princes, in all partes of Chriſtendom within theſe 500 yeres, for the maintenance & encreaſe of his power? How much blood hath he ſhed? when as he in the meane

ſeaſon like to a Fencer hauing ſet others togither by the eares, is a beholder of theſe bloodie ſports: Or as another Nero, beholding in his turret the citie ſet on fire, which himſelfe had fired, doth feede and pleaſe his mind, and delight his eies with ſuch a hidious and pitiful ſpectacle. What miſchiefe did he work in that voyage to Ieruſalem, for the recouerie of the ſepulchre of the Lorde, the citie Ieruſalem, and the holy lande? which was firſt begun by Gregorie the 8: one, who was more cruell and abominable then Nero himſelfe: and after proſecuted by Vrbanus, the deare and moſt neare friend which Gregorie had: wherein the Weſt fought againſt the Eaſt verie dangerouſlie, & the Chriſtian ſouldiers ſo vſed the matter by ſpoiling & killing Chriſtians, Iewes, & others, & by committing other outrages, that all the warres which were made by the Romanes being Gentiles, may (in compariſon of that) bee called Chriſtian, godly, and holy.
            Howe madly and furiouſly haue the Counter popes raged together, euen that they might diſpatch one another, onely to ſerue their owne ambition? To conclude, how many and how great perſecutions hath the Pope cauſed within this 60 yeeres? what torments hath he inflicted vpon men faithfull, and holy, whome he proclaimed as heretiques, eſpecially in France, and the low Countries. For becauſe that he is cruell, he doeth perſecute the ſaintes, but he worſhippeth them when they be placed in heauen. For this is the propertie

of a bloody and cruell man, to iniurie thoſe which are his equals, or them who are his inferiours & whom he may hurt: but as for them who are his betters, & whom he can not hurt, but feareth leſt himſelfe be hurt by them, theſe he reuerenceth.
            
                He alſo appeared by little & litle by the His appearance. craft of the deuill, which mingleth truth and falſhood together, which is a cunning cozening and ſophiſticall ſubtilty. For a lie is weake of it ſelfe & can not ſtand: therfore theſe cozening mates do vnderprop their lies with ſuch propoſitions & aſſertions, as be either true, or els haue a ſhew of trueth. Therfore ſathan by litle & litle brought in the corruptions of doctrine & maners, & confirmed them more and more by ſophiſtrie & hypocriſie, till at length this kingdome did fully appeare.
            Hee alſo hath bin extant ſince the diuiſion His time. & ouerthrow of the Romane Monarchie, and ſince the expiring & date of thoſe 666 yeeres: that is ſince the death of Mauritius the Emperour: when the Emperour Phocas (who ſlewe his father) made this decree, that the Church of Rome ſhould be head ouer all other Churches, and that the Biſhop of Rome (who then was Boniface the third) ſhould be head ouer all Biſhops, & be the Catholique and general Biſhop. And alway ſince, eſpecially ſince the time of Charles the great, hee hath gotten ſtrength and growne greater and greater.
            He appeared in the temple of God. that is, in the Churches, and there he ſtill ſitteth and His place.
               
ruleth, feigning that hee is the Vicar of Chriſt and the ſucceſſour of Peter: for there was the true Church where the Pope of Rome firſt appeared as Antichriſt, and afterward there remained the name, the title, & the print of the Church, there was the bible, that is, the booke of the Prophets & Apoſtles, there remained the true doctrine concerning God, concerning the trinitie of the deuine perſons, & concerning the perſon of Chriſt, there remained baptiſme together with the creed of the Apoſtles: and though the Popedome was not then, no more then in trueth it is now the Church, yet the Church was, and did as it were, lie hid in the Papacie.
            
                He ſitteth at Rome betwixt two ſeas, Tyrrhenum & Adriaticum, for here is the ſeate of the Pope, wherein oftentimes, (for ſometimes the place is changed) he dwelleth bodily.
            
                He is diſcouered in theſe laſt daies of the world, firſt by Iohn Hus, ſecondly by Martin Luther, 
               The diſcovery of the pope. & other excellent men, whom God raiſed vp, who hauing found out Antichriſt euen in the time of his marchandiſe, and as we ſay, with the manner, haue put him to ſhame, by ſhewing his impietie and indeauour againſt Chriſt, and haue kindled the light of the goſpell in all places, eſpecially in Germany though the Pope & other the Lords of Chriſtendom, being vtterly againſt it, haue threatened baniſhments, puniſhments, warres and ouerthrowe: who would not ſuffer the religion (which had continued ſo many ages) to

be ouerthrowen, to the great trouble & deſtruction of all Europe. For ſo ſoone as men which were not giuē vnto pleaſures (as Epicures are) did ſee but a ſpark of light ſhining vnto them, they being verie much grieued with that darknes & ſeruitude (wherewith they had beene ſo manie yeres oppreſſed) and being intiſed with the beautie & ſweetnes of trueth, they ioyned themſelues vnto the ſincere teachers of truth, not hauing regard of other matters whatſoeuer. By which meanes, the puritie of doctrine was euerie where propagated & ſpred abroad, the Churches were eſtabliſhed & reſtored vnto their former beautie, firſt in Germanie, Switſerland, then in England, Scotland, France, Flanders, Denmarke, & other prouinces. And though that vnluckie contention concerning the ſupper of the Lorde, did ſtraightwaie beginne, amongſt the preachers of the Goſpell, euen in the beginning thereof, and continueth alſo vnto this day (Satan endeauouring thereby to hinder and ſtaie the cauſe of the goſpell) yet we are to thinke thus: Firſt, that Sathan hath not now begun, but hath practiſed long agoe, to ſet at variance the holy ſeruants of God, as Paul and Barnabas, and againe the ſame Paul and Peter with others more: ſecondlie, that as concerning the foundation of the doctrine & religion of Chriſt, & all things neceſſarie vnto ſaluation, there hath alwaies bene and ſtill is, an agreement betwixt thoſe men, who are the reſtorers of this goſpell which now beginneth to take life againe. For hauing conſuted merit,

and truſt repoſed in workes wherwith miſerable men were bewitched in time of Poperie, both parties agreed, that our whole ſaluation conſiſteth in the merites of Chriſt: onely the difference is in the ſupper of the Lorde, concerning the corporall preſence, and the bodily eating, and that the ſame is common vnto the godlie and the wicked (as the one part defendeth) and ſo not neceſſarie vnto ſaluation. Thirdly, it is no great maruell, if in the beginning of reformation, & as it were, in the dawning of the day, all things were not at the firſt well conſidered: for it can ſcarſely be declared what a deep gulfe of ignorance was in popery, and what an horrible darkeneſſe by reaſon of errours. And doubtleſſe, it was a verie great miracle wrought by God, that thoſe firſt doctours of the goſpell could ariſe from thence, in ſo litle and ſhort ſpace. And although the Ieſuites which are lately ſprong vp, indeauour to heale this wounde of Antichriſt, yet ſhall they neuer fullie cure the ſame.
            
                Finally, he ſhalbe deſtroied in the laſt daie of Chriſt, when he returneth to iudgement, The deſtruction of the Pope. and ſhalbe caſt into the lake of fire and brimſtone according vnto the prophecie before declared. In the meane ſeaſon, we are patiently to beare that perſecution wherwith he oppreſſeth vs, and we muſt not for his tyranie leaue or forſake the profeſſion of the truth.
            
                Which things ſith they are all true, it followeth, that the Pope ſince the death of The concluſion. 
               Gregorie the great, and the murther of Mauritius
               
the Emperour, is that Antichriſt whome we haue before deſcribed out of the Prophecies of the Prophets and Apoſtles. For whether they conſider the doctrine or behold the maners and actions of the Pope, they all agree vnto theſe prophecies: and though heretofore there were controuerſie touching primacie, & there were diuers errours (and they not ſmall) concerning the doctrine: yet afterwarde, the deſire of bearingſway, did more breake forth, Idolatrie, and impietie was encreaſed, and at the length Boniface the third obtained of Phocas the Emperour, that whoſoeuer ſhould be the Biſhop of auncient Rome, ſhould alſo bee eſteemed as vniuerſall Biſhop, that Rome ſhoulde be accounted the heade of all Churches, and that this priuiledge might be traduced to their ſucceſſours: and within a while after, others of them chalenged both the ſwords for themſelues, eſtabliſhed this by decree, that the Maſſe was a ſacrifice propitiatorie for the liuing and the dead: and to conclude, they made Rome a ſanctuarie for Idols.
            
                Hitherto wee haue ſhewed, who this great Antichriſt is. But as in the former queſtion, the Papiſtes doe differ from vs, what Antichriſt ſhould be, ſo likewiſe in this latter, who Antichriſt ſhould be: for as they doe define Antichriſt otherwiſe then we, ſo doe they vtterly denie that the Pope of Rome is that Antichriſt. For the Pope with his adherents (now playing the part of Antichriſt) doeth feigne another Antichriſt, and teacheth that

he is yet to come, leaſt he himſelfe ſhould bee thought to be the Antichriſt indeed. Of whoſe opinion and their reaſons we will ſay more as occaſion ſhall be offered: for the manner of our poſitions will not now permit vs to ſpeake of the ſame.
            God the Father graunt for our Lorde Ieſus Chriſtes ſake, that men may learne to knowe and to abhorre that Antichriſt, the moſt dangerous enemie of Chriſt and the Church: and may likewiſe learne more and more to loue and worſhip Chriſt.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   