
      
         
            
            
            The excellent and pleasant
worke of Iulius Solinus
Polyhistor. Contayning the noble actions of humaine
creatures, the secretes & prouidence
of nature, the description of Countries, the
maners of the people: with many meruailous things
and strange antiquities, seruing for the benefitt
and recreation of all sorts of
persons. Translated out of Latin into English, by
Arthur Golding. Gent.
            
            
            
               At London
Printed by I. Charlewoode for Thomas
Hacket. 1587.
         
         
            
               
               
The Right Honble. Charles Viscount Bruce of
Ampthill (Son & Heir Apparent of Thomas Earl
of Ailesbury) & Baron Bruce of Whorleton
         
         
            
            THE LIFE OF SOLINVS,
VVRITTEN BY IOHN
CAMERTES.
            
               THere is no certaintie
left in writing by them
that are skilfull, in what
time Iulius Solinus florished.
which thing I beleeue
to haue happened because
the monuments of such as
writ after him perrished almost
vniuersally, at such time as the barbarous nations
made hauock of all things. I maruel that the
cōpiler of the Supplement of Chronicles (in all other
respectes a base wr
                  •
               ter.) hath reported that
this Solinus floris
                  •
               ed in the time of Augustus Caesar
to whom he surmiseth him to haue dedicated hys
Polyhistor. For it is euident that in this woorke,
Solinus maketh mentiō of the Emperor Vespasians
dooings. Furthermore, hee speaketh of Suetonius
Paulinus, whō 
               Plinie saw as he witnesseth himself.
Besides this, Solinus hath drawn almost all his matter
out of Plinies fountaines, and yet neuerthelesse
in wryting these things, hee desireth hys freende

in the beginning of his worke, to beare wyth hys
simplicitie. But forasmuch as he no where maketh
mention of Plinie, (by whom he was furthered) I
coniecture that Solinus wrate this work while Plinie
was yet aliue. And therevppon (by likelihoode)
it comes to passe, that hee made no mention of hys
author at that time liuing. By like reason it might
fall out, that Plinie no where maketh mention of
Dioscorides a famous wrighter of the same time
that he was, when notwithstanding it is apparant,
that Plinie borowed many thinges out of him into
his work. The same fault also might bee imputed
to Dioscorides (for it might bee founde in Ammon
which of them purloyned from other) if hee suppressing
the name of Plinie, haue filched so manie
thinges out of him. They that haue written moste
precisely of the liues and manners of Xenophon and
Plato, and sundry other things of thē, report that in
al the nūbers of Volumes which eche of thē wrate,
neyther Plato made once mention of the name of
Xenophon, nor Xenophon of the name of Plato.
            
            
               Beleeue 
                     •
                  e such is Enuies kind, that Readers very seeld.
               To wryters in their present times deserued thanks do yeeld.
               For En
                     •
                  y feedeth on the quick: but when that men be dead,
               The sting of Enuie stints, and hath no poison more to shead.
            
            VVhich saying of Naso is very true. VVhat
may be sayd of Macrobius, who diuers times taketh
whole leaues out of Gellius? Or of Placidus,
who boroweth of Ser
                     •
                  ius? or of Acron, who stealeth

from Porphyrio? What shall wee say of sixe
hundred others, who in long treatises, suppressing
the names of them from whome they borowed
them, haue word for word attributed all things to
themselues? No mā doubteth but that Aulus Gellius
the very Diamond of the Latin tongue, profited
greatly by reading Liuie, and yet he wil not in
any wise that Liuie the prince of Latin Historiographers,
should be partaker of his Nights. Yet
am I not of the opinion of some mē, which thinke
that Solinus made no mention of Plinie, in hope
that Plinies works should vtterly haue perished, &
so his collections onely haue remained, and in
processe of time no mā shold haue bin able to discouer
his filchings, as Florus & Iustine are thought
to haue trauelled to the like end & purpose▪ would
God there were none other cause then this of the
losse of so many good Authors. Then to passe ouer
the Greekes by the way, the monuments of
Cato, Varro, Nigidius, Salust, Higinius, Celsus, Ennius,
Furius, Varrius, Actius, Neuius, and Pacuuius, all
noble Authors, (which now are perrished, to the
great hinderaunce of Students) shoulde haue remained
vnto this day. But howsoeuer the case stā
               deth,
Solinus courteously confesseth, that whatsoeuer
he hath comprehended in hys Polyhistor, proceedeth
out of most allowable Authors, & hechalengeth
nothing for his owne, in as much as (sayth
he) the diligence of men in olde time hath beene
such, that nothing hath continued vntouched to

our dayes. And againe he sayth plainly, that hee
leaueth the auouchi
                  •
               g of the trueth of thinges, to
such Authors as hee hath followed in this worke.
Neither is it to be vpbraided to Solinus as a shame,
that hee hath euery where followed Plinie, more
then Virgill is to be found fault with for translating
into his worke the verses of the auncient Poets, &
specially of Homer. For it is no small commendation
to counterfet singulerly a singuler Author.
            That Solinus was a Romaine, it is to be coniectured
both by his phrase of wryting, and also for that
commonly when occasion serueth to speake of the
Romaines, hee is wont in most places to call them
our men, or my countrymen. Not onely the latter
wryters, (as Sipontinus, Perottus, Domitius, Calderinus,
Angelus Politianus, Hermolaus Barbarus, Ianus
Parrhasius, and diuers others such like, whom not
without cause a man might account among the
auncient wryters.) But Seruius also in his seconde
booke vpon Virgills Husbandry, and Priscian, two
of the sixe notable Gramarians, haue cited the authoritie
of Solinus by name. Also the interpreter of
Dennis, (whither it were Priscian or Rhemninus)
hath oftentimes put whole sentences of Solinussis
in his verses. If I be not deceiued, all that which
Macrobius reciteth of the diuision of the yeere, and
of the odde dayes, are Solinussis. Moreouer, the
Doctors of the Church, Ierom, Ambrose, and Au
                  
                     •
                  ten,
and other Doctors also, haue many times borowed
sentences worde for worde out of Solinus.
            
            
               There are some that terme Solinus by the name
of Plinies Ape, in like manner as Iulius Capitolinus
Plinius Caecilius, and Sidonius Apollinaris reporte,
that Titian was called the Ape of the Orators, and
Arulen the Ape of the Stoiks. But these men consider
not, that such are wont to be called Apes, as eyther
repeate things writtē by others altogether in
the same order without alteration, or els such as
counterfet, not the Authors but theyr shadowes.
But Solinus hath so followed Plinies phrase, that
(vnder correction bee it spoken) there may scarce
any other be found, that hath approched neerer to
the maiestie of Plinies stile. He intitled his Booke
(as is found in certaine old Coppies) to his freend
Autius, to who also he deliuered it to be corrected.
Some hold opinion, that he left other monumēts
also of hys wyt, which eyther by force of time are
perished, or els perchaunce lie hyd in some blinde
corner among Mothes.
            Finis.
         
         
            
            ¶C. Iulius Solinus sendeth hartie
commendations to his freende
Autius.
            
               FOrasmuch as certain persons
rather of too much eagernesse
then of good vvill, haue hasted
to snatch vp this little peece of
vvorke that I was in hande
withall, and haue pulished it,
beeing yet vnpullished, before
the matter that I had begunne,
could be fullie finished: & now
also do blaze abroad in corrupted copies, the things that are
disalowed, as though they had beene well allowed: slightlie
ouerpassing such things as by further aduise haue beene added
for the increase of knowledge: Least peraduenture such
a rude and vnperfect hochpotch should be brought vnto your
handes as a 
                  •
               ooke by mee well ouerlooked: I haue sent you
this worke in such sort, as you may knowe it to bee by myne
owne aduise set in order. First, for that the processe of the
whole discourse was to be referred to your discretion, and
secondlie to the intent that the ilfauorednesse of that rustie
publication might by the true edition bee abolished. The tytl
                  •
               
of this vvorke therfore shall be Polyhistor. For it is my
mind that the title which I had purposed vppon at the beginning,
(that is to say, A collection of things woorthy
remembrance) should be abolished vvith the rest of those
thinges that I haue disallowed. Wherefore when you shall
compare this Epistle with the Epistle which is in the beginning
of the other coppie, you shall vnderstande that I have
made the same account of you, as of him to vvhō I haue dedicated
the whole substaunce of my trauell.
            Farewell.
         
         
            
            
               ❧ THE EPISTLE
DEDICATORIE
of the Author written to the
same Autius.
            
               INasmuch as I
vnderstande, that both in
fauourable perusing the
dooings of other men, and
also in knowledge of the liberall
Sciences, you excell
all others, wherof I my self
also haue had so good experiēce,
so as I cannot seeme to haue presumed vnaduisedly
vpon your courtesie, any further then becommeth
me: I thought to dedicate the web of thys my
little worke specially vnto you, as at whose hande I
hoped eyther for your learnings sake to bee the sooner
allowed, or for your courtesies sake to bee the easier
borne withall. The booke is framed to a breefenesse,
and (as farre as reason woulde suffer) so moderatlye
abridged, that there is not in it, eyther too lauash aboundaunce,

or to nigardly skantnesse. And if you
consider it aduisedly, you shall finde it rather leuened
with knowledge, then vernished with eloquence. For
I confesse my selfe to haue studied earnestly certaine
choyse Bookes, to the intent to digresse further of frō
thinges knowne, and to make longer tariance in
things more strange. Recitall of places occupyeth the
most part of this worke, as whereunto the whole matter
is somewhat inclined of it selfe. And heereof I
minded in such wyse to entreate, as I might set out
the platts of the famous Lands, & the notable Bayes
of the Sea, euery one in theyr order, keeping the accustomed
distin
                  •
               tion of the world.
            Also I haue interlaced many thinges some what
differing (but not disagreeing) from the matter, to
the intent that (if nothing els, yet at leastwyse) the
varietie it selfe myght ease the wearines of the Readers▪
Heerewythall I haue expressed the natures of
men and other lyuing things. And not a few things
are added concerning straunge Trees and Stones: cō
               cerning
the shapes of farborne people: and concerning
the diuersities of customes of vnknown nations.
Moreouer, there are diuers thinges worthy to be intreated
of, which to passe ouer, I thought had beene a
poynt of negligence, inasmuch as they be auouched
by the authority of most allowed wryters, which thing
inespecially I would your wysedome shoulde vnderstand.
For what can wee callenge properly for our
owne, sith the dilygence of menne in olde tyme hath
beene such, that nothyng hath remayned vntouched

vnto our dayes. VVherefore I beseech you waygh not
the credite of this woorke that I put foorth, in
the ballance of thys present tyme. For I ensuing the
print of the olde stampe, thought good rather to take
my choyse of all the olde opinions, then to alter them.
Therefore if any of these thynges shall sound otherwyse
to your vnderstanding, then I wysh they shold:
I pray you beare wyth my vnskylfulnes, and let those
Authors which I haue followed stande to the auouching
of the trueth. And euen as they that drawe the
Images of men, setting all the rest aside, doo first and
formost proportion out the head, & meddle not with
portraying out the other limbes before they haue taken
theyr begynning (as yee woulde say) at the very
topcastle of shape and proportion: So wyll I also take
my begynning at the heade of the world, (that is to
weete) the Cittie of Rome. And although the best
learned Authors haue left nothyng that may bee spoken
a newe to the prayse thereof, and that therefore
it be almost a superfluous matter to trace the pathe,
that hath beene troden ouer in so many Chronicles.
yet neuertheles, because it shal not be altogether ouer
slipped, I wyll set forth the Originall thereof wyth as
much faythfulnesse as may be.
            Farewell.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The fyrst Chapter
            of Caius Iulius Solinus Polyhistor,
entreateth of the first foundation of
the Cittie Rome.
            
               THere are some which
would haue it séeme,Opinions concerning the name of Rome. that
the name of Rome was
giuen first of all by Euander:
who finding there a
Towne built before by the
young men of Latiū
                which
they called Valentia,
               Valentia. kept
the signification of the first
name, & called it in Gréeke
Rhome, which is the same that Valentia is in Latine.
And forasmuch as the Arcadians planted themselues
there vppon the highest toppe of an Hill, it came to
passe that euer after the Latines termed the strongest
places of Citties by the name of Arces. Heraclides
                is
of opinion, that after the taking of Troy, certaine Achiues
came by the Riuer Tyber, and arriued in the
place where Rome is nowe: and that afterwarde by
perswasion of one Rome a noble Lady (who was prysoner
among them and at y• time in theyr companie)
they did set fire on their Shippes, setled themselues to
abide, reared the wals, and called the Towne Rome,
after the name of the Ladie. Ag
                     •
                  thocles wryteth,
that it was not this Rome the prisoner as is a
                  •
               oresaid,
but the daughter of Ascanius and graundchild to Aen
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  ,
that was the cause of this foresaid name of thys
Cittie. There is also registred a peculiar name of
Rome: but it is not lawful to be published, forasmuch
as it is enacted among other secretes of our Ceremonies,

that it should not be blazed abrode, to the intent
that the reuerence giuen to the inacted secrecie, might
abolish the knowledge thereof. And Valerius Soranus
(because he durst be so bold as to disclose it contrary to
the Law) was put to death in recompence of his ouer-liberall
talke. Among our auncientest Religions, we
worship the Chappell of Angerona, to whom wée doo
sacrifice before theThat is about the 19. day of December. twelfth day of the Calends of Ianuarie,
which Goddesse (as the Gouernour of silence)
hath her Image there with mouth closed, and lyppes
sealed fast together. As concerning the times of the
building of the Cittie,The time of the buildinge of Rome. it hath raysed doubtfull questions,
inasmuch as certayne things were builded there
long before the time of Romulus. For Hercules
               Hercules. (according
to the vowe that hee had made for the punishing
of Cacus,
               Cacus. and the recouerie of his Oxen,) dedicated an
Altar to his Father Iupiter, whom he surnamed ye finder.
This Cacus inhabited a place named Salines
whereas is now the Gate called Trigemina. Who
(as Coelius reporteth) béeing sent to ward by Tarchon
               Tarchon.
the Tyrrhenian (to whom he came of Ambassade from
King Marsias,
               Marsias. accompanied with Megales the Phrygian)
brake out of prison, and returning from whence
he came, raysed a greater puissaunce, and subdued all
the Country about the Riuer Vulturnus & Campane.
Wherewith béeing not content, as he attempted the
conquest of those thinges that were come in possession
of y• 
               Arcadians,
               Megales a Ph
                     •
                  ygian the firste founder of the arte of Birdspelling among the Sabines. he was vanquished by Hercules, who
by chaunce was there at the same time. And the Sabines
receyuing Megales again, were taught by him
the art of Byrdspelling. Hercules also hauing learned
of Nicostrate the mother of Euander (who for her
skill in prophesying,Nicostrate coū
                  ted one of the nine Sybilles. was also called Carmentis) that
he should become immortall, erected an Altar to hys
owne maiestie, which among our Byshops is had in

very great reuerence. Moreouer he made the consept,
within the which he taught the Potits, howe they
shoulde solemnize his rites and ceremonies in offering
Oxen. Hercules Chappell is in the Oxe-market,Hercules Chappell, and the institution of hys Ceremonies.
wherein are remayning the monuments of hys banquet
and maiestie, euen vnto this day. For such a gyft
is giuen it from Heauen, that neither dogs nor flyes
can enter into the place. For at such time as hee was
offering the inwards of his sacrifice, it is sayd that he
cursed the God Myagrus,
               Myagrus the God of Flyes. and left his Clubbe in the
Porche, at the smell whereof dogges ran away, and
so it continueth to this howre. The Church also which
is called the Treasory of Saturne,
               The Treasorie of Saturne. was builded by hys
companions in the honor of Saturne, whō they had learned
to haue béene an inhabiter of that Country. Furthermore
they named the Hill where now is ye Capitoll,
Saturnes Hyll. Of the Castle also which they
builded, they named the Gate Saturnes Gate,The dwelling of Nicostrate. which
afterward was called Pandangate. At the foote of the
Hill Capitoline, was the dwelling of Carmentis, and
there is nowe the Chappell of Carmentis, wherof the
Gate of Carmentis taketh his name.Wherof the Romane Pallace tooke that name. As for ye Pallace
it is not to be doubted but that the Arcadians were
founders thereof, who also before that time builded
the Towne Palanteum, which the Aborigens inhabited
a whyle, but afterward (for the noysomnesse of
the fenne and marrys which the Tyber running by it
had made) left it vp and remooued to Rhaeatee. There
are that thinke thys Hill tooke hys name of the bleating
of shéepe by chaunging of Letters, or of Pale the
Goddesse of Shéepeheardes, or (as Silenus prooueth) of
Pallas the daughter of Hyperboreus, whom Hercules deflowred
on that Hyll. But howsoeuer these thyngs
agrée: it is manifest that the glorye of the Romaine
name did chéefely spring out of thatThat is to sa
                     •
                   of Romulus. luckye fore
                  •
               oken:
specially séeing that the account of the yéeres

bringeth good reason to ground the trueth vppon. For
(as Varro a most exquisite Author affirmeth) Romulus
the sonne of Mars and Rhaea Siluta, or (as diuers other
suppose) of Mars and Ilia, builded Rome. And at
the first Rome was called square, because it was platted
out by line and leuell. It beginneth at the Groue
that is in the floore of Apollo, and endeth at the vpper
brew of Cacus staiers, where as was ye cotage of Faustulus.
And there dwelled Romulus that luckely layd
the foundation of the walles in the 18. yere of his age,
theThe time of the building of Rome by Romulus, the 19. of Aprill. eleuēth Calends of May betwéene two & thrée of
the clock, as Lucius Tarutius the famous Mathematick
hath left in wryting. Iupiter béeing at that time
in Pisces. Saturne, Venus, Mars, & Mercurie in Scorpio:
the Sonne in Taurus: and the Moone in Lybra.
And it was euer after kept for a custome, that no sacrifice
should be slayne by men on theyr birth dayes,
to the intent that that day should be pure from bloodshed.
The signification whereof (men holde opinion)
was taken of the deliueraunce of Ilia. The said Romulus
raigned thirty and seauen yéeres.The first Tryumph. He ledde the
first tryumph that euer was. And first hee tryumphed
ouer the Ceninenses, and spoyled Acron theyr King,
whose Armour he first dedicated to Iupiter F
                     •
                  retrius,
and hung it vp in hys Temple, terming it by y• name
of a rich spoyle. Secondly he triumphed ouer the Antenua
                     •
                  s:
and lastly ouer the Vien
                     •
                  s. Finally at ye Fen
of Caprea he vanished away, theThe seconde day of Iuly. Nones of Iuly.
            Now will I shew in what places the other Kinges
dwelt.Tatius king of the Sabines. 
               Tatius dwelt in the Towre where as nowe is
the Temple of Iuno Moneta: who in the fift yeere after
his comming into the Cittie, béeing murthered by
the Laurents, departed out of this lyfe, the 27. Olimpiad.
Numa dwelt first on Quirins Hyll,Numa Pompilius the second K. of the Romains. and afterward
by Vestaas Church, in the Court, which yet still

beareth the same name. Hee raigned 43. yéeres, and is
buried vnder Ianiculum, Tullus Hostilius
               
               Tullus Hostiliu
                     •
                  
                dwelt in Velia,
where afterward was made the Temple of Houshold
Gods. He raigned two and thirty yéeres, and died
in the thirty fiue Olympiade. Ancus Martius
               Ancus Martiu
                     •
                  
               
dwelt in the vpper ende of the holy stréete, wher now
is the Temple of the Gods called Lares. Hee raigned
thirty and foure yéeres, and dyed the 41. Olympiade.
Tarquine
               Tarquine the Elder. the elder, dwelt at the Gate Mugonia, aboue
the New stréete, and raigned seauen and thirty yeres.
Seruius Tullius
               Seruius Tullius. dwelt in the Exquilies aboue Olbyes
Hyll, and raigned forty and two yéeres. Tarquine
               Tarquine the proude. the
proude dwelt in the Exquilies also, vpon Mount Pullus,
by the Béechie Lake, and raigned twentie & fiue
yéeres.Opynions of the time of the building of Rome. 
               Cincius thinketh that Rome was builded in
the twelfth Olympiad. Fabius 
                     •
                  ictor thinketh it was
builded in the eyght. N
                     •
                  epos and Lactātius approouing
the opinions of Eratosthenes and Apoll
                     •
                  dorus) suppose
it was builded in the second yéere of the seuenth Olympiad.
Pomponius Atticus, and Marcus Tullius
C
                     ••
                  ero, hold opinion, that it was builded ye third yéere
of the sixt Olympiad. Therefore by conferring our
time
                  •
                with the Gréekes, wee finde that Rome was
builded in the beginning of the seauenth Olympiad,
the foure hundred and thrée and thirty yéere after the
taking of Troy. For the gaming of Olympus (which
Hercules made in y• honor of Pelops hys great Grandfather
by the mothers side,) béeing left of, was by
Iphiclus (one of hys posteritie) renued after the destruction
of Troy, the foure hundred and eyght yéere.
Wherevpon it commeth to passe, that the first Olympiad
is reckoned from Iphiclus. So letting passe sixe
Olimpiads betwéene Iphiclus & the building of Rome,
               An Olimpiad and what it contayneth.
of which euery Olympiad contayneth foure yéeres,
séeing that Rome was builded in the beginning of the

seauenth Olimpiad, it must néedes fall out that there
were iust foure hundred thirty and thrée yéeres betwéene
the destruction of Troy, and the foundation of
Rome. To the proofe of this argument maketh, that
when Caius Pompeius Gallus, and Quintus Verani
                     •
                  s
were Consuls, it was the eyght hundred and first yere
from the building of the Cittie: which time of theyr
Consulshipp was registred in the common Recordes,
to be the two hundreth and seuenth Olimpiad. Nowe
multiplie two hundred and sixe. Olimpiads by foure▪
and they shall amount to eyght hundred and twentye
foure yéeres, to the which must bee added y• first yeers
of the seauenth Olimpiad, to make vp full twenty and
fiue aboue eyght hundred. Out of the which summe,
abate twenty and foure yéeres for the sixe Olimpiads
that were behind: and the remnant shall appeare to
be eyght hundred and one yéeres. Wherefore séeing
that the beginning of the two hundred and seauen Olimpiad
is accounted for the eyght hundreth and firste
yéere of the building of the Cittie, it is to bee beléeued
that Rome was builded the first yéere of the seauenth
Olimpiad. The which was gouerned by Kinges two
hundred and one and forty yéeres.Of the sundry gouernments in Rome. The estate of the
Tennement was erected the thrée hundred and second
yéere. The first Punick warre was begun the foure
hundred fourescore and ninth yéere. The second Punick
war, the fiue hundred and thirty fiue yéere. The
third Punick warre, the sixe hundred and foure. The
warre of the Confederats, the sixe hundred thréescore
and second yéere. Unto the yéere that Hircius and Pa
                     •
                  
                  sa
were Consuls, there had passed seauen hundred and
tenne yéeres. In the time of whose Consulship, Caesar
Augustus
               Caesar Augustus. was created Consull in the eyghteenth
yéere of his age. Who so behaued himselfe in the entrye
of his raigne, that through hys circumspectnesse,

the Empyre of Rome was not onely in quiet,
but also safe and frée from all danger. The which time
was almost alone to be found, wherein warres for the
most part had longest discontinuance, and wits chiefly
florished. Undoubtedly to the intent that during thys
vacation time, when warres ceased, the exercises of
vertue should not growe out of vre.
         
         
            CAP. II.
            Of the diuision of the yeere, and of the odde dayes
added in the Leape-yeeres.
            
               
                  ABout thys tyme
was the orderly course of
the yéere perceiued, which
from the beginning of the
worlde hadde béene déepely
hidden in darknesse. For
before Augustus Caesar, men
reckoned the yéere diuerslie
and vncertainely. The Aegiptians
determined it in foure monethes. The Arcadians
in thrée. The Acarnanians in sixe. The Lauinians
of Italy in thirtéene: and this their yéere was reported
to be of thrée hundred threescore and fourteene
dayes. The Romaines at the firste, accounted ten monethes
for a yéere, beginning at March. In so much
that in the firste day thereof, they kindled fire on the
Altars of Vesta, they shifted theyr olde Baye Garlandes
for Gréene, the Senate and people chose newe
Officers, the Matrons serued theyr seruaunts at the
Table, in like sort as the Masters did at the feaste of

               Saturne: the Matrons to the intent through this courtesie
to prouoke thē to y• more obedience, the Maisters
as it were to rewarde them in respect of theyr paynes
taken: specially seeing this moneth is the first, and
chiefe of all the rest, which may wel be prooued, in that
the fift moneth from it was called Quintilis, & when
the full number was fulfilled. December did close vp
the whole circuit within the three hundred and foure
day. For at that time thys number of dayes accomplished
the yeere, so that sixe monethes were of thirty
dayes a peece, and the other foure had thirty and one
a peece. But forasmuch as that account before the
comming of Numa differed from the course of the
Moone, they supplyed the yeere to the computation
of the Moone, by putting thereto one and fiftye
dayes. To the intent therfore to make vp full twelue
monethes, they tooke from eche of the sayd sixe monethes
one day, and put them to these one and fiftye,
and so made iust fifty and seauen, the which were deuided
into two monethes, whereof the one contained
twentie and nine dayes, the other twenty and eyght.
So the yeere began to haue three hundred fiftye & fiue
dayes. Afterward, when they perceiued the yéere to
be vnaduisedly determined within the foresayd daies,
forasmuch as it appeared that the Sunne finished not
hys ful course in the Zodiack, before ye three hundreth
threescore and fift day, wyth the ouerplus welneere of
a quarter of a day: they added that quarter and tenne
dayes, to the intent the yéere should consist of ful thrée
hundred threescore and fiue dayes, and the fourth part
of a day. Whereunto they were the rather induced
for obseruing the odde number, which (according to
the doctrine of Pythagoras) ought to be preferred in all
thinges.
            And heerevpon it commeth to passe, that Ianuary

for hys odde dayes is dedicated to the Gods supernal,
and February for hys euen dayes as vnlucky is allotted
to the Gods infernall. Therefore when as thys
order of account séemed alowable to the whole world,
for the exacter keeping of the sayd quarter, it was of
diuers Nations diuersly added, and yet it could neuer
be brought to passe, to sal out euen with ths time. The
Greekes abated out of euery yeere eleuen dayes, and
the fourth part of a day: which beeing eyght tymes
multiplyed, they reserued to the ninth yeere, to the
intent that the number of nine béeing gathered into
one grosse summe, might be deuided into 3. monethes
of thirty dayes a péece. The which being restored againe
the ninth yeere, made foure hundred forty and
foure dayes, which they called odde or superfluous
dayes. The Romaines liked well of this reckoning at
the first. But afterward mislyking it in respect of the
euen number; they neglected it, and within short space
forgot it, committing the order of the addition to the
Priestes: who to pleasure the tolegatherers in theyr
accounts, did after theyr owne fancy shorten or lengthen
the yeere as they lysted.
            Whyle thinges stoode in this case, and that the
manner of adding was sometime too short, and sometime
too long, or els dissembled and let slip altogether:
it happened oftentimes that the monethes which had
beene woont to passe in Winter, fell one whyle in
Sommertime, and another while in the fal of y• leafe.
Caius Caesar therefore to the intent to set a stay in this
variablenesse, did cutte of all this turmoyling of the
tymes. And that the error foreslypped myght be reduced
to some certaine staiednesse: he added twenty and
one dayes and sixe houres at a time, by meanes wherof
the monethes being drawn backe to theyr accustomed

places, might from thenceforth kéepe theyr Ordinarie
and appointed seasons. That onely yéere therfore
had thrée hundred and foure and forty daies, and
all the rest afterward had thrée hundred thréescore and
fiue daies, and sixe howres. This notwithstanding,
then also was a default committed by Priestes. For
whereas order was taken that they shoulde euerye
foure yeere adde one daie, which ought to haue beene
doone at the ende of the fourth yéere, before the fifte
yéere began, they reckoned it in the beginning of the
fourth yéere, and not in the ende. By meanes wherof,
in thirtie and sixe yéeres, whereas nine daies had béen
sufficient, twelue daies were reckoned. The which
béeing espied, Augustus reformed in this wise. Hee
commaunded that twelue yéeres should passe without
leape, to the intent y• those thrée daies aboue the nine,
which were superfluously added, might by this means
be recompensed. Uppon which discipline was afterward
grounded the order of all times. Notwithstanding,
albeit that for these and many other thinges, we
may thinke our selues beholding to the raigne of Augustus,
               The mis-fortunes of the Emperour Augustus. who was almost péerelesse in his gouernment:
yet there are to be found so manie mis-fortunes in his
life, that a manne can not easily discerne whither hee
were more miserable or happy. First, for that in his
sute to his Uncle for the Lieuetenantship of the horsmen,
Lepidus the Tribune was preferred before him,
not without a certaine foyle of his first attempts. Secondlie,
for that he was greatlie anoied by the authoritie
of Antony ioyned with him in the office of the
Thréemen, and with the battell at Philippo. Thirdly
for the hatred that hee raised against himselfe for proclayming
the Noblemen Traytors: The disheriting
of Agrippa, (borne after the decease of his Father)
whom he had adopted before to be his Sonne, and the

great repentance he tooke thereof afterward, for the
desire he had vnto him. His shipwracks in Sicill: his
shamefull lurking in a Caue there: the often mutinies
of his Souldiours against him: the thought hee
tooke in the siedge of Perusium: the detecting of hys
Her 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  ▪
                Daughters aduoutrie, and of the intent shee had to
murther him: and (as shamefull a matter as y• other)
the infamie of his Néece, blamed for the death of her
Sonnes: the gréefe of his solitarinesse for the lesse of
his Children, which was not a corzie alone: The pestilence
y• raigned in the Cittie. The famine through
all Italie, in the time of his warres in Illirick: the narrowe
shifts that he was driuen to for want of Souldiours:
the crazednes of his body which was alwaies
sicklie: the spightfull discention of Nero hys Wyues
Sonne: the vnfaithfull imaginations of his wife and
her Sonne Tiberius: and manie other thinges of the
same sort.
            Notwithstanding, as though the World hadde bewailed
this mans ende, the euils hanging ouer mens
heades, were shewed before by tokens nothing doubtfull.
For one Fausta a woman of the meaner sorte,
brought foorth at one burthen foure Twinnes,Foretokens of the death of Augustus. two
Sonnes, and as manie Daughters: prognosticatinge
by her monstrous fruitfulnesse, the great calamitie
that was to come. Howbeit that Trogus the wryter of
Histories affirmeth that seauen are borne together at
one burthen in Aegypt:
               Monstruous fruitfulnesse of Women. which thing in that Country
is not so great a wonder, forasmuch as the Ryuer
Nilus with his fruitfull water, maketh plentifull, not
onelie the soile of the grounde, but also mens bodyes.
Wée reade that Cneus Pompeius did shewe openly in
the Theater at Rome, one Eutichis a woman of Asia,
               Twentie Childrē at three c
                     ••
                  ld beddes.
with her twentie Children, which she was certainlie
knowne to haue beene deliuered of at three

burthens onelie. And therefore I thinke it exp
                  •
               dient
to treate in thys place concerning the generation
of Man.
         
         
            CAP. III.
            Of Man and of his byrth: of men of wonderfull
strength: and of the stone Alectorius,
or the Cockstone.
            
               
                  FOr inasmuch as
we are minded to make a
note of thinges woorthy to
be touched, concerning lyuing
creatures, as y• Countries
of eche of them souerally
shal put vs in remembraunce.
Reason would we
should begin chiefly at that
creature which nature hath preferred before al others
in iudgement of vnderstanding, and capacitie of wisedome.
Of Women, some bee barren for euer: othersome
by change of Husbandes become fruitfull. Many
beare but one Childe: and diuers bring forth eyther
onely Males, or onelie Females. After fiftie yéeres
the fruitfulnesse of them all is at a point: but Men begette
Children vntill they be fourescore, like as King
Masinissa begat his SonneHe was also called Methym
                  
                     •
                  us. 
               Metymathnus, when
he was of the age of fourescore and sixe yéeres. Ca
                     ••
                  
               
when he was full fourescore yéere old and vpward, begat
the Grandfather of Cato that killed himselfe at Vti
                     •
                  a,
vpon the Daughter of his Client Salonius. Thys
is also found to be of a truth, that when two are conceiued

one somewhat after another, the Woman goeth
out her full time of them both: like as hath beene
séene in Hercules and his broth
                  •
               r Iphiclus,
               The byrth of Hercules and Iphiclu
                     •
                  . who béeing
carryed both in one burthen, had notwithstanding
like distaunce of time betwéene their birthes, as there
was distance betwéene their begetting. And likewise
in a wench called Proconesia, who committing aduoutry
with two sundry men, was deliuered of a payre of
Twinnes eche of them resembling his Father. This
Iphiclus begat Iolaus, who entering the Iland Sardinia
and there alluring vnto concord the wauering minds
of the inhabitants, builded Olbia and other Greeke
Townes. They which after his name were called
Iolenses, reared a Temple ouer his Tombe, because
he folowing the vertues of his Uncle,Of the conception of Man. hadde deliuered
Sardinia from manie euilles. The tenth day after cō
               ception
will by some paine put the Mothers in remē
               braunce
that they be with Child. For from that tyme
forward, their heads shall begin to bée disquieted, and
their sight shal waxe dimme. Also the appetite of their
stomack shall abate, and they shall beginne to loathe
meate. It is agréed vpon among all men, that of the
whole flesh, the first part that is formed is the harte,
and that it increaseth vnto the thréescore and fift day,
and afterwarde diminisheth againe: and that of gristles
are made the backbones: and therefore it putteth
them in daunger of death if eyther of bothe those
partes be hurt. Doubtlesse if it be a Malechild that is
in fashioning, the Women that beare them are better
coloured, and their deliueraunce is more spéedy, and
finally it beginneth to stirre at the fortie day. The
Female stirreth not before the fourescore and tenth
daie, and the conception thereof dyeth ye countenaunce
of the Mother with a pale colour, and also hindereth
the legges with a faint slownesse in going. In bothe

kindes, when the heare beginneth to growe, then is
the greater disease, and the paine is more bréeme in
the full of the Moone, wt time also is alwaies noysome
to thē when they are borne. Wh
                  •
               n a Woman wyth
Child eateth meates that are ouersalt, the Child shalbe
borne without nayles. At such time as the byrth
béeing fully rype approcheth to the instant of deliueraunce,
it greatlie auaileth the Woman that laboreth
to hold her breath, for asmuch as yawning dooth wyth
deadlie delay prolong the deliuery. It is againste nature
for the byrth to come foorth with his féete forward:
and therefore as Children hardly borne,Of such as are borne wyth theyr feete forwarde. they
are called in Latine, Agrippae. Such as are so borne,
are for the moste parte vnfortunate and short liued.
Onely in one Man, namely Marcus Agrippa, it
was a token of good lucke: howbeit not altogether so
misfortunelesse but that hee suffered more aduersitie
then prosperity. For with miserable paine of his féete,
and the open aduoutry of hys wife, and certaine other
marks of ill luck, hee did abye ye foretoken of his awke
byrth. There is also an vnfortunate manner of byrth
in the Female kinde, like as was séene by Cornelia
the Mother of the Gracchusses, who made satis-faction
for her monstrous byrth,The first Caesar among the Romaines. wyth the vnluckye ende of
her Children. Againe the byrthe is the more luckie
where the Mother dyes of it: as was seeme by the
first Scipio Affricanus, who after ye death of his Mother,
because hée was ript out of her wombe, was the
firste of the Romaines that was called Caesar. Of
Twynnes, if the one remaine still and ye other perrish
by béeing borne before his time, hee that is borne
at hys full tyme is called Vopiscus.
            
            Some are borne wyth téeth, as Cneus Papirius,
Carbo, and Marcus Curius, who for the same cause
was surnamed the toothed. Some instéede of téeth haue

the roome supplied with one whole bone. After which
manner Prusias King of Bythinia had a Sonne. The
téeth differ in number according to the difference of
the kind. For in men are moe, and in women are fewer
of those téeth which are called dogtéeth. Unto such
as haue two double téeth growing vp vppon the right
side of theyr mouth, it behighteth the fauour of Fortune.
And vnto such as haue them on the left side, it
betokeneth the contrary.
            The firste voyce of Children after they bee borne
is wayling. For the declaration of myrth is delayed
to the forteth daie. Wee knowe of none that laughed
the same howre he was borne,Zoroastres king of the Bactrians. Crassus. but onely one: that is
to wéete, Zoroastres, who became moste skilfull and
cunning in all good artes. But Crassus, the Graundfather
of him that was slayne in the battell againste
the Parthians, because he neuer laughed, was surnamed
That is to saye laughterlesse. Socrates. 
               Agelastos. Among other great thinges y• were
in Socrates, this is worthy to bee noted, that hee continued
alwayes in one manner of countenaunce, euen
when hee was troubled with aduersitie.Heraclitus and Diogines. 
               Heraclitus
and doggysh Diogenes did neuer abate one whitte of
theyr stiffe stomackes, but treading vnder foote the
stormes of all casualties, continued vnchaungable in
one purpose, against all gréefes and miseries. It is
Registred among other examples, that Pomponius the
Poet, such a one as hadde béene Consull, did neuer
rasp.
            It is verye well knowne,Examples of singuler strēgth. that Antonia the
Wyfe of Drusis didde neuer spette. Wée haue heard
of dyuers that haue beene borne wyth whole boanes
not hollow wythin, and that such are wont neither to
sweat nor to be a thirst: of the which sort Ligdamus of
Syracuse is reported to be one: who in the thyrtie and
thrée Olimpiad caried away the firste Garl
                  •
               nd of victory

in theRunning leaping, buffeting, wrestling and throwing of the Sledge fiue exercises of actiuitie, from y• gaming
of Olympus, and his bones were founde to haue no
maroe in them. It is most certaine that the greatest
substaunce of 
                  •
               trength commeth of the sinewes: and
that the thicker they bee, so much the more dooth the
strength increase. Varro in his Register of monstruous
strength, noted that there was one Tritanus a
Swordplayer a Samnite borne, that had sinewes both
right out, and crosse ouerthwart, and that not only the
bulke of his breast, but also his handes and his armes,
were as it were lattised with sinewes: who foyled all
his aduersaries with a fillippe, and almost with carelesse
encounters: And that the Son of the same Man
a Souldiour of Cneus Pompeiussis, beeing borne in the
same sort, did set so light by an enemie that did challenge
him, that béeing himselfe vnarmed, he ouer came
him, and taking him prisoner, carried him with one of
his fingers into his Captaines Pa
                  •
               ilion. Milo also of
Croton is reported to haue doone all thinges aboue
the reache of Mans power. Of whō this is left in wryting,
that with the stroke of his bare fist, hee felled an
Oxe starke dead, and eate him vpp himselfe alone the
same day that he killed him, without ouercharging
his stomack. Hereof there is no doubt. For vppon hys
Image is an inscription in witnesse of the facte, wyth
these wordes. Hee died a conquerer in all attempts.
There is a stone calledThe Cockstone. 
               Alectorius, of the bignes of
a Beane, like vnto Christall, founde in the bellies of
Cockes, méete (as is reported) for them that goe to
battell. Moreouer, Milo florished in the time of Tarquine
the Elder.
         
         
            
            CAP. IIII.
            Of the likenesse of shape and fauour: of the tallnesse
of certaine personages: of the measure of a
Man: and of the reuerence of the
deade.
            
               
                  NOw who so bendeth
hys minde to consider
the causes of likenesses,
shall perceiue the wonderfull
disposition of the workmanshippe
of nature. For
somtime such likenesses belong
to some stocke, and descende
from issue to issue,
into the succession: like as diuers times young Children
beare sometime Molles, sometime scarres, and
sometime any other marks of theyr auncestors. As among
the Lepids, of whom thrée of the same line (but
not successiuelie one after another) are found to haue
béene borne after one sorte, with aA seely how. filme ouer theyr
eye. As in the famous Poet of Byzance, who hauing
a Mother that was the bastarde of an Aethiopian, although
there were nothing in her resembling her Father,
yet did he degenerate againe into the likenesse of
the Aethiopian that was his Grandfather. But this
is the lesse wonder, if wee consider those thinges that
haue béene séene betwixt méere straungers. One Artemon
a man of the baser sort in Syria,
               Of straungers that resembled one another. did so resemble
King Antiochus in face, that afterwarde the Kinges
wyfe Laodice, by shewing this rascall fellowe, kept

close the death of her Husbande so long, vntill such a
one was ordeyned successor of the Kingdome as shee
listed to appoynt. There was such likenesse to all respects
in personage and making, betwéene Cneus Pompeius,
and Caius Vibius a man of meane byrth, that the
Romaines called Vibius by the name of Pompey, and
Pompey by the name of Vibius.
            
            
               Rubrius the Stage-player did so fully expresse the
Orator Lucius Plancus, that ye people called him Plancus
also. Mirmillo a Neatehearde, and Cassius Seuerus
the Orator did so resemble one another, that if
they were séene together at any time, they coulde not
be discerned which was which, vnlesse there were a
difference in theyr apparell. Marcus Messala Censorius,
and Menogenes a fellowe of the verye rascallest
sort, were so like, that euery Man thought Messala
to bée none other then Menogenes, nor Menogenes anie
other than Messala.
            
            A Fysherman of Sicill was likened to the Proconsull
Sura (besides other things,) euen in the drawing
or wringing of his mouth also. So fully dyd they
agrée, in the same impediment of spéeche, and slowe
brynging foorth of theyr wordes, through the default
of nature. Sometime also it hath béene a wonder to
sée the vndiscernable likenesse of countenaunces, not
onely in straungers, but also euen in such as haue
béene brought together from the furthest partes of the
whole worlde. For where as one Thoranius solde
vnto Antony bearing at that time the office of Triumuir,
for thréehundred Sesterties, two Boyes of excellent
beautie for Twynnes, of which he had gotten
the one in Fraunce and the other in Asia,) so resembling
eche other in all poynts, that they might haue
béene taken bothe for one, if theyr spéech hadde not bewrayed
them: and that therefore Antonie was displeased,

thinking hymselfe to haue béene deluded, because
they were not Twynnes indéed. Thoranius pleasantlie
auouched, that that thing was chiefely to be estéemed,
which the Chapman founde fault wyth. For
it had béene no wonder to haue had two Twyns like:
But this was it which could by no meanes be prysed
according to the value, that béeing of two diuers Coū
               tryes
so farre distaunt, they were borne more like one
another then any Twinnes. With which aunswere
Antonie was so appeased, that euer after hee woulde
tell men, he had not any one thing of all hys possessions,
that he did sette more store by.
            Nowe if wee shall mooue question concerning the
personages of menne,Of the talenes and goodly personages of men in olde time it will manifestly appeare, that
antiquitie hath vaunted no lyes at all of it selfe: but
that the ofspring of our time béeing corrupted by succession
growing out of kinde, hath through ye decrease
of them that are nowe borne, lost the comlinesse of the
auncient beautie. Therefore although dyuers doo conclude,
that no man can excéede the stature of seauen
foote, because that Hercules was no hygher then so: yet
notwithstanding, it was founde in the time of ye 
               Romaines
vnder the Emperour Augustus,
               Pusio and Secundilla. that Pusio and
Secundilla were tenne foote high and more: the corses
of whom, are yet to bee séene in the Charnelhouse
of the Salusts.
            
            Afterward, in the raigne of Claudius, there was
one named Gabbara
               Gabbara brought out of Araby, that was
nyne foote and as many inches hygh. But almoste a
thousande yeeres before Augustus, there was no such
personage séene, neither after ye time of Claudius. For
what is he in our dayes y• is not borne lesser then his
Parents? As for the hugenes of menne in olde time,
the Reliques of Orestes
               Orestes. doo testifie. Whose bones
béeing founde of the Lacedemonians at Tegaea by the

information of the Oracle the fiftie and eyght Olympiad,
wee are assured were full seauen cubites long.A dead body of monstrous bignesse.
Also there are wrytings Registred in remembraunce
of thinges doone in auncient time, which auouch the
assurednesse of the trueth, wherein it is specified, that
in the Candian warre, at such time as ye Riuers more
outragiously flowing than freshe waters are woont,
had broken vp the ground there, after the fall of ye sayd
waters, among many clifts of the grounde, there was
found a body of thrée and thirty cubits. For desire to
sée the which, Lucius Flaccus the Lieuetenant and
Metellus himselfe also, béeing wonderfully amazed
at the straungenesse thereof, went thither, and beheld
the wonder wyth theyr eyes, which they thought a
Fable to heare reported. I may not let passe the Son
of Euthymines of Salymis, who grewe thrée cubits high
in thrée yéeres.An ouerswif
                     •
                   growth. But he was slow of gate, dull wytted,
boystrous of voyce, too soone rype, and immediatly beset
with many diseases: so as hee recompensed hys ouerhasty
growth with vnmeasurable punishment of
sicknesse.
            The manner of measuring agréeth two wayes.
For looke how much a man is betwéene the endes of
his two longest fingers stretching hys armes out.The manner of measuring a Manne. so
longe is hee betwéene the sole of hys foote and the
crowne of his head: and therefore the naturall Philosophers
déeme man to bee a little Worlde. Unto
the ryght side is ascribed the handsomer moouing, and
vnto the lefte side the greater firmen
                  •
               sse. And therefore
the one is more apt to dauncing and other exercises
of lyghtnesse, and the other better able to beare
burthens.
            Nature hath decréed a kinde of reuerence to bee
obserued euen of bodyes disceased:Naturall reuerence in bodyes disceased so that if at anie
time it happen the carkasses of such as are kylled,

to bée borne vppe wyth the waues, Mennes bodyes
fléete with their faces vpwarde, and Womens with
theyr faces downewarde.
         
         
            CAP. V.
            Of swiftnes: of sight: of the valiantnesse of certaine
Romaines: and of the excellency of Caesar
the Dictator.
            
               
                  BVt to the intent
we may passe to the title of
swiftnesse:Of Swiftnes. the pricke and
prise in that behalfe, obtayned
one Ladas,
               Ladas. who ranne
in such wyse vpon the loose
dust, that the sande houered
still vp, and he left no printe
of his footesteppes behinde
him. Polymestor
               Polymestor. a Boy of Miletum béeing sette by his
Mother to feede Goates, ranne after a Hare in sporte
and caught it. For the which deede within a while after
the owner of the hearde brought him to ye gaming
in the forty and sixe Olimpiad, (as Bocchus reporteth)
and there in the race he gained the Garland. Phylippides
               Phylippides.
ranne one thousand, two hundred and fortye furlongs
from Athens to Lacedaemon in two dayes. Antistius
a Lacedaemonian and Philonides the Lackies of
great Alexander,
               Antistius and Philonides. iournied a thousande and two hundred
furlongs from Sycion to Elis, in one day. The
same yéere that Fonteius and Vipsanus were Consuls,
a Boy in Italy of eyght yéeres olde, went 45. myles
betwéene noone and night.
            
               The quickest of sight was one Strabo,
               Quick
                     •••
                  tednes. Strabo. whom Varro
auoucheth to haue ouerlooked a hundred thirty & fiue
miles, and that hee was wont exactlie to viewe from
the watch Towre of Lyliby in Sicill, ye Punicke fléete

                  •
               etting out of the Hauen of Carthage, and to reporte
the iust number of their Shippes. Cicero maketh report,
that the Ilias of Homer was so finely written in
Uelame, that it might be closed in a Nutshell. Callicrates
               Callicrates.
carued An
                  •
               s of Iuory so finely, that some of thē
could not be discerned from other Ants. Apollonides
declareth that in Scythia there is a race of Women
called Bythies, which haue two balles in eche eye, and
doo kill folke with their sight,A race of strange Women. if they happen to cast an
angry looke vppon anie body. Such there bee also in
Sardinia.
            
            That Lucius Sicinius the toothed excelled in valiantnesse
among the Romaines,
               Valiantnes. Lucius Sicinius. the number of hys
titles doo declare. This man was one of the Protectors
of the cominalty, not much after the dryuing out
of the Kinges, when Spurius Tarpeius, and Aulus
Thermus were Consuls. Hee béeing vanquisher in
eyght challenges hand to hande, hadde fiue and fortie
scarres in the forepart of his bodye, and on hys backe
part not one. He tooke spoyle of his enemie foure and
thirtie times. In horsetrappers, pure speares, Bracelets
and Crownes, hee earned thrée hundred & twelue
rewards. Hee followed nyne Grandcaptaynes in tryumphe
that had conquered by his meanes. Next after
him Marcus Sergius
               Marcus Sergius, the Father of Catiline. seruing twice in the warres, in
the first time receiued thirty and three wounds on the
forepart of his body, and in the second lost his ryght
hande, and therefore made him a hande of yron. And
whereas almost none of both his handes were able to
doo him any seruice in sight, yet notwithstanding hee
fought foure times in one day, and gotte the victorie

with his left hand, hauing had two Horses slayne vnder
him. Béeing twise taken prisoner by Hanniball, he
scaped awaie, when by the space of twentie moneths
in which he had béene prisoner, he had at no time been
without Giues and Fetters. In all the sharpest battels
which the Romaines tasted of in those dayes, he
béeing honoured with warlike rewards, brought Ciuill
Crownes from Thrasymenus, Trebia, and Pauy,
At the battell of Canuas also, (out of the which it was
counted a poynt of valiantnesse to escape wyth lyfe)
he onelie receiued a Crowne. Happie doubtlesse had
hée béene in so manie aduauncements of honor, if Catiline
his next heyre by lineall descent, had not defaced
his so renowined praises with the hatefulnesse of hys
cursed name.
            As much as Sicinius or Sergius excelled among the
Souldiours,C. Iulius
                     •
                  
                so much among the Captaines (or rather
among all men) excelled Caesar
               Caesar. the Dictator. Under
his conducte were slaine eleuen hundred, fourescore
and two thousand enemies. For he would not haue it
noted howe manie hee ouerthrewe in the ciuill wars.
He fought in piched fielde two and fiftie times, alonely
surmounting. Marcus Marcellus, who in like sorte
had fought nine and thirtie times. Besides this, no
man wrote more swiftly, nor no man read more spéedilie.
Moreouer, hee is reported to haue indited foure
Letters at once. He was of so good a nature, that such
as he subdued by battell, he more ouercame them with
gentlenesse.
         
         
            
            CAP. VI.
            VVho were notable for memorie: who loste theyr
speech by mischaunce, or gotte it by chaunce, who
florished in eloquence: of the prayse of
manners, of godlinesse, of chastity,
and who hath beene iudged
happy.
            
               
                  CYrus was notable
for the good gifte of memorie,Cyrus King of Persia.
who in the most populous
armie whereof hee
was Captaine, coulde call
euerie seuerall personne by
his name. The same thing
did Lucius Scipio
               Lucius Scipio. amōg the
people of Rome. But wee
may beleeue that bothe Scipio and Cyrus were furthered
by custome. Cyneas
               Cyneas. the Ambassador of Pyrrhus, the
next day after he was entered into Rome, saluted both
the Knights and also the Senators by their propper
names.
            
               Methridates
               Methridates King of Pontus ministred iustice
without an interpreter, to two and twenty Nations
that were vnder his dominion. It is manifest that
memorie may be made by arte,Memorie made by Arte. like as in the Philosopher
Metrodorus that was in the time of doggyshe
Diogenes: who furthered himselfe so much by dailie
practise, and beating with himselfe, that he kept in
remembrance what many men spake at once, not only
in order of sence, but also in order of wordes. Notwithstanding

it hath béene often séene,The perishing and losse of memorie. that nothing
may easiler be perished by feare, by falling, by chance,
or by sicknesse. We haue founde that he that was but
striken with a stone, forgot to reade. Surely Messala
Coruinus
               Messala Coruinus. after a disease that hee had endured, was so
striken with forgetfulnesse, that he remembred not
his owne name, and yet otherwise his wit was freshe
enough. Feare astonieth ye memorie. And again feareFeare.
is an enforcement of spéeche, the which it not onelie
sharpeneth, but also extorteth although there were
none before. Surely when Cyrus in the eyght and fiftie
Olympiad entred by assault into Sardis,
               Athis the Sonne of king Craesus. a Towne
of Asia, where Craesus at that time lay hidden, Athis
the Kinges Sonne (who vnto that instaunt hadde alwaies
béene dumbe,) burst out into spéech by force of
feare. For it is reported, that he cryed out: Cyrus
spare my Father, and learne to know (at leastwise by
our casualties) that thou art a Man.
            Nowe remaineth to intreate of manners,Excellency of manners. Cato. the excellentnes
whereof appeared moste in two men. Cato
the founder of the stocke of the Portians was a verye
good Senator, a very good Orator, and a verie good
Captaine. Neuerthelesse, for diuers quarrelles picked
vnto him of malice, he was endited and arrayned
fortie and foure times, but yet was alwaies quitted.
The praise of Scipio Aemilianus
               Scipio Aemilianus. is yet greater: who
besides the vertues for which Cato was renowmed,
surmounted also in loue towards the common weale.
Scipio Nasica
               Scipio Nasica was iudged to bee the best man then lyuing,
not onely by the voice of the commons, but also
by the othe of the whole Senate, inasmuch as none
coulde bee founde worthier then he, to be put in truste
with a misterie of chiefe Religion, when the Oracle
gaue warning to fetch into the Cittie the holy Ceremonies
of the mother of the Gods from Pessinus.
            
            
               
Many among the Romaines florished in eloquence,Eloquence or learning.
but this gift was not heritable at any time, sauing to
the house of the Curios, in the which, three were Orators
successinelie one after another.The singuler estimation of learning in those dayes. Archilocus the Poet. Surely thys was
counted a great thing in those dayes, when eloquence
was had in chiefe estimation both of God and manne.
For at that time Apollo bewrayed the murthers of
the Poet Archilocus, and the déede of the felons was
detected by God.
            And at such time as Lysander King of Lacedaemon
besieged Athens (where ye body of Sophocles the TragedieSophocles the Tragedy wryter.
wryter lay
                  •
                vnburied) Bacchus sundry times warned
the Captaine in his sléepe, to suffer hys darling to
be buried, and neuer ceased calling vppon him, vntyll
Lysander hauing knowledge who it was that was departed,
and what the God demaunded, tooke truce
with the Athenians, vntill so worthy a corse might be
buried accordinglie. Castor and Pollux standing wythout
the dore in the sight of all men, called Pindarus
               Pindarus the Harper. the
Harper out of a place where he was making merrie,
(which was at the point to fall) to the intent he should
not perrish with the rest. Whereby it came to passe,
that hee onelie escaped the daunger that hunge ouer
their heads. Next vnto the Gods is Cneus Pompeius to
be reconed: who when he should enter into the house
of Possidonius,
               Possidonius the Philosopher. the notablest professor of wysedome in
those dayes, forbadde his Mace-bearer to strike ye dore
as the custome was: and so holding downe his sheaf,
albeit hee hadde at that time dispatched the warre agaynste
Methridates, and was Conqueror of ye East.
yet of his owne frée wyll he gaue place to the Gate of
Learning. The firste Scipio Affricanus commaunded
that the Image of Quintus Ennius
               Quintus Ennius. shoulde be sette vppon
his Tombe. Cato that slewe himselfe at Vtica,
brought vnto Rome two Phylosophers, one when he

was Marshall of the Hoste, and another when he was
Ambassador in Cyprus: alledging that in so dooing, he
had greatlie benifited the Senate and people of Rome
albeit that hys great Grandfather had oftentimes decréede,
y• al Greekes should be vtterly driuen out of the
Citty. Dennis y• Tyran of Sicill sent a Shyppe decked
wyth Garlonds to méete Plato,
               Plato. and hée himselfe in a
Charyot drawne with foure White steedes, entertained
him honorably at his first comming to lande.
Perfect wisedome was adiudged onely to Socrates
               Socrates. by
the Oracle of Apollo.
            
            The proofe of godlinesseGodlinesse. and naturall affection toward
the parents shined in the familie of the Metels.
But it was found moste euident in a poore childbearing
Woman. This Woman who was of lowe degree,A poore childbearing woman
and therefore not altogether so famous, béeing
with much adooe (and after much serching oftentimes
of the Gaolers, leaste shee shoulde haue carryed any
meate in with her) suffered to goe to her father, (who
was condemned to the punishment of perpetuall prysonne)
was founde to séede him with the milke of her
breasts: which thing consecrated bothe the déede and
the place. For the Father which was condemned to
death, béeing gyuen vnto his daughter, was reserued
in remembraunce of so woorthy a déede, and the place
béeing dedicated to the power that wrought the déede,
was made a Chappell,Chastitie. Claudia. Sulpitia, and entitled the Chappell of
godlines. The ship that brought the holy misteries out
of Phrygia, in following ye hearelace of Claudia, gaue
vnto her the preheminence of chastitie. But Sulpitia
the daughter of Paterculus and wyfe of Marcus Fuluius
Flaccus, was by the verdite of all the Ladyes in
Rome aduisedlie chosen out of a hundred of the vertuousest
of them, to dedicate the Image of Venus according
as y• bokes of Sybill gaue warning to be done.
            
               As touching the title of happinesse,Happynes. hee is not yet
found that may rightly be iudged happy. For Cornelius
Sylla
               Cornelius Sylla was happie rather in name then in déede.
            Surelie Cortiua iudged onelie Aglaus
               Aglaus. to be blessed:
who béeing owner of a poore péece of ground in y• narrowest
nooke of all Arcadie, was neuer founde to haue
passed out of the boundes of his naturall soyle.
         
         
            CAP. VII.
            Of Italy and the prayse therof: and of many peculiar
thinges that are founde therein.
            
               
                  AS concerninge
Man I haue saide sufficient.
Now to the intent we
may returne to our determined
purpose, our stile is
to be directed to the recital
of places: and chiefelie and
principally to Italy, ye beautie
whereof we haue alreadie
touched lightly in the Cittie of Rome. But Italie
hath béene written of so throughlie by all menne, and
specially by Marcus Cato, that there cannot bée found
that thing which the diligence of former Authors hath
not preuented, for the Country is so excellent, as it
ministreth matter of praise aboundantly, while the
notablest writers consider the healthfulnesse of y• places,
the temperatenesse of the ayre, the fruitfulnes of
the soyle, the open prospects of the Hills, the coole shadowes
of the woods, the vnhurtful lowe grounds, the
plentifull increase of Uines and Oliues, the Sheepes

courses, the pasture groundes, so manye Riuers, so
great Lakes, places that beare flowers twice a yéere,
together with the Mountaine Veseuus, casting vppe a
breath of flaming fire as if it had a soule, the Bathes
with their springes of warme water, the continuall
beautifing of the Land with newe Citties, so goodlie
a sight of auncient Townes, which first ye 
               Aborigens,
Arunks, Pelasgians, Arcadians, Sicilians, and lastlie
the inhabiters of all parts of Greece, and aboue all others,
the victorious Romaines haue builded. Besides
this, it hath shoares full of Hauens, and coastes with
large Bayes and harbouring places, meete for trafficke
from all places of the world. Neuerthelesse, least
it may séeme altogether vntouched of our part, I think
it not vnconuenient to busie my wittes about those
thinges that haue béene least beaten, and slightly to
trauell through those thinges ye haue béene but lightly
touched and tasted by others. For who knoweth not
that Ianiculū
                was either named or builded by Ianus?
Or that Latium was called so,The founders of the cheefe Citties and places in Italie. & Saturnia of Saturne?
Or that Ardea was builded by Danace? Polydee by
the companions of Hercules? Pompeios in Campane
by Hercules himselfe, because that after his victory in
Spayne hee draue his Oxen with a pompe that way?
Or that the stonie fieldes in Lombardy tooke theyr
names of that, that Iupiter fighting against ye Gyants,
is supposed to haue rayned downe stones thither? Or
that the Region Ionica tooke his name of Ionee the
daughter of Naulochus, whom Hercules is reported to
haue slaine, because he malepartlie stopped ye waies against
him? Or that Alcippe was builded by Marsias,
king of the Lidians, which béeing afterward swallowed
with an Earthquake, was dissolued into the
Lake Fucinus? Or that the Temple of Iuno of Argos
was founded by Iason: Pisae by Pelops: the Dawnians
               
by Cleolans the Sonne of Minos: the Iapigians by Iapix
the Sonne of Daedalus: the Tyrrhenians by Tyrrhenus
King of Lydia: Cora by Dardanus: Argilla
               
by the Pelasgians,
               Who brought Letters first into the shyre where Rome is. who also brought Letters first into
Latium: Phalisca by Halesus the Argiue: the Phalerians
by Phalerius the Argiue: Fescininum also by
the Argiues: the Hauen of Parthenium by the Phocenses:
Tybur (as Cato witnesseth) by Catillus the Arcadian
the Admirall of Euanders fléete: or (as Sextius
saith) by the youth of Argos? For Catillus the Sonne
of Amphiaraus, after the monstrous destruction of his
Father at Thebae, béeing sent by his Grandfather Oecleus
with all his issue or ceremonies into Italy, begot
there thrée Sonnes: Tyburtus, Cora, and Catillus, who
dryuing out of the Towne the Sicanes of Sicill y• anncient
inhabiters thereof, called the Cittie after the
name of the elder brother Tyburt. Anon after was the
Temple of Minerua builded by Vlisses, among the Brutians.
            
            The Ilande of Ligaea tooke his name of the bodie
of the Meremaid Lig
                     •
                  a cast a land there. Parthenopee
was so called of the Meremaide Parthenopees
Tombe: which towne it pleased Augustus afterward
to call Naples. Prenestee (as Zenodotus reporteth)
tooke his name of Praenest the Nephewe of Vlisses, and
Sonne of Latinus: or (as the bookes of y• 
               Prenestines
make mention) of Caeculus whom the Sisters of the
Digitians found by the fatall fires, as the bruite goeth.
It is knowne that Petilia was founded by Philoctete,
Arpos and Beneuent by Diomed, Padua by Antenor,
Metapont by the Pylians, Scyllace by the Athenians,
Sybaris by the Troyzenians, and by Sagaris the sonne
of Aiax, of Locres, Salentum by the Lycians, Ancon
by the Sicilians, Gabye by Galace and Bius of Sicill,
brothers: Tarent by the posteritie of Hercules, the

Ilande Te
                     •
                  sa by the Ionians, rest by the Dorians,
Croton by Myscell and Archia, Rhegium by the Chalcidians,
Cawlon and Terin, by the Crotonians, Locros
by the Naritians, Heret by the Greekes, in the honour
of Iuno whom they call Hera, Aritia by Archilocus
the Sicilian, whereof the name (as liketh Cassius
Hermina) is deriued.
            In thys place Orestes by admonishment of the Oracle
hallowed the Image of Diana of Scythia which
he had fetched from Taurica, before hee went with it
to Argos. The Zanclenses builded Metawre, and the
Locrines builded that Metapont which is now called
Vibo. Baccbus saith plainelie, that the Vmbrians are
the auncient of-spring of the Galles, Marcus Antonius
affirmeth that they were called Vmbrians in Greeke,
because that in the time of the generall destructiō that
was by water, they escaped the daunger thereof. Licinius
is of the opinion, that the originall of Messapia
(which was giuen by Messapus a Gréeke) was afterwarde
turned into the name of Calabrie, which in the
first beginning Peucerius the Brother of Oenotrius had
named Pe
                     •
                  ceria.
            
            The like agreement also is among Authors, that
Palynure tooke that name of Palynure the Pylotte of
Aenaeas his Shyppe, and Misene of hys Trumpetor
Misene, and the Iland Leucosie of his Systers daughter
Leucosia.
            
            It is fully agréed vppon among all menne, that
Caiet tooke that name of Caieta▪ Aenaeassis Nurce, and
Lauine of his wyfe Lauinia, which Towne was builded
the fourth yéere after the destruction of Troy, as
Cussonius auoucheth.The time of the comming of Aeneas into Italy Neither must it be omitted that
Aenaeas arryuing on the coast of Italy the second sommer
after that Troy was taken (as Hemina reporteth)
wyth no moe then 600, in hys companie, piched hys

Campe in the fieldes of Laurent, and there while hee
was dedicating the Image that he had brought wyth
him out of Sicill, vnto his Mother Venus by the name
of Aphroditee, he receiued the Image of Pallas of Diomed,
and anon after receiuing fiue hundred Acres of
ground of King Latinus, hee raigned thrée yéeres in equall
authoritie with him. After whose decease, when
he had raigned two yéeres, he went to the Riuer Numicius
and was neuer séene more.
            The seauenth yéere after, was giuen to him the
name of Father I
                     •
                  diges. Afterward were builded, by
Ascanius, Alba longa, Fidenee, and Antium: by the
Tyrians,
               Sybill of Cumes 
               Nola: and by the Eubaeans, Cumes. There
is the Chappell of the same Sybill which in the fift Olympiade
was present at the Romaine enterprises,
whose booke our Bishops resorted to for Counsell, vntill
the time of Cornelius Sylla: for then was it together
with the Capitoll consumed with fire. As for her
two former bookes, shee hadde burned them with her
owne handes, because Tarquine the proude did offer
her a more niggardly price then she had sette them at.Sybill of Delphos.
Her Tombe remaineth yet in Sicill. Bocchus auoucheth
that Sybell of Delphos prophesied before the battel
of Troy, and he declareth that Homer did put many of
her verses into his worke.
            After her, within fewe yéeres space, followed Heriphylee
of Aerythra,
               Sybill of Aerithra. who was also called Sybill for the
affinity she had with y• other in the same kind of knowledge:
who among other great thinges, warned the
Lesbians that they should loose the dominion of y• Sea,
many yéeres before the thing came to passe. So y• very
order of the time prooueth, that Sybill of Cumes was
third after this.The description of Italie. 
               Italy therefore (wherein sometime
the auncient Country of Latium stretched from the
mouth of Tyber, vnto the Ryuer Lyris) ryseth whole

together from the sides of the Alpes and reached to the
toppe of the Promonorie or headlonde of Rhegium,
and the Seacoast of the Brutians, where it shooteth
Southward into the Sea. Procéeding from thence, it
rayseth it selfe by little and little at the backe of the
Mountaine Appen
                     •
                  ne, lying in length betwéene the
Tuscane Sea and the Adriatish Sea, that is to saye,
betwéene the vpper Sea and the neather Sea, like an
Oken leafe, that is to say, larger in length than in
breadth, When it commeth to the furthest, it deuideth
into two hornes: whereof the one butteth vppon
the Ionish Sea, and the other vppon the Sea of Sicill.
Betwéene which two heades it receiueth not y• winding
Sea in with one whole and maine shoare, but
shooting foorth as it were sundrie tongues, it admitteth
the Sea disseuered by the heads running forth in
to the déepe.
            There (to the intent we may note thinges heere
and there by the way) are the Towres of Tarent, the
Countrye Scyllaea with the Towne Scylleum, and
the Riuer Crathis the mother of Scylla as antiquitie
hath fabled: the Forrests of Rhegium, the Ualies of
Pesta: the Meremaids Rocks, the most delectable coast
of Campane, the playnes of Phlegra, the house of Circ
                     •
                  :
the Iland of Tarracine, sometime enuironed with
the wauing Sea, but nowe by continuance of time
landed vppe to the firme grounde, hauing cleane contrarie
fortune to the Rhegines, whom the Sea by
thrusting it selfe betwixt, hath violently disseuered frō
the Sicilians. Also there is Formy inhabited somtime
by the Lestrigones, and many other thinges entreated
of at large by pregnant wittes, the which I thought
more for mine ease to passe ouer, then not to set them
out at the full. But the length of Italy,
               The length of Italy. which runneth
from Augusta Pr
                     •
                  toria through the Cittie and Capua
               
vnto the Towne of Rhogi
                     •••
                  , 
               
                  〈◊〉
                to a thousand
and twenty miles. The breadth of it where it is
broadest,The breadth of Italie. is foure hundred and ten myles: and where
it is narrowest, a hundred and sixe and thirtie miles,
sauing at the Hauen which is called Hanniballes
Campe, for there it exceedeth not fortie miles. The
hart of the Realme is in the fieldes of Rheatee (as V
                     •
                  rro
testifieth.) The compasse of the whole circuite together,The whole circuit of Italy
is two thousand, foure hundred, fourescore and
tenne miles. In the which circuit ouer againste the
Coast of Locres, is finished the first Coast of E
                  •
               rope.
For the seconde beginning at the heade of Laciuium,
endeth at the Cliffs ofNow called mount Cimera. 
               Acroceraunia. Further more
Italie is renowmed with the Riuer Po,
               The Ryuer Po. which Mount
Vesulus one of the toppes of the Alpes, powreth out
of hys bosome from a spring that is to be séene in the
borders ofNowe called Lombardy. 
               Ligurie: from whence Po issueth, and
sinking into the ground, ryseth againe in the fieldes
of Vibo, not inferior to any Ryuer in same, and it is
called of the Greekes, Eridanus. It swelleth in the beginning
of the dogge dayes at such time as y• snow
                  ••
               
and hoarefrosts of the former Winter begin to melt:
and so beeing increased with ye surplusage of waters:
it carrioth thirtie Ryuers with him into the Adriatish
Sea.
            Among other thinges woorthy of remembraunce,A certaine kindred priuiledged from hurt of fire.
this is famous and notably talked of in euery Mans
mouth, that there are certaine housholds in the Countryes
of the Phalisks, (which they call Hirpes▪
               ) These
make yéerely sacrifice to Apollo at the Mountaine Soractee,
and in performing thereof, doo in honor of the
diuine seruice frisks and dawnce vppe and downe vpon
the burning wood without harme, the 
                  〈◊〉
                sparing
them. Which religious and deuout kinde of ministration
the Senate rewarding honourably, priuiledged

the Hirpes from all taxes, and from all kind of seruice
for euer.A people vnable to be hurt by Serpents. That the Nation of the Marsyes can not bee
hurt by serpents, it is no maruell. For they fetch their
pedegrée from the Sonne of Circee, and of the power
descended to them from their auncestors, they vnderstand
that venemous thinges ought to stande in awe
of them, and therefore they despise poysons. C▪ Caelius
saith, that Octas had thrée daughters: Augitia, Medea,
               Circe, Augitia and Medea the daughters of Octas King of Colchos.
and Circee, and that Circee possessed the Hilles called
Circes Hilles, there practising to make sundry shapes
and fashions through her sorceries and charmes. And
that Augitia occupyed the Country about Fu
                     •
                  num,
and there (after practising the wholesome sciences of
Léechecrast against maladies and diseases) when shée
forewent this life, was reputed for a Goddesse. And
that Medea was buried by Iason at Buthrote, and her
Sonne raigned among the Marsyes. But although
that Italy haue this customable defence: yet is not altogether
frée from Serpents. Finally, the inhabiters
chased the Serpents from Amycle which the Amycleans
of Greece had builded before.
            There is great store of a kinde of Uyper whose
byting is incurable.A horrible kind of Viper. They be somewhat shorter then
the reste of Uipers that are founde in other places of
the world, and therefore while they bee not regarded,
they hurt the sooner. Calabrie swarmeth with Snakes
that liue bothe by water & by land, called Chersydres:
and it bréedeth the Boa,
               A wonderfull kind of Snake which is a kinde of Snake reported
to grow to an vnmeasurable bignesse. First, it
seeketh after Heardes of mylche Kyne, and what
Cowe soeuer yeeldeth most milke, her dugs dooth hée
draw. And batling with continuall sucking of her, in
processe of tyme hee so stuffeth out hymselfe wyth
ouerglutting hym tyll hee bée readie to burste, that at
the last no power is able to withstande hys hugenesse.

So that in fine rauening vp the lyuing creatures, hee
maketh the Countries waste where he keepeth. And
in the raigne of Claudius there was séene a whole
Chylde in the mawe of a Boa that was kylled in the

                  •
               ilde which nowe is called Vaticane.
            
            
               Italy hath Wolues which are vnlike the WoluesWolues
of other Countryes, and therefore if they sée a Manne
before a Man sée them, he becommeth dumbe, and beeing
preuented with theyr hurtfull sight, although hee
haue desire to crie out, yet hath he no vse of voice to doo
it withall. I passe ouer manie thinges willingly concerning
Wolues. This is moste certainly tryed, that
in this beastes tayle is a very fine hare, that hath the
power of loue in it, the which hee is willing to loose,
and therefore casteth it away when he feareth to bee
caught, for it hath no vertue vnlesse it be pulled from
him while he is aliue. Wolues goe to sault not aboue
twelue dayes in all the whole yéere. In time of famine
they féede themselues with earth. But those that
are called Hartwolues,Hartwolues. although after long fasting
when they haue hardly founde fleshe, they fall to eating
it: yet if they happen to cast theyr eye vpon anie
thing by chaunce, they forget what they are in dooing,
and forsake theyr present aboundance, gadde to séeke
n
                  •
               we reléefe wherewith to fill theyr bellyes. In thys
kind of beastes is also rekoned the Lynxes,Lynxes. The stone Lyncurion. whose Urine
such as haue narrowly searched the natures of
stones, doo vphold to congeale into the hardnesse of a
precious stone. Which thing that the Linxes themselues
doo well perceiue, is proued by thys tryall: that
as soone as the water is passed from them, by and by
they couer it ouer (as much as they can) with heapes
of sande: verily of spight (as Theophrastus auoucheth)
least such matter issuing from them shoulde turne to
our vse. This stone hath the coloure of Amber. It

it draweth vnto it thinges that bee néere at hande, it
qualifieth the gréefe of the raynes: it remedieth the
Kinges euill, and in Gréeke it is calledThat is to say, Lynxpisse. Dumb Grashop pers. 
               Lyncution.
Grashoppers are dumbe among the Rhegines, and
not elswhere, which silence of them is wonderfull:
and good cause why, séeing the Grashoppers of y• 
               Locrines
theyr next neighbors, cry louder then all others.
Granius reporteth the cause thereof to bee this: that
when they made a yelling about Hercules as he rested
there, he commaunded them to cease their chyrping,
wherevpon beginning to holde theyr peace, they continued
mute from thenceforth to thys day. TheThe Sea of Genoa. Corall. 
               Lygusticke
Sea bringeth foorth shrubbes, which so soone
as they be in the déepes of the water, are lushe and almost
like a grystle to touch. But assoone as they come
aboue the water, by and by degenerating from theyr
naturall sappe, they become stones. And not onely the
qualitie, but also the colour of them is turned, for
straight way they looke Redde as Scarelette. The
braunches of them are such as we sée on Trées, for the
most part halfe a foote long, but seldome to bee found
of a foote long. Of them are carued many prety things
to were about folkes. For (as Zoroastres sayth) thys
substaunce hath a certaine singuler power, and therefore
whatsoeuer is made thereof, is counted among
those thinges that are wholesome. Other folke call it
Corall, and Metrodorus nameth it Gorgia. The same
man affyrmeth also that it withstandeth whirlwinds
and thunder and lightning. There is a precious stone
dygged vp in a part of Lucanie,
               The Syrtite o
                     •
                   sandstone. so pleasant to behold,
that it casteth a Saffron colour vpon the starres dimmed
inwardly and glimmering vnder a myste. The
same stone is called a Syrtite because it was founde
first vpon the Seacoast of the Syrts. There is also the
Veientane stone,The Veiētane Stone. so named of ye place wher it is found,

the colour whereof béeing blacke, for the more beautie
of varietie, is enterlaced distinctly with white lynes,
and whitish strakes.This Ilande is nowe called S. Maryes of Trinitie. The Ilande which faceth the
coast of Puell, is renowmed with the Tombe & Temple
of Diomed,
               Diomedes birds The wonderfull nature of them. and alonely nourisheth Diomeds birds.
For this kind of Foule is no where els in al ye worlde
but there. And that thing alone might séeme woorthy
to bée recorded, though there were not other thinges
beside not méete to bee omitted. They are in fashion
almost like a Coote, of colour whyte, with fierie eyes,
and 
                  •
               oothed bylles. They flie in flocks, and not without
order in theyr setting forth. They haue two Captaines,
that rule theyr flight: of whom the one flyeth
before, and the other behinde: the sormost as a guyde
to direct them certainly which way to flie, the hindermost
as an ouerséear to haste forward them that lagge
behinde, with continuall calling vpon them. And this
is the order that they keepe in theyr fléeting. When
bréeding time is at hande, they digge pits with their
billes: and then bending wickers ouer them after the
manner of Hardles, they close in that which they haue
made hollow vnderneath.
            And least they might bee vncouered if paraduenture
the windes should blowe awaie theyr woodden
roofes, they coope this watling ouer with the earthe
which they hadde throwne out when they digged the
pittes. So they build theyr nestes with two entryes,
and that not at a venture: insomuch that they caste
their entries in and out, according to ye quarters of the
heauen. The dor
                  •
                that they goe out at to their féeding,
openeth into the East: and that which receiueth them
home againe, is towarde the West. To the intent the
light may both hast them when they make tariaunce,
and also not faile them to return home by. When they
will purge their paunches, they mount aloft against

the wind, to the intent it may carrie their ordure the
further from them. They discerne a straunger from
a man of the Country. For if he be a Gréeke, they approche
vnto him, and as far as may bee vnderstanded,
doo fawne gentlie vppon him as their Countriman.
But if he be of anie other Nation, they flye vpon him
and assault him. They frequent the holy Church euery
day after this maner. They wash their feathers in the
water, & when they haue wet their wings throughlie,
they come flocking al on a deaw, & so shaking the moisture
vppon the Church, doo purge it. Then they rouse
their feathers, & afterwarde, as hauing doone their deuotion,
depart again. Here vppon it is reported y• 
               Diomedes
cōpanions were 
                  •
               urned into birds. Certainely
before y• comming of y• 
               Aetolian Captaine, they were
not called Diomedes birds, but euer since they haue had
that name.
            The running forth of Italy through the L
                     •
                  burnians
(which are a people that came out of Asia,)Dalmatia and Illyrick are nov
                     •
                   one countrey, and are called Sclauoni. extendeth
to the foote of Dalmatia, and Dalmatia vnto the
borders of Illyrick, in which coast y• 
               Dardanians haue
their dwelling, a people descended of the line of Troy,
but growne wilde and sauage, and degenerated into
barbarous manners. On the otherside it extendeth by
the marches of Lombardie vnto the Prouince of Narbone,
               The founding of the Citty of Marsilles.
in which the Phocenses (beeing in olde time
chased out of theyr Countrey by the comming of the
Persians,) builded the Cittie of Marsills in ye fiue and
forteth Olympi
                  •
               d.
            
               Caius Marius in the tyme of the warre against the
Cymbrians, did let in ye Sea in Channels made wyth
mans hand, & mittigated the dangerous sayling of the
riuer Rhone,
               The description of the Ryuer of Rhone. which faling down frō the Alps rusheth
first through Swicerland carying with him a nūber of

waters that meete him by the way, and afterward by
his continuall encrease becommeth more troublesome
then the very Sea wherinto it falleth, vnlesse it bee
when the Sea is raised with the wyndes. Rhone is
rough euen in calme wether, and therefore they account
him among the greatest Ryuers of Europe. In
the same place also florished Sexties bathes, sometim
                  •
               
the Consulles winter garrison, and afterward garnished
with walles: the feruent heate whereof beeing
breathed out, is vanished awaie by continuaunce of
time, and it is not nowe according to the auncient report
thereof. If we haue a mind to the Greekes, it is
best to looke to the Seacoast of Tarent, from whence,
(that is to saie from the Promontorie or HeadlondeSaint Mary of Leke.
which they call * Acra Iapigia) is the shortest cutt for
such as wil sayle to Achaya-ward.
            
         
         
            CAP. VIII.
            Of certaine base Iles of the Tyrrhene Sea, which
lye against Italy: Of Corsica, and of the
stone Catochites.
            
               
                  FRom hence our
style is to bee directed another
waie, and other lands
call vs to treate of their
matters, & it were a long
péece of woorke to goe leysurelie
along the Seacoast
to all the Ilandes that face
the Promontories of Italy,
although for that they bee scattered in most delectable

outnookes, and set by nature as it were to the shewe▪
they were not to be omitted. But how farre should I
steppe aside, if delaying the chiefe thinges, I should of
a certaine slothfulnesse treate ofPalmaria or Palmarosa. 
               Pandataria, or of
Procida 
               Prochita, orElba. 
               Ilba plentifull of yron, orCaprara. 
               Capraria,
which the Greekes call Aegila, orPianosa. 
               Planasia so called
of the leuelnesse of the Sea, or of Vlisses straying: or
* Dooue. Ilande, the mother of the byrdes that beare
that name, or Ithacesia, which is reported to haue been
the watch towre of Vlisses, orIschia. 
               Anaria named of Homer
Iuarimee, and other no lesse fruitfull then these.
Among which, manie hauing some what more largely
treated of Corsica in wryting, haue moste exquisitlie
comprised it to the full, and nothing is omitted which
were not superfluous to be touched againe. As howe
the Ligurians sent first inhabiters thither: how towns
were there builded. How Marius and Sylla sent people
a newe to refresh it: and howe it is beaten vpon
with the Saltwater of theThe sea of Genoa, 
               Lygustick sea. But let all
this géere passe. Neuerthelesse the Country of Corsica,
(which is a peculiar thing to that land) doth onely
bring forth the stone which they call Catochites, most
worthie to be spoken of. It is bigger thē the rest,The Catochite that
are ordeined to decking, and it is not so much a Iewell
as a common stone. If a man lay his handes vppon
it, it holdeth them downe, so fastening it selfe vnto seuerall
substances, that it cleaueth to the thinges that
it is touched of. For there is in it I cannot tell what,
a kinde of clammy glew and gummishnesse. I haue
heard say, that D
                     •
                  mocritus the Abderite didde oftentimes
vse to boast of this stone, to proue the hid power
of nature, in the contentions that he hadde against
the wyzardes.
         
         
            
            CAP. IX.
            Of the Ile Sardinia: of the Shonnsunne: of the
hearbe Sardonia: and of the wonderfull
power of waters.
            
               
                  SArdinia which we
reade of in Timaeus, by the
name of Sandaliotes, and in
Chrysippus by the name of
Ichnusa, is sufficiently knowen
in what Sea it lyeth,
and who were firste inhabiters
thereof. Wherefore it
is to no purpose to tell howe
Sardus was begotten of Hercules, and Norax of Mercurie:
and howe the one comming from Lybye, and
the other from as far as Tartesus in Spaine into these
quarters: the Lande tooke his name of Sardus, & the
Towne of Nora tooke his name of Norax: Or howe
anon after, Aristaeus reigning ouer them, vnited the
people of bothe the races together into the next Cittie
Caralis which himselfe had builded, and knitt the two
sundry Nations which hetherto had béene disseuered,
together into one order of lyuing: in such sorte as the
strangnesse thereof made them not disdaine to become
hys Subiects. This Aristaeus also begatte Io
                     •
                  aus, who
inhabited the Countrie thereabouts. Further more,
wée wyll passe ouer both the Ilians and Locrines.
            
            
               Sardinia is without Serpents. But looke what
noysomnesse Serpents bring to other places,The Shonsunne the same
noysomnesse bringeth the Shonsunne to the Countrey
of Sardinia. It is a verie little Worme and like to a

Spyder in shape, and it is called a Shonsunne because
it shunneth the daie light. It lyeth moste in Syluer
Mynes, for the soile of that Land is rich of Siluer. It
tréepeth priuily, and casteth the plague vppon such as
sitte vpon it vnwares. To the furtheraunce of thys
mischiefe cometh also the Hearbe Sardonia,
               The Hea
                     •
                  be Sardonia. which
groweth much more plentifully thē néedeth, in groues
where springes runne. If it be eaten, it draweth together
the sinewes, and wryeth the mouth, so y• such
as thereby draw vnto death, doo die with resemblance
of laughter. Contrariwise, all the waters of that Ile,The wholesomnesse and commoditie of the waters of Sardinia.
doo serue to diuers commodities. The standing pooles
are full of fish. The Winters rayne is kept to releeue
the Sommers browght, and the Men of Sardinia haue
much aduauntage of raynie water. For they gather it
and kéepe it in store, that it may doo them ease when
the springes faile them which serued them for theyr
meate & drinke. In some places doo bubble vp warme
and holes
                  •
               me springes, which serue for cures in knitting
of broken bones,A water that discouereth theft. or expulsing y• poyson
                  •
               e sheadded
by the Shonsunnes, or in dryuing away diseases
of the eyes. But those that remedy y• eyes, haue power
also to discouer théeues. For whosoeuer denyeth
the theft wyth an oath, washeth his eyes with thys
water. If hys oath bee true, his sight becommeth the
clearer: if he forsware himselfe, the fact is detected by
blindnesse: and he is driuen to confesse hys faulte in
darknesse, with the losse of hys eyes.
         
         
            
            CAP. X.
            Of Sicill, and the Land Pelorias, and the nature of
the waters there: of the Mountaine Aetna,
and many other wonders of that Ile:
and of the seauen Iles called
Vulcanes Iles.
            
               
                  ANd if wee haue
respecte to the order of the
times or of the places: after
Sardinia, the matters
of Sicill doo call vs next.
            First, because that bothe
those Iles béeing broughts
in subiection to the Romains,
were made Prouinces
both at one time. For Marcus Valerius was
made Gouernour of Sardinia, and C. Flaminius Pretor
of Sicill all in one yéere: and secondly for that immediatly
after you are out of the straighte of Sicill,
the Sea beareth the name of the Sardine Sea. Sicill
therefore.The Plat of Cicilye. (which thing is firste and formost to bee
marked) by reason of his heads shooting foorth, is platted
thrée cornered.Capo passaro 
               Pachynnus lookes toward,Morea
               Peloponnesus and the South coast.The heade of the fare. 
               Pelorus beholdeth
Italy, butting Westward vppon it.Capo Boey. 
               Lylibye
shooteth towarde Affrick. Among which, the Countrey
about Pelorus is commended, for the temprature
of ye soyle, inasmuch as it neyther washeth away into
durt through ouermuch moysture, nor crumbleth into
dust through ouermuch drynesse. Where it goeth

further into the maine land-warde, and enlarg
                  ••
               h in
wydenesse, it hath three Lakes Of the one,A Lake that serues both for hunting and fishing. that it is
well stored with fish I count no great wonder. But
the next vnto it, for that in the thirke groues among
the shadowy shrubbes of young trées, it nourisheth
wilde beastes, and admitteth hunters by drye pathes
wherein they may haue accesse a foote by land, seruing
to bothe vses of hunting & fishing, is numbred among
the notable thinges.A straunge Lake. The third is prooued to bee holie
by an Altar standing in the mids, which deuideth the
shallowes from the deepes. All the waie that leadeth
vnto it, the water is but midde legge déepe. Whatsoeuer
is beyonde, may neither be gaged nor touched. If
it be: he that attempteth it is punished for his labour
and looke howe much of himselfe he putteth into the
water, so much he goe
                  •
               h about to destroy. They say
that a certaine man threw a line as farre as he coulde
into the déepes, and y• as to recouer it againe he thrust
his arme into the water to the intent to haue ye more
strength to pull, his hand became rotten. The coaste
of Polorias is peopled with inhabitants of Tauromiu
                     •
                  
               
which Men in old time called Naxus. The towne
ofMessana. 
               Messana is sette di
                  •
               ectly oueragainst Rhegium
of Italy, vnto the which Rhegium the Greekes gaue
that name, by reason of the breaking of that place.
            
               Pachinnum is moste plentifull of Tunnyes and alother
Sea fish, and therefore there is alwaies great
fishing. The beautie of the Headlond of Lyliby, is the
Towne Lyliby with the Tombe of Sybill. Long before
the s
                  •
               edge of Troy,
               The first inhabiters of Sicill. King Sicanus arryuing in the
Ile with an Hoste of Spanyards, named it Sicanie. Afterwarde
Siculus the Sonne of Neptune called it Sicill.
Into this land re
                  •
               o
                  •
               ted many of the Cor
                     •
                  nthyans,
Argiu
                     •
                  s, 
                     〈◊〉
                  , Dorians and Men of Candy. Among
whom also theArchimedes. Master of all Carpenters & Masons

hath the chiefe Cittie, Syracuse, in which euen in winter
season when fayre wether is hidden, the Sunne
shyneth euery day. Moreouer the Fountaine Ar
                     •
                  
                  thusa
is in this Cittie. The highest hylles in it, are
Aetna and Eryx
               Mount Gibell and the wonderfulnesse thereof. 
               Aetna is hallowed vnto Vul
                     •
                  ane,
and Eryx, vnto Venus. In the toppe of Aetna are
two chinkes which are named Cuppes, at which the
vapor bursteth out, with a great roaring going before.
which runneth rumbling a long while together in the
bowels of the earth, through the burning brakes of
hollow holes within. Neither doo the flake of stror
                  •
               se
out, vntill such time as the roaring & rumbling wythin
haue gone before. This is a great wonder. And it
is no lesse wonder that in that burning heate, nature
is so stubborne, that it bringeth foorth snowe mingled
wyth the fire: and that although it boyle in outragious
heare, yet the toppe of it is whyte with snowe, as
if it were continuall winter.
            There is therefore aninuincible force in bothe, so
that neyther the heate is abated by the colde, nor the
colde asswaged by the heate. There are also two hyls:
Buckhyll and Neptunes hyll. Uppon Neptunes is a
watchtowre that looketh into the Tuskane and Adriatish
Seas. Buckhyll taketh hys name of the store
of redde and fallowe Déere that walke vp and down
there in heards.
            Whatsoeuer Sicill bringeth foorth, whither it bee
by the nature of the soyle, or by the d
                  •
               uice of Man, it
is next those thinges that are iudged to be the best: sauing
that in the fruits of the earth, there is none comparable
to the fruite ofCa
                     •
                  torby. 
               Centuripe. Heere was the
Commedy inuented: heere came the sporting of Iesters
firste vppon the Stage: heere was the house
of Archimedes, who accordynge to the Sryence
of Astronomie, was the fyrste inuenter of Engynes.
            
               Héere was that Lais that hadde rather choose her
Countrey then bee knowne of her Countrey. The
great Caues vnder the grounde beare witnesse of the
race of the Cyclops. The place wherein the Lestry
                  
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  s
dwelt, beareth theyr name still. Of that Country
was Ceres the Ladie of 
                  ••
               llage and husbandry. In the
selfe same place is the fielde ofThat place is now called Anna. 
               Aenna continuallie
full of Flowres, and freshe like the spring euerye day
of the yeere, by which there is a hole sunken into the
grounde, whereat Dis the Father of Hell hadde frée
passage into the worlde (as 
                  •
               ame goeth) when hee ra
               
                  •
               ished
Proserpine.
            
            BetwéeneCatanea. 
               Catina andSaragoza. 
               Syracuse is contention
for the memoriall of the two famous Brethren, whose
names eche part chale
                  •
               geth seuerallie to themselues.
If we giue eare to the Ca
                     •
                  nenses, it was Anapias and
Amphinomus. If we credite that which the S
                     •
                  acusans
would willingly haue, we must thinke they were Ac
                  
                     •••
                  nthius
and Crit
                     •
                  o. Neuerthelesse, the cause of y• déede
procéeded from the Countrie of Catina. Into which at
such time as the fire of Aetna had burst out,A notable example of loue toward the Parents. two youngmen
taking vppe theyr Parents, carryed them out
through the flames vnhurt of the fire. They y• came
after, didde so reuerence the memorie of these younge
men, that the place where they were buried, was named
the field of the godly.
            As touching Ar
                     •
                  thusa and Alpheus,
               The Fountaine Arethusa and the Riuer Alpheus. it is true vnto
thys day, that the fountaine & the Ryuer méete both
in one channell. In the Riuer is the greatest store of
wonders. If any man that is not of chast & cleane life
take of y• water of y• fountaine Diana,
               The Well of Diana. which runneth
by Camerine, the liquor of the wine, and the liquor of
the water will not ioyne in one substance. Among the
Segestans,
               Herbesus. the Ryuer Herbesus séething vp suddainlye
in the mids of the streame, becommeth excéeding hote.

               Acis,
               Acis. Hymerus. for all that it issueth out of the Mountaine Aetna,
yet can no Riuer be colder then it is. Hyme
                     •
                  us is
altered with the Coast of the ayre. For while it runneth
Northward it is bytter: but when it turneth into
the South if is swéete. There is not more strangenesse
in the Waters then in the Saltmynes.Saltmynes. If yee
throwe the Salt of Arigent into the fire,Gergent. it me
                  ••
               cth in
burning: and if ye put water to it, it cracke
                  •
               h as if it
were burned.
            
               Aena beareth salt of a purple colour. In Pachynnus
it is founde so shéere, that yée may sée through it.
The other Saltmynes that are néere eyther to Arigent
or Centuripe serue in sté
                  •
               de of quarries. For out
of them they haue Images to the likenesse of men or
Gods. In the places where the who
                  •
               e waters are, is
an Ilande that groweth full of Reedes vorye mée
                  •
               e to
make pypes of all manner of sortes: whither they be
Precentories whose vse is to play before the shrynes
of the Gods: or Vasks, which excéede the Prerentories
in number of holes: or maydenpipes, which haue that
name of their cléere sounde: or Gingrynes, wt though
they be shorter. yet haue they a shriler sound: or Miluines
which haue sharpest sounde of all: or Lydians
which they call also Turaries: or Cor
                     ••
                  thyans, or A
                     •
                  
                  giptians,
or any others, howe diuerslie soeuer they bee
named by Musicians, according to the diuers and sundrie
vs
                  •
               s which they serue for.A dauncing Fountaine. In the Country Halesine
there is a Fountaine at all times quiet & calme▪
when no noyse is made, which riseth vpp if a S
                  •
               alme
be plaid vpon, leaping at the sound and swelling ouer
his brimmes as though he were in loue with y• swéetnesse
of the Musicke. The Poo
                  •
               e of 
                  
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  on with hys
stinking sauour,A stincking Poole dryueth away such as come night Also
there are two springes, whereof if a barraine Woman
taste the one, she shall become fruitfull and if a

childbearing Woman taste of the other, shee becommeth
barrain. The Poole of the Petrenses is hurtfull
to serpents, but wholsome to men. In the Lake of Arigent
swimmeth an Oyle aboue. This fatnes throgh
the continuall wauing of the Réedes, cleaueth to the
coppes of them: out of the sedgie heare wherof is gathered
a medicinable oyntment against the diseases of
great Cattell.Vulcans Hyll, See howe the deuill can worke false miracles. Not farre from thence is Vulcans Hyll,
vpon which when men doo sacrifice, they lay Uyn
                  •
               
               sticks
vppon the Alters, without putting fire thereto
when they cast on the offalles.
            If the God like well of it, (for that is the tryall of
the sacrifice) the sticks (bee they neuer so gréene) doo
take fire alone, and the God to whome the sacrifice is
made, causeth it to burne without kindling. And as
they are making mery, the flame playeth with them,
and scoping out in wreathed flakes among them sindgeth
not any man whom it toucheth. but sheweth it
selfe to be none other thing then the Image of fire, declaring
that the vowe is rightfully performed. In the
same field of Arigent, doo burste out quagmyres of
mudde. And as y• vaines of Fountaines serue to make
Riuers, so in this part of Sicill the soile neuer faileth,
and earth with continuall vtterance casteth out earth.
Sicill yéelded first the stoneThe Agate. 
               Achates, founde in the
banks of the Ryuer Achates, which was of no small
price as long as it was found no where els. For the
vaines imprinted in it do portrait such natural shapes
therein, that when it is of the best making, it representeth
the likenesse of many thinges. For which consideration
the Ring of King Pyrrhus
               The Ring of king Pyrrhu
                     ••
                  
                that made war
against the Romaines, was not meanely spoken of,
the stone whereof was an Agate, wherein were to bée
séene the nine Muses, euerie one with theyr seuerall
cognisaunces, and Apollo with hys viall in hys hand,

not 
                  ••
               grauen by arte, but growne by Nature. But
nowe it is founde in diuers other places. Candy yéeldeth
a kind of them which they call Corallagats,
               Coralagats. because
they are like Corall. It is powdered with drops
glistering like Golde, and it resisteth Scorpions. Inde
yéeldeth of them expressing the proportions of Forrests
and Beastes: the sight whereof comforteth the
eyes. And béeing receiued into the mouth, it stauncheth
thyrst. There are also of them which béeing burned
doo cast a sent like Myrrhe. The Achate is ful of
redde spots like bloode. But those that are most sette
by, haue the cléerenesse of Glasse as the Achate of Cyprus.
For those that looke like ware, (because there is
aboundance of them) are as little estéemed as y• stones
in the stréetes.
            The circuit of all thys whole Ile, is thrée thousand
furlonges about.The whole circuit of Sicilie. In the narrowest Sea of Sicill,
are the Iles Hephestiae, fiue and twenty myles distant
from Italy. The Italians cal them Vulcans. Iles.V
                     •
                  lcans Iles.
For these by reason of the whole nature of their soile,
doo eyther borrow fire of the Mountaine Aetna, or els
minister fire vnto it by priuie intercourse vnder the
grounde. Héere was appointed the dwelling place of
the God of fire. They are in number seauen. Lypara
tooke that name of King Lyparus, who gouerned it before
Aeolus. Another they calledMaretam 
               Hiera. The same
is chéefely halowed vnto Vulcane, and burneth moste
in the night time wyth an exceeding hygh hyll. The
thirde namedStrombolie. 
               Strongyle which was the Pallace of
Aeolus, standeth toward the Sunne rysing. It is least
couered, and it differeth some what from the reste in
cléerenesse of flames. Héere vppon it commeth to passe
that chiefely by the smoake thereof, the inhabiters vnderstand
before, what windes are like to blowe three
daies after. And this is the cause why A
                     •
                  olus was beléeued

léeued to be the God of wyndes. The rest, Didymee,
               A
                     ••
                  cur. 
               Ericusa,
               Faelica
                     •••
                  . 
               Phaenicusa, and Euonimon, because they
be like the other, we haue as good as spoken of them
already.
         
         
            CAP. XI.
            Of the thyrd Coast of Europe: of the Countryes and
places of Greece: of many thinges worthy to be recounted
in them: and of the Nature of
Partriches.
            
               
                  THe third Coast
of Europe beginneth at the
Mountaines ofCimera of Albany. 
               Ceraunii,
and endeth at Hellespont.
In this coast among
the Molossians (where as is
the Temple of Iupiter of
Do
                     •
                  on) is the Mountaine
Tomarus, renowmed for y•
hundred Fountaines y• are about the foote of it, as
Theopompus reporteth. InAlbanye. A well of strang nature. 
               Epyre is a holy wel, cold
aboue all other waters, and of approoued contrarietie.
For if yée dippe a burning brand therein, it quencheth
it: and if you hold it a good way of without any fire on
it, of it owne nature it kindleth it. Dodon
               Dodon. (as Maro
sayth) is hallowed vnto Iupiter. Delphos
               
               Delphos. is renowmed
with the Riuer Cephisus, the Fountaine Castalie,
               The situation of Acarnania.
& the mountain Parnasus. Acarnania vawnteth of
Aracynth. This Country is deuided frō 
               Aetolia wyth
the Mountaine Pindus, which bréedeth Aclelous a ryuer
anciently renowmed among the chiefe Riuers of

and not vnworthely, considering that among the little
stones that lye glistring in his bancks, there is founde
theThe Galac
                  
                     ••••
                   or Milkstone. 
               Galactite, which béeing it selfe blacke, if it bee
chased yéeldeth a whyte iuyce that tasteth like Milke.
Béeing tyde about a woman that gyueth sucke, it maketh
her breasts full of milke: béeing tyde to a Chyld,
it causeth more aboundant swallowing of spettle, and
béeing receiued into the mouth it melteth, but therewithall
it perisheth the gyft of memory. Thys stone
is founde in Nylus and Achelous, and not in any third
place.Scioessa Néere vnto the Towne of Patrae, is a place called
Scioessa shadowed with the couert of nine Hylls,
and not renowmed for any other cause, then that the
beames of the Sunne come almoste neuer there.
InThe Country about Lacedemon. 
               Laconia is an issue out of the earth, called
Taenarus.
            
            
               Taenarus is also the Headlonde against Affricke,
where as is the Chappell of Arion of Methymna,
               The storie of Arion the Mufician that was brought thether through the Sea vppon a Dolphins backe.
who was brought thither by a Dolphin, as hys Image
of brasse witnesseth there portrayted out liuely according
as the chaunce happened, and as the thing was
doone indéede. Moreouer, y• very time expressed there,
namelie the twenty and nine Olympiad (in which the
same Arion is recorded victor at the gaming in Sicill)
a
                  •
               oucheth the selfe same thing to haue béene doone.
            There is also a Towne called Taenaron of noble
antiquitie. Furthermore there are certaine Citties,
and among them Leutrae, somewhat famous by reason
of the shamefull ende that the Lacedemonians made
there of late: and Amyclae brought to destruction in
olde time through theyr owne silence: andCalled also Lacedemon, and now called Mi
                  
                     •
                  ithra. 
               Sparta
renowmed with the Temple of Castor and Pollux,
and also with the tytles of Otryas a manne of greate
fame: And Theramu
                     ••
                  
                from whence first sprang the
worshipping of Diana: and Pitan
                     •
                  
                which Arch
                     •
                  silaus
               
the Stoicke (who was borne there) did bring to lyght
by the desert of his wyse
                  •
               ome: And Anthea and Cardamilee,
where was sometime y• Cittie Thyre, which
now is but the name of a place, where was fought a
notable battell betwéene the Lacedemonians and the
Argyues, the seauentéenth yéere of the raigne of Romulus.
For the Mountaine Taygeta and the Ryuer
Eurotas are better knowne then that they néede to bée
written of.Taygeta. Inachus. 
               Inachus a Ryuer of Achaia cutteth throgh
all the Country of Argoly, which tooke his name of
Inachus the first founder of the nobility of Argos.
               Epidaurus nowe called Rhagusia and Dubronik The
beautie of Epidaurus is the Chappell of Aesculapius,
where sicke and diseased personnes lodging, are informed
by dreames of remedyes for their maladies. It is
sufficient to put you in remembraunce, that there is
in Arcady a towne called Pallanteū, which by meanes
of Euander the Arcadian, gaue the name to our Pallace.
            In Arcady are the Mountaines Cyllen, Ly
                     •
                  aeus,
               Arcady.
and Menalus renowmed with the Gods that were fostered
in them, among which, Erymanthus is not obscure.
Also among the Riuers is Erymanthus springing
out of the Hill Erymanthus, and the famous Ladon.
Héereabouts the encounters of Hercules are apparant.
Varro affirmeth that there is aThis Fountaine was named Phineus. Fountaine
in Arcady which killeth as manie as drinke of it. In
this part of the world we finde this thing not vnworthy
to be mentioned concerning byrds, that whereas
in other places Mauisses be yellowe as golde,White Mauisses. about
Cyllen they are as whyte as milke. Neyther is the
stone to be despised which Arcady sendeth.The stone called Asbest. The name
thereof is Asbest. It is of the colour of yron: and béeing
sette on fire, it cannot be quenched. Into the Baye
of Megara shooteth the Isthmos which is renowmed
with gamings kept there euery fift yéere,The gamings of Isthmos. & wyth the

Temple of Neptune. The said gamings (as is reported)
were instituted in resemblance of the fiue coastes
ofNow called Morea. 
               Peloponnesus which are beaten vpon wyth fiue
sundrie Seas. On the Northside with the Ionian sea,
on the West with the Sicilian Sea, on y• Southweste
with the Aegean Sea, on the Northeast with the Myrtoan
Sea, and on the South with the Candian Sea.
This pastime béeing put downe by the Tyrant Cypselus,
was by the Corinthians restored to the former
solemnitie, in the fortie and nine Olimpiad. But the
name of Peloponnesus declareth that Pelops was king
of that Countrey.The description of Peloponnesus. The platforme of it, is like y• leafe
of a Plane trée with Créekes and nookes, and it maketh
a diuorce betwéene the Ionian Sea, and the A
                     •
                  
                  gaean
Sea, disseuering the one shore from the other,
with a slender balke not aboue foure myles broade,
which for the narrownesse thereof man call Isthmos.
From hence beginneth Hellas, which properlye they
would haue to bée the true Greece.
               The true Greece. That Countrey
which is nowe called Attick, was in former time called,
Actee. Ther
                  •
               in is the Cittie Athens, néere wherto
adioyneth Scyrons Rocke,Athens nowe called Satmes extending sixe myles in
length, so named in honour of Theseus his victorie, and
in remembraunce of the notable punishment of Seyron.
From this Rocke Ino casting her selfe headlonge
into the déepe▪ increased the number of the Goddes of
the Sea. But we will not so slightlie passe ouer the
Mountaines of Attick. There are Icary, Brilesse, Lycabet,
and Aegialus.
               Mount Hymet But Hymet dooth most woorthelie
beare the bell among them all, because that béeing verie
full of flowres, the Honny therof excelleth y• Honnie
of all other places, not onely of forraigne Lands,
but also of the same Countrey, in pleasaunt sauor and
taste.
            They wonder at the Fountaine Callyrhoee,
               The Fountaine Cally
                     •
                  hoe. & yet

they make not therefore the lesse account of another
Fountayne called 
                  
                     ••
                  unesos. The place of iudgment
among y• 
               Athenians is called Ariopagus.
               This battell wa
                     •
                   betweene the Persians and Athenians. The plaine
of Marathon was made famous by y• report of a most
bloody battell foughten there. Manie Iles lye ouer against
the maine Lande of Attick, but Salamis, Sunium,
Cos, and Ceos which (as Varro witnesseth) yéelded
the first Garments of fine spynning y• were made
of wooll for the decking of Women) are almoste suburbes
to the Cittie.Baeotia. 
               Baeotia is renowmed with Thebae,
which Cittie was builded by Amphion.
               Thebae nowe called Thiua, Not that
he drew stones together with the sound of his Harpe,
(for it cannot séeme likely that anie such thing should
be doone) but for that with the swéetnesse of his eloquence,
he allured menne that dwelt in Rocks (who
were altogether sauage and vnnurtured,) to become
obedient to ciuil order and discipline. This Citty glorieth
in the Godds that were borne within her wals,
as they affirme which with holy verses doo set out the
commendations of Hercules and Bacchus. At Thebae
is the Grou
                  •
                
               Helicon,
               Helicon the Forrest Cytheron, the Riuer
Ismenius, and the Fountaines Arethusa, Ocdipus,
Psamatee, and Dircee: but before all others Aganippe
andHorsewell 
               Hippocren
                     •
                  e, which because Ca
                     •
                  mus the
first inuenter of Letters founde out as he rode about
to searche what manner of Country he was come vnto,
the Poets ranne vpon the brydle of liberty, publishing
in theyr writinges, bothe that the one of them
was raised by the stamping of a winged Horses hoofe,
and that the other béeing tasted of, did endue mennes
mindes with eloquence: and also that the winged
Horses hoofe was opened, and that the waters there
of beeing dronke, inspired folke wyth learning.
            The IlandeNegropon
                     •
                  . 
               Eub
                     •
                  a by shooting his side against
the Coaste of the maine Lande, dooth make the

Hauen of Aulis,
               The Hauen of Aulis. renowmed in all ages for rememberaunce
of the confederacie of Gréece. The Baeotians
are the same people that were the Lelegs, through
whose Country runneth the Riuer Cephisus & falleth
into the Sea. In this land is the Bay of Oxus, the
Towne of Larissa, and Delphiramne also, wherein is
the Chappell of Amphiaraus, and the Image of Diana,
which the Caruar Phidias did make. Varr
                     •
                  
                supposeth
that there are two Riuers in Baeotia,
               Two wonderfull Ryuers, though
of nature vnlike, yet nothing differing in wonderfulnesse.
If shéepe drinke of the one, theyr fléeces change
into a Russet colour. If they drinke of the other: as
manie of their fléeces as were of a browne coloure, become
whyte. He addeth moreouer that there is a pitte
to be séene, that killeth as manie as drinke of it.
            Where as Partriches in all other places are frée
like as the rest of birds be,The Partriches of Baeotia in Baeotia they are not frée:
neither are they at liberty to flye where they list, but
but haue boundes in the verie ayre, which they dare
not passe, Insomuch that they neuer goe beyond theyr
appointed limits, nor neuer flie ouer into y• Marches
of Athens.
               The nature of Partriches in generall This is peculiar to the Partriches of Baeotia.
For such things as are common to all other Partriches,
we will treate of generally héereafter. Partriches
are slie in trimming and fencing their nestes.
For they hedge in their haunts with pricking shrubs,
and sharpe sprigges, to the intent such beastes as are
noysome vnto them may bee kept off with the sharpnesse
of the thornes. Under their Egges they lay dust:
and they come and goe priuily, least theyr often haunting
should bewray the place. Many times y• Hennes
re
                  •
               ooue the egges out of the way, to deceiue y• Cocks,
who trouble them out of all measure with theyr continuall
flickering about them. There is fighting among
the Cocks for the Hens: and it is thought that

those which are ouercome, doo abide the other to tread
them as if they were Hennes. They are so ranke of
nature, that if the winde doo but blow from y• Cocks,
the Hennes become with egge, euen wyth the verye
sent of them. And if anie manne come néere the place
where they sitte, the Hennes springing forth doo offer
themselues of their owne accorde to the commers, and
feygning some default in their féete or their winges,
(as though they might be by and by caught) they coū
               ter
                  •
               et
a slowe pace before them. By which subtiltye
they eg foorth such as they méete, and mocke them vntill
they haue tolled them and drawne them a greate
way of from theyr neste. Neyther are their yong ones
lesse carefull for theyr parte, howe to saue themselues.
For when they perceiue that they are séene, they caste
themselues vpon their backes, and take vp cloddes in
theyr féete, with the couert whereof they hyde themselues
so subtillie, that they escape euen when they
are founde.
         
         
            CAP. XII.
            Of Thessaly & Magnesia, and of the Townes therin:
of the Riuer Peneus: of the plesantnes of Tempee:
of the heyght of the Mountaine Olimpus:
and of him that stroke out
King Philips eye.
            
               
                  THessaly is the same country
y• beareth y• name of Aemonia, which
Homer calleth Argos Pelasgicū, where
Hellen was borne, of whom the Kinges
were called Hellens. At the backe héereof

stretcheth Pieria toward Macedonie: which béeing cō
               quered,
came in subiection to the Macedons. Manie
Townes and many Ryuers are there. Of Townes
the notablest are Phthia, Larissa, Thessaha, & Thebae.
Of Ryuers, the notablest is Peneus, which running
downe by Ossa and Olimpus, by meanes of the Hyls
bowing gently on bothe sides with wooddy bottoms,
maketh the Thessalian Tempee: and swéeping thence
wyth broader streames through Macedonie & Magnesia,
falleth into the Gulfe of Thermy. Unto Thessalie
belong the playnes of Pharsaly, wherein were the
thundring stormes of theBetweene Caesar and Pompey, ciuill wars. And to the intent
we goe not altogether to knowne hyls: let them
buzie themselues about Othrys & Pindus, which séeke
for the originall of the Lapythes: or about Ossa which
delight to linger in the Fables of the Centaures. As
for Pelion, the mariage feast of Peleus and Thetis haue
brought it so much to knowledge, that it may be a maruell
howe it should be kept in huggermugger. For the
thinges that are to bee séene in Olympus,
               Mount Olimpus doo declare
that Homer did not celebrate it throgh vnaduised rashnesse.
For it ryseth so bigge, with so hygh a toppe, that
the dwellers by doo call the knappe of it heauen. Ther
is on the top of it an Altar dedicated to Iupiter, where
vpon if any part of the inwards be layd, they are neyther
blowne a sunder wyth blastes of the wynde, nor
washed away with rayne: but when the yéere comes
about againe, they are founde the selfe same that they
were left. And whatsoeuer is once consecrated there
vnto the God, it is priuiledged for euer frō corruption
of the aire. Letters written in the ashes continue tyll
the Ceremonies of the next yéere. In the Country of
Magnesia is the Towne ofModon. 
               Methone, in the 
                  ••
               edge
wherof Phillip the Father of great Alexander of Macedonie,
lost hys eye by the stripe of an Arrow, which

a Townsman named Aster shot at him with his own
name, and the name of the party that he shot it at, and
the place that he wounded written thereuppon. That
this people could skyll of Archery, we may beléeue by
Philoctetes, forasmuch as Melibaea is reckoned in the
foote of thys Country.Philoctetes. But to the intent we procéede
no further then wee haue Poets for our defence, the
fountaine Libethrus also appertaineth to Magnesia.
            
         
         
            CAP. XIII.
            Of Macedonie, and the successyon of the Kinges
thereof: and of the stone Peantis.
            
               
                  THe people which
were sometime the Edonians,
and that which was the
Lande of Migdony, or the
Countrey of Pieria, or Aemathia,
is nowe in one entyre
terme the Realme of
Macedonie. And the partitions
which héeretofore
were seuerally disioyned,The bounds of Macedonie béeing nowe vnited in the
name of Macedo
                     •
                  es, are become all one body. Macedonie
therefore is bounded on the forepart with y• Marches
of Thrace. The South Countrey of Thessaly is
inhabited by the Epirots. On the Westside are theThe people of Seruia & Rascia▪
               
               Dardanians and Illyrian
                     •
                  . Where the North beateth
vpon it, it is fenced in with Paeony & Pelagony From
the Triballs it shooteth foorth in Mountaines to the
colde Northeaste wynde. It is deuided from Thrace
by the Riuer Strymon which runneth from y• Mountayne
Haemus.
            
            
               
But to passe Rhodopee with silence which is a
Mountaine of Mygdony, and Athos sayled through
by the Persian fléete, and cutt of frō the maine Land, by
the mountenaunce of a myle & a halfe, together wyth
the vaines of Gold and Siluer, wherof there are digged
vppe verie good and great store in the fieldes of
Macedonie, I wyll speake of the Countrey Orestide.
There are a people which take the name of Orestides
heerevpon. Orestes fléeing like an outlawe from Mycene
after he had killed his mother,The Orestides forasmuch as he
                  •
               
hadde determined to goe further of, commanded that
a yong Sonne of hys, borne in Aemathia of Hermione
whom he had taken to be his companion in all aduentures,
should be brought vp priuilie héere. The Childe
bearing his Fathers name, as he grew to mans estate
so also grewe in courage and stomacke méete for hys
royall race: and conquering all that extendeth to the
Coast of Macedony, and the Adriatish Sea, hee called
the Land (whereof he was ruler) Orestide.
            
            
               Phlaegra (in which place, before there was anye
Towne there,The Gyants war agaynst Heauen. the report goeth y• a battell was fought
betwéene the hoste of Heauen and the Gyants,) dooth
put vs in minde to declare throughlie with how great
proofes of soueraigntie there, the tokens of that Heauenlie
warfare haue and doo continue it vnto thys
day. If at any time (as it commeth to passe indéede)
the brookes ryse with foule weather, and the excesse of
waters breaking theyr bankes doo shoote themselues
ouer violently into the fields: they say that euen now
through the gulling of the water, are discouered ben
                  •
               s
like to mens carkasses, but farre bigger, which for the
vnmeasurable hugenesse of them, are reported to haue
béene the bodies of that monstruous Army. And thys
opinion is furthered with the euidence of excessyue
great stones, wherewith heauen was thought to haue

béene assaulted. I will procéede to the residue which
extende into Thessaly and Aemony. For they be heigher
then that in anie place, the height of the Mountain
is able to reache therunt
                  •
               . Neither is there any thing
in anie Land vnder Heauen, that may woorthely bee
compared héere
                  •
               nto in height, as wherevnto only the
rage of water neuer attained when y• flood ouerwhelmed
all thinges els with woozie moistnesse. There remaine
yet prints of no small credite, whereby it appeareth
that these places were aboue the stormy flood.
For in the darke Caues of the Hilles, which at that
time were eaten hollow with the strugling of the water,
the shelles of Fishes are left behinde, and many other
things which are cast vppe by the working of the
rowgh Sea: so that although (to sée to) the places bée
mayne Land: yet they haue a resemblaunce of y• Sea
shore.
            Nowe will I speake of the Inhabiters.The descent of the kinges of Macedoni. 
               Aemathius
who was the first that obtained soueraigntie in
Amathia, (whither it be because the knowledge of his
pedegrée is worne out by time, or because it is a matter
farre fette) is counted to bee bredde of the earth.
After him the name of Aemathia which procéeded frō
him, continued to the Realme of Macedony. But Macedo
the Nephewe of D
                     •
                  ucalion by the Mothers side,
(who onelie with the familie of his housholde scaped
from the general destruction) chaunged the name, and
called it Macedony, after himselfe. After Macedo
followed Caranus Captaine of a companie of Peloponesians:
who according to the aunswere gyuen by Apollo,
builded a Citty in the same place, where he had
séene a hearde of Goates sitte, and named itWhich may be interpreted, Goteham. 
               Aegaea,
in which place the custome was to bury theyr Kings:
neyther was it lawfull among the auncient Macedones,
to burie their chiefe states in anie other place

than there. After Caranus succéeded Perdicas in y• two
and twentith Olimpiad, who was the firste that bare
the name of King: after whom came Alexander the
Sonne of Amintas,
               King Alexander, a louer of Musick. who was counted rich, and not
without cause. For he had so good successe in encreasing
his substaunce, that he first of all men, sent Images
of cleane golde for a gyft, one to Apollo at Delphos,
and another to Iupiter at Elis. He was greatlie
giuen to delight hys hearing: insomuch that for hys
pleasures sake, he entertained with honourable pensions
as long as he liued manie that were cunning vppon
Instruments, among whom was Pyndarus the
Harper. From this man Archelaus receiued the kingdome,Kinge Archelaus a louer of Learning.
who was a politick Prince in feates of warre,
and the firste deuiser of battell vppon the Sea. Thys
Archelaus was so great a louer of learning, y• he made
Euripides the Tragicall Poet, one of his priuie Counsell.
At whose burial, he was not content to follow the
Herse onelie, but also he shore his hayre, and vttered
in countenau
                  •
               ce the sorrowe that he conceiued in hys
hart. The same Archelaus winning the wager in running
with Chariots at the gaminges of Pythia and
Olimpus, shewed himselfe rather to haue the hart of a
glorious Greeke then of a royall King, in séeking that
kind of prayse. After Archelaus the state of Macedony
béeing troubled with dissention, at last was stayed in
the raigne of Amyntas, who had thrée Sons, of whom
Alexander succéeded his Father: who béeing dispatched
out of the way, the fruition of that great preheminence
was first giuen to Perdicas: by whose decease
the Kingdome was left by inheritance vnto his Brother
Philip, who (as we tolde you before) lost hys right
eye at Methone, of which maine there had gone a fore
token before.
            For at his marriage 
                  •
               easte it is reported that the

Musitians which serued that daie, sung (as it were in
sport) a song of the one eyed Gyants, called Cyclops.
Thys Phillip begat great Alexander,
               King Phillip howbeit that Olympias
Alexanders Mother, coueting to purchase hym
a nobler Father, auouched him to haue béene begotten
by a Dragon. But howsoeuer the case stoode,Great Alexande
                     •
                  
                
               Alexander
so behaued himselfe, that he was beléeued to be the
Sonne of a God. He trauailed ouer the worlde, vsing
the direction of Aristotle and Callisthenes. Hee conquered
Asia the lesse, Armeny, Iberia, Albany, Cappadocia,
Syria, and Aegypt. He passed ouer ye Mountaines
Taurus and Caucasus: He subdued the Bactrians: hée
raigned ouer the Medes and Persians: Hée wan Inde,
and went beyond all that Liber and Hercules reached
vnto. He was of personage more statelie than Man,
with long and straight necke, chéerefull & cléere eyes,
chéekes ruddy with a pleasantnesse, and comely featured
in all proportions of bodye, not without a certaine
maiestie. Béeing conqueror of all men, hee was hymselfe
a thrall to wyne and wrath. Through surfette of
drunkennesse he died at Babylon, somewhat after a
more base and vncomely sorte then he had lyued. Wée
finde that those that came after him, were borne rather
to increase the glory of the Romaines, then to inherite
so great renowne. Macedony bringeth foorth a
stone which they call Paeantis. The common reporte
goeth,The stone Paeantis. that this stone doth helpe Women, bothe in the
time of theyr conception, and in the time of their labour.
It is founde much about the Tombe of Tyresias.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
            
         
         
            
            CAP. XIIII.
            Of the manners and customes of the Thracians. Of
the places and peoples of Thrace. Of Cranes and
Swallowes. Of Hellespont. Of the Ilande
Clarob, and of the Aegaeum
Sea.
            
               
                  NOw it is time to
take our iourneye intoRomania
               Thrace, and to sette sayle
toward the puissantest Nations
of Europe:
               The manners and customes of the auncient Thracians. which
whosoeuer will looke vpon
aduisedlie, shall easily finde
that there is a contempt of
life in the barbarous Thracians,
through a certaine discipline of moother wytt.
They agrée all to die willingly: some of them beléeuing
that the soules of them that decease returne againe,
and othersome thinking that they die not, but
are in a more happie and blisful state. Among most of
them, the birth daies are sorrowfull, and contrariwise
the burialls are ioyfull. In somuch that the Fathers
and Mothers fall a wéeping when they Children are
newe borne, and reioyce when theyr are deade. The
Menne doo glorie in the number of theyr Wiues, and
count it an honour to haue manie bedfellowes. Such
Women as are chare of their chastitie, doo leape into
the fires where their dead Husbandes are burned, and
(which they thinke to be the greatest token of chastity
that may bee) runne headlong into the flame. When
Women come to the time of marriage, they take not

Husbands at the appointment of their Parents: but
such of them as excel others in beautie, set themselues
foorth to sale, and making Proclamation who wyll
giue moste, they marrie not to him that is of best conditions,
but to him that is best Chapman. Those that
are foule or deformed, bring dowries with them to bie
Husbandes withall. When they feast, bothe sexes of
them goe about the harthes, and cast the séede of certaine
Hearbs growing among them into the fire. The
fume of which Hearbes so striketh vp into their heads
that it woundeth theyr sences, and maketh them like
drunken folke, whereat they haue a good sporte. Thus
much concerning their customes. Nowe shall ensue
of their places and peoples. Along the Ryuer Strymo
on the right hande thereof, inhabite the Denselats.
There are also manie kinreds of the Besses, euen vnto
the Ryuer Nestus, which runneth about the foote of
the Mountaine Pangaeus. The soyle of the Odryses
sendeth foorth the Ryuer Hebrus which runneth amōg
the Briants,
               The Ryuer Hebrus. 
               Dolonks, Thynes, Corpills, and other barbarous
nations, & toucheth also ye 
               Cycones. Then is there
Mount Haemus,
               Mount Haemus sixe myles high, the back part wherof
is inhabited by the Maesians, Gets, Sarmats, Scythians,
and manie other Nations.
            On the sea coast of Pontus dwelleth the people of
Sythony, the renowne whereof is augmented by Orpheu
                     •
                  
               
the Poet and Prophette that was borne there,
who is reported to haue practised the secrets (whither
it were of his Musicke or of his Ceremonies,) in the
Promontorie Sperchius. Afterwarde is the Poole of
Biston, and not farre from thence the Country of Marony,
wherein was the Towne of Tyrada sometime
the stable of Diomeds horses. But nowe it hath giuen
place to time, and there remaineth no more but the
foundation of the Towre. Not farre from thence is

the Citty Abdera which Diomeds sister builded,Abdera. & called
so after her owne name. Anon after, it became the
house of Democritus ye natural Philosopher,Democritus. & therfore
to (say the truth) it is the more renowmed. This Abdera
béeing by time decaied, was restored to a greater
countenaunce by the Clazomenians comming out of
Asia, the hundreth and one and thirty Olympiad, who
abolishing the things that had passed before, restored
it to the olde name againe. The comming of Xerxes
made the place of Doriscon famous, because he mustered
hys Armie there. Mount Haemus hath ye tombe
of Polydore to shewe, on that side which the Scythians
Ar
                     •
                  teres doo inhabit, and it hath the Cittie which in
olde time was called Gerania, and is now called of the
barbarous people Cattruza, from whence the reporte
goeth that the Pygmaeans were dryuen by Cranes.
            Surely it is manifest that Cranes in the wynter
time doo flye in great heards towards the North,Of the nature and order of Cranes. and
it shall not gréeue me to declare whither, and in what
sort they direct their sight. They march in araye as it
were an Armie vnder an Ensigne. And least the violence
of the windes should driue them from the coaste
to which they direct theyr course, they gorge thēselues
wyth Sande, and balace themselues by taking vppe
stones of a measurable waight. Then they mount as
high as they can, to the intent 
                  •
               rom thence (as from a
hygh watchtowre) to aime the Landes which they
would goe vnto. He that is surest of wyng goeth before
the Hearde, and with his clarying rebuketh their
slothfulnesse, and causeth the trayne behinde to make
haste after. When he wexeth hoarce, another takes
his roome. When they shall passe the Sea of Pontus,
they séeke for the narrowest places, which they may
easilie finde by eye sight, and they are betwéene Taurica
and Paphlagonia, that is to say betwéene Carambis
               
and the Rammes head. As soone as they knowe themselues
to be past the mid channell, they disburden thē
               selues
of the stones in theyr féete. So the Shipmenne
report, who by suddaine aduenture haue oftentymes
béene rayned vppon wyth theyr stonie showers. As
for theyr Sande, they put it not vp againe before they
be well assured of theyr abyding. They are all alike
rarefull for such as are weary. Insomuch that if any of
them tyre, the rest flocke altogether and beare them
vppe that faint, vntil they may recouer their strength
by resting. Neyther are they lesse circumspecte vppon
the Land. For they kéepe watch a nights, in such wise
that euery tenth of them waketh. Those that watche,
holde little weyghts in their clawes, which reprooue
them of sléepe if they happen to let them fall. If aught
be to be auoyded, they giue warning thereof by clarying.
Theyr colour bewrayeth their age, for the elder
they growe, the blacker they wexe.
            Let vs come to the PromontorieIt may be interpreted Goldenhorne. 
               Chrysokeras,
renowmed with the CittieConstantinople. 
               Byzance héeretofore called
Lygos, which is distaunt fromDurazo. 
               Dyrrachium seauen
hundred and eleuen miles. For so much is ye space
betwéene the Adriatish Sea, andThe Sea of Constant
                     •
                  nople 
               
                  
                     •
                  ropontis. In the
Country of Cenik not far from Flauiople a Towne
builded and peopled with Romaines, is the Towne of
Byzia in tymes past the Palace of King Tereus, now
hated and vnhaunted of Swallowes,The nature of Swallowes. and so foorth of
other byrds: although it bee so that Swallowes doo
shunne to come within Thebae also, because the wals
thereof haue béene so often taken. For among other
thinges: that they haue a kinde of foreknowledge, it
is knowne héereby, that they wyll not come neere a
house that is like to fall, nor come vnder the roofe that
by any means shal perish. Surely they are not chaced
by rauening foules, neither are they a pray to any, but
are as holy birds.
            
               There is an otherThat is to say a narrow balke of grounde betweene two seas. 
               Isthmos in Thrace of lyke
straightnesse, and hauing a narrow Sea of like wydenesse
to that of Peloponnesus, vpon the shores wherof
stande two Citties, on either side one. The shore toward
the Sea of Constantinople is beautified wyth
the Towne of Pactie, and Melane bay with the Cittie
It may be interpreted Hartsted. 
               Cardy: which hath that name because the platt of it
is in fashion like a hart. All the great Sea of Hellespont
is streightned into seauē furlonges, which space
disseuereth the coast of Asia from Europe. Héere also
stande two Citties, Abidos in Asia, and Sestos in Europe.
And harde by are two Promontories one ouer
against the other: Mastusia of Chersonesus, where endeth
the thirde coast of Europe, and Sygeum of Asia,
where is a little Hill calledDogs Tombe or dogs graue. 
               Cynossema the Tombe
of Hecuba, and the Tower of Protesilaus, put to y• vse
of a Chappell.
            On the Northmarches of Thrace, beateth the Riuer
Danow or Tonware. 
               Ister, on the Easte Pontus and Propontis: and
on the South, the Aegaean Sea. Betwéene Tenedos
and Chius, is the Iland Cla
                     •
                  os situate at such place as
the Aegaean Sea wydneth. On the ryght hand, as men
sayle to Antandros, there is a Rock (for so it deserues
to be called rather then an Ile) which (to them that
beholde it a farre of) séemeth to haue the shape of a
Goate, which the Greekes call Aega, that is to saye a
Goate. Of this Rocke the Aegaean Gulfe taketh hys
name. From Phalarion a Promontorie ofCor
                     •
                  u. 
               Corcyra,
hangeth out a Rock of the likenesse of a Ship, into the
which Vlysses bys Shyppe was beléeued to haue béen
                  •
               
trans-formed. Cythera which is 
                  •
               lue myles from Malea,
was héeretofore named Porphyris.
            
         
         
            
            CAP. XV.
            Of Creta, and of many other thinges pertayning
thereunto.
            
               
                  MOre easie it is to
to treate fully ofNow Candi
                     •
                  
                
               Creta,
thē to say expresly in what
Sea it lyeth. For ye 
               Greeks
haue so mingled the names
of the Sea that enuironeth
it, that while they thruste
one in an others place,
they haue almost drowned
altogether. Neuerthelesse, I will bestowe my trauell
with as much faithfulnesse as I canne, in buttelling it
out, to the intent that nothing may hang in vncertaintie.
It stretcheth out a great length betwéene ye EasteThe situation of Candy
and the West, hauing Greece butting against it on
the one side, and Cyrene on the other. On the Northside
it is beaten vpon with theOr Gotesea 
               Aegaen Sea▪ and on
the South with the Libicke and Aegiptian Seas. It
was garnished with a hundred Citties (as they report
which haue lauash tongues of theyr owne) but indéede
with a hundred great and Lordly proud Townes: the
chiefe whereof were Gortim, Cydon, Gnoson, Therapne,
               The auncient names of Candy
and Scylletion. Dosiades reporteth that it was
named Crete, of the Lady Crete, the daughter of Hesperus.
Anaximander saith, it was so called of Cretes K.
of the Curets. Crates auoucheth that it hyght, first Aeria,
and anon after Curetis. And manie also affyrme,
that of the temperatenesse of the ayre, it was called

               The blessed Ile. Of things first founded in that Ile. 
               Macaronesus. It was the first that could skil of seamatters
and of shooting. It was the first that comprehended
words in writing. It was the first that taught
dauncing in Armor, called the Pyrrhicke daunce, of
Pyrrhus the first deuiser thereof. It was the first that
trayned troopes of Horsmenne to winde and vnwinde
themselues in way of sport and daliance, whereuppon
was afterward founded the vse of warlike discipline.
The arte of Musicke began first there, by meanes of
the Dactyles of Ida, who finding out the distinction of
tunes by the sounding and tinckling of brasse, brought
it in order of songe, and sunge ditties to it. It looketh
whyte by reason of the snowie toppes of the Mountaines.
Dictimus and Cadiscus, which are so excéeding
white, that vnto such as sayle a farre off, they séeme
rather clowdes then hilles. Besides the others, there
is Ida,
               Mount Ida. which before the rysing of the Sunne, séeth the
Sunne.
            
               Varro in his worke intituled of the Seacoasts, affirmeth
that in his time,The manners and customes of the auncient Candians. the Tombe of Iupiter was
there to be séene. The people of Crete doo very deuoutlye
worshippe Diana, whom in their owne moother
tongue they cal Brithomartis, which is as much to
saie in our language, as Swéete maide. No man may
lawfullie enter into the Goddesses Temple, but barefooted.
The saide Temple sheweth the workmanship
of Daedalus. By Gortyn runneth the Riuer Laethey,
at the which the Gortynes saie, that Europa was
brought in vppon a Bulles back. The same Gortynes
doo worshippe Cadmus, Europas brother, of whō they
report thus. He is séene, and méeteth folke, but in the
shutting in of the Euenings toward night,Illusion of the deuill by walking Ghostes. he offereth
himselfe to sight, with a countenaunce of much greater
maiestie. The Gnosians account the Goddesse Minerua
to be a Countriwoman of theirs, and affyrme

that Corne was firste sowne among them, standing
boldlie in contention with the A
                     •
                  henians for that matter.What thinges Candy breedet
                     •
                  
               
The fieldes of Crete are well stored wyth wylde
Goates: but it wanteth Redde déere. It bréedeth not
anie where Wolues, Foxes, and other fourefooted
Beasts that be scarefull. There is no kind of serpents
there. There is great store of Uynes. The soyle is
wonderous batling. The increase of fruites of trées is
aboundant. For in a part of this Ile onely, Cypresse
Trées béeing felled doo spring againe. There is an
Hearbe calledHungarlesse 
               Alimos, whereof if a man champe
a little, it kéepeth him from béeing a hungred
for one whole daie, and therefore this also is peculiar
to Crete. There is a kinde of Spider, called
Phalangium. If yée demaund what force it hath, there
is no strength at all in the bodie of it, but if you would
learne what power it hath, the man whom it stingeth
dyeth of the poyson. The stone also which is calledThe Fingerstone.
               Idaeus dactylus, is sayde to growe in this Ilande. It
is of the colour of yron, and it is in shape like a mans
thombe.
            
               Crete hath no night Owles, and if any by brought
thether, they dye out of hand.
         
         
            
            CAP. XVI.
            Of Caristos, and the hote waters therein, and of
the byrds called Carists. of Chalcis, of
the Circle Iles, and of the Ilands
Ios, and Delos,
            
               
                  CAristos hath hote
Bathes which they call
Hellops, and byrdes called
Carists, which flye into the
fire without sindging their
feathers: and also a kynde
of fine Lynnen which remaineth
in the fire without
perishing. This Ilande (as
Callidemus auoucheth) was in olde time taken forBrasselande
               Chalces, because Brasse was there first founde. That
the Titans raigned there time out of minde, the rytes
of theyr Religions doo declare. For the Caristians doo
diuine seruice to Briareus, like as the Chalcideans doo
to Aegaeon. For in a maner allNegropont 
               Euboia was in subiection
to the Titans. It is supposed that those Ilands
tooke the name of Cyclads, because that although they
be situate some further then some fromSdiles, 
               Delos: yet
they stand all in a Circle round about Delos, and the
Greekes call a circle Cyclos. Ios is more famous then
the rest by reason that Homer is buried there. It is
héere to be remembred, that after the first flood, which
is noted to haue béene in the time of Ogyges, when the
day had continued as darke as night, by the space of
nyne Monethes together: Delos before all other

Landes was lightned with the Sunne beames, and
thereof gate hys name, in that it was y• first that was
restored to light. Nowe betwéene Ogiges and Deucalion
is accounted the space of sixe hundred yéeres.
         
         
            CAP. XVII.
            Of the Ilande Ortygia, and of
Quayles.
            
               DElos is also called
               Quaylland. 
               Ortygia, the most renowmed
of all the Cyclads, béeing
it selfe one of the number
of them, and is named
diuersly: sometime Asteria,
of the honouring of Apollo,
there: sometime Lagia, of
hunting: and Cynethus, and
Perpole because fire pannes,Of Q
                     •
                  ayle
                     •
                   and of theyr propertyes. and fire it selfe also were
founde there. In thys Iland were Quayles séene first
which byrds the Greekes cal Ortyges. Men think that
these foules are in the tuition of Latona. They are
not to bée séene at all seasons, but haue theyr time of
comming, which is when Sommer is gone. When
they passe ouer the Seas, they flye leysurely at ye first,
cherryshing theyr strength wyth flying softly for feare
of a longer iourney. But as soone as they spy Lande,
they cluster on a flock, and thronging close together,
make all the spéede they can: which hast of theyrs doth
oftentimes turne to the destruction of them that are
vpon the Sea. For it happeneth in the nights, that
they rende the tackling, and bearing the sayleclothes

before them by viole
                  •
               ce & turne the bottomes of the
kéeles vpwarde. They neuer sett
                  •
                foorth whyle the
Southerne winde bloweth, for feare of the force of a
more swelling foggie blaste. They commonly cōmitt
themselues to the Northerne wyndes, to the intent
that the gale thereof béeing more drie and more vehement,
may the easlyer carrie their bodies which are
somewhat fatte, and by reason therof somewhat slow
also. Hée that guydeth the flocke, is calledThe Quailguyde. 
               Ortygometra.
As soone as he draweth towarde the Land, the
Gossehawke (which watcheth for the nonce) seazeth
vppon him, and therefore it is all theyr séeking to get
them a guyde of a straunge broode, by whom to escape
the first daunger. Their chiefe delight is to féede vpō
the séede of venemous hearbs, and therefore wisemen
haue forbidden them their Tables. And thys lyuinge
creature onely (sauing manne) suffereth the falling
sicknesse.
         
         
            CAP. XVIII.
            Of the Ile Eubaea, nowe called
Nigropont.
            
               
                  THe Ile of Eubaea
is disseuered with so small
a cut from the maine land
of Baeotia, that it is to bee
doubted whether it bee to
be numbred amōg Ilands
or no. For on that syde
which they call Eurypus,
it is ioyned to the Lande
with a brydge, and is gone vnto a foote by the frame of

a very short Engine. It shooteth into the North with
the Promontorie Caeneum, and with two other it extendeth
into the South, whereof Gerastus faceth the
Countrey of Athens,
               The headlond of Capharew and Caphreus looketh into Hellespont,
where after the destructiō of Troy (whether
it were through the wrath of Minerua, or (as the
certainer report goeth) through the influence of the
Starre Arcturus) the Grée
                  ••
               i
                  •
               h Nauie suffered great
losse by shipwrack.
         
         
            CAP. XIX.
            Of the Ilande Paros, and the stone
Sarda.
            
               PAros is renowmed
for the Marble that is
in it. Next Delos it is the
beste inhabited wt townes.
But before it hadd y• name
of Paros, it was called Minoia.
For béeing conquered
by Minos, as long as it cō
               tinued
vnder the Cretish
dominion,The Stone Sarda. it was called Minoia. Besides the Marble,
it yéeldeth the stone Sarda, which is better then Marble,
but yet accounted as basest of all Iewels. Eyghtéene
myle from Delos is the Ile of Naxos, wherin is
the Towne of Srongyle. But before it was called
Naxus,
               Naxus now called N
                     •
                  xia it bare the name of Dyonisia, eyther because
it was the harborough of Bacchus, or els because it excelled
the rest in fruitfulnes of Uines. Besides these,
there be many moe of ye Circle Iles, but y• things that
are chiefly worthy to be remembred are in the Iles aforesaid.
         
         
            
            CAP. XX.
            Of the Ilande Icaros, and of the Phylosopher Pythagoras:
of the Ilands Melos, Carpathos,
Rhodes, and Lemnos, and of
the shaddowe of Mount
Athos.
            
               ICaros also is one
of the Ilands called Sporades,
               Now it is called Nicaria.
and gaue the name to
the Icarish Sea. Thys Ile
shooting forth in Rocks betwéene
Samos and Myconus,
is altogether harbourlesse:
and because it hath
no Bay nor Hauen to arryue
at, it is ill spoken of for the daungerousnesse of
the Coastes of it. Varro therefore is of opinion, that
Icarus of Crete perished there by shipwrack, and that
the place tooke hys name of the mis-fortune of the
man. In Samos
               Samos. nothing is more notable then y• 
               Pythagoras
               Pythagoras.
was that Countryman borne: who béeing

                  •
               ffended at the Lordlinesse of the Tyrants, forsooke
hys natiue Country, and arryued in Italy in the tyme
that Brutus which draue the Kings out of Rome was
ConsullNow called Mylo. 
               Melos (which Callymachus calleth Melanis)
hard by A
                     •
                  olia, is the roundest of all the Iles. For
Scarpanto. 
               Carpathus is the same whereof the Carpathian sea
hath hys name. The ayre is neuer so clowdye but the
Sunne shyneth vppon the Rhodes. The Lemnians
worshippe V
                     •
                  ulcane, and therefore the chiefe Cittie of

               Stalimene. 
               Lemnos is called Haephestia. There is also y• towne
of Myrina, into ye Marketsted wherof, the Mountaine
Athos casteth his shaddowe out of Macedonie,
               The exceeding height of Moun
                     •
                   Athos. which
thing (not without cause) men haue noted for a wonder,
forasmuch as Athos is fourescore and sixe miles of
frō 
               Lemnos. Surely Athos is of such a height, y• it is
supposed to bee higher then from whence the rayne
falleth. Which opinion hath got credite héere vpon, for
that the ashes which are left vpon the Altars y• stande
on the toppe of it, are neuer washt awaie, nor doo in
anie wise diminish, but doo alwaies continue euen in
the same heape that they were raked vppe in. On the
toppe of it was sometime y• Towne Acrothon, wherin
the Inhabiters liued halfe so long againe as the inhabiters
of other places: and therfore the Greekes cal
the people thereof Macrobians, which is as much to
say in our language, as longliued.
         
         
            CAP. XXI.
            Of Hellespont, Propontis, the Bosphor of Thrace
and of the maruellous nature of the fishes
called Dolphins.
            
               
                  THe fourth coast
of Europe beginneth atSaint Geo
                     •
                  
                  ges arme.
               Hellespont, and endeth at
the mouth of Maeotis. Al the
saide widenesse which deuideth
Europe and Asia a
sunder, gathereth into a
straight of seauē furlongs.
This is Hellespont, héere

did Xerxes make a brydge of shippes and passe ouer a
foote. From thence stretcheth a narrowe arme of the
Sea to a Cittie of A
                     •
                  ia called Priapus, which Alexander
the great sayled vnto, and gotte it into his handes,
when he went about to conquer the worlde. From
thence wydning into a mayne Sea, it groweth narrow
againe towardThe Sea of Constantinople. 
               Propontis: and by and by gathereth
into halfe a mile breadth, and is called theThe straighte of Constantiple, and it signifieth the Oxeforde.
               Bosphor of Thrace, at which place Darius conuaied ouer
his armie. These Seas haue manie Dolphins,
which haue in them many straunge things to be wondred
at. First and formost, the Seas bréede not anie
thing swifter or nimbler then them: insomuch as ofttimes
in their leaping vpp,The wonderful nature of Dolphins and their loue towardes manne. they shóote thēselues quite
ouer the topps of the maine sailes of the ships. Whersoeuer
they become, they goe by couples. They bring
foorth pigs, and the tenth month is the ful time of their
farrying, and they farroe euer in Sommertime, and
giue their pigs sucke, and while they bee verie yonge
they take them in at their mouth, and they wayt vpon
them for a time till they wexe strong. They liue thirtie
yéeres as hath béene tryed by experience in cutting
of theyr tailes for a marke to knowe them by. They
haue theyr mouthes not in ye same place where other
Beastes haue, but almost in theyr bellies, and contr
                  •
               
               rie
to the nature of Fishes they onely mooue theyr
tongues. They haue sharpe prickes on their backes,
which stand vppe stife when they be mooued to anger,
and are hidden as it were in a sheath whē their minds
be quiet. Men say they dont not in the water, nor take
any breath but aboue in the aire. When ye Northwind
bloweth they be light of hearing, & contrariwise thick
of hearing whē ye wind is in the South. They delight
in Musicke, reioysing to heare shalmes, & whersoeuer
is harmonie, thither flo
                  •
               k they together in heards. In

the raign of Augustus, a boy in Campane, first trayned
a Dolphin wt shiuers of bread, & did so much by custom
that he was contented to be fedde by hand. Afterward
when ye boy wexed bold in playing with him, he carryed
him frō the land into ye lake of Laurine, & beare the
boy as it were on horsback frō the shore of y• bay, vnto
Pozzolo. 
               Puteolis. This was doone many yeeres together, so long
til ye continual beholding therof made it to séeme
no wonder. But when the lad was dead, the Dolphin
mourning for ye want of him, died for sorow in y• sight
of al men. I wold be l
                  ••
               he to vouch this thing, but y• it
is registred in ye wrytings of Mecaenas, & Fabian, & many
others. Anon after, vppon the seacoast of Affrick at
Hippon Dyarrhyton, a Dolphin beeing fed by ye men
of Hippon, offred himself to be handled, and euer now
an then caried such as were set vpō his back. And this
thing was not doon by ye peoples hands only, for Flauianus
ye Proconsul of Affrick handled him himselfe, and
anointed him wt ointments, insomuch as the Dolphin
being cast a sléepe with y• strangnes of the smell, was
tumbled hither & thither for dead, and many monethes
after desisted frō his accustomed kéeping of cōpany. At
Iassus a cittie of Babilon, a Dolphin fel in loue with a
lad, & in folowing him ouer eagerly after their accustomed
sporting together, shot himself into ye sand and
there stuck fast. Alexander ye great interpreting it to
haue béene y• loue of theNeptune. God of the sea, made the lad
chiefe priest to Neptune nere vnto ye said citty, as Egesidemus
maketh report. Another childe named Hirmias
likewise riding on a Dolphins back in the sea, & being
drowned by violence of the waues, was caryed backe
againe to lande by the Dolphin, who tooke such repentance,
that he punished the fact with wilfull death, and
neuer returned more into the Sea. There are store of
other such examples, & yet I wyll not speake of Arion,
whose aduenture is credibly auouched by Chronicles.
            
               Furthermore, if theyr yong pygs at any time playe
the wantons, theyr auncients sette one of the elder
sorte to be guyde ouer the Hearde, by whose instruction
they learne to slippe from the assault of greater fishes
that rush in vppon them, howbeit that in those
Seas there be very few great Fyshes except it be the
Seale.
            In Pontus there is great store of Tunnyes, and
they bréede not lightlie els where.Tunnyes. For there is no
place that they come sooner to their full growth in,
then there: and y• is by reason of the plenty of swéete
waters. Their comming into the Sea is in y• springtime,
and they enter in by the right side of the shore,
and goe out by the left side: which thing they are
thought to doo, because they sée better wyth the right
eye then with the left.
         
         
            CAP. XXII.
            of Ister: of the beaste called a Beuer, and of
the precious stone of Pontus.
            
               
                  ISter riseth in the
               
Hylles of Germanie,
               Danow or Tonware. and
issueth out of a Mountaine
that lieth ouer against Turgew,
a part of the ancient
Gall. It rec
                  •
               iueth into it
thréescore Ryuers, almoste
all able to beare Shippes,
and it falleth into Pontus
with seauen mouthes, wherof the first is called Peuce,
the second Narcustoma, the thirde Calostoma, and the

fourth Pseudostoma: for Boreostoma the fift, and Stenostoma
the sixt, are slower then the rest: and as for
the seauenth, it is so dull and like vnto a Poole, that it
hath not anie likelihoode of a streame. The firste foure
are so great, that by the space of forty miles together
they are not intermedled with the Saltwater, but
kéepe theyr swéete taste with vncorrupted sauoure.
            Through all Pontus there is great store of Beuers,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
which they call by the names of Fiber & Castor. Thys
Beaste is like an Otter, and is a very sore byter, insomuch
that if he fasten vpon a man, hee will not let goe
his holde vntill he féele the bones crash betwéene hys
téeth.
            His stones are greatly coueted for the medicinablenesse
of them, and therefore when he findeth hymselfe
put to the pinch, he byteth of his owne cods, and
eateth them vp, to the intent men should haue no good
of them when he is taken.
            
               
                  
                     •
                  ontus yeeldeth also precious stones of sundrye
sortes, which of the Countrey wee call Pontiks:
               Agats and Porphyris. for
some haue starres of the colour of Golde, and some of
the colour of bloode in them, and they are counted among
the sacred: for they are gathered rather for a
showe, then for anie vse that they serue to. They are
not besprent in droppes, but are interlyned with long
strokes of sundry colours.
         
         
            
            CAP. XXIII.
            Of the Ryuer Hypanis, and the Fountaine
Exampeus.
            
               
                  THe Ryuer Hypanis
               
springeth among the
They are nowe a part of Moscouia. 
               Auchets. It is the prince
of Riuers in Scythia, pure
and verye wholesome to
drink
                  •
               , vntill such tim
                  •
                as
it entr
                  •
               th into the bo
                  ••
               ers
of theMay be interp
                     •
                  eted Fayrfeete they are also a people of Mos
                  
                     •
                  ouia. 
               Ca
                     ••
                  pods, where
the Fountaine Exampeus
(which is iustly defamed for the bytternesse of hys
spring) béeing mingled wyth the cléere streame, inferteth
the Riuer with hys fault, so that hee falleth into
the Sea vnlike to himselfe.
            Héereuppon groweth diuersitie of opinions among
folke concerning Hypanis. For they that know hym
at the beginning, doo prayse him: and they that tast of
hym at the ende haue good cause to curse hym.
         
         
            
            CAP. XXIIII.
            Of the Ryuer Bo
                  •
               isthenes, and the people that dwell
thereby: of the nature of dogges: of the manners
of the Scythians: of the precious
stones called the Emerawd,
Cyanie and Crystall.
            
               
                  WIthin the Countrey
of theNepar. The Neuers are now a part of Moscouia. 
               Neuers springeth
the RyuerThe manners and customes of the auncient Moscouites. 
               Borysthenes,
wherein are Fyshes of
excellent taste, without any
bones, hauing nothing but
very tender grystlys. But
the Neuers (as wee haue
heard) in the
                  •
                Sommertime
are trans-formed into Wolues: and afterward when
they haue passed a certaine time limitted for the continuaunce
in that state, they returne to theyr former
shape againe. The God of this people is Mars: in
st
                  •
               dde of Images they worshippe Swordes: they
off
                  •
               r menne in Sacrifice and wyth theyr boanes

                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  ••
               re to burne the Sacrifices wy
                  •
               hal
                  •
               . Next
Neyghbours to these are theThese were afterward called Getes, and nowe are Tartarians. 
               Gelones: They make
bothe rayment for themselues and furniture for their
horses of theyr enemyes shinnes.
            
               Uppon the Gelones border theThese also are now Tartaria
                     •
                  s 
               Agathyrses,
painting their faces with a blewe colour, and dying
theyr hayre into a blewe colour. And this is not doone
without a difference. For the better man he is, y• déeper
colour he dyeth himselfe: so that it is a token of
lowe degrée to bee lightlie painted. After them are the
Meneaters or Cannibals. 
               Anthropophags, who like cursed caytiues féede on
Mans fleshe. The which custome of that wicked nation,
the Countryes adioyning beare witnesse of, by lying
continuallie waste, the inhabiters of them abandoning
them, and running away for feare of that cruell
outrage: and this is the cause that from thence to
the sea which they cal Tabis al along that coast which
lyeth toward the Northeast, the land is vtterly without
inhabiter and altogether wyldernesse, vntill yee
come to the Seres.
            
            The Chalibyes and Dahyes which inhabit a part
of that Scythia that is in Asia, doo differ nothing in
cruelnesse from the most outragious of all. But theTheyr Countrey is now called Zuira & Seroan.
               Albanes inhabiters of the Seacoast by the Caspian
Sea, who will haue themselues thought to be the posteritie
of Iason) are borne with white hayre, and haue
hore heads as soone as theyr hayre buddeth, the colour
whereof hath) giuen name to the nation. The apple of
theyr eyes is of colour bright gray, and therefore they
sée better by night then by day. The dogges that are
bredde in this Countrey,Wonderful dogs & of the nature and property of dogs in general. excell all other beastes, for
they pull downe Bulles, kill Lyons, and hold whatsoeuer
they are put at. In consideration whereof, they
deserued to be spoken of in Chronicles. We read that
as Alexander was going toward Inde the King of Albanie
sent him two dogs for a present. Of which the
one so disdained Swine and Beares brought before
him, that béeing offended with the basenes of the pray
he lay still a great while and would not once 
                  •
               turre at

them: Alexander thinking him to bee but a cowardly
curre (because he knewe not hys properties) commanded
him to be killed. But the other at the information
of them that brought the present, béeing put to a Lyon
kylled him. And anon after, spying an Oliphant, hee
made a great leaping and skypping for ioy, and beeing
put to him, first tyred the Beaste with cunning fyght,
and afterward (to the great feare of them that looked
on) pulled him downe to the grounde. These kinde of
Dogs groweth to a very large syse, and make a farre
terribler noyse in theyr barking, then is the roaringe
of a Lyon.
            These things are peculiar to y• dogs of Albanie:
               Examples of the loue of dogges toward theyr Masters. the
rest are common to all dogges. All dogs generally doo
loue their Maisters, as is manifest by examples. InIt is nowe called Albanie
               Epyre a dogge descrying the murtherer of his Master
in a great thronge, bewrayed him by barking. When
Iason of Lycia was slayne, hys dogge forsaking meate
dyed for hunger. When the fire was kindled wherein
the corse of King Lysimachus should be burned, his dog
threwe himselfe into the flame, & was consumed wyth
him. Two hundred dogs brought home the King of
the Garamants out of exile, and ouercame them in battell
that withstoode them. The Colophonians & Castabalenses
carryed dogges with them to the warres,Dogs vsed in battell.
and made theyr foreward alwayes of them. In the
time that Appius Iunius, and Publius Silius were Consulles,
a dogge folowed his Master that was condemned
to pryson, and could not bee driuen away: and anone
after, when he was executed, hee followed howling
after him. And when the people of Rome for pittie
gaue him meate, he carryed and layd it to his dead
Masters mouth. Lastly when the carkasse was caste
into Tiber, he swamme to it, and endeuoured to beare
it aboue the streame. Onely dogges know their owne

names, and remember the wales that they haue gone.
The Indians when their Bitches goe proud, tie them
in the Forrestes to haue them limed by Tygers: of
whom they caste away the firste litter, and likewise
the seconde, as the which will serue to no purpose because
of their excéeding cruelnesse: the thyrde they
kéepe vppe. The dogs of Aegypt neuer lap of the Nyle
but running, for auoyding the Crocodiles which lye
in wait for thē. Among the Anthropophags in ye part
of Asia are numbred the Essedons, who likewise are
embrewed with the same vngracious foode. It is the
manner of the Essedons to follow the corses of theyr
Parents singing:The Essedons deuourers of mans fleshe. and calling together a knot of their
next Neighbours, to teare the carkesses a sunder with
their téeth, & dressing them with other flesh of beastes,
to make a feast with them. The skulles of them th
                  •
               y
binde about with Golde, and vse them as mazers to
drinke in. The Scythotaurians offer vppe straungers
in sacrifice. TheGr
                     •
                  syers. 
               Nomades giue themselues to grazing.
            TheTillmen. 
               Georges that are situate in Europe occupie
Tillage. The Axiaks béeing likewise situate in
Europe, neyther couet other mens goods, nor set anye
store by their owne. The Satarches vtterly conden
                  •
               
               ning
the vse of Gold and Siluer, haue banished couetousnes
out of their Cōmon weale for euer. The Scythians
that dwell more into the firme lande, liue much
more straightlie. They kéepe in Caues: they make
themselues drinking Cuppes, not as the Essedons do,
but of the skulls of their enemies: they loue fighting:
they sucke the blood out of the woundes of them that
are slayne:The manners of the Vplandish Tartarians in olde time. their reputation encreaseth by the number
of slaughters, from which it is a reproche among
them to haue cléere handes: they make leagues by
drinking eche of others bloode: wherein they not onely

keepe the custome of theyr owne Countrey, but
also borrowe the manner of the Medes. In that warre
that was helde the fortie and nine Olympiade, which
was the sixe hundred and fourth yéere after the wynning
of Troy, betwéene Alyattes King of Lydia, and
Astiages King of Media, the league was confirmed after
the same fashion. Amphitus and Telchius, the wagoners
of Castor and Pollux, buildedSebast
                     •
                  ople. 
               Dioscorias the
chiefe Cittie of Colchos, from whence the nation of
the Henioches had their beginning. Beyond the Sauromats
that are in Asia, where Methridates hid himselfe,
and from whence the Medes had theyr originall.
            The Thalians march vpō those nations, which East
ward lie vpon the entring of the Caspian Sea,The wonderfull nature of the enterie into the Caspian Sea. which
entrance (after a maruellous manner) dooth emptye

                  〈◊〉
               , and encrease by drowght. Out of the Mountains
of ye 
               Henioches issueth Araxes, & out of ye mountaines
of the Moscouits, issueth Phasis.
               Araxes. But Araxes
rayseth his head a little way from the spring of Euphrates,
and from thence runneth into the Caspian
Sea. The Arimaspes,
               The Arimaspes. which are 
                  •
               ituat about Gesglithron,
are a people that haue but one eye. Bey
                  •
               nde
them and the Mountaine Ryphey is a Countrey continually
c
                  •
               uered with Snowe, calledIt may be englished Fetherlande. 
               Pteropheron.
For the incessant falling of the hore frosts and Snow
maketh there a likelihood of fethers: a damned parte
of the worlde is it, and drowned by nature it selfe in
the clowde of endlesse darknes, and vtterly shut vppe
in extreame colde as in a pryson, euen vnder the very
Northpole. Onelie of all Landes it knoweth no distinction
of times, neyther receyueth it any thynge
else of the ayre, then euerlastyng Winter. In the
the Asiatik Scythia are rich Lands, but notwythstanding
vninhabitable.
            
               For wheras they abound in gold and precious stones:
the Gryffons possesse all,Gryffons. a most fierce kinde of foule,
and cruell beyond all cruelnesse: whose outragiousnesse
is such a stoppe to all commers, that hardlie and
seldome arryue any there: for as soone as they sée thē
they teare them in péeces, as creatures made of purpose
to punish the rashnesse of couetous folke.
            The Arymaspes fight with them to get away theyr
precious stones, the natures whereof I wyll not refuse
to treate of. Thys Land is the natiue soyle of the
Emerawdes,
               Emerawdes to which Theophrast gyueth the thyrd
place of estimation among precious stones. For although
there be of them in Aegypt, at Chalcedon, in
Media, and about Lacedemon, yet those of Scythia are
of chiefest reputation. The eye canne beholde nothing
more pleasaunt, nor nothing more wholesome than
them, first they glister gréene aboue the moyste grasse,
and aboue the hearbes that are in the Ryuers, and secondlie
with the mildnes of theyr colour, they refresh
the eyes that are wearyed with beholding other thinges.
For they relieue and sharpen the sight that was
dymmed or dulled wt the glosse of another stone. And
there is none other cause why men think it not good to
haue ought ingraued in them, but least the beautye of
them should be perished wyth the cuttings of imagry:
albeit that the right Emerawd wyll hardly bee cutte.
They are tyred in this wise: if a man may sée throgh
them, if béeing rounde they caste theyr colour vpon the
things that are next them by reflexion of the ayre, or if
béeing holow they resemble the faces of them that beholde
them, or if neyther in the shaddowe nor by candlelight,
nor in the sunnelight is founde any alteration
in them. Neuerthelesse they are of the best fashyon,
which are plaine and leuell long. They are founde
when the Eastern wyndes called Etesiae
               Etesia
                     •
                  
                doo blowe, for

then the wynde discouereth the ground, and they glyster
through the fine sande easily: for those Easterne
wyndes doo verie much remooue the sandes. Other of
lesse valew appeare in the seames of stones in Rocks,
or in brassemynes, which they call brazen Emerawds.
The refuse sort of them haue certaine pranes within,
like eyther to leade, or to hayre, or to salt. They are
eased with Uineger, but they are much better amended
with gréene Oyle, although they be spotted of nature.Cyanies.
And the best sort of the stone called Cyanie commeth
out of Scythia, it is of the colour of a bright Azure.
They that be skilful Iewellers make two kinds
of it, the Male and Female.This should seeme to be the stone called Lapis Lazulus. The Females are of
shéere brightnesse: but the Males are fretted wyth
little sparkes beautifull to beholde, hauing as it were
dust of golde scattered betwixt them. There is also
Crystall,Crystall. which although the greater part of Europe,
and some part of Asia also doo yéelde, yet Scythia yéeldeth
the best.
            It is much vsed to make drinking Glasses of, for
it abydeth heate best, although it cannot well suffer any
thyng but cold. It is found sixe cornered. They that
choose it, couet the purest that no rednesse, no clowdynesse,
nor frothinesse, hinder a man to sée through it:
and moreouer that the ouermuch hardnes therof maketh
it not subiect to brittlenes. Some think y• Ise congealeth
and hardneth into Crystall, but y• is false. For
if it were so, neither Alaband of Asia, nor the Ile of
Cyprus shoulde engender thys kinde of stuffe, forasmuch
as the heate in those Countreys is mos
                  •
               e ve
                  ••
               
               ment.
Liuia the wyfe of Augustus dedicated among
the gifts of the Capitoll, a Crystall of a hundred and
fiftie pounde weight.
         
         
            
            CAP. XXV.
            Of the people called Hiperboreans.
            
               
                  SVndrye thinges
that haue béene reported of
the Hyperboreans had béen
but a fable and a flying tale
if ye thinges that haue come
from thence vnto vs hadde
béene beléened rashlie. But
séeing the best Authors and
such as are of sufficient credite
doo agrée in one constant report, no man néedes to
feare any falshod.The Hiperboreans. Of the Hyperboreans they speake
in this wise. They inhabite almost the Pteropheron,
which wee heare sa
                  •
               e lyeth beyond the North pole, a
most blessed Nation. They ascribe it rather vnto Asia
then vnto Europe, and some doo place it midwaie
betwéene the Sunne rysing and the Sunne sette, that
is to wete, betwéene the West of the Antipodes, and
our Easte, which thing reason reprooueth, considering
what a waste Sea runneth betwéene the two worlds.
They are therefore in Europe, and among them are
thought to be the poles of the worlde, and ye vttermost
circuit of the starres, and halfe yéere light, lacking the
Sunne but one day. Howbeit, there are that think the
Sunne riseth not day by daie to them as it doth to vs,
but that it riseth in the springtime, & goeth not downe
againe before the fall of the leafe, so that they haue cō
               tinuall
daie by the space of sixe monthes together, and
by the space of other sixe moneths continuall night.
The aire is very milde, the blasts wholesome, and no

hurtfull winde. Their houses are the wylde fieldes or
the woods, and the trées yéelde them foode from daie to
daie. They knowe no debate, they are not troubled
with diseases, all men haue one desire, which is to liue
innocentlie. They hast death, and by wilfull fordooing
thēselues, preuent the long taryance of their decease.
For when they haue liued as long as they wold desire,
then feasting and annointing themselues, they throwe
themselues headlong from some knowne Rocke into
the déepe Sea, and they beléeue this to be the best kind
of buriall. The report goeth also, that they were accustomably
wont to send the first fruits of their increase
to Apollo of Delos, by the handes of their most chaste
Maydens. But for because those Maides through the
trecherie of them in whose houses they lodged, returned
not vndefiled: they erected a Bishopricke wythin
their owne Countrie for that deuotions sake, for the
performance whereof they were faine before to sende
abroade.
         
         
            CAP. XXVI.
            Of the Arimphaeans, of the Caspian Sea, of the
Tygers, Panthers, and Pards.
            
               
                  ANother Nation
there is in Asia furthest
Northeast, where the ridge
of the Mountaine Ryphey
fayleth, like the Hyperboreans,
which are called Arimpheans.
               
                  
                     •
                  he Arymphae
                  
                     •
                  an
                     •
                  .
These also delight
in the leauie woodes,
and féede vpon berryes.
            
               The Men and women are both alike weary of their
bayre, and therefore bothe sexes of them d
                  •
               o poll theyr
heades. They loue quietnes and not to doo anie harme
They are counted holie, and euen the wildest nations
that be, doo thinke it an offence to touch them. Whosoeuer
feareth anie daunger among his owne Countrimen,The Cimmerians and Amazons.
if he flye to the Arimphaeans, hee is as safe as in
a Sanctuarie. Beyond these are the Cimmerians, and
the nation of the Amazons, extending to the Caspian
Sea, which slyding along the backe part of Asia, faleth
into the Scythish Ocean.Hircanie. A great way of from thence
is the mouth of the Ryuer Oxus: and there inhabite
the Hircans, a Country full of rowgh woods, plentiful
of cruell wilde Beastes, and stored aboundantly with
Tygers,Of Tygers. a kinde of Beastes notable for the goodlye
spottes wherewith their coates are powdred, and for
theyr swiftnes.
            Their colour is a bright yellowe: which béeing
powdred with drops of black, make a very trim show
by reason of the varietie therof. I am not able to say
whither it be their nimblenesse or their eagernes that
furthereth their swiftnes. For nothing is so long but
they passe it ouer in short time: nothing is gone so
farre afore them but they ouertake it by and by. But
most of all they show what they are able to doo, when
they haue littered, and when they pursue them that
haue stolne away their whelps. For though poste horses
be layd by the way, and that they worke neuer so
subtillie to goe cléere away with theyr bootie, yet if
the Sea 
                  •
               e not at hand to rescue them, all their endeuour
is in vaine. And it is noted in them oftentimes,
that if perchaunce they sée the stealers that haue carryed
away their welppes sayling away againe: after
they haue raged in vaine, they cast themselues headlong
into the Sea, as it were to punish their owne

slownesse by wylful drowning themselues, and yet of
all their whelps (which are manie in number) scarsely
may one be cō
               
                  •
               eied awaie. Of Panthers also is great
store in Hyrcanie,
               Panther
                     •
                  . which are spotted with little round
specks, in such sort that the hayre of their skins, which
is either white or of a skye colour, is beset with round
eyes of yellow. It is reported that cattell are wonderfullie
delighted with the sent & beholding of thē, and
that as soone as they perceiue them, they hearde together
in hast, and are not afraid but onely of the grimnesse
of their looke. For which cause the Panthers hiding
their heads,A Panther and a Lybard is all one kinde of Beaste sette forth the rest of their bodyes to
looke vpon, to the intent that when the Cattell are astonied
in gazing, they may fall vpon them and deuour
them without danger.
            But the Hyrcans (as mans nature is euer full of
deuises) kill them more commonly with poyson then
with weapon. They stéepe flesh in ye iuyce of Lybardbane,This Hearbe i
                     •
                   also called Woolfwort
and caste it in the waies where diuers pathes
meete: the which as soone as the Panthers haue eaten,
by & by their throats are troubled with ye squince,
and therfore the wéede is called in Gréeke Pardalianches.
But the Panthers against this venome deuoure
mans dunge, and so by a remedie of their own finding
withstande their destruction. They are very long in
dying: in so much that they liue a greate while after
that their bowels are taken out. In these wooddy coū
               tries,
are also Lybards a second kind of Panthers,Lybarde
                     •
                  
                sufficientlie
knowne, and therfore not to be entreated of
with further circumstaunce. Betwéene these and the
Lyonesses matching against kinde, are engendred bastarde
Lyons without force or courage.
         
         
            
            CAP. XXVII.
            From whence the Midland Seas haue theyr
beginning.
            
               
                  FOrasmuch as we
are in the matters of Pontus,
it is not to bee omitted
from whence the Mydland
Seas doo rayse theyr heads.
For some are of opiniō that
they take their beginning
at the streights of Marrok,
and that they haue none other
originall than the waues of the Ocean breaking
in at that place, the liuely operation wherof sheading
it selfe abroade, canseth the flowings & ebbings of the
tydes on diuers coasts of the mayneland; as for examples
sake in a part of Italy. They that are of the contrarie
opinion, say how all that flowing cōmeth from
the mouth of Pontus: and thys they auouche wyth no
tryfling argument, because the tyde that commeth out
of Pontus neuer ebbeth backe againe.
         
         
            CAP. XXVIII.
            Of certaine Iles in Scythia.
            
               
                  FOurscore myles from
the Bosphor of Thrace, is y• Ile of the
Apollonits, situate on thys side Ister, frō
whence Marcus Lucullus brought vnto
vs the Apollo of the Capitoll.
            
               Against the mouth ofNow called Nepar. 
               Borysthenes is the Iland of
Achilles, with a Church wherein commeth no byrde:
and if any come by chaunce, shee flyeth away againe
with all the spéede she can make.
         
         
            CAP. XXIX.
            Of the North Ocean, of the Caspian Sea, and
of the Iland Baltia,
            
               
                  THe North Ocean
on that part where Paropamisus
a Ryuer of Scythia
washeth into it,The Frozen Sea. is named
of Hecataeus Amalchium:
which in ye language
of that nation, signifieth the
Frozen sea. Phylaemon saith,
that from the Cimbrians to
the Promontorie Rubeas, it is called Morimarusa,
which is as much to saie, as the dead Sea. Whatsoeuer
is beyonde Rubeas is called Cronium. That the
Caspian Sea on the otherside of Pontus beyonde the
Massagets and the Scythians called Apellaeans,
               The water of the Caspian Sea is sweete of taste. in the
coast of Asia, is swéete of taste, it was tried by Alexander
the great, and afterwarde by Pomp
                     •
                  y the great,
who in his warres against Methridates (as Varro
one of his fellow Souldiours reporteth) would néedes
knowe whither it were true or no by drinking of it
himselfe. It is reported that it commeth so to passe by
reason of the number of Riuers, whereof there falleth
such a sort into it, that they alter the nature of ye Sea.
            
               I must not let passe, that at the same time the said
Alexander was able to come in eyght daies out of
Inde from Bactria vnto the Riuer I
                     •
                  arus, which runneth
into the Riuer Oxus, and from thence to ye 
               Caspian
sea, and so by the Caspian to passe into y• streame
of the Ryuer Cyrus which runneth betwéene the marches
of Iberia and Armenie. From Cyrus also conueying
his Shippes after him by lande, hee came in fiue
daies at the most to the Channell of Phasis: at whose
issue it is manifestlie proued, that those which come
out of Inde may be brought into Pontus. Xenophon of
Lampsacum affirmeth that we may saile from the sea
coast of Scythia, to the IlandeIt is nowe found to be many Ilands. 
               Baltia in thrée dayes,
the greatnesse whereof is vnmeasurable, and almoste
like vnto a maine land, from whence it is not farre to
the Ilands called Oones, the inhabiters whereof, liue
by egges of Sea-foules, and the séede of wylde Dates:
and that other Iles adioyning therevnto doo liue after
the same sort: or which, the people that are called
They may be called Egge Ilands. 
               Hyppopodes,
               Hors-feete béeing shaped in all points like men
downe to the instep, haue féete like horses. He sayth also
howe there are other Ilandes, and a nation called
Phanesians, whose eares are of such an vnmeasurable
syse, that they couer the rest of theyr bodyes with thē,
and néede none other apparrell to clothe theyr limbes
with,Vnmeasurable cares. then theyr owne flappes.
         
         
            
            CAP. XXX.
            Of Harts and Tragelaph
                  •
               s.
            
               
                  BBefore we steppe
aside frō 
               Scythia, me thinks
it a matter of conscience, to
passe ouer what beastes are
peculiar to that Countrey.
There is greate store of
Harts in this lande, & therefore
we wil treate of HartsOf the nature of Harts,
firste. The male Déere of
this kinde, when rutting time comes, are madd fonde
ouer the Hyndes. Although the Hyndes bee bukt before,
yet are they not wyth fawne vntill the star Arcturus
ryse, neither doo they bring vp their yong 
                  •
               alues
at aduenture. For they hyde them very charily while
they be yong, and beate them with their féete to make
them lye still in the thicke bushes or wéedes where
they haue laid them. When their strength will serue
them to followe about, they teache them to runne by
exercise, and enure them to leape through places.
            When they heare the opening of a Hound, they flie
with the winde, that the sent may goe away with thē.
They like well the noyse of pypes. When their eares
stande vp, they heare verie lightly, and when they bée
down, they heare nothing at all. They gaze at al thinges,
and therfore it is an easie matter to haue a shoote
at them. If they swymme ouer the Seas, they aime
to lande, not by sight but by smelling. They sette the
weakest behind, and beare vp the heade
                  •
                of them that
are wearie vpon theyr haunches by turnes. Of theyr

hornes the right hath moste efficacie in Medicine. If
thou wilt driue away Serpents, burne which of them
thou wilt, and besides that, the fume that ryseth of the
burning thereof, will euidentlie bewray if the falling
sicknesse be in anie bodie. According to their yéeres the
tynes of their hornes increase, which multiplying cō
               tinueth
sixe yéeres. For after that time, their hornes
cannot increase in number of tynes, but they may bee
thicker or broader palmed. If they bee gelded theyr
hornes neuer increase, neyther doo they caste them.
            Their téeth bewray their yéeres: for if they haue
few or none then they be olde. They swallowe Serpents,
and with the breath of theyr nostrells draw thē
out of their l
                  •
               rking hooles.The Hearbe Dittayne. The hearbe Dyttaine they
brought to light, while by féeding theron they cast out
arrowes & darts sticking in their bodyes. The hearbe
also which men call an Artechoke they doo eate of against
hurtfull wéedes.The Artichoke The curds that are in ye maw
of one of their Fawnes killed in his dammes belly, is
a wonderfull preseruatiue against poyson.A speciall preseruatiue against poyson. It is manifestlie
knowne, that they are neuer troubled with any
Feuer: and therefore oyntments made of their marroe,
asswage the burning fits of those that haue the Agew.A remedy against the burning Ague.
We reade that very many which were wont to
breake their fast a mornings with redde Déere liued
a long time, and neuer hadde Ague: but it taketh not
effect, vnlesse the Hart be killed at one stripe. To dyscerne
the continuaunce of theyr life, great Alexander
put collers about many Stagg
                  •
               s ne
                  •
               kes, which were
caught a hundred yéeres after, & yet had not any lykelihoode
of age in them. In maner of the same shape are
those which the Greekes call Tragelaphes,
               Gotebucks (but they
are not to be séene els where thē about Phasis) sauing
that they haue long haire on their shoulders, and long
rough beards vnder their chynnes.
         
         
            
            CAP. XXXI.
            Of Germanie, and the wonderfull byrdes therein,
and of the Bugles, Vres▪ and Alces.
wylde Beastes.
            
               
                  GErmanie takes his
               
beginning at y• Mountaine
Seuo which is greate of it
selfe,The bo
                     •
                  nds the auncient Germani
                     •
                  
                and not lesse then the
Hilles of Ryphey. This hill
is inhabited by theThey were Indwellers. 
               Ingeuons,
at whom first next after
the Scithians beginneth
the name of Germaines. It
is a land rich of men, and inhabited with peoples innumerable
and altogether sauage. It stretcheth from the
Forrest ofHertswalde 
               Hercinia, to the Hils of Sarmatia. Where
it beginneth it is watred with Danow, and where it
endeth it is watred with the Rhyne. Out of the inward
parts thereof,Elb. 
               Albis, Guttallus, andWixell. Strange byrd
                     •
                  
                
               Vistula
very déepe Ryuers runne into the Ocean. The Forrest
of Hertswald bréedeth byrds, whose 
                  •
               ethers shyne
and giue light in the darke, though the night be neuer
so close and clowdy. And therefore men of that Countrey,
doo for the most parte so laye theyr outgoings by
night, that they may vse thē for a helpe to direct theyr
iourney by: and casting them before them in ye open
pathes, doo finde howe to kéepe theyr way by the glystring
of those feathers, which shewe them which
way to goe. In this Region and in al the North coast,The be also c
                     •
                  lled Buffles or wylde Oxen
there is verye greate store of Bugles: which are
in manner lyke Oxen, brystled, wyth rough manes
on their neckes, they are farre more swyfter then

Bulles, and which béeing taken wil not by any mean
                  •
               
be made to come to hand. There are also Ures which
the vnskilfull common sort cal Buffles, wheras Buffles
are bredde in Affrick almoste altogether like a
Hart.Vres. But these which we call Ures haue hornes like
Bulles, of such length, that for the great receit therof,
they are taken to make Cuppes for Kinges to drinke
in. There is also a beast called Alce much resembling
a Mule,Al
                     ••
                  . with such a long vpper lippe, that he cannot
féede but he must goe backward.
         
         
            CAP. XXXII.
            Of the Ilande Scandinauia, of Amber, of the
stone Callais, and of the precious stone
called Ceraunius.
            
               
                  OVer against Germanie
is the Ilande Scandinauia,
               Sconeland
which bréedeth a beast
Munster taketh this beast to be the Alce much resembling an Alce,
which like ye Oliphant boweth
not the nether ioyntes of
his legs, and therefore lyeth
not downe when he sléepeth,
but resteth himselfe when he
is drowsie, against a Trée, the which is sawne almost
a sunder, ready to fall, that when the beast leaneth to
his accustomed staie, he may fall downe: and so is hee
caught, for otherwise it is a hard matter to catch hym
by hand. For although hys ioynts be so stiffe, yet is he
of incomparable swiftnesse.
            
               Of the Germaine Iles, the greatest is Scandinauia,
but there is nothing in it great sauing it selfe. The Ilande
Now called Sudawe, Of Amber, 
               Glessaria yéeldeth Crystall, and also Amber,
which the Germaines in their Country spéeche call
Glesse. The qualitie of this kinde of stuffe is touched
briefly before. But at such time as Germanicus Caesar
searched all the corners of Germanie, there was found
a Trée of the kind of Pynes, out of whose pyth euerie
haruest issued a Gumme. Ye may vnderstande by the
That is to say by the latin name of it, which is Succinum. name of it, that it is the iuyce of a Trée: and if yee
burne it, the smell will bewray y• it comes of a Pyne
Trée. It is woorth the labour to procéede somewhat
further, least men might surmise that the woods about
Po, did wéepe stones. The barbarous nation brought
Amber into Illyrik, which through intercourse of
Merchandise with the Paunonians, came to ye handes
of the Italians beyond the Po, nowe because our Men
sawe it there firste, they beléeued it had also growne
there. Through the bounteousnesse of the Emperour
Nero, no attire was gorgeous without Amber, which
was no hard matter for him to doo, sithence that at the
same time, the King of Germanie sent him thrée and
thirtie thousande pounde thereof for a present. At the
first it groweth rugged and with a barke, and afterward
it is boyled in the greace of a sucking Pigg▪ and
and so is pollished to that brightnesse that wee sée. According
to ye colour, it hath diuers names. It is called
Melleum and Phaleruum, bothe which names it hath
giuen vnto it for the likenesse it hath to that kinde of
wine, or to honnie. It is manifest that it gathereth
vp leaues and draweth chaffe vnto it: and the arte of
phisicke hath taught, that it remedieth manie inconueniences
of men. Inde also hath Amber, but Germanie
hath the best, and best store. Because we were come to
the Ile of Glessaria, we began with Amber: for in the

i
                  •
               ner parts of Germanie is founde a stone called Callais,
               The stone Callais.
which men preferre before the precious stones of
Arabie: for it passeth them in beautie. The Arabians
saie it is not found anie where but in the nestes of the
birds which they callThey may bee interpreted black 
                     •
                  oppes. 
               Melancoryphes: which no mā
beléeueth, forasmuch as they are to be found in the Regions
of Germanie among stones, although very rarelie.
In respect of the estimation and value of the Emerawd,
it is of colour a faint gréene. Nothing dooth better
beséeme golde. Furthermore, of the Ceraunies are
diuers sorts,The Ceraunie or thunderstone. that of Germanie is white, with a bright
blew: and if yée haue it abroade, it draweth the brightnes
of the starres to it.
         
         
            CAP. XXXIII.
            Of Gallia, of the Countryes of Rhetia and Noricum,
of Pannonie and Masia, and of the
medicinable Oyle.
            
               
                  CAllia is situat betwéene
the Ryuer Rhyne
and the Mountaines Pyrenyes,
               The more part of it is now the Realme of Fraunce.
and betwéene the
Ocean and y• Mountaines
The Mountaine of Geneua, or the Mountaines of Auuerne. 
               Gebenua andThe Mountaine of Saint Claude. 
               Iura, fortunate
for the fatnes of the
soyle, and rich of increase of
fruits, in many places also
replenished with Uines and Orchyardes, and blessed
with store of all things for the behoofe of manne. It is
well watred with Ryuers and Fountaines, & of those
Fountaines some in times past sacred and hote.
            
               It is ill spoken of for the custome of the inhabiters,
who (as is reported) for I auouch not my selfe to haue
had triall of the truth, after a detestable manner, (not
to the honor, but rather to the iniurie of Religion,) offer
men in sacrifice. Out of this Country yée may goe
into what part of the world yée wil: Into Spayne and
Italy both by sea and lande: into Affrick by sea onely.
If ye iourney into Thrace, yée must come to the fayre
and fruitfull fieldes ofSweuia. 
               Rhetia, renowmed with the
LakeThe Lake of Constance. 
               Brigantine: from thence intoBauyer. 
               Noricum, a
colde Countrey and lesse fruitfull, but where it is far
from the Alpes verie plentifull: ThenAustrich an
                     •
                   Hungary 
               Pannonie,
puissaunt in men, the soyle champion and rich, and inclosed
with the two famous Riuers Drauus & Sauus,
and lastlie theWalachy 
               Maesians which our auncestors called
worthelie the Gardner of Ceres. In one part wherof,A wonderfull Oyle.
(namelie of that which is toward Pontus) there groweth

                  〈◊〉
                hear
                  •
               e wherwith they make an Oyle that they
call the Chirurgions Oyle. This béeing sette a fire, if
yée goe about to quench it with water, burneth the
more, and cannot bee put out otherwyse then by casting
on of duste.
         
         
            CAP. XXXIIII.
            Of Britaine and the other Iles about it, of the
stone called Geate.
            
               
                  THe Sea coast of Gallia
had béene the ende of the worlde,Britayne which nowe is England & Scotland but
that the Ile of Brytaine for the largenesse
therof euery way, deserueth the
name almoste of an other Worlde,

for it is in length eyght hundred myles and more, so
we measure it to the angle ofCaten
                     •
                  sse 
               Calydon, in which
nooke an Altar engrauen with Gréeke Letters for a
vowe, beareth witnes that Vlisses arriued at Calydon.
It is enuironed with many Iles, and those not vnrenowmed:
wherof Ireland draweth néerest to it in bygnesse,Ireland and the manners of the Irish men in old time, not altogether altered to thys day.
vnciuill for the sauage manners of the inhabiters,
but otherwise so full of fat pasture, that if theyr
Cattell in Sommer season be not now and then kept
from féeding, they should run in daunger of bursting.
There are no Snakes, and fewe byrdes: the people
are harbourlesse, and warlike. When they haue ouercome
theyr enemies, they first be sméere their faces in
the blood of them that be slayne, and then drinke of it.
Be it right or be it wrong, all is one to thē. If a Woman
be deliuered of a manchilde, shee layes his firste
meate vppon her Husbands sworde, and putting it
softlie to his pretie mouth, giueth him the first h
                  •
               msel
                  •
               
of his foode vppon the very point of the weapon, praying
(according to the manner of their Countrey) that
he may not otherwise come to his death, then in battel
and among weapons. They that loue to bee fine, doo
trimme the hylts of theyr Swords with the téeth of
monsters that swymme in the Sea: for they bee as
white and as cléere as Iuorie. For the men doo chiefly
glorie in the beautie of their Armour. There is not anie
Bée among them: and if a man bring of the duste
or the stones from thence, and strow them among Bée
hyues,This is founde nowe to be contrarie. the swarmes forsake ye combes. The Sea that
is betwéene Ireland and Brytaine, béeing full of shallowes
and rough all the yéere long, cannot be sayled
but a fewe dayes in the Sommertime. They sayle in
Kéeles of wicker doone ouer with Neats leather. How
long soeuer their passage continueth, the passengers
abstaine from meate. Such as haue discussed the cercertaintie

of the matter according to reason, haue estéemed
the breadth of that narrow Sea, to be a hundred
and twentie miles. The troublous Sea also deuideth
theIt should seem
                     •
                   to be the Ile of Manne. Iland of the Silures, from the coast of Brytaine:
the men of which Ile kéepe their olde customes euen
vnto this day. They vtterlie refuse buying and selling
for money, and giue one thing for another, prouiding
things necessary, rather by exchaunge then for ready
mony. They worshyppe the Gods very deuoutly. As
well the Women as the Men boast of the knowledge
of prophesying.
            The IleThe Ile of Wyght. 
               Thanatos is beaten vpon with y• French
Sea, and is deuided from Brytaine with a verye narrowe
cutte, luckie for corne fieldes and fatte soyle, and
not onely healthful to it selfe, but also to other places.
For inasmuch as there is no snake créeping there, the
earth thereof to what place soeuer it be
                  •
                carried from
thence, killeth snakes. There bee many other Iles about
Brytaine, of whichIseland. 
               Thule is ye furthest of, wherin,
at such time as the Sun is at the hyghest in Sommer,
and passeth through the signe of Cancer, there is
almost no night at all. Againe in the deade of wynter,
when the Sunne is at the lowest, the day is so shorte,
that the rysing and going downe of the Sunne is both
together. Beyond Thule wee learne is the deade and
frozen Sea. From the Promontorie of Calydon,
               Catenesse 
                     〈◊〉
                   Scotlande. to
the Iland Thule, is two dayes sayling. Next come the
Iles calledThe West Iles of Scotland, of them are now founde aboue fortie. 
               Hebudes fiue in number, the inhabiters
wherof, know not what corne meaneth, but liue onely
by fishe and milke. They are all vnder the g
                  •
               uernment
of one King. For as manie of them as bee, they
are seuered but with a narrowe groope one from another.
The King hath nothing of hys own, but taketh
of euery mans. Hee is bounde to equitie by certaine
lawes: and least he may start from right through cocouetousnes,

he 
                  •
               earneth Iustice by pouertie, as who
may haue nothing porper or peculiar to himselfe, but
is found at the charges of the Realme. Hee is not suffered
to haue anie woman to himselfe, but whomsoeuer
he hath minde vnto, he borroweth her for a tyme,
and so others by turnes. Wherby it commeth to passe
that he hath neither desire nor hope of issue. The seconde
Harborough betwéene the maine lande and the
Hebuds, is theOrkney of them be nowe xxx, 
               Orc
                     •
                  des: which are frō the Hebuds,
seauen dayes and as manie nyghts sayling. There bée
but thrée of them: no man dwelleth in thē: they haue
no 
                  〈…〉
                are ouergrowne with rushye
wéedes: and the rest of them is nothing but sand and
bare Rocks. From the Orcades vnto Thule is fyue
dayes and fiue nights sayling. But Thule is plentiful
in store of fruits that will last. Those that dwel there
doo in the b
                  •
               ginning of the spring time liue on hearbs
among Cattell, and afterward by milke, and againste
Winter they lay vppe the fruite
                  •
                of their trées. They
vse their women in common, and no manne hath any
wife. The whole circuit of B
                     •
                  itaine, is foure thousand
eyght hundred, thréescore and fiftéene miles. In which
space are great and 
                  〈…〉
                and ho
                  •
               e Bathes,Bathe
finelie kept to the vse of men, the souer 
                  〈◊〉
                of which
Bathes is the Goddesse Minerua, in whose Chappell
the fire burneth continuallie, and the 
                  •
               oles do neuer

                  •
               urne into ashes, but as soone as ye embars wexe dead,
it is turned into 
                  •
               alles of stone. Moreouer, to the intent
to passe th
                  •
                large aboundance of sundry mettals,
(wherof Britaine hath many rich veyn
                  •
               s on all sides)
Here is store of the stone called Geate,Geate and ye best kind
of it. If ye demaund ye beautie of it, it is a black Iewell:
if the qualitie, it is of no weight: if the nature, it
burneth in water, and goeth out in Oyle: if the power,
rubbe it till it be warme, and it holdeth such things

as are laide to it, as Amber doth. The Realme is partlie
inhabited of barbarous people, who euen frō theyr
childhoode haue shapes of diuers beastes cunninglye
impressed and incorporate in theyr bodyes, so that béeing
engraued as it were in theyr bowels, as the man
groweth, so growe the marks painted vpon him, neyther
doo those Nations cou
                  •
               t any thing almost to be a
greater token of patience, then y• their bodyes shoulde
by manifest scarres drinke in the déepest colour.
         
         
            CAP. XXXV.
            Of Spayne, and the Iles about it: Of the Ocean, and
the Midland Sea, and of theyr sundry names,
and what the Phylosophers haue left in
wryting, concerning the ebbing
and flowing therof.
            
               
                  NOwe that I am
come again to ye maine lād
the matters of Spayne call
me.The plentifulnes of Spayne. The coast of this Coū
               trey
is cōparable with the
the beste, and inferiour to
none, whether yee haue respecte
to the fatnesse of the
soyle, or to the reuenewes
of the Uyneyardes, or to the fruitfulnes of the Trees.
It aboundeth in all kind of things, whatsoeuer is costlie
of price, or necessary to be occupyed. If yee séeke siluer
or golde, it hath thē: the yron mynes neuer wast:
it gyueth place to no Countrey for Uines: and for Oliues
it passeth all others.
            
               It is deuided into thrée prouinces, and in the second
warres against Carthage it became ours. Nothing is
in it idle, nothing barraine. Whatsoeuer grounde is
not able to beare corne, beareth good pasture, euen the
places that are drye and barraine, yéelde stuffe for ship
men to make Cables of. They séeth not salt there, but
dyg it out of the grounde. They scoure the fine sparks
of dust and make Sinople of it, and therwith dye theyr
wooll, that they may afterward make it the better into
a scarlet engraynde.
            InPo
                     ••
                  ingale 
               Lusitania is a Promontorie which some cal
Artabrum, and some call it the Promontory of Lysbone.
It disseuereth both ayre, land, and Sea. By land
it finisheth the one side of Spayne: and it deuideth the
ayre and the Seas in such wyse, at the circuit thereof
the French Ocean and the North coast begin, and the
Athlantish Ocean and the West doo end. There is the
Cittie of Lysbone builded by V lisses: and there is the
Ryuer Tagus, preferred before other Ryuers for hys
golden sandes. In the marches of Lysbone the Mares
excéede in fruitfulnesse after a wondrous manner. For
they conceiue by the blaste of the Southwest wynde,This fable was made of the Genets because of theyr swiftnes
and theyr lust is as well spedde with the breath of the
ayre, as if they were couered wyth Horses. The Ryuer
Iberus gaue name to ye whole Realme of Spaine,
and the RyuerGranat and Andolosia. 
               Baetis to the prouince ofGuadalqueuer 
               Baetica,
bothe of them are famous streames. The Cittye Carthage
in Spayne, was builded by the Carthagenenses
of Affrick, and replenished also with people of that
Countrey. The Scipios builded Tarracon, and therefore
it is the head of the prouince calledArragon. 
               Tarraconensis.
The Seacoast of Lusitania hath greate plenty of
the precious stones calledThe thunderstone. 
               Ceraunie, which is preferred
before the Ceraunie of Inde. The colour of this
Ceraunie is like the Carbuncle: and the vertue therof

is tried by fire: the which if it be able to abide without
perrishing or blemish, it is thought to bee good against
the force of ligtning. The IlesThe Iles 
                     〈…〉
                  . 
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                rid
                  •
               s
but against y• side ofBy
                     ••
                  ay 
               Celtiberia very fertile of leade:
so 
                  〈◊〉
                also theThe 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                fortunate Iles: of which there is nothing
worth the noting saue the name onely.Euisa. 
               Ebusus,
one of the Iles called Baleares, which is distant frō
               Dianiu
                     •
                  
                sea
                  •
               en hundred furlongs, hath no Serpent,
for the soile thereof driueth away Serpents. But the
IleAdderlan
                     •
                  
                
               Colubra
                     •••
                  
                which is towarde Sucro, swarmeth
with Snakes. TheMallorca and Menorca. 
               Baleares were sometime ye king
dome of Boccharis, and there was such store of Connyes,
that they vtterlie destroyed all kinde of fruites.
At the Hearde ofGranad
                     •
                  
                
               Betica where as is the vttermoste
point of the knowne world, there is an Ilande about
seauen hundred paces from the mayne land, which the
Tyrians (because they came from the red Sea) called
Cales Male
                     •
                  
                
               Erythraea, and the people of Affrick in theyr language
called Gadir, that is to say the Hedge. There
are many monuments to prooue that Gerion dwelled
héere, albeit some think that Hercules fetched his kyne
out of another Iland, which lyeth ouer againstPortinga
                     ••
                  
                
               Lusita
                     •••
                  .
But the narrowe Sea betwéene Affricke and
Spayne, tooke his name of the Ilands calledThe streigh
                     •
                   of Gibraltar 
                     〈◊〉
                   Marocke: 
               Gades.
At that place, the Athlantish Ocean sendeth in our
Sea which deuideth the world. For the Ocean (which
the Greekes so call because of the swiftnesse thereof,)
breaking in at the Sun going downe, raseth Europe
on the left side and Affricke on the right: and hauing
cut a sunder the Mountaines Calpe and Abila (which
are called Hercules Pyllars) rusheth in betwéene the
Mores and the Spanyards. And at this streight (which
is in length fiftéene miles, and in breadth scarcely seauen,)
as it were at a gate, he openeth the barres of the
inner Sea, and wyndeth himselfe into the mydlande

coasts, which he beateth vppon from place to place, euen
vnto the East. Where it beateth vppon Spaine, it
beareth ye name of the Spanish & Balearish Sea, where
it runneth by the prouince of Narbon,
               Now the Sea of Fraunce. it is called the
Sea of Gall: thenThe Sea of Genoa. Lygusticum: & from thence to Sicill,
Tuscane, which y• 
               Greekes call Ionian, or Tyrrhaeniā,
and the Italians the nether sea. From Sicill to the
Ile of Candy it is called the sea of Sicill: from thence
to Pamphylia and the Aegiptian Sea,Now the Candian Sea, it is called the
Cretish sea. The same gull of waters wrything hys
side first into the North, and fetching great circuits by
the Greeke lands, and by Illyrik throughSaint Georges arme. 
               Hellespont
draweth into the straights of The Sea of Cō
                  stantinople. 
               Propontis: the which
Propontis disseuering Europe and Asia, extendeth to
The Sea of Zabacca. 
               Maeontis. Of the originall of the names there is no
one vniforme reason. It is called Asiaticke and Phaenician
of the Countries: Carpathian, Aegaean, Icarian,
Balearick, and Cyprian of the Ilands: Ausonian,
Dalmatian, Lygustian, and Thuscane of the nations:
Adriatish, Argolicke, Corynthian, and Tyrian of the
Townes: Myrtoan or Hellespontian of the mischances
of men: Ionian in remembraunce of a King of
that name: Bosphor of the passing ouer of an Oxe, or
of the streights which an Oxe might swim through:
of the natures of the dwellers byHarboursome 
               Euxinus, or as it
was called beforeHarbourlesse. 
               Axenus: and of the order of the
flowing Propontis. The Egyptian sea is allotted to
Asia: the Gallik sea to Europe, and the Affrick sea to
Lybia: and as the sea approcheth to any of the seueral
parts of these Countries, so taketh it name therafter.
These are in the bowels of the world. But the Ocean
beclippeth the vttermost coastes, which according to
the shoares it beateth vpon, is named Arabick, Persian,
Indian, Easterne, Serick, Hercanish, Caspian, Scythick,
German, French, or British, Athla
                     •
                  tish, Lybick
               
and Aeth
                     •
                  opick.
               Why the tydes be higher in the East parts of th
                     •
                   worlde▪
                The flowing of the tydes whereof,
doth rise exceeding high about the Sea coasts of Inde,
and make verie great breaches ther, which happeneth
eyther because the waters swelling by force of heate,
are helde vp beyond their stint, or els because that in
that part of the world. is farre greater aboundance of
springs and Ryuers. The matter is yet in question,
what should be the cause that the Ocean should swel
or why it should fal again into it selfe,Reasons of the swelling of the Ocean. considering the
s
                  •
               perfluitie thereof: and it is euident y• many things
haue béene vttered, rather to showe the wits of y• disputers,
then to the setting forth of the trueth. But to
omitte the doubtfull debatings of the Demurrers, we
haue found th
                  •
               se opinions to haue most likelihoode of
trueth. The naturall Philosophers hold opinion, that
the world is a liuing creature, and that being compact
of the diuers bodies of the Elements, it is mooued by
a soule, and gouerned by a minde: bothe which béeing
shed through all the members, doo put in vre the force
of theyr eternal
                  •
                moouing: and therefore that like as
in our bodies there is an intercourse of the breath and
the soule, so in the déepes of the Ocean, there are as it
were, certaine nostrils appointed, at which ye breache
béeing sent out, or drawne in againe, dooth one whyle
puffe vppe the Seas, and another while call thē backe
againe. But they that folow the knowledge of Astronomie,
affyrme that these goings and comminges are
mooued by the course of the Moone, and that the interchaungablenesse
of the ebbings and flowinges, depende
vppon the increasing and decreasing of her, insomuch
as they keepe not alwaies one ordinary stint,
but altar from tyme to tyme, according to her approching
or going away.
         
         
            
            CAP. XXXVI.
            of Lybia: of the Orchyardes of the Sisters called
Hesperides: and of Mount
Atlas.
            
               
                  OVt of Spayne my
next start is into Lybia.
               Of Affrick and the sundry names therof For
when yee are loosened from
Belon which is a Towne of
Betica, the next arriuall on
the furtherside of that Sea
which is thrée & thirty miles
broade, isTanger. 
               Tingie nowe a
Towne inhabited with people
of Mauritanie,
               Antaeus. wherof Antaeus was the founder.
Moreouer, because in that circuit the Sea of Aegypt
endeth, and the Sea of Lybie beginneth, it hath séemed
good to mē, to call Affrick by the name of Lybie.
Some notwithstanding haue auouched, that Lybie
was so named of Lybia, the daughter of Epaphus, and
Affrick of Afer the Sonne of Hercules the Lybian.
            
            
               Li
                     •
                  .
               Li
                     •
                  
                also another newe inhabited Towne standeth
on the same coast, where was sometime the Palace of
Antaeus: who béeing perfecter in wynding & vnwinding
of knots vpon the ground then els where, as if he
had béene the natiue Sonne of the earth, was there
vanquished and put to death by Hercules. As concerning
the Orchyardes of the Hesperides,
               The Orchards of the Hesperides. and ye waking
Dragon, least the liberty of Fame might be infringed
this is the very truth. Out of the Sea commeth a crooked
arme with so wreathed and wynding banks, that

to such as beholde the broken turnings of it a far of, it
resembleth the glyding of a Snake: and it enuironeth
the place that they called the Orchyard. Wherevppon
interpreting it to bee the kéeper of the Apples,
they opened a gappe to deuise lyes vpon. But thys Iland
so wreathed about with the wynding Channell
running forward and backward, which is situate in a
certaine circle of the Sea, hath nothing in it to prolong
the memoriall of antiquitie with, sauing a fewe
Trées like wylde Olyues, and an Altar consecrated
vnto Hercules. But this is a greater wonder then the
golden fruite Trées or the leauie gold, that though the
grounde be lower then the leuell of the Sea, yet the
tyde neuer ouerfloweth it: but the water béeing kept
off by the prouidence of nature as by a Iettie, stayeth
at the very brimme, and the waues of theyr owne accorde
stand still in a circle at the innermost brewes of
the Sea bankes: and so through the wonderfull disposition
of nature, the leuell grounde continueth styl
dry, though the Seas come falling downeward vpon
it. Upon the Ryuer Sala standeth the Towne of Sala.
From hence by the nation of the Autolians the way
lyeth to theThe deserts of Nu
                     •
                  idie wyldernes of Atlas.
            
            The Mountaine Atlas rising out of the mids of the
waste and sandy Countries,The description of Mount Atlas▪ called of those Countrimen D
                     •
                  ris. and growing into a circle
like the halfe moone, lifteth his head aboue ye c
                  •
               wdes.
Where it reacheth to the Ocean that is named after
him, no Fountaines spring out of him, but all lyeth
horrible wast, all is stéepe cliffs and Rocks all is loth
some and barraine: the grounde bare, and no grasse
growing thereon. But where he turneth backe to Affrick
warde, he is rich of all kinde of fruites springing
of theyr owne accorde, and he is shadowed with
bygh Trées, the sent whereof is ranke, and ye leaues
like Cypresse leaues, and they are couered with a kind

ofIt shoulde seeme to be Cotton. The herbe Fupho
                     •
                  bia which some suppose to bee Eybright, downe, of no lesse value then silke. On that side also
groweth plentiously the hearbe 
                  
                     ••
                  phrobia, ye iuyce
whereof cléereth the eye sight, and many wayes preserueth
health, and greatly expulseth the force of venims.
The top of this hyll is euermore couered wyth
snowe, the launes thereof are haunted with foure footed
beastes, and Serpents, wyld beastes & Olyphants
together. All day long there is no noyse▪ but al is whist
not without an horror. But in the night time he glystreth
wyth fires,These seeme to be all one wyth the Fayries which appeared to men in the time of popyshe darknesse. and rings with the noyse that the
Aegyptians make in dauncing on a ryng. There are
also hearde the sounde of shalmes, and playing vppon
Cymballs all along the Seacoast, it is distaunt from
Lyx two hundred and fiue miles, and Lyx is from the
straights of Marock a hundred & twelue myles: sometime
it was inhabited as the plat of the place witnesseth,
and throughly occupyed, as where there remaine
a fewe Uines and Date trées for a token. Perseus and
Hercules made themselues passage ouer the toppe of
it, but no man els came euer there, as the inscriptions
of the Altars doo plainly manifest. Where it looketh
Westward, betwéene it and the Ryuer Anatis by the
space of foure hundred, fourescore and sixtéene myles
together, is nothing but woods full of wylde beastes.
There are Riuers about him, not to bee passed ouer
wyth silence, which though they be seperated a greate
waie one from another, yet they serue all after a sort
to doo the Mount Atlas pleasure. Asaua is brackish of
fast like the Sea water. Bambothum swarmeth with
Waterhorses and Crocodiles:Waterhorses & Crocod
                     •
                  les and beyond them another
Ryuer, which béeing of colour blacke, runneth
through the innermost and scorched deserts, that are
broyled continually wyth vnmeasurable heate of the
parching sunne burning, hoter then any fire, and is neuer
wythdrawne from the heate.
            
               Thus much of Atlas: which the Mores call Dyris,
according to the instructions of the Books of Hanno of
Carthage, and of our owne Chronicles, and also of Iuba
the Sonne of Piolome, who helde the kingdome of
both the Mauritanies. Suetonius Paulinus also hath finished
the certaintie hereof, who first (and almost only
of all the Romaines) aduaunced hys banners beyonde
Atlas.
            
         
         
            CAP. XXXVII.
            of Mauritanie,Called Sanguia Draconis. and of Oliphants, and Dragons
and whereof Cinnabar is
made.
            
               
                  DIuers are the prouinces
of Mauritanie. The
prouince of Tingie where it
butteth vpon ye Northwest,
and where it extendeth toward
the midland Sea, ryseth
with seuen Mountains
which of their likenesse one
to another, are called Brothers,
and butt vpon the Sea.Oliphants and of the natures and properties of them. These Mountaines are
full of Oliphants. Thys kinde of beast putteth me in
remembraunce from the beginning to intreate of thē.
Oliphants therefore, according to mans perceiueraunce,
haue vnderstanding, and excell in memory,
and obserue the discipline of the starres. When the
Moone shineth bright, they goe in heards to the riuers
and there hauing washed themselues with water they

                  •
               alute the sunrysing with such gestures as they can,
and then return againe into the Forrests. There are
two kindes of them: the nobler sorte are knowne by
theyr greatnes, the lesser sort are called bastards.
            
               By the whytenesse of their téeth it is known that
they be yong: whereof the one is euer occupyed, and
the other is spared, least béeing made blunt with continuall
chaufing, it shoulde haue no force when they
haue néede of it in fighting. When they bee chaced in
hunting, they breake them both, to the intent y• when
the Iuorie is gone, they may be pursued no further:
for they vnderstand that that is the cause of their danger.
They goe together in heards. The eldest of them
leadeth the bande, and the eldest next him followeth
the trayne. When they passe a Ryuer, they sende the
smallest before, least the treading of the greater sorte
should weare the channell, and make déepe gutts in
the Foordes.
            The Females goe not to make before they bee ten
yéeres olde, nor the Males before they bee fiue. Two
yéeres they giue themselues to generation, whereabouts
they spend fiue dayes in eche yéere & not aboue:
and they returne not to the heard, before such tyme as
they haue washed thēselues in running water. They
neuer stryue for the Females: for there is no adultery
knowne among them. They haue in them the vertue
of pittie. For if they happen to finde a man going
astray in the wildernesse, they guide him into some
beaten and knowne way. Or if they méete wyth any
Heards of Cattell as they are trauelling, themselues,
they make way gentlie and courteously with theyr
hand, because they woulde not kill any beast that meeteth
them.
            But if it so chaunce that they must fight, they haue
no small regard of them that be wounded: for they receiue
the wearyed and wounded into the middes of
them. When they are taken and come into mennes
hands, they become tame with drinking meshes made
of Malt. When they shall passe the Seas, they wyll

not take shypping before it bee sworne to them that
they shall return. The Oliphants of Mauritanie feare
the Oliphants of Inde, and as though their consciences
grudged at theyr owne 
                  •
               malnesse, they are afraide
to come in their sight. They growe in their dams bellies,
not tenne yéeres (as the common reporte goeth)
but two yéeres as Aristotle determineth. And
they neuer ingender but one time, nor bring forth mo
then one at that once. They liue thrée hundred yeres,
but in anie wyse they can not awaie with cold. They
eate the bodies of Trees, swallowe stones, and loue
aboue all things to feede of Dates. Most of all things
they shunne the sauour of a Mouse: and they wyl not
eate of anie thing that Mise haue touched. If anie of
them by chance deuoure a Camaeleon (which worme
is a poyson to Olyphants) he remedieth the mischiefe
by eating a wilde Oliue. The hyde on theyr backs is
very hard, and the skinne on their bellies is but soft,
and they are altogether smooth without haire. Betwéene
them and the Dragons is continuall enmitie,
and the ambush is laide for them in this wilie sorte.
The Serpents lurke by ye waie sides, where the Olyphants
vse to goe customablie: and letting ye formoste
slippe by, they assaile the hindermost, to the intent the
first should not be able to rescue the last, and first they
wrythe their tailes in knottes about theyr féete, that
hauing snarled their legges, they may staie them from
going awaie. For the Oliphants if they be not preuē
               ted
and staied by this winding about their féte, doo
leane themselues to trées or stones, and there with enforcing
themselues, treade the Dragons to drath. The
chiefe cause of their fighting is (as men saie) for that
Olyphants haue great store of blood, which is colder
then the blood of other beastes, and therefore the Dragons
doo vnsatiatiably desire it in the excesse of heate.
Finallie, they neuer sette vpon them, but when they

haue drunk theyr bellies full, to the intent when their
vaynes be well stuffed with moysture, they may suck
the more out of them when they haue ouercom them.
They séeke nothing so much as the eyes of thē, which
alonelie they know may be perished: or els the inner
parts of their eares, because that part cannot be defended
with their snow
                  •
               e. But when the Dragons haue
sucked out their bloode, they themselues are also ouerwhelmed
with the fall of the beaste: and so the bloode
that is shedde from them both soketh into the ground,
and all the earth that is stéeped therewith, becommeth
a vernish to paint withall, called Cinnabar. The firste
time that euer Oliphants were séene in Italy, was the
fourehundred, thréescore and twelfth yéere after the
building of Rome, when Pyrrhus king of the Epirhots
made warre against the Romaines: and because they
were séene in Lucanie first, they called them Oxen of
Lucanie.
            
            In the Prouince Caesariensis is the Towne of
Caesarea, peopled wyth Romaines, sent thither by the
Emperour Claudius, héeretofore the Pallace of king
Bocchus, which Towne afterwarde by the bountifulnesse
of the Romaines, was gyuen to King Iuba for a
rewarde. There is also the TowneSeren. 
               Siga, where
Syphax dwelled. But wee must not passe mute from
It signifieth the number of twenty 
               Icosium. For as Hercules passed that way, twentie
that forsooke his companie, chose a place, and laid foundation
of the walles, and because no man should boast
peculiarlie of gyuing the name by hymselfe alone, the
name was gyuen it of the number of the builders.
         
         
            
            CAP. XXXVIII.
            Of Numidia and of the Beares therein.
            
               
                  HOwe much soeuer
is from y• Ryuer Ampsaga,
is attributed to Numidia.
The Inhabiters
heereof, as long as they
straied abroade in grazing
like wanderers, were called
That is to say. Grazyers. 
               Nomades. In it are
many noble Cittyes, but
Cirta excelleth them all, and next Culloo, comparable
to Tyre in dying Purple. All this Region bordereth
wholie vpon the marches of Zeugitane. In such part
of it as is wooddie, it nourisheth wilde Beasts, where
it is high ground, it bréedeth Horses, also it is cōmended
for the excellent Marble that it hath. The Beares
of Numidie excell all other Beares onely in fiercenes
and déepe hayre,Of the nature and property of Beares. for the littering of them is like in all
places, wheresoeuer they be bred. I will speake therof
by and by. They couple not in like sort as other foure
footed beastes doo: but inasmuch as they are formed
apt to embracinges, they couple together as man and
woman do. Winter stirreth vp their desire of generation.
The Males seuering themselues for the tyme,
doo reuerence the Females when they are bagged, and
although they lie all in one den, yet they lie seuerallye
by themselues in couches deuided one from an other
with diches. The time of their whelping is very swift
for they goe not past thirtie daies, whereby it cōmeth
to passe, that their ouerhastie littering maketh them
bring forth deformed whelps.
            
               The things that they bring forth are little lumps
of flesh, of colour white, without eyes. And (by reason
of the hastie comming foorth before it be ripe) it is nothing
but a shapelesse matter, sauing that it hath the
proportion of nayles. These they fashion by little and
little with licking, and sometimes they cherrish them
by laying their warme breastes to them, to the intent
that through the heate of their continuall rucking vppon
them, they may gather the breath of lyfe. All that
while they fast. Surelie for the first fouretéene daies,
the dammes fall into so heauie a sléepe, that they cannot
be waked with woundes. After they haue whelped,
they kéepe home by the space of foure months together.
Afterward when they goe abroade into the open
daie, they can so ill awaie with the vnaccustomed
light, that a man would think they were blinded.
            Beares haue weake heades, and their greatest
strength is in their fore pawes, and in their loynes,
wherby it commeth to passe, that sometimes they will
stande vpright vppon their hinder féete. They lye in
waite for Béehiues, lusting greatlie for the Combes,
and they snatch at nothing more gréedilie then at honnie.
If they taste of the Apples of Mandrake they die.
Neuerthelesse, they preuent the mischiefe before it
growe too strong, and deuoure Ants to recouer theyr
health. If at anie time they sette vppon Bulles, they
knowe vppon what parts it is best for them to catche
holde: and therefore they catch at no parte, but their
hornes and theyr nostrils: their hornes to the intent
to weigh them downe, theyr nostrilles to the intent
to put them to greater payne in so tender a place. In
the time that Marcus Messala was Consull, Lucius
Domitius Aenobardus béeing Curulis Aedilis,
showed a hundred Beares of Numidie, and as manie
Huntsmen of Aethiop, in y• great Theater at Rome:
               
and that syght was regystred among hys honourable
tytles.
         
         
            CAP. XXXIX.
            Of Affrick, of Lyons, of the Hyene, of the sundry
sorts of Serpents, of precious stones, of
monstrous kindes of creatures, and
of other notable thinges of
that Countrey.
            
               
                  ALl Affricke beginneth
at the foote of Zeugitane,
facing the Ilande
Sardinia from the Promontorie
of Apollo, and butting
towarde Sicill from y• Promontorie
of Mercurie.
            
            Thus shooteth it foorth
wyth two heades, whereof
the one is called the whyte Promontorie, and y• other
which is in the region Cyrenaica, is called Phycus.
The same béeing situate directlie against the Ile of
Crete by the Cretish Sea, shooteth into the sandes toward
Taenarus of Lacedemon.
               The Syrts 
                     〈◊〉
                   whashes of Affrick. 
               Catabathmos windeth
into Aegypt. The next Country whereunto (which
is Cyrenaica) lyeth betwéene the two Syrts, which the
shallowe and vncertaine Sea maketh vnaccessible.
            The rysing and falling of which Salt water, it is
no easie matter to finde: so vncertaine is the moouing
thereof, one while breaking into shallow shelues, and
another whyle ouerflowing like a spring tyde. Varro
affyrmeth that the ground béeing there loose, is readye

to be perced with euery wynd, by meanes wherof the
suddaine force of the swift blastes, dooth eyther puffe
out or sowpe in the Seas. All this coast is deuided frō
               Aethiope & the borders of Asia, by the Ryuer
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                
               Nygris,
which is the mother of Nilus, and from Spayne
by the narrowe Sea. On that side that enclyneth to
the South, it is voide of springs & altogether droughtie.
On the other side that lyeth towarde the North,
it is watred aboundantly, insomuch that in the Countrye
Bizacene which is two hundred myles ouer or
more, the soyle is so rich, that the séede there sowne
yéeldeth increase of a hundred times as much fruite.
That many straungers haue resorted thither to inhabite,
we will showe you for a proofe the Cittyes and
places there. The Promontorie Boreon which is beaten
vppon wyth the Northwynde, was so named by
Greeks that came thither. The Towne ofBona. 
               Hyppon,
(which afterward was called Rhegium, and the other
Hyppon called afterward Dyarrhyton of the narowe
sea running by it, two noble Townes, were builded
by Knights of Greece. The Sicilians builded the Citie
Coros. 
               Clypea, and named it first Aspis, they builded Venerie
also, whereunto they trans
                  •
               ferred the religion of
Venus of Eryx. The Achaeans in their language gaue
the name of Trypolis, because of the number of ye thrée
Citties Taphre,
               Tripolie 
               Abrotone, & the greater Lextis.
            
            The Philene brethren tooke that Greeke name,
of the desire of praise. The people of Tyre were founders
of Adrymet and Carthage. But now wyll I declare
what true bookes haue reported of Carthage.
               Carthage
This Cittie (as Cato in his Oration before the Senate,
affirmeth) was builded at such time as Hiarbas
raigned in Lybia. Elyssa a Lady of the Country Phaenicia,
who called it Carthad, which in the Phaenician
tongue, is as much to say as a newe Cittie.
            
               Anon after as theyr spéeche turned into Punicke,
both she was called Elissa & the Cittie Ca
                     •
                  thage: which
was vtterly rased seauen hundred thirty and seauen
yéeres after it was builded. Within a while after, being
repayred againe by Caius Gracchus, and peopled
wyth Italians, it was named by him Iunonia, and continued
for a certain time without estimation, in a low
and faint state. At length after a hundred and two
yéeres respit, in the time that Marcus Antonius and
Publius Dolobella were Cons
                  •
               lls, it reco
                  •
               ered the honour
to be called the second Carthage, the second bea
                  •
               
               tie
of the whole world next Rome. But to the intent
to returne againe to * Affrick, it is an Angle seuerally
enclosed by it selfe. The inner partes thereof are
possessed with manie kyndes of wylde beasts, but speciallie
with Lions,Of Lyons, and of the noble nature and properties of them which alonely of y• kind of beastes
y• men call toothed beastes, wt they (as Aristotle affyrmeth)
doo sée as soone as they bee whelped. Of them
there is reckoned thrée sortes. For y• shorter sort with
curled manes, are for the moste part weake and cowardlie.
The longer sorte with smooth hayre, are more
fierce and strong. But those that the Lybards begette,
are of the rascallest sort, and haue no manes at all. All
of them alike forbeare gorging of themselues: firste
for that one day they féede, and another day they drink
by turnes, and oftentimes, if they haue not good digestion,
they forbeare meate a day longer: and secondly
for that if they féele themselues gréeued with rauening
too much flesh, they put their pawes into theyr
mouthes, and pull it out againe. And euen the like also
doo they when they flée, if they bée to full. The falling
away of their téeth, argueth age. And there bee
many proofes of theyr pittifulnesse.
            For they spare them that humble themselues before
them: and shewe theyr crueltie rather against

men then women. As for sucking Children they kyll
them not, vnlesse it be for extreame hungar. Neyther
are they without mercie. For by dailie examples from
time to time it is manifest y• they haue shewed mercy
inasmuch as manie prisoners méeting with some Lyons
by the way, haue notwithstanding returned vntouched
into theyr Countryes. And in the Bookes of
King Iuba is recorded the name of a Woman of Getulia,
who by entretaunce escaped vnhurt from y• Lyons
that she mette. They engender backwarde: and
not they onely, but also Lynxes, Camels, Oliphants,
Rhynocerots, and Tygers. The Lyonesses at y• firste
lytter bring forth fiue Whelps, and euery yéere after
they diminish their number by one, and at the length
when the dammes come to bringing forth but one at
once, they become barraine for euer. The looke and the
taile declare the courage of the Lyons, like as the stomacke
of a horse is knowne by hys eares. For nature
hath gyuen these two markes to euerie notable beaste
to be knowne by. Their chiefest force is in their brest,
and their chiefest stedinesse is in their heades. When
they be chaced with dogs, they goe away disdainfully,
and now and then staying, dissemble theyr force wyth
pretence as though they cared not whither they went
away or no: and this they doo when they be followed
in open and champion fields. But in woody places (as
though they thought no body were able to beare wytnesse
of their cowardlinesse) they runne away as fast
as theyr legs can beare them. When they themselues
pur
                  •
               ue any thing, they further their pace with leapping.
When they goe at leysure, they hyde the hookes
of their talants betwéene the fleshe of their toes, as it
were in sheathes. And this they obserue so warelye,
that they runne not but wyth their talants turned inward.
When they are enuironed and beset with hunters,

they looke stedfastlie vpon the ground, to the intent
they will not be made afraid with the sight of the
hunting staues. They neuer looke a squint, neyther
can they abide that one shoulde looke a squint vppon
them. They feare the crowing of a Cock, and the ratling
of whéeles, but most of all they feare fire.The beast called Lyons-bane. Wee
reade that there are little beasts called Lyonsbanes,
which are caught and vncased, to the intent that flesh
béeing powdred with the ashes of them, and caste in
the pathes where wayes méete, may kill the Lyons,
if they taste neuer so little thereof. And therefore Lyons
pursue them with a naturall hatred, & when they
get them at aduauntage, they forbeare byting of them
but they teare them all to péeces with theyr pawes.
Scaeuola the Sonne of Publius was the first that made
a showe of them, in the time that he was Curulis Acdilis.
Affrick bréedeth the Hyene,The Hyene, and of hys wonderfull nature. which beast cannot
wrythe his necke a side, vnlesse h
                  •
               e mooue his whole
bodie, because his backbone is without ioyntes, and
runneth so whole through his necke. Many wondrous
things are reported of it. Firste that it haunteth shepheards
cotages, and by continuall harkning, learneth
some name, the which he expresseth by counterfeyting
mans voyce, to the intent to worke his wrath vppon
the man whom he tolleth out by his policie in y• night
time. Also he counterfetteth the vomiting of men, and
thereby alluring out the dogs with his false sobbing,
deuoureth them. Which dogs if perchance they touche
his shaddowe in hunting of him, they loose their voice,
and cannot barke. The same Hyene in séeking mens
carkasses, scrapeth vpp theyr graues: and therefore it
is the easier matter to take the Males. For the Females
are of nature more subtill. There is great varietie
in their eyes, and chaungablenes of colours, and
in the balles of them is founde a stone called Hyenie,

endued with such power,The stone 
                     •
                  alled Hyeuie. y• vnder what mans tongue
soeuer it be put, he shall prophesie of thinges to come.
But what lyuing thing soeuer a Hyene compasseth in
thrice about, cannot moue it selfe: and therfore it hath
béene auouched for a certaintie, that there is a magicall
power in him. In a parte of Aethyop it coupleth
with a Lyonesse, and betwéene them is engendred a
Monster named a Crocute.
               A Crocute Which in likenesse also
counterfetteth the spéech of man. He neuer stirreth the
balles of his eyes, but star
                  •
               th continually without
twinckling.
            He hath no gummes at all in hys mouth, but one
whole and maine tooth, which is naturally closed vpp
as it were in Caskets, because it should not be blunted.
Among those kinds of beasts that are called Grazers,
the same Affrick hath wyld Asses, in which kind
euery Male hath his heard of Females.Wyld Asses. They cannot
abyde that any other shoulde haue to doo where they
like. And therefore they wait very narrowly vppon
their Mares when they be with foale, that (if it bee
possible they may byte of the genetoryes from the
Colts when they be new foaled: to the end they be not
apt for generation. Whereof the Mares béeing ware,
hyde their young ones out of the way.Serpents 
               Affrick swarmeth
in such wise with Serpents, that it may worthelie
challenge the preheminence in that mischiefe
from all the worlde. The Caerasts péere with foure little
hornes,The Cerast or Horneworme by shewing whereof (as it were wyth a
bayse) they allure birds to them, and deuoure them.
For they hide the rest of their bodyes for the nonce in
the sand, discouering no part of thēselues sauing that
onely part wherwith they entice the birds deceitfully
to féeding,The Amphisbene or double
                  
                     •
                  eade. when they lie in wait to kill them for theyr
labor. The Amphisbene riseth with two heads wherof
one is in his accustomed place, and the other where

his taile should bee. Wherevpon it commeth to passe,
that with both heads forward at once hee créepeth in a
roundell.The Darter. The Darters clymbe vp vppon trées, from
whence whirling themselues with as much violence
as may be, they péerce through what beast soeuer happeneth
to come within their dint.The Scytale. The Scytale hath
such a glystering and speckled hide, that the beautie of
the spots staie such as behold it, by means whereof, hee
catcheth them as they stande gazing and wondring,
whom he cannot ouertake by his slownes in créeping.
Notwithstanding, as beautifull as his scales be, he is
the first that casteth his wynter coate.Red Adders There are many
and sundry kinds of redde Adders, but they haue
diuers effects in hurting.A Thirstworme. The Dipsas killeth wt thirst
The Hypuale killeth with sléepe,A Sleepeworme, and Cl
                     •
                  opatra may
beare witnesse, that it is bought to kill folke. The poysons
of others, forasmuch as they bee curable deserue
lesse fame. The Hemorrhoyd byteth till it bléedes,The bloodworm and
thereby breaking the intercourse of the vaynes, draweth
out the life wyth bléeding.The Prester Whomsoeuer the Prester
stingeth he is bloune, and béeing puffed vp to vnmeasurable
hugenesse dyeth with swelling. Immediatlie
vppon the stinging of the Seps ensueth rotting.The rotworme.
There are also,A sandcreeper 
               Ammodits,
               A Leaperworme. 
               Cheuchries,
               A watersnake 
               Olyphantyes,
               The Earthdragon, 
               Chersydres, and * Chamedraconts. And
finally as many sundry names as there bee, so manye
sundry deathes there are.
            For Scorpions, Scinks and Lucerts, are accounted
among vnhurtfull wormes, and not among serpents.
These Monsters, if they drinke, doo sting the gentlier.
They haue affections, for lightly they goe not but
by couples. If the one be caught or kylled, the other
that scapeth runneth madde. The heads of the Females
are finer, theyr bellyes rownder, and theyr
venime more hurtfull.
            
               The Male is a like rounde in all places, and higher
also, and more méeke. All Serpents are dull sighted
They seldome looke right before them: and not wythout
a cause, forasmuch as their eyes stand not in theyr
foreheads, but in their temples, so as they are lighter
of hearing, then of séeing any thing. As concerning the
precious stone called Helitrope,
               The stone Helytrope or Turn stone. there hath béene contention
betwéene Aethyop, Affrick, & Cyprus, which
of them should yéelde the excellentest of that kynd: and
it is founde by mani
                  •
                trayals, that the stone of Aethiop
or of Libie hath y• prerogatiue. It is of a gréene colour
not altogether verye fresh, but somewhat more clowdie
and déepe, powdred aboue with spots of scarlett.
The st
                  •
               ne taketh hys name of hys operatiō and power.
Béeing cast into a brasse panne, it altereth ye colour
of the Sunne beames, making them to haue a bloody
reflexion: and it casteth the glymering brightnesse of
the ayre out of the water, and turneth it aside. Moreouer
it is reported to haue this vertue, y• beeing mingled
wyth the herbe of the same name, and consecrated
before with the accustomable enchantmēts, it maketh
the bearer thereof to goe inuisible. They that trauell
the Syrts,
               The alteration of the land like to the tydes of the Sea. though theyr iourney lie by lande, yet must
they direct theyr course by the starres, otherwise they
shall neuer come to the place appointed. For ye ground
is so rotten, that the aire altereth the vpper part therof,
and if there whiske neuer so small a wynd, ye blaste
thereof maketh such an alteration, that it leaueth no
token whereby to knowe a mans way. For it euermore
turneth vpside downe, the plats of the places in
such wyse, that those which were euen nowe full of
hygh hils, sinck into vallies: and those that euen now
were vallies, are heaped vp with sande like hyls. And
the maine land beareth the nature of the sea that beateth
vppon it. Neyther makes it any matter where

stormes rather bée, séeing that the elements conspyre
the destruction of trauellers,The Syrts or Wha
                     •
                  hes. so as the wynd rageth vppon
the land, and the land as the sea. The two Sy
                     •
                  ts
are seperated two hundred and fiftie myles a sunder:
the lesse of them is somewhat calmer. Wee reade that
in the time that Cneus Seruilius, and Caius Sempronius
were Consuls,Meninx the Romaine fléete passed harmles betwéene
these shallowes. In this Coast is the Ile Meninx,
where Caius Marius hid himself after he came
out of the Fennes of Minturue.
               The Psylls Beyonde the Garamants
were the Psylls, forti
                  ••
               ed with a wonderfull
strength of body against hurtfull poyson. They onelie
dyed not of the byting of Snakes: and although they
were stunge with their deadly tongues, yet they continued
in vnappayred health. Yea they layde theyr
newe borne babes to Serpents, and if they were misbegotten,
the adulterie of the Mothers was punished
wyth the destruction of y• Children. But if they were
right begotten, the priuiledge of theyr fathers bloode
saued the innocent babes from death. Thus they put
the assurance of theyr issue to the triall of poyson. But
the Nasamons conquered this country, and destroyed
it, insomuch that now
                  •
                the Psylls haue left nothing
whereby to be remembred,The Nasamones sauing onely theyr bare
name. The Nasamones yeelde a stone which is called
a Nasamonite, altogether bloode shaddowed
with blacke vaynes. In the innermost part of the bigger
Syrt,
               The Loteaters. about the Philenes Altars, (as we learne)
inhabited the Loteaters, and it is so indeede. Not farre
from the Philenes Alters, is a Lake whereinto y• Ryuer
Tr
                     •
                  ton runneth, where men haue beléeued thatMinerua.
the Goddesse of arts was first seene▪ The greater Syrt
               
                  •
               aunteth of a Cittie called Cyrene,
               Cyrene. which Battus the
Lacedemonian builded. the fiue and fortith Olimpyade,
when 
                  
                     •
                  ncus Marcius raigned ouer y• 
               Romains,
               
the fiue hundred, 
                  •
               ours
                  •
               ore and sixe yéere after she destruction
of 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                the which Cyrene was the natyue
Country and dwelling place of Callimachus the Poet.
Betwéene this Towne and the Temple of Ammon,
are fourehundred myles, harde by the Temple is a
Fountaine consecrated to the Sunne, which with the
moysture of his water byndeth the ground, and hardneth
ashes also into a clod, wherin (not without wonder)
the place glistreth rounde about none otherwyse
then if it were the gréene fields. There is also gathered
the stone called Ammons horne.
               Ammons horne. For it is so warpped
and crooked, that it is shaped like a Rams horne.
It is as bright as gold. Béeing layde vnder a mannes
head when he sléepeth, it is said to represent vnto him
heauenly dreames.Ammoniacke. Also there is a Trée called Metops
out of which floweth a clammy gumme, which of the
place it commeth fro, we call Ammoniack. Furthermore
among the Cyrenenses groweth Syrpe ye rootes
whereof haue a pleasant flauor,Syrpe. and it is more like a
shrubbie hearbe then a fruite Trée. Out of the stalke
thereof, yssueth in the summer time a fatte dew, which
cleaueth to the beards of Goates that feede thereon,
and when it is there throughly dryed, it is gathered in
dropps like Isickes to serue vppon Tables, or rather
to serue for medicine.
            It was first called the mylke of Syrpe, because it

                  •
               zeth in the manner of Mylke. Afterward (custome
drawing it thereunto,) it was named Laser. Thys
Herbe was afterwarde almoste vtterlie dygged vppe
by the Inhabiters of the Countrey, by reason of the intolerable burth
                  •
               n of trybute that was layde vppon
them, when their Countrey was wasted at the firste
inuasion of strange nations.
            On the left hande of Cyrene isThis is Affrick the lesse, where Carthage stoode. 
               Affrick, on the
right side Egypt, on the foreside the rough and harborowlesse

sea, on the backpart diuers barbarous nations,
and a wildernesse not to be come vnto, vninhabited
and forlorne which bréedeth the Cockatrice, such
a singuler mischiefe as is not in all the whole worlde
beside.The Cockatrice and of his horrible nature. It is a serpent almost halfe a foote long, white,
wyth, as it were a little myter, proportioned in lynes
on his heade. Hee is giuen to the vtter destruction not
onely of man and beast, or whatsoeuer hath life▪ but
also euen of the earth it selfe, which he stayneth & burneth
vppe, and seareth away, wheresoeuer he hath his
deadlie denne. To be short, he destroyeth hearbs, kylleth
Trées, and infecteth the very aire: insomuch that
no byrd is able to flye ouer the place which he hath in
fected wyth hys pestilent breath. When hee mooueth
himselfe, he créepeth wyth hys one halfe, and wyth the
other halfe auaunceth himselfe aloft. All other Serpents
are horiblie afraide to heare his hyssing: and
as soone as they heare him, they flee euerye one
wyth as much haste as they can, euery one hys way.
Whatsoeuer is kylled of his, byting, no wylde beaste
will feede of it, no foule wyll touche it And yet for all
this,God hath prouided a remedye for euery mischiefe. he is ouercome of Weasels, which menne bring
thether, and sende them into the dennes, where he lurketh.
Notwithstanding, he wanteth not power euen
when he is dead. The Cittizens of 
                  
                     •
                  ergamus gaue a
full * Sestertium for the carkasse of a Co
                  •
               katrice,Fiue pounde sterling. and
hanged it vpp in a nette of gold in the Temple of Apollo,
which was notable for the great workmanshypp
thereof: to the intent that neyther Spyders shoulde
spynne there, nor byrds flye in there About the vttermost
nooke of the Syrts, there runneth by the Cittye
Berenice the Riuer Lethon,
               The Ryuer Lethon. which (as is supposed)
issueth from the springes of hell, and is renowmed among
the auncient Poets for his forgetfull waters.Berenice.
            
            The foresaide Cittie was builded and fortified in

the great Syrte by Berenice that was marryed to the
third P
                     •
                  olomie. All the large contry that lyeth betwéen
Egypt Aethyope, and Lybia, as farre as there is anye
woods to cast shaddowe, is replenished wyth sundry
kyndes of Apes: and I would not that any man shold
be greeued at the mistaking of the name. For surely it
is not expedient to omit any thing, wherein the prouidence
of nature is to be séene.Apes. Among these is the
common sorte of Apes which we sée euery where, not
without great aptnesse to counter
                  •
               et, by means wher
of they are the easier taken. For while they desirouslie
practise the gestures of Hunters, who for the nonce
leaue byrdlime to noynt them withall, they dawbe vp
theyr eyes as they had séene them pretende to doo before,
and so when theyr sight is stopped vppe, they are
easie to be caught.
            They make merry at the newe of the Moone, and
they become sadde when shee is in the wane. They
loue their yong ones out of all measure in so much as
they easiler loose the whelps that they are most chare
ouer and carry in theyr armes, because those that are
not set by, doo euer folow their dam hard at her bréech.
The Moonkyes haue tayles:Monkyes Dogheads and this is the onely
difference betweene them and the Apes. The Dogheads
are also of the number of Apes, most plenteous
in the parts of Aethyop, sprightish in leaping, cruel in
byting, neuer so tamed, but that they be more rather
wyld.
            Among Apes are also accounted the Sphinxes,
               Sphinxes
shacke hayred, side and déepe dugged, apt to be taught
to forget theyr wyldnesse.Satyres. There are also that menne
call Satyres, very swéetefaced, and full of mopping and
toying continually.The fairhayres. The Callytriches are almost altogether
vnlike the other. On their face is a bearde, and
on their rumpe a broade tayle. To catch these is no

hard matter, but so bring them out of the Country is
a rare thing. For they liue not but in the soyle of Acthiop,
that is to say in their owne soyle.
         
         
            CAP. XL.
            Of the nation of the Hammanients, and of the
houses therein builded of salt.
            
               
                  BEtween the Nasamonits
and the Troglodits,
               Cauecreepers
is the nation of the
Hammanients, which build
theyr houses of Salt, which
they heawe out of ye Mountaines
in manner of stone,
and laye it with morter.
Such is the aboundance of
this vaine, that they make them houses of Saltstones.
These are the Hammanients which haue intercourse
of Merchandise wyth the Troglodits.
               Carbuncles The precious
stones called Carbuncles are on this side the Hammanients,
               The Asbysts
more néerer the Nasamones. The Asbysts lyue
by Laser. This is their nourishment, and this is their

                  •
               oode.
         
         
            CAP. XLI,
            Of the Garaments, and of a wonderfull fountayne
among them.
            Among the Garamants is the Towne Debris,
               A wonderfull Fountaine, with
a wonderfull Fountaine in it, which by turnes is

               
                  •
               old a day times and hote a night times, one while séething
like water on the fire, and another while becomming
as cold as Ise, both contrarieties procéeding out
of y• selfe same veynes. It is a meruailous thing to be
spoken of, y• in so short a time, nature should so strangly
disagrée with her selfe, that whosoeuer tried her doings
in the dark, would think there were a continuall
fire in the spring: and he that felt it in the day, would
beléeue it were none other thing then a winters Water
continually frozen. By meanes whereof (not with
out good cause) Debris is famous among those nations,
for that the waters change their propertie according
to the moouing of the heauen, though after a maner
cleane con
                  •
               rarie to the disposition of the Planets.
For whereas the euentide asswageth the heate of the
world: this spring beginneth to heate in such wise at
the Sunne going downe, that if yee touch it, yee shall
find it scalding. Againe, when the Sunne is rysen aboue
the ground, and all things are chauffed with hys
rayes, the water thereof is so excéeding colde, that no
man is able to drinke it, be he neuer so thirstie. Who
then would not wonder at a Fountaine y• becommeth
cold through heate,The Garamants. and hote through cold? The heade
of the Garamant Regyon is Garaman▪
                wherevnto
for a long whyle the way was very combersome, and
not able to be passed. For the théeues couered the pyts
with sande, so the intent that withdrawing ye waters
deceitfully for a time, no man might be able to trauell
to them for famine and thirst. But in the raigne of
Vespasian, in the warre that was against the Oyans,
this distresse was taken away, by finding a nerer passage.
Cornelius Balbus was the first that subdued the
Garamants, and for his victory firste tryumphed ouer
them Surely he was the first of 
                  〈◊〉
                (for 
                  〈◊〉
               
was borne in one of the Ilands Gades) that attayned

the honor of a tryumphant conqueror.Strange Cattell. The great cattell
of this Countr
                  •
               y féede with their necks awry, for
if they should graze with their heads right forwarde,
their hornes bowing downe, with the tynes into the
ground,The Ilande Gaulos. would hinder their féeding. On the same part
that Cercina lyeth, the reporte goeth that there is an
Ile called Gaulos, wherein bréedeth no serpent, neyther
lyueth any yt is brought in thither. And therefore
the dust thereof béeing strewed in any place of the
worlde, kéepeth away Snakes: and béeing cast vppon
Scorpions, it killeth them out of hande.
         
         
            CAP. XLII.
            Of Aethyop: of the filthy fashions of the people of
that Countrey, and of theyr monstrous shapes: of
the Dragons, and other wylde beastes of
wonderfull nature there: of the
spyce Cinnomom, and of the
Iacint stone.
            
               
                  THe Aethiopians, and
the Nations that inhabite the
Countryes bounding vpon the
Mountaine Atlas, are parted
a sunder with the RyuerSenega. 
               Nigris,
which is thought to bee
parte of Nyle.
            
            It is so gréene with Rushes wherof paper is made
it is so clad wyth Reede, it bringeth forth y• same kind

of liuing thinges, it floweth ouer at y• same times, and
returneth againe with his banks euen then when Nilus
is content with his own channel.The beastly manners of the Garmants of Aethyope. The Garamants
of Aethyop know no seuerall marriage, but vse their
women in common, who that list. Thereon it cōmeth
that the Children acknowledge onely their mothers.
For the name of Father hath no reuerence at all among
them. For who is able to knowe hys Father,
where such incestous lecherie runneth at large. Therfore
are the Garamants of Aethyop counted a bastard
people among all nations: and not without cause, considering
how they haue infringed the discipline of chastitie,The Aethiopians
and by a wicked custome destroyed the knowledge
of their succession. The name of Aethiopians extendeth
large.
            On Affrick side, where Lybie faceth the Ilande
Meroe, there be many and sundry nations of them. Of
the number of them the Nomades
               The Nomads liue by the mylk of
the Dogheades. The Syrbots
               The Syrbots, are lazie things of a 12.
foote long. The Asaches
               The Asaches take Oliphants in hunting,
and deuoure them. Among the Sambres
               The Sambres. no fourfooted
beast hath eares, no not so much as the Olyphants.
Theyr next neighbours, make a Dog theyr King: by
whose gesture they diuineg what he cōmayndeth them
to doo. The Aethiopyans on the Sea coast are reported
to haue foure eyes a péece, but the trueth is otherwyse,
namelie that they are verye sharpe s
                  •
               ghted, and
ayme the throwing of theyr darts most certainly.The Agriophages or wyldeaters, Toward
the West dwell the Agriophags which feede
onely on the flesh of Lybards and Lyons, and haue a
King that hath but one eye, which standes in hys forhead.The Pamphags or eateals Meneaters or Cannibals Bytch 
                     •
                  ylkers
There are also Pamphags who féede of al things
that may be chewed, and all things that grow vnse
                  •
               t.
There be also Anthropophages, whose name expresseth
their conditions. They say that the Cynamolgies
               
haue chaps like Dogs, and long snowts. The Arthabathits,
goe groueling like foure footed beas
                  •
               es,Arthabathits. and
wander abroade without dwelling place, as beastes
doo. The borderers vpon Mauritanie gather Loeusts,
in time of yéere, and powdring them, doo lay them vp
as their onely foode to liue by: But none of them lyueth
aboue fortie yéeres. From this Ocean vnto
Guagu
                     •
                  ra. 
               Meroe (which is an Ilande that Nyle maketh where
be first parteth and meeteth againe) are sixe hundred
and twenty miles. Beyond Meroe toward the Sunne
rysing, are theThe Macrobians or long lyued and their manners. 
               Macrobian Aethyopians. For theyr
life is longer then ours by the one halfe. These Macrobians,
execute Iustice, loue vpright dealing, excell
in strength, are very comely and beautifull of personage,
are decked wyth brasse, and make giues of golde
for offenders. There is among them a place calledThe Sunnes Table. 
               Heliutrapaeza
cōtinually furnished with dainti
                  •
                fare,
whereof all men eate without difference, for they vpholde
that they are encreased by the power of God.
There is also in the same place a Lake, wherwith the
bodyes that are washed, shyne as if they were anoin
               
                  •
               ed
wyth Oyle. This Lake is moste wholesome to
drinke.A strange Lake Surely it is so shéere, that it wyl not beare the
leaues falne from the Trées, but letteth them sinke
downe to the bottome, by reason of the thinnes of the
liquor. Beyond these lye desert and vninhabited wildernesses,Monstrous Nations,
euen vnto the coast of Arabie. And then in
the furthest part of all the East, are nations of Monstrous
shape, some hauing yll fauoured visages, altogether
plain without noses: & othersome hauing theyr
mouthes growne together sauing onely a little hole
to put in an Oaten Réede, whereat they draw in their
sustenaunce. Some haue no tongues: but vse becknings
and gestures in stedde of spéeche. Certaine of
these nations neuer kn
                  •
               we the vse of fire, before the

               
                  〈◊〉
                of 
                  〈◊〉
                
               Lathyrus King of Egypt. Aethyop
contayneth all y• is from the South east, to the South
west. As much of it as is vnder y• South coast, is garnished
wyth thicke woods, which are gréenest in winter.
On the South part there hangeth into the Sea a
high Hall▪ continually hote with gentle fire, and burning
on the toppe wyth restlesse flames, among which
co
                  •
               tinuall 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪ fires, there is great store of Dragons.
Furthermore,Dragons. the true Dragons haue smal mouthes,
and not ga
                  •
               ing wyde to byte with, but of a narrowe
conduit, by which they drawe breath, and spirt out
their tongues. For their force lyeth not in theyr téeth,
but in their tayles, and they hurt with beating, rather
then with 
                  •
               yting.The stone called Draconce There is cut out of the Dragons

                  •
               raynes a Stone called Dracon
                     ••
                  , but it is not a stone
vnlesse it be taken from them while they are alyue.
For it the Serpent die before, the hardnesse resolueth
and vanisheth away wyth hys life. The Kinges of the
East doo chiefely v
                  •
               unt themselues of the wearing
thereof, although it be so hard, that no man can deuise
to imprint or engraue any thing in it: and whatsoeuer
is beautifull in it, is not made by mans hand, because
there should none other colour stayne the pure
naturall whitenesse thereof. An Author named Soth
                     ••
                  us,
sayth that he hath sée
                  •
               e this Iewel, & declareth
by what meanes it is come by. Men of excellent courage
and audacitie serche out by holes where the Serpents
lie, and also their haunts. Then watching 
                  •
               yll
they come forth to féede, and passing by them wyth as
much apéede as they can, they cast them hearbes stéeped
in thinges that haue as much force as may bee so
prouoke sléepe. So when they be fast a stéepe, they cutt
the stones out of their heades, and getting the booty of
their heady enterprise, enioy the
                  •
               reward of their rashnesse.
The places which the Aethyopians possesse, is
full of wyld Beastes, whereof one is the Nabis which

we call a Cameloparda
                     •
                  is.
               The Nabis. It is necked like a horse,
footed like an Oxe, headed like a Camell; & of a bryght

                  •
               ay colour powdred with white spottes. This beast
was shewed first in Rome at the gamings that Caesar
the Dictator made in the Lysts. Almost about ye same
time also were brought from thence monsters called
Celphies,
               Celphies. whose hinder féete from the ancle vpp to the
toppe of the calfe, where like a mans legge, and lykewyse
hys forefeete resembled a mans hande: notwithstanding,
these were neuer séene of the Romaines but
once.The Hornynose. Before the showes of Cneus Pompeius: the Romaines
had neuer seene the Rhynoceros openly. Thys

                  •
               east is of a pa
                  •
               e ru
                  ••
               et colour: in hys nose is a horne
that boweth vpward: the which hee maketh sharpe
poi
                  •
               ted like a bo
                  •
               kyn, by whetting it vpon stones, and

                  •
               ighteth wyth it against the Olyphants, béeing almost
ful as long as they, but some what shorter legged, and
with this his naturall weapon he pusheth at theyr
bell yes,The Catoblepe as the onely part which he 
                  〈◊〉
                may bee
perced with 
                  〈…〉
               . By the Riuer Nigris bréedeth
the Catoblepe, a little s
                  •
               uggish beast, with a great heauie
ioll, and a venemous sight For they that happen to
come in hys sight die.Wonderfull Ants. There bee Ants as big as a Mastiffe,
that haue talents like Lyons, wherewyth they
scrape vp sand of golde, which they 
                  〈◊〉
                that no man
may fetch it away, & if any man 
                  〈◊〉
               , they pursue
them 
                  •
               o death.The Lycaon The same Aethiop bréedeth y• 
               Lycaon,
which is a woolfe with a mane on his necke, & so pied,
y• men say there is no colour, but he hath parte of
it. It bréedeth also y• 
               Tarand, of the bignes of an Oxe,
clouen footed, with tined hornes, headed like a stag, coloured
like a Beare,The Tarrand
                     •
                  
                & shacke hayred. It is saide y• thys
Tarand changeth his complexion for feare, and y• whē
he hideth himself, he becōmeth like vnto the thing y• he
is next vnto, whither it be a quarrie of white stone, or
a groue of gréene trées, or what thing soeuer it be, of any
other likenes.
            
               The same thing also dooth the Fyshe Polypus
in the Sea,The Fish Polipus. and theLand lyons 
               Chameleons on the lande.
But the Polypus and the Chameleon haue a sheere
skinne, and therefore it is the easier for them to resemble
things next vnto them, because of theyr thin smug
skynnes, which are like glasse. But it is a straunge
and singuler case, that harsh hayre should alter colour,
heereby it comes to passe, that they are hardly taken.The Woolues of Aethiop.
It is a peculiar propertie to the Wolues of Aethyop,
to be as nimble in leaping, as a byrde, so as they ridde
not more ground by running, then by going, but yet
they neuer assault a man. In Winter time they are
hayrie, and in Sommertime naked. Menne call them
Thoes.
            
            The Porkpine also is very ryfe in those Countries
a beast like a Hedghog,The Porkpyne wyth a hyde full of rough brystles,
which he oftentimes looseneth of his owne accorde,
and darteth them foorth so thicke as it were a
showre of pricks,The bird Pegasus. and therewyth woundeth the Dogs
that pursue him. Of that coast is the byrde Pegasus:
but this bird hath nothing of a horse but his eares. So
is also the Tragop, a byrde bigger then an Egle, vaunting
himselfe with an armed head,The Tragop or Goteface. besett with hornes
like a Rammes hornes.Of Cynnamom The Aethiopyans gather
Cynnamom. Thys shrub groweth on a short stalke,
wyth low and flatte boughes, neuer aboue two cubits
high. That which groweth slenderest is counted
the excellentest: and that that swelleth into thicknes,
is nothing sette by. But it is gathered by the priestes,
who make sacrifice before. Which doone, they take
good heede that they beginne not theyr haruest before
the Sunne rise, nor continue it after the Sunne sette.
He that is Primate among them, deuideth the heapes
of sticks wyth a speare, which is consecrated to y• same
vse. And so a portion of the faggots is dedicated to the

Sunne, which if it bee rightlie deuided, taketh fire alone.
Among these things that we haue treated of, is
found the Iacin
                     •
                  , in colour a bright azure,The Iacin
                     •
                  . a precious
stone, if it may be found faultlesse: for it is not a little
subiect to faultines. For diuers times it is eyther vernished
with a violet colour, or darkned with a mistynesse,
or wanzing into a watry shéerenesse, the best fashion
of it is, if it be not dimmed with two déepe a die
nor ouer lighth with too pure a shéerenesse, but haue a
swéete orient colour of lightsomenesse and purple equallie
mixed together. This is he that féeleth y• ayre,
and altereth with it: insomuch as it is not a like bright
when the wether is clowdy, as whē it is fayre. Moreouer,
béeing put into ones mouth, it becommeth colder.
And for ingrauing it is nothing méete, because it
wyll abide no cha
                  •
               ing, yet is it not altogether inuincible:
for with a Diamonde a man may write in it,Crysolamp. and
drawe what he list in it. Where as is the Iacint, there
is also the Chrysolamp, which stone the light hydeth,The Haemati
                     •
                  e or bloodstone
and the dark discouereth. For this diuersitie is in him
that in the night he is fierie, and in the day he is pale.
Out of that soyle also we take the Haematite, a stone
as redde as blood, and therfore called the Haematite.
            
         
         
            CAP. XLIII.
            VVonderfull things of the nations of Lybia, and of
the stone called Hexacontaly thos.
            
               
                  WHatsoeuer lieth between
Mount Atlas and the mouth of Nile called
Canopitane, which beareth the name
of Canopus the Master of Menelau
                     •
                  
                ship
who was buried in that Ilande, whych

lyeth against the said mouth of Nyle, where Libie endeth,
and Egypt beginneth, is inhabited by nations of
sundry languages, which are withdrawne into waylesse
wildernesses.The Athlantians Of these the Athlantians are altogether
void of manners méete for men. None hath anie
proper calling, none hath any speciall name. They
curse the Sun at his rising, and curse him likwise at
his going downe: and because they are scorched wyth
the heate of his burning beames, they hate the God of
light. It is affirmed that they dreame not, and that
they vtterlie abstaine from all thinges bearing lyfe.
The Troglodits dig them caues vnder the grounde,The Troglodites or Cauecreepers.
and house themselues in them. There is no couetousnesse
of getting, for they haue bound themselues from
riches, by wilful pouertie.The stone called the threescore stone, or the Sixtistone. Onely they glory in one
stone which is called Hexacontalythos so powdred
with diuers sparks, yt the colours of thréescore sundrie
stones are perceiued in his little compasse. All these
liue by the flesh of Serpents, and béeing ignoraunt of
spéech,The Augyles. doo rather iabber and gnarre then speake. The
Augyles worship none but the deuils. The first nyght
that they are married, they compell theyr wyues to
haue to doo with as many as will come: and from that
time forward, they bind them by most straight lawes
to continuall chastitie. The Gamphasants abstayne
from warres,The Gamphasants. eschew intercourse of merchandise, and
will not abide to intermedle with any straunger. It
is thought that ye 
               Blemmyes (but not those Blemmyes
that dwell by the Red sea) are borne headlesse,The Blemmyes & that
they haue theyr mouth and eyes in their breste.The Satyrs or Woodwards. The Goatefeete The crookelegs The
Satyres haue no resemblance of manne sauing onely
shape. The Egypanes are the very same that wée see
them painted. The Hymamtopodes hauing ye ioynts
of their legges bowed, doo rather créepe then goe, and
in walking vse rather to slyde then to steppe.
            
               The Pharusians hauing brought Hercules on the
waie as he was going toward the Hesperids,
               The Pharusian
                     •
                  
                were so
wearie of the iourney, that they taryed there. And
thus much of Lybie.
            
         
         
            CAP. XLIIII.
            Of Egypt, of the head, encrease, & mouthes of Nile,
of the Oxe Apis: of the Crocodiles: of the bird Trochyle:
of the Skinks, waterhorses, and the bird
Ibis, of the wonderfull trees of Egypt,
of Alexandria, and of Pyramyds
or Broches.
            
               
                  EGypt runneth to
the South inward, vntill it
méete with the Aethiopyans.
               Of Nyle.
Behind it floweth Nile
about the lower part thereof.
The which Riuer béeing
deuided at the place that is
named Delta, embraceth a
péece of groūd within it like
an Ile, and it is almost vnknowne where the head is
from whence it commeth, as we shall declare. It hath
hys beginning from a Mountaine of the lower Mauritanie,
that is n
                  •
               ere the Ocean. Thus affirme the
Punick bookes, and so reported King Iuba as I vnderstand.
By and by therefore it maketh a Lake which
they call Nilides.
            
            And it is coniectured that Nile commeth frō thence.

because thys Poole bringeth forth the same kinds of
hearbs, fishes, and beasts that we sée in Nyle, and that
if Mauritanie from whence it hath his originall, happen
to bee watred eyther with ouer déepe snowe, or
rage of raine, the flood in Egypt is thereby increased:
But the Nyle when he runneth out of his Lake is sucked
into the sandes, and hydden in the loose moulde of
the earth▪ and afterward, bursting foorth in the Caue
of Caesarea, larger then hee was before, bringeth the
same tokens with him which we noted in him at hys
first spring.
            Afterward hee sinketh downe againe, and venteth
not aboue the ground, till after a long weary iourney,
he come to the Aethyopians. Where it ryseth vppe againe,
it maketh the Ryu
                  •
               r Nygris which we told you
before bounded the borders of Affrick. The Inhabiters
there call it Astapus, which is as much to say, as
a water flowing out of darknesse. It inuironeth many
and great Iles, whereof some are of so large and huge
bignesse, that a man can scarce lakey through them in
fiue dayes,Nowe called Guaguera. runne he as fast as he can. The noblest of
them is * Meroe, about which, the Ryuer béeing deuided,
is named on the right Channell Astusapes, and
on the left Astabores. Then also trauelling through
great Countryes a long iourney, as soone as ye Rocks
méeting him by the way make him rough, hee caryeth
his waters with such violence through the cragged
cliffs, that he may séeme to fal rather then to flow, and
at lenght when he hath passed the last leape (for so the
Egyptians call certaine straights of hys) there is no
daunger in him. Then leauing the name of Syris behinde
him, he runneth from thenceforth playne wythout
any stoppe. Lastly he is deuided into seauen channels:
and so turning towarde the North, is receiued
into the Sea of Egypt.
            
            
               Such as are ignorant of Astronomie and Cosmographie,Coniectures of the increase of Nyle.
haue aledged manie causes of his increase. Some
affyrme that the East wyndes called Etesiae, do driue
great store of clowdes to the place where the Ryuer
springeth, and that the spring rysing by the moysture
comming from aboue, afoordeth so much water to the
flowing of the Riuer as the clowdes haue let fal moysture
to the féeding of the spring. Othersome reporte,
that béeing driuen backe by the violence of wyndes,
when hee cannot vtter his waues, which kéepe their
accustomed swiftnesse, the water béeing pent in the
straight ouerfloweth his banckes, and the more the
blasts of the contrarie wynds resist, so much the higher
dooth the swift Riuer (being beaten backe) mount
aloft, because that neyther the accustomed course can
emptie the channel, and yet the weyght of the streame
commeth on still from the head of the spring vpon the
Ryuer which is dammed vp: And that thus by the agréeable
violence of the Element on the oneside stryuing
forward, and on the otherside beating backward,
the waues swell, and gather into a heape, whereby is
made the floodde.
            Diuers hold opinion, that this spring which is called
Phiala, is raysed by the influence of the stars, and
that béeing haled out by the Sunne beames, it is heaued
vpp by the celestiall fire, but not wythout a sure
and orderly custome, that is to say, at the newe of the
Moone, howbeit that the Sunne is the verye grounde
of hys excesse. For the first rysing and swelling thereof
beginneth when the Sunne mooueth through y• signe
of Cancer: and afterwarde, when the thir
                  •
               y partes
thereof are runne out, so as the Sunne is entred
into Leo, and the starre called Sirius ryseth: then the
Riuer flushing forth wyth so great a violence, breaketh
ouer his bancks: which time the Priests iudged

to be the byrth day of the worlde, that is to wéete betwéene
theThe nineteenth day of Iuly. thirtéenth of the Calends of August, and
the eleuenth day of August, and that afterward all the
excesse is called back againe, when the Sunne passeth
into Virgo, and is driuen cleane againe within hys
banks, when the Sunne is entred into Libra. They
adde this moreouer, that he hurteth both wayes, whether
he swell too high or too lowe, forasmuch as hys
scantnes bringeth small store of increase, and his ouer
great aboundance hindreth the tyllage by to long continuance
of moistnes. They say that his greatest excesse
riseth to eightéene cubits, and his measurablest
to sixtéene: and y• at fiftéene wanteth no store of fruite.
But if it be vnder, it causeth derth. They attribute also
this maiestie vnto him, that hee shoulde foreshewe
thinges to come: grounding their argument héerevppon,
that at y• battell of Pharsalie, it excéeded not fyue
fathome. This is most certaine, that hee onely of all
Riuers breatheth forth no ayres. It beginneth to appertaine
to the Realme of Egypt from Syene, wherein
is ye vttermost bounde of Aethyop, & so from thence
vntill it fal into the Sea, it keepeth the name of Nyle.
Among all the thinges that Egypt hath woorthye to
be spoken of, they make a wonder specially of the Oxe
which they call Apis.
            
            Him they worshyppe as a God,Apis the God of Egypt. and hee is notable
for the whyte specke which groweth naturally on hys
right side, representing the likenesse of the horned
Moone. The time is appointed howe long hee shall
liue, which beeing expyred, hée is drowned in the
bottome of a holy Well, because hee shoulde not liue
any longer then is lawfull for him. By and by not
wythout solemne mourning of all the whole Realme
another is sought.
            Assoone as he is founde, a hundred Priestes wayte

vpon him to Memphis, to the intent that taking orders
there, he may begin to become holye. The Temples
into which he entereth or where he resteth, they
misticallie name bryde Chambers. Hee giueth manifest
foretokens of things to come:See howe the deuil can delude Idolaters by false Miracles. and that inespecially
if he take meate of their handes that come to aske
counsel. By refusing Germanicus
                     •
                   Caesars hande, hee bewrayed
that which hung ouer his head, for it was not
long after, but Caesar was dispatched of his life. The
boyes followe flocking after Apis, and suddainly, as
though they were mooued with some spirit, they tell
of things to come. Once in a yéere a Cowe is shewed
him, and shée also is not without certaine marks, the
which is kylled the same day that she is found, assoone
as she hath béene shewed to him. The people of Memphis
solemnize the byrth day of Apis, by casting a cup
of golde into Nyle. This solemnitie is helde seauen
dayes together, during which time the Crocodyles
kéepe as it were a truce with the Priestes, and touch
them not in their washings. But the eyght day, when
the Ceremonies are nowe finished, (as though open
warre were proclaimed again) they take to thē theyr
former crueltie.Of Crocodyle
                     •
                  
                The Crocodile a fourefooted myschiefe,
hath force both vpon land and water alike. Hée
hath no tongue, and he mooueth y• vpper Iaw. Where
he byteth he taketh horrible fast holde, his téeth shutting
Checquer wise one wythin another. For the most
part he groweth to the bignes of twenty fathoms, and
they lay Egs like Géece Egs. Hee chooseth a place to
builde his neste in, where the water of Nyle cannot
come when it is at the fullest. In cheryshing vp theyr
young, the Male and Female kéepe theyr turnes. Beside
hys wyde chappes, hée is also armed with outragious
long talants. A nights hee kéepeth in y• waters,
and a dayes he resteth vppon the lande.
            
               He is clad in a meruailous strong hyde, in so much
as a péece of artillarie shotte at him out of any engine
reboundeth backe againe from hys skynne. There is
a little prettie byrde called Trochylos,
               The bird called Trochylos. which in seeking
to féede vpon the flesh that sticketh in the Crocodyles
téeth, dooth by little and little scrape his mouth,
and so delyghting him easily with hys soft tyckling,
maketh him gape, that hee may stande betwéene his
chappes.The beast called the Enhydre. Which thing the Enhydre (which is a kynd
of water Ratte) perceiuing, whyppeth into the beasts
belly, and eateth vp hys inwardes, and then grating
through his paunche commeth out againe. There is
also a kind of Dolphins in Nyle,
               The Dolphins of Nyle. that haue finnes like
sawes vpon theyr backs. These Dolphins egge foorth
the Crocodiles for the nonce to swymme, and then diuing
subtillie, they poppe vppe vnder them, and cutting
theyr bellies kyll them. Moreouer in a certaine
Iland of Nyle, there dwell men of a very low stature,
but of such a boldnesse, that they offer to méete y• Crocodyles,
for these Monsters pursue them that flée from
them, and flée from them that follow them. Therfore
are they caught, and béeing made tame become slaues
in their owne waters, and when they be throughlye
brought in awe, they are so obedient for feare, that for
getting their wildnesse, they carry theyr Maisters ryding
on their backs. As soone therefore as they escrye
this Iland or this nation by the smell, they flée far of.
In the water they are dull of sight, and on the lande
most sharpe sighted. All the Winter long they eate no
meate: but from the beginning of the short dayes,
they continue fasting by the space of foure Monethes
together. Ther is also about Nile great store of Skinks
which are like Crocodiles,Skinks but of a lesser making, and
shorter, howbeit they are very necessarye for the preseruation
of helth. For Physicions make drinkes of

them to ease the numnes of sinewes, and kil the force
of poyson. In the same Ryuer, and in the same soyle,
bréedeth the Water horse, lyke a Horse in back, mane,
and neying: wyth a snoute turning vpwarde,The Waterhorse clouen
clées, tushes like a Boare, and a writhed tayle. Hee
eateth vppe the Corne in the night, whereunto of a
subtiltie hee goeth backwarde, that by the deceitfull
print of his foote, hée may not bee laide for in hys way
homeward.
            The same beast, when he is ouerfull with féeding
gettes him to the Réedes that are newe cutte downe,
and trots so long vppe and downe vppon them, vntill
the sharpe stumppes haue so wounded his féete, that
with bléeding he may abate the burthen of his bellye.
Afterwarde hée stoppeth the wounde with clay, vntill
it growe to a dry scarre. Marcus Scaurus was y• first
that brought Water horses and Crocodiles to Rome.
About the same bankes is a Byrde called Ibis,
               The bird Ibi
                     •
                  
                which
maketh hauocke of Serpents Egges, and carryes
them as a most delectable meate to her young ones in
her nest: by meanes whereof the increase of hurtfull
thinges is diminished. Neyther doo these birdes good
wythin y• coast of Egypt onelie. For wheras swarms
of winged Snakes come out of the Fennes of Arabi
                     •
                  
               
whose poyson is so swift of operation, that menne dye
of their stinging before they féele anie paine, the birds
béeing mooued with a certaine foresight (wherewith
they are endued for the same purpose) goe altogether
in aray, and before the saide forraine mischiefe canne
waste the bounds of theyr owne Country, they méete
the pestilent flocks in the ayre, and there deuoure all
the whole hoste of them. For which deserte they are
counted holie, and no man may hurt them. They lay
their Egges at theyr mouth. Onelie Pelusium breedeth
them blacke, the reste of Egypt bréedeth them

white. Of the trées which only Egypt beareth, y• chiefe
is the Figge trée of Egypt, which hath leaues lyke a
Mulberrie Trée,The Fygtree of Egypt. and beareth fruite not onely on the
boughes, but also on the body of the Trée. It is so 
                  •
               o
                  ••
               
               teous
in fruitfulnesse, that in one yéere it beareth seauen
times. Wheresoeuer yée pull of one Fyg, by and
by buddeth vppe another. The woode thereof beeing
put into the water sinketh downe to the bottome: and
afterward, when it hath lyen long soking in the water,
as though it were made lighter, it ryseth vppe and
fléeteth vpon the brym: and cleane contrary to the nature
of all other woods, moistnes maketh it dry. The
Date trée of Egypt,
               The Date Tree of Egypt. Thirstlesse, is also a thing worthy to bee spoken
of, properly it is called Adipsos, and so it ought to
bee called: for béeing tasted it putteth away thirste.
The sauor therof is like a Quince: but it stauncheth
not thirst, vnlesse it be gathered somwhat before it bée
ripe. For if it be taken full ripe, it perisheth the memorie,
takes away ones going, makes ones tongue
trippe, and weakening the powers both of the minde
and of the body, coūterfetteth the vice of drunkennes.
A straunge finding of the beginning of the yeere. The Marches of Egypt where it ryseth in height toward
the vppermost point of Kakecaumen, are inhabited
by a people, which find out the moment wherin
the yéere beginneth first his ordinarie course by thys
deuice. There is chosen a holy groue, whereinto they
driue beastes of all kinds. These beastes, at such time
as the motion of heauen is come about to his determinate
point, expresse their vnderstandings by such
outward signes and tokens as they are able. Some
howle, some lowe, some roare, some bray, and diuers
runne together into the myre, and theyr wallowe.
            Thys experiment is a rule to them, wherby
to finde out the beginning of the time. The same

people reporte also, that it hath béene left vnto them
for a certaintie by the first founders of their Nation,
that the Sunne rysing was there, whereas is now the
going downe.Thebae of Egypt Among the Citties of Egypt, Thebe is
notable for the number of Gates, vnto which Cittie
the Arabians bring merchandise from all parts of the
worlde. Hereof the Countrey Thebaica taketh hys
name.Abydos in Egypt. 
               Abydos also sometime renowmed wyth the
Palace of Memnon, and nowe beautified with the
Temple of Osyris. Both the hugenesse of the work itselfe,
and the King of Macedonie the founder thereof,
doo 
                  •
               nnoble Alexandria,
               Alexandria. and Dimocrates the maister
of the workes, deserued the seconde place of fame
next vnto the builder, for setting out the platt thereof.
Alexandria was builded in the hundred and twelfth
Olympiade, when L. Papyrius the Sonne of Spurius
and C. Petilius the Sonne of Caius were Consulles of
Rome, not farre from the mouth of the Ryuer Nyle,
which some call Heracleotick, and othersome Canopick.
There is also Pharos▪
               
               Pharos peopled with inhabiters
sette there by Caesar the Dictator, where lights are
sette vppe a nights for men, to sayle safely in and out
of the Hauen by. For the comming to Alexandria is
subtill, full of deceitfull shelues, an vntertaine Sea,
and arriuable onely at thrée Channels, Tegamus, Posidonius,
and Taurus. Hée
                  •
               e upon therefore such beakons
or engines as are framed in Hauens to giue
light, are called Phari.
               Pyramide
                     •
                  
                The * Pyramides are Broches
in Egypt, raysed with sharpe spyres aboue the height
of any thing that can be made by mans hand: and for
asmuch as they passe the measure of shaddowes, they
haue no shadowes at all. Now let vs turne our talke
from Egypt.
            
         
         
            
            CAP. XLV.
            Of Arabie and of the Frankencence and Myrrhe in
it, of the byrds called Phaenix and Cynamolgies
Of the manners of the Arabians,
and of the kynds of theyr
precious stones.
            
               
                  BEyonde the mouth of
Nylus called Pelusiacum is
Arabie stretching to y• Red
sea,This is Arabie 
                     •
                  he Desert. which Varro affirmeth
to be called Erythraeum, of
King Erythrus the sonne of
Perseus & Andromeda, and
not onely red of the colour,
thereof. The sayde Author,
auoucheth also,A strange spring that on y• shore of this Sea, is a Fountaine,
whereof if Shéepe drinke, they chaunge the colour
of theyr fléeces: and wheras they were white before,
they lose that which they had vntill they drunke,
and afterward become a déepe yellow colour. Uppon
the Redde Sea, standeth 
                  •
               he Cittie Arsinoe. And thys
Arabie extendeth to that spicebearing and rich Land,Arsinoe.
which the Cutabanes andDwellers in Tents. 
               Scaenits possesse. The Arabians
are renowmed with the Mountain Casius. The
cause why these Scaenits are so named, is for that they
dwell in Tents, and haue none other houses. Theyr
Tents are couered with haires made of Goates haire
wouen.
            Moreouer, they vtterly abstaine from Swynes
flesh. Surelie if this kind of beast bee brought thither,

it dieth by and by. This Arabie the Greekes callBlessed 
                     〈◊〉
                   happy. 
               Eudaemon,
and we call it by interpretation blessed. It is
inhabited wyth a Hyll made by hand, betwéene y• Ryuer
Tygris, and the Riuer Eulaeus: which springing
among the Medes,
               The estimation had in old time to the water of the Riuer Eulaeus. is so renowmed for the cléerenesse
of hys water, that all the Kings of that Realme, drink
none other thing then the liquor thereof. That it was
not vnworthelie surnamed Eudaemon or blessed, yee
may gather héereby: that besides the spyces whereof
it hath great store, that Countrey onely and none other,
yéeldest, Frankencence, and yet not al the whole
Countrey neither. For in the mids of it are the Atranits
a shiere of the Sabaeans,
               Of Frankencence. from whence about eight
remoouings of, is the Countrey that beareth y• Frankencence.
It is called Arabie, that is to say holy, for so
the name signifieth by interpretatiō.What the worde Arabie signifieth. These low trees
are not cōmon: but (which is a strange thing among
barbarous nations) they goe by right of inheritaunce
in the succession of certaine Families. And therefore
those that haue the possession of thys groue, are called
in the Arabian tongue holy. The same persons also at
such time as they doo eyther crop or fell
                  •
               these groues,
come not nigh any coarse, nor defile themselues wyth
the companie of women. Before the trueth of the matter
was certainlie knowne, some likened thys trée to
the Mastick Trée, and some to the Turpentine Trée,
vntill such time as by the Bookes of King Iuba, wrytten
to Caesar the Sonne of Augustus, it was plainlie
declared, that it was a Trée wyth a crooked stock, and
boughes like a Maple, yéelding a iuyce like y• Almond
Trée, and that it is wont to be cutte in the beginning
of the Dogdaies, when the Sunne burneth hotest. In
the same lands groweth also Myrrhe:Myrrhe. the rootes wher
of doo thriue with dyging, and delight to bee proyned:
and when they be layd bare, they yéelde y• fatter gum.
            
               The iuyce that issueth of his owne accord is y• more
precious: and that which is drayned forth by slitting
the barke, is counted the worser. The barke wyndeth
rounde like a whirlepoole, and is full of rough pricks:
the leafe is like an Olife, sauing that it is somewhat
more rough. The vttermost height that it groweth
vnto, is fiue Cubits. The Arabians make fire wyth
the shreddes of it: the fume whereof is so noysome,
that if they preuented not the mischiefe with the sent
of burnt Storax, diuers times they shoulde catch vncurable
diseases. Among the same people bréedeth the
byrd called the Phaenix,
               The Phaenix of the bignesse of an Eagle,
his head garnished with a plume of feathers sticking
vppe like a crest, with tufted chéekes, and with a ring
about his necke, shyning like gold. All his hinder part
is purple, sauing his trayne, the feathers whereof are
of a rose colour, medled with a bright Azure. It is
prooued that he lyueth fiue hundred and fortye yéeres.
Hée maketh hys herse of Cynnamom, which he trimmeth
néere vnto Panchaia, bringing his pyle of sticks
into the Cittie of the Sunne,Hel
                     •
                  opolis. What a great yeere is. and there laying it vppon
the Altar: It is a matter of doubtfull credite among
Authors, whither a great yéere be accomplished
with the life of this yéere or no. The most part of thē
affyrme, that a great yéere consisteth not of fiue hundred
and fortie, but of twelue thousand, nine hundred
fiftie and foure of our yéeres. Finally, when Quintus
Plautius, and Sext
                     ••
                   Papinius were Consuls, the Phaenix
               
                  •
               lewe into Egypt, and béeing taken the eight hundreth
yeere after the building of the Cyttie, was by
the commaundement of Claudius the Emperour,
shewed openlie at the election of the Officers. The
which deede, besydes the decrée that remaynes concerning
the same, is also enrolled among the Acts of
the Cittie.
            
               The Cynnamolgus likewyse a byrd of Arabia,
               The Cinnamom Byrde. maketh
hys neste of the twygges of Cynnamom in the
trées that be highest, whereunto because there is no
clymbing by reason of the height of the trées, and brittlenesse
of the boughes, the inhabiters throwe lynes
with plummets of lead on the endes of them into the
nestes, and so pulling them downe, sel them farre déerer,
because the Merchants like that Cynnamom better
then any other.The manners of the Arabians. The Arabians haue a large and a
wyde Countrey euery way, and liue after diuers maners,
with diuers kinds of Religion. Many goe wyth
powled heads, and hoodes like myters, and in apparel
fashyon like to the same: and some shaue their beards
to the hard skyns. They giue themselues to Merchandise:
not bying other folks wares, but vttering they
                  •
               
owne. For they bee rich bothe in woods and waters.
The shadowes which lye to vs on the ryght hande,Not at all tymes of the yeere, but openly while the Sun is in Cancer, and that is but in the South part of Arabie onely. lie
to them on the left. Some of them that liue hardlye
eate Snakes flesh. They haue neither regard of body
nor soule, and therfore they are named Ophiophags.
From the Seacoast of thys Countrey was brought
vnto King Polycrates, a precious stone called a Sardonix,
which first stirred vppe the firebrand of excesse in
our part of the worlde.Snakeaters. But the Sardonix
               Sardonix. is so well
knowne of all men, that I thinke not méete to make
long processe about it. The vpperpart thereof is allowable
if it be a shéere red: but it is reprooued if it be
thicke like dregges. The mids of it is girded wyth a
whytish circle, the grace whereof is if it neither shed
his colour into the next, nor he himselfe borrow of the
other. The rest of him is finished with a black, which
(if it giue a light through it,) is counted a fault: but
if it let from séeing through, it giueth it the greater
grace.The Molochyte. The Arabian also findeth the Molochite of
a deeper greene then is the Emerawde, hauing a

natiue vertue against the perrills of infants. Hee findeth
likewise the Iris in the Red sea, sixe cornered as
the Crystall:The Iris or Rainbow stone which béeing touched with the Sunnebeames,
casteth out of him a bryght reflexion of the
ayre like the Raynebowe. The same Arabians gather
the Androdamant bright as Siluer,The Androdamant or Male Diamond with sides equallie
square, which yée would thinke to haue borowed
somewhat of the Diamond. It is thought y• hys name
is gyuen him of that hee asswageth ye passions of hote
mindes, and restrayneth the rage of anger. Wee haue
from thence also the Arabish
               The Pederote called also Opalius, 
               Pederote: which (to
sée to) is like Iuorie, and will not be filed. It helpeth
them that beare it, against paines of the sinewes. In
the Pederote is conueyed whatsoeuer is excellent,
with a certaine prerogatiue of comlines. It is cleere,
like Crystal: it is ruddy like purple: glystring in the
vttermost verges as it were out of water, with a border
yellowe like Saffron. With this swéetnesse it rauisheth
the eyes, allureth the sight, deteyneth the beholders:
and for this beautie, it pleaseth also the Indians.
This is inough concerning Arabie, nowe let vs
retyre againe to Pelusium.
            
         
         
            
            CAP. XLVI.
            Of Mount Casius: of the great Pompeis tombe:
and of the Towne Ioppa.
            
               
                  FRom Pelusium is
Mount Casius, and y• Chappell
of Iupiter Casius, and also
the place of Ostracina,
ennobled with the Tombe
of the great Pompey. From
thence beginnethEdom 
               Idumaea,
fruitful of Date trées.
Afterward comesNow called Port Iaffe 
               Ioppa,
the auncientest Towne in all the worlde, as which
was builded before the generall flood. In that Towne
is to be séene a Rocke, which kéepeth yet the print of
the chaynes of Andromeda, who (as is reported,Of Andromada and the Monster and
that by no vaine rumor) was sette foorth there to bee
deuoured of a Monster.
            For Marcus Scaurus in his Aedileshyppe showed
the bones of that Monster openly at Rome. The
thing is regystred in Chronicles. The measure of thē
also is contayned in true Bookes: that is to say, that
the length of his ribbes was more then fortie foote,
and that hee was farre higher then the Olyphants of
Inde. Moreouer, euery ioynt of hys ridgbone were
aboue halfe a foote broade.
         
         
            
            CAP. XLVII.
            Of Iewry: of the Ryuers and Lakes therein: of
Balme: of Sodom and Gomor
                  •
               he: and
of the Essaene Nations.
            
               
                  IEwrie is famous
               
for waters, but all the waters
are not of one nature.The Ryuer Iordan.
The Ryuer Iordan béeing
of excellent sweetnes, and
flowing out of ye fountaine
Peneas, runneth by moste
pleasant Countries, vntill
that falling into the Lake
The dead Sea. 
               Asphaltites, which ingendreth Bitumen, it is there
corrupted with the standing water. This Lake hath
no lyuing thing in it, nothing can drowne in it. Buls
and Cammels swym without daunger in it. There is
also a Lake called Genezar,
               The Lake of Genezareth sirtéene myles long, besett
with many goodly Citties, and himselfe fellowe with
the best. But the Lake of Tyberias
               The Lake of Tyberias is preferred before
all these, wholsome for his milde tast, and effectuall
of operation for health. The heade of Iewry hath
béene Ierusalem,
               Ierusalem. but it is vtterly destroyed. In stedde
thereof, succéeded Iericho,
               Iericho. and this also hath ceased to
be the head, since it was conquered in the warres of
Artaxerxes.
            
            Néere vnto Ierusalem is the FountaineFairestreame. 
               Callyrhoe,
greatly commended for the medicinable heate
thereof, which taketh hys name of the renowne of his
water.Of Balme Onely in thys Lande groweth Balme, which

kynde of Trée was not to be founde out of y• compasse
of twenty acres of grounde, vnto the time that wee
conquered the Countrey. But after that we had gotten
Iewry, those groues were so spredde abroade, that
nowe very large Hylles doo yeelde vs Balme.
            The stocks of them are like vines: they are sette
of slyppes: they we
                  •
               e lustie with dygging about the
rootes: they delight in water: they loue proyning,
and are shadowed continually with their own leaues
which stick fast.
            The wood of the stemme béeing touched wyth yron,
dyeth without delay: and therefore they be cunningly
slytted eyther with glasse or with Knyues of
boane, and that onely in the Barke, out of which issueth
a Gumme of excellent swiftnesse. Next after
the Gum, the second place of price is gyuen to ye Apples,
the thyrd to the rynde, and the last to the woode.
A great way from Ierusalem lyeth a sorrowful coaste,
which was striken from heauen, as appeareth by the
soyle thereof, which is black, and resolued into Ashes.
            There were two Townes, the one named Sodom,
               Sodom and Gomorrhe. the other Gomorrhe: and there groweth an
Apple which though it séeme to bee rype, yet canne
it not bee eaten. For wythin the skynne that goeth
about it, there is contayned a cindrye soote, whych
at euerye lyght touch puffeth out lyke a smoke, and
crumbleth into loose dust.
            The inner partes of Iewrye towarde the West,The secte of the Esseyes.
are possessed by ye 
               Essaenes: who vsing a notable trade
of dyscypline by themselues, haue departed from the
custome of all other Nations, ordeyned heereunto
(as I thynke) by the prouidence of the diuine maiestie.
            There are no Women among them: they haue

vtterly renounced fleshlie lust: they occupy no mony,
they liue by Dates: no manne is there borne, and yet
there wanteth no store of men. The place it selfe is
deputed to chastitie: wherevnto though many resorte
from all places about, yet is none admitted vnlesse his
approoued chastitie and innocent life make him woorthie.
For hee that is guiltie of neuer so light a fault,
cannot get in there, make he neuer so much sute: but
is remooued by the power of God.
            Thus time without minde (a wonderfull thing to
bée spoken) the nation continueth, and yet no chyldbeddes
among them. Beneath the Essaenes was the
Towne of Engaddie, which nowe is vtterly rased.
Neuerthelesse, the notable woods kéepe theyr reputation
still, and the high groues of Date trées are nothing
at all defaced, neither by time nor by warres.
The vttermost bounde of Iewry is the Castle of Massada.
            
         
         
            CAP. XLVIII.
            Of the Towne Scythopolis, and the Mountaine
Casius.
            
               
                  I Passe ouer Damasco,
Philadelphia, and
Raphana, and will tel who
were the firste inhabyters,
and who was the founder
of S
                     •
                  ythopolis.
               Scythoplis. At suche
time as Bacchus had buried
his Nourse, he builded this
Towne, to the intent by

rearing the walles thereof, to aduaunce the renowme
of her Sepulture. And forasmuch as inhabiters wanted,
he chose out of his company the Scythians: and
the more to encourage them to defende the Cittie, hee
gaue it their name.
            In the Countrey Selucia is another Mount Casius,
harde by Antioche, from the toppe whereof a manne
may in the fourth watch sée the Globe of the Sunne,Mount Casius.
and with turning his body about a little aside, behold
day on his one side, by meanes of the Sun dispersing
the darknesse wyth his bright beames, & on hys other
side still night. Such a prospect is there out of Mount
Casius, that yée may sée the light before the day appeare.
         
         
            CAP. XLIX.
            Of the Ryuers Euphrates and Tygris, and of
sundry sorts of precious stones.
            
               
                  EVphrates cōmeth
               
out of the greater Armenia,
               Euphrates
rysing aboue Zimara vnder
the foote of a Mountayne
that is next Scythia, which
the dwellers by call Capotes.
This Riuer receiuing
certaine others vnto him,
wexeth bigge, and béeing encreased
with forraine waters, wrestleth wyth the
straights of the Mountaine Taurus, whom he cutteth
through at Eligea, albeit he withstand hym twelue

myles broade: and so running still foorth a long way,
leaueth Comagene on his right side, and Arabie on
his left. Afterwarde, swéeping by many Nations, hee
deuideth Babylon sometime the heade Citty of Chaldey.
Hée enricheth Mesopotamia with the excesse of
his yéerely ouerflowing, and maketh the soile fruitful
by shedding himselfe vpon the land, in the like sort as
the Riuer of Egypt doth. He passeth ouer his bankes
in a manner the same time that Nylus doth, namelye
when the Sunne is in the twentye degrée of Cancer.
And it falleth againe at such time as the Sunne hauing
trauailed ouer Leo, is setting foote into the vttermost
Marches of Virgo.
            
            The Cosmographers holde opinion, that it happeneth
so vnto like paralleles, which by the plat bothe
of the heauen and of the earth, méete iust and euen together,
according to the order of the imaginitiue line.
Whereby it appeareth that these two Ryuers, béeing
situate plomme vnder one parallele, albeit they flowe
out of sundry quarters, haue neuerthelesse one selfe
same cause of both theyr increasings.Tygris. It is conuenient
also to speake of Tygris in this place. In the
Realme of the greater Armenie, it lyfteth vppe hys
head wyth a meruailous fayre and cléere spring, in a
hygh ground, which is named Elongosine: and yet is
hee not bygge from the beginning.
            Fyrst he goeth slowly, not wyth hys owne name:
but as soone as he entreth the borders of Medea, hee
is forthwyth called Tygris: for so doo the Medes call
an arrowe. Hée runneth into the Lake Arethusa,
which sustaineth all weyghts:A strange Lake the Fysh whereof neuer
come within the Channell of Tygris, lyke as the
Fysh of Tygris neuer passe into the Poole of Arethusa,
through which hee shooteth vnlyke of colour, and
a very swift pace.
            
               Anon after béeing letted by the Mountaine Taurus,
hée sinketh into a déepe Caue, and so running vnder
him, venteth againe on the otherside of hym at
Zoroanda, bearing before him wéedes & other drosse,
and a little way of sinketh againe, and afterwarde auauncing
himselfe, hee runneth by the Adiabines and
Arabians, embraceth Mesopotamia, receiueth the noble
Ryuer Choaspes into him, and carryeth Euphrates
into the Sea of Persia. As many Countryes as
drinke of Euphrates, doo glyster wyth sundry precious
stones.The Smilax. The Smilax is gathered in Euphrates
owne Channell, a Iewell like to the Marble of Procomiesus,
but that in the belly of thys stone, there
shynes a yellow, like the ball of ones eye. The Sagda
commeth to vs from the Chaldyes, not easie to bee
founde, but that (as they affyrme) it offereth it selfe
to be taken. For by the naturall operation of the spyrite
thereof, it ryseth out of the bottome to the shyps
that sayle ouer it, and cleaueth so fast to theyr Kéeles,
that it can hardly bee seperated from them wythout
scraping away part of the timber.The Sagda This Sagda for the
effects that they knowe it hath, is hyghly estéemed of
the Chaldyes: and it hath such an orient gréene, that
the beauty thereof maketh it to bee liked aboue all others.
The Myrrhite The Myrrhite is common among the Parthyans.
If yée should iudge thys stone by the eye, it is of
the colour of Myrrhe, and hath nothing that may delight
the sight. But if ye try him throughly, and chafe
hym tyll hée bee hote, hee hath as sweete a flauor as
Nardus. In Persia is such aboundance of stones, and
such varietie, that it woulde bee a long matter to reporte
theyr names. The Mythridax béeing stryken
wyth the Sunne,The Mythridax glystereth wyth sundry sorts of
colours.
            The Tecolythe
               The Tecolythe beeing lyke the kernell of an

an Oliue, is despised in sight: but in goodnes for medicine
it excelleth the beautie of other stones. For béeing
beaten into powder and drunke, it breaketh the
stone, and easeth the diseases of the rayne and ye bladder.The Ammochrise or goldsand.
The Ammochryse béeing medled wyth sparkes
of golde and fine grauell together, hath héere and there
little square spots of goldfoyle and dust. The Aetite is
both yellow, and round of proportion, contayning another
stone within it, which maketh a noyse when it
is styrred, albeit that the cunningest Iewellers say, it
is not the little stone within it that maketh that tingling,The Aetite or Aeglest one.
but a spirite. This Aetite Z
                     •
                  roaster preferreth
before all other stones, and attributeth very great
vertue vnto it. It is founde eyther in Egles nestes, or
els on the shoares of the Ocean: but most of all in
Persia. Béeing worne about a woman wyth chylde, it
preserueth her from deliuerance before her time. The
Pyrrhite is of the colour of golde, and wyll not suffer
himselfe to bee helde ouer close in ones hande, for if it
chaunce to be strayned ouer hard,The Pyrrhite or Fyrestone. it burneth ye fingers.The Chalazias or Haylstone.
The Chalazias pretendeth both the whytnes and the
fashyon of a Haylestone, of hardnesse most sounde and
inuinsible.
            The Echite is spotted like a Uiper. The Dyonisias
is browne,The Echite or Adderstone. besprinckled with red specks: the same
béeing broken in powder and mingled with water,The Dyonisias or Winestone
hath the flauor of wyne, and (which in that sent is a
wonder) it resisteth drunkennes.The Glossopetre or Tonguestone. The Glossopetre
falleth from the skye in the wane of the Moone, lyke
to a mans tongue, and it is of no small power as the
Magicians affirme: who thinke that the motions of
the Moone are stirred out of it. The Iewell of ye Sun
is very white,The Iewell of the Sunne Venus hayre. after the manner of a streaming starre
and spreadeth out ruddy beames. The hayre of Venus
is of glossy black, resembling inwardly the likenes of

red hayres. The Selenite is of a shéere white colour,Selenite or the Moonestone.
medled with the colour of honny, contayning in it the
Image of the Moone, which is reported to growe or
diminish from day to day,The Meconite or Poppy stone according to the course of
the Planet.
            The Meconite resembleth Poppie.The Myrmecite or Antstone The Myrmecite
is marked with the likenesse of an Ant créeping.The Chalcophthong or brasse
                  
                     •
                  ounde.
The Chalcophthong ringeth like Brasse beaten
vppon. Béeing carryed chastly, it preserueth the voice
cléere.The Syderite or Ironstone The Syderite (to sée to) differeth nothing from
yron: but like a makebate, wheresoeuer it is brought
in, it styrreth discorde.The Phlogite or flame stone The Phlogite representeth as
it were flames of fire burning within it.The Authracias or the colestone. The Anthracias
glistereth as it were with sparkling stars. The
Enydros sweateth in such wyse,The Enydros or Waterstone as yée woulde thinke
there were some spring of water shut vp within it.
         
         
            CAP. L.
            Of Cilicia, and the Denne Coricium,
and of the Mountaine
Taurus.
            
               
                  COncerning Cilicia
               
which now is in hande,
if wee treate of it as it is
nowe, we shall séeme to discredite
antiquitie. Againe,
if we 
                  •
               ollowe the bounds it
had in olde time, it is cleane
contrarye from the state of
thinges present. And therefore

to auoyde both inconueniences, the best that wee
can doo is to report the states of both times. In olde
time Cilicia extended euen vnto Pelusium of Egypt,
               The bounds of Cilicia in olde time.
and the Lydians, Medes, Armenians, Pamphilians,
and Cappadocians, were vnder the dominion of the
Cilicians. Anon after, béeing subdued by the Assyrians,
it was streightened into a narower roome. It lyeth
for the most part in Champion ground, receiuing
the Sea of Issos in a large Bay: and on the back it is
enclosed wyth the ridges of the Mountaines Taurus,
and Amanus. It tooke the name of Cilix, whom auncient
time hath hidden quite beyond the reache of remembraunce.
They say he was the Sonne of Phaenix,
who is counted auncienter then Iupiter, and one
of the first that euer was bredde vppon the earth. It
hath the mother of Citties Tarsus,
               Tarsus. which Perseus the
noble ympe of Danae founded.The Ryuer Cydnus. The Ryuer Cydnus
cutteth through thys Cittie. Some haue left in wryting,
that this Cydnus falleth from the Mountaine
Taurus: and othersome say it is deriued out of the
Channell of Choaspis:
               Choaspes. the which Choaspis is of so
swéete tast, that as long as it runneth wythin ye borborders
of Persia, the Kinges of Persia reserued it only
for their owne drinking: and when they should go
a progresse any whither, they carryed of the water of
it with them. Of such parent therefore doth Cydnus
take hys wonderfull swéetnes. Whatsoeuer is white
the Syrians in their natiue language call it Cydnus:
wherof the name was giuen this Ryuer. Hee swelleth
in the spring time when the snowes are melted,
the rest of the yéere he is slender and quiet. About
Corycus in Cilicia groweth much Saffron, and very
good,Corycus. for though Sicill, though Syrena, though Lycia
yéelde Saffron to, yet is the Saffron of Cilicia ye most
principall. It hath a more fragrant smell, it is of a

more golden colour, and the iuyce thereof is more eflectuous
in medicine.
            There is also the Towne Coricus,
               A description of the Caue of Corycus and a Caue
which maketh hollow the Mountaine that butteth vppon
the Sea, from the very toppe to the hard bottom,
wyth a most large and open roome wythin. For hauing
both sides pitched fast in the déepe of the ground,
it commeth ouer the midspace that is emptie in manner
of a vault, wyth greene trées hanging inwarde
wyth their toppes downe. The descent into it is two
myles and a halfe long, hauing the open day al ye way,
and springes of fountaines flowing out on both sides.
When ye come to the bottome of the first vault, there
openeth againe another Caue: the entry whereof is
at the first wyde and lightsome, but after warde in going
further in, it waxeth darke by reason of the narrownes.
            In it is a holye Chappell of Iupiter: in the innermost
retreit whereof, the dwellers by doo beleeue
that the cowche of the Gyant Typhon standeth. There
was in Cilicia an auncient Towne called Soloe:
               Soloe the
natiue place of Chrysippus Prince of the Stoick Philosophers:
which béeing wonne by Tygranes King of
Armenia, was long after named Pompeyople by
Cneus, Pompeyus the great, who conquered Cilicia to
the Romaine Empire. The Mountaine Taurus riseth
first at the Indian Sea,The description of Mount Taurus. and so bearing hys ryght side
towarde the North, and his left side toward ye South,
and hys frunt full into ye West, shooteth himselfe betweene
the Sea of Egypt and the Sea of Pamphilia
at the Rocks of Chelidonie.
            
            It is manyfest hee woulde haue contynued
the mayne Lande styll foorthe, but for the deepe
Seas, which wyll not suffer hym to extend his rootes
any further.
            
               Surelie they that treate of the natures of places,
doo prooue that with his promontories, he hath assaide
all meanes possible, to finde passage. For wheresoeuer
he is washed with the Sea, hee runneth out in
Promontoryes. But he is stopped, sometime by the
Phaenician Sea, sometime by the Sea of Pontus, somtime
by the Caspian or Hyrcan Sea: through whose
resistaunce béeing often broken of hys wyll, hee wrytheth
towarde the Lake of Maeotis: and béeing as it
were tired with so manie distreses, ioyneth hymselfe
wyth the Mountaines Riphaei. According to the diuersitie
of nations,The names of Mount Taurus. and varietie of tongues that hee
passeth by, he is diuerstie named. Among the Indians
he is called Imaus, and afterwarde Paropanisus: among
the Parthians, Choatras: from thence Niphates:
then Taurus: and where hee ryseth of greatest
height Caucasus. By the way also he taketh names of
peoples. On the right side he is called Caspius or Hircanus,
and on the left side Amazonicus, Moschicus,
and Scythicus. Besides these, he hath also many other
names, where he gapeth with riuen cliffs, hee maketh
Gates, whereof the first is called the Armenian, the
seconde the Caspian: and the thyrd the Cilician. Hée
beareth hys heade towarde Greece also, where hée is
called Ceraunius. From the Coast of Cilicia, hee looketh
downe into the Marches of Affricke. As much of
him as lyeth to the South, is scorched wyth the Sun,
and whatsoeuer butteth vpon the North, is punished
with winde and frost. Where it is woodye, is is replenished
wyth wylde Beastes, and most cruell Lyons.
         
         
            
            CAP. LI.
            Of Lycia, and the Fable of the Monster
Chymaera.
            
               
                  THat which Vesuuius
               
is in Campane,
               Mount Chimaera & Aetna
in Sicill, the same is Chi
                  
                     •
                  era
in Lycia. This Hyll
breatheth vp smokie flames
in the night times. Wherevpon
rose the Fable of the
thréeformed monster amōg
the common people, beléeuing
that Chimaera was a liuely beaste. And because
the place is of a firie nature, the Lycians dedicated the
next Citty vnto Vulcane. and called it Ephaestia, after
the originall of his name. Among other thinges, there
was also the noble Towne of Olympus: but it is de
               
                  ••
               yed,
and nowe it is but a Castle.
            Beneathe the which are the Kinges waters, a
wonder to such as beholde them, for the beautifulnesse
of them.
         
         
            
            CAP. LII.
            Of the lesser Asia: of the Temple of Di
                  •
               na at Ephesus:
of the birth of great Alexander, of the famous
wryters of Asia: of Phrygia, of the fourefooted beast
called Bonasus, of the tymes of Homer and
Hesiodus, of Memnons byrds, of the
Chameleon, of Storks: and of the
originall of the Galathians.
            
               
                  NOwe followeth
Asia:
               Asia the lesse now called Natolia. but I meane not that
Asia which béeing the thyrd
part of the worlde, is from
the Egyptian Sea bounded
wyth the Ryuer Nyle, and
from the Lake Maeotis with
the Ryuer Tanais: but I
meane that Asia which beginneth at Telmessus of
Lycia, from whence the Gulfe, of Carpathus also taketh
hy
                  •
                beginning. This Asia therefore is enclosed
on the East wyth Lycia and Phrygia, on the West
wyth the 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                Sea, on the South with the Egyptian
Sea, and on the North with Paphlagonia.
               Ephesus. In it
is the most famous Cittie Ephesus. The beauty of
Ephesus is the Temple of Diana, buylded by the Amozons,
such a royall péece of worke, that when Xerxes
               
                  〈◊〉
                fyre on all the T
                  •
               mples of Asia, thys one onlie
hee spared.
            But thys gentlenesse of Xerxes exempted not thys

holy Church vtterly from that mys-fortune. For one
Herostratus to the intent (to purchase himselfe an euerlasting
fame by hys mischieuous déede) did sette
this noble péece of work on fire wyth his own hands,
The desire of vaine glory and when he had doone it, confessed it to wyn hymselfe
a continuall name.
            It is therefore noted that the Temple of Ephesus
was burned the selfe same day that Alexander the
great was borne in Pella,
               The byrth of Alexander the great. which (as Nepos reporteth)
was in the Consulshyppe of Marcus Fabius Ambustus
and Titus Quintius Capitolinus, the thrée hundred
fourescore and fift yéere after the building of Rome.
At such time as the Ephesians afterward repayred it,
more beautifull and stately then it was before. Dinocrates
was chiefe maister of the workes,Dinocrates euen ye same
Dinocrates who by the commaundement of Alexander
builded Alexandria in Egypt, as we tolde you before.
The great ruines of Asia beare wytnesse that there
neuer happened so continual earthquakes, and so manie
ouerthrowes of Citties in any place of the whole
worlde,Horrible earthquakes. as in Asia. In somuch that in the raygne of
Tiberius, twelue Citties were ouerthrowne at one
tyme wyth earthquake.
            The wyts of Asia haue béene renowmed ouer all
the world. Fyrst for Poetrie Anacreon: then Mimnermus
and Antimachus:
               Famous Poets after them Hipponax:
then Alcaeus: and among them also one Sapp
                     •
                  o a woman.
            For wryting of Hystoryes, Xanthus, Hecateus,
Herodotus,
               The famous wryters of Hystories and wyth them Ephorus and Theopompus.
Also of the seauen Sages, there were Bias, Thales
and Pittacus, and of Philosophers,Sages Philosophers. 
               Cleanthes one of the
excellen
                  ••
               st Stoicks, Anaxagoras a sercher of nature,
and Heraclitus also that bestowed all hys tyme in the
secrets of a subtiler doctrine.
            
               Next Asia, 
               
                  〈◊〉
                in Phrygia:
               Phrygie. wherein was
Celenae▪
                which hauing abolished hys former name,
fléeted into Apamaea, a Towne builded afterward by
Seleucus.
            
            Héere was Ma
                     •••
                  as borne, and héere was hee buried:
of whom the Ryuer thereby tooke his name.
For in remembrance of his vngracious chalenge, and
ouer malapart contention wyth the God of Musicke,
in playing vpon a shalme, there is a Ualley wyth a
Well in it not far from thence, which beareth marks
of the thing that was doone, and is a tenne myles of
from Apamaea, bearing the name ofPypewell 
               Aulocrene vnto
thys day.The crooked Riuer Maeander Out of a Mount of this Towne, the Ryuer
Maeander lifteth his heade: which running forwarde
and backward in crooked banks, falleth headlong
betwéene 
                  
                     •
                  aria, and Iconia, into the Gulfe that
deuideth Miletum and Priene.
            
            
               Phrygia it selfe lyeth aboue Troas,
               Phrigya. and bordereth
Northwarde vpon Galatia, and Southwarde vppon
Lycaoma, Pisidia, and Mygdonia. The same is on
the Easte, next Neighbor vnto Lydia, and on ye North
to Mysia and Caria. On that side that is towarde the
midday, is the Mountain Tmolus florished ouer with
Saffron, and the Riuer Pactolus,
               Pactolus. whom they call by
another nameGoldstreame The beaste Bonasus. 
               Chrysoroa, because he caryeth golde
in his streame. In these Countries bréedeth a beaste
called Bonasus, who hath the heade and all the bod
                  •
               e
foorth on, like a Bull. Onely hee hath a mane lyke a
Horse, and hys hornes are so manie times twysted
rounde one within an other, that if a man light vppon
them h
                  •
                cannot be wounded. But that defence that the
fro
                  •
                
               
                  〈…〉
               , hys pau
                  •
               che recom
                  ••
               nceth.

                  〈…〉
               
ground: the heate whereof is such, that it scaldeth

whatsoeuer it toucheth, and so with his mischieuous
squirt, hée kéepeth of such as pursue him. The head of
Ionia is Miletus,
               Ionia sometime the house of Cadmus, the
same that first founde the order to wryte in prose. Not
farre from Ephesus is the Cittie Colophon, renowmed
with the Oracle of Apollo Clarius. And wythin a
little way of that,Colophon ryseth Mount Mimas, which giueth
knowledge of the alteration of the wether by the
clowdes that flye ouer the toppe of it. The heade of
Maeonia is Sypilus,
               Maeonie called héertofore Tantalis, and for
the longer continuaunce of that name, commeth Niobe,
borne to the losse of her husbande and children. About
Smyrna runneth the Ryuer Melas,
               The prince of all Ryuers in the lesser Asia. without all
controuersie, the prince of all the Ryuers in Asia.
            
            Through the fieldes of Smyrna, cutteth also the Riuer
Hermus: which rysing at Dorilaum in Phrigya,
cutteth Phrigya of from Caria. Antiquitie was in a
beléefe,Hermus. that this Hermus also flowed with golden
streames.
            
               Smyrna (which is the greatest beautie of all to it)
was the Countrey of the Poet Homer, who departed
out of this world,Homers byrt
                     ••
                   and death. the two hundred, thréescore, & tenth
yeere after the taking of Troy, Agrippa Siluius, the
Sonne of Tyberinus then raigning in Alba, which
was the hundred and threescore yeere before the building
of Rome.
               Hesiodus Betwéene whom and the Poet Hesiodus
(who dyed in the beginning of the firste Olympiad,)
there were a hundred and eyght & thirty yeeres.
In the Rhetaean shore, the Athenians and Mytileneans
at the Tombe of theAchille
                     •
                  . 
               Thessalian Captaine builded
the Towne Achylleon, which is almost decayed.
And about a forty furlonges from thence, in another
nooke of the same shore, the Rhodians builded another
Towne in the honor of Aiax the Sonne of Telamon,
which they named Aeantion.
            
            
               But hard by Troy standeth the Tombe of Memnon,
whereunto come certaine Byrds flying continuallie
out of Aethyop in flocks,Memnons birds which the Troyans cal
Memnons Byrdes. Cremutius is mine Author that
these Birds euerie fifth yéere, assemble in flocks from
all quarters wheresoeuer they be in all the worlde, to
the Palace of Memnon. In the vplande Countrey, aboue
a part of Troas,
               Teuthranie. lyeth the region of Teutranie,
which was the first dwelling of the Mysians. Teutranie
is watred wyth the Ryuer Caicus. Through
all Asia is great store ofThe Chameleon or earthlyon. 
               Chameleons, a fourefooted
beast, in making like a Lucert, but that hee hath
straight and somewhat longer legges growing to hys
belly, wyth a long tayle wrythed rounde in, with hooked
talants finely bowing inwarde, slowe of gate, and
in a manner trayling like a Snayle: rough bodyed,
wyth such a hyde as we sée Crocodiles haue, and hollowe
eyes suncke farre into his head, which he neuer
shadoweth wyth twinckling. Moreouer, he beholdeth
thinges not wyth rolling the bals of his eies, but with
staring continually forward. His mouth is euer gaping,
and serueth to doo no kind of thing wyth all: for
he neyther eateth meate, nor is nourished with drink
but liueth onely by drawing in the ayre, which is hys
onely sustenaunce. Hys colour is variable, and euerie
moment chaungable: so that to what thing so euer he
leaneth himselfe, hee becommeth of the same colour.
Two colours there are which hee is not able to counterfett,
redde and white: all other he counterfetteth
with ease. Hys body is almost without flesh, and hys
intrailes without spléene: neither is there any blood
to be founde in him, saue in his hart, and thereof is verie
little. He hydes himselfe in wynter, and comes abroade
in the spring time. The Rauen hath greate
spight at him, but if he taste of him, hee béeing deade,

kylleth his enemie that hath kylled hym. For if the
Rauen eate neuer so little of him, he dyeth by and by.
But the Rauen hath his defensiue, by meanes of nature
it selfe, which putteth foorth her hande to heale
him. For as soone as he féeleth himselfe diseased, hee
eateth a Bay leafe, and so recouereth hys health.
            There is in Asia a ground called Pythous
               Village. 
               Come,
a plott in the Champion fieldes, to which at the very
firste time of theyr arriuall, the Storks assemble,Of Storks and
there all of them fall vppon him that commeth laste,
& teare him in péeces. They say these foules haue no
tongues, but that the crocking which they make, is
rather a sounde of the mouth then a voyce. There is
in them a singuler naturalnesse. For looke how much
time they bestowe in bringing vppe theyr yong birds,
so much time doo their birdes bestowe in cherrishyng
them againe. For they are so fonde in kéeping theyr
nestes, that by continuaunce of sitting, they cast theyr
feathers. They thinke it a haynous matter in all places
to hurt them, but specially in Thessaly, where is
vnmeasurable store of Serpents, which they persecuting
to feede vppon, doo greatly ease the Countries of
Thessaly of that mischiefe.
            
               Galatia was in auncient time conquered by the
olde Inhabyters of Gallia,
               Galatia. namely by the Tolistobogians,
Voturians, andPeople of Amiens. 
               Ambians, which names
remaine vnto this day, albeit that Galatia by the
verye sounde of the name, declareth from whence it
is deriued.
         
         
            
            CAP. LIII.
            Of Bythinia, and the rauishing of Hylas: and of
the death and buriall of Hanniball.
            
               
                  BIthinia at the enterance
of the Sea Pontus,
toward the Sunne rysing,
oueragainst Thrace, welthie,
and garnished richlye
with Citties, taketh hys
beginning at the heade of
the Riuer Sangarius.
               The names of Bithinia. It
was in olde time named
Bebrycia, afterwarde Mygdonia, and lastly (of King
Bithynus) Bithynia.
            
            In this Countrey by the Cittie Prusias, runneth
the Ryuer Hylas, and likewyse there is the Lake
Hylas, wherein it is thought that the Chylde Hylas
Hercules delight whom the Nimphes hadde rauished
was drowned. In remembraunce of whom, the people
vnto this day runne solemnlie a scatterloping about
the Lake,The place where Hanniball was buried. and cry Hylas as loude as they can. In
Bithynia also is a place called Lybissa, néere to Nicomedia,
registred in the Booke of fame for the Tombe
of Hanniball, who after the iudgment gyuen vppon
him at Carthage, resorting first to King Antiochus,
and after the vnfortunate battell of Antiochus at Thermopyles
and hys vtter discouragement through the
vnconstancie of Fortune, béeing retayned a guestwise
by King Prusias, because hee woulde not bee deliuered

to Titus Quintius who was sent into Bithynia for the
same purpose, and bée caryed prisoner to Rome: poysoned
hymselfe, and by wilfull death defended his bodie
from the yrons that should haue béene laide vppon
hym by the Romaines.
            
         
         
            CAP. LIIII.
            Of the Coast of Pontus.
            
               
                  IN the Coast of
Pontus beyond ye straights
of Bosphorus, and the Ryuer
Rhaesus, and the Hauen
of Calpas: the Ryuer
Sangaris (called of manye
Sangarius) which ryseth in
Phrigya,
               The Ryuer Sangaris maketh the beginninge
of the Mariandine
Gulfe, wherein is the Towne of Heraclea, standing
vppon the Ryuer Lycus, and the Hauen Acone,
               The Hauen of Acone. so notable
for the increase of wycked wéedes, that of the
name of that Towne, wee call all hurtfull hearbes
Aconite. Next vnto that is the Caue of Acheruse,
               The Caue of Acheruse.
where (as men say) is a darke déepe hole, that goeth
downe to hell.
         
         
            
            CAP. LV.
            Of Paphlagonia, and of the originall of
the Venetians
            
               
                  THe Marches of
Galatia inclose Paphlagonia
on the backe part. Thys
Paphlagonia from the promontorie
of Carambis, looketh
vntoPrecop 
               Taurica Chersonesus.
It ryseth in height
with the Mountaine Cytorus,
the space of thréescore
and thrée miles,The originall of the Venetians famous for the place called Henett,
from whence (as Cornelius Nepos affyrmeth) the Paphlagonians
passing ouer into Italy, were anon after
named Venetians. The Milesians builded many Citties
in that Realme. And Mithridates builded Eupatoria,
which béeing subdued by Pompey, was named
Pompeyople.
            
         
         
            CAP. LVI.
            Of Capadocia, and the nature of horses
in the same.
            
               
                  OF all the Realmes that
border vpō 
               Pontus, Cappadocia draweth
furthest into the firme land.The bounds of Cappadocia. On the
left side it lyeth all along both the Armenies
and Comagene: on the rightside

it hath the Marches of many people of Asia. It
ryseth at the rydges of Mount Taurus, and the sunne
rysing. It passeth all along by Lycaonia, Pisidia, and
Cilicia. It goeth beyond the Coast of Syrya that is about
Antioche, stretching euen vnto Scythia at another
part of the Realme, and is deuided from ye greater
Armenie wyth the Ryuer Euphrates, which Armenie
taketh hys beginning at the Mountaines Pariedrie.
There be manie famous Cities in Cappadocia:
But to passe ouer the rest, the Ryuer Halys runneth
by Archelais, which Claudius Caesar peopled. The Ryuer
Lycus washeth by Neocaesaria. Semyramis
                builded
Melita. Mazacha which is situate vnder Mount
Argaeus, the Cappadocians call the mother of Citties.
The which Argaeus beeing very high,The Ryuer Lycus. hath his tops
so couered wyth snowe, that euen in the whotest of all
Sommer he is frozen, and the Inhabiters of the countrey
beléeue there is a God dwelling in it. This countrey
is a speciall bréeder of horses, and most commodious
for increase of them, the natures of whome I
thinke meete to be treated of in this place.The nature of horses. For it is
manifest by the sundry proofes, that there is discretion
in horses, forasmuch as there haue béene some founde,
that woulde not bee acquainted wyth any but wyth
theyr first owners: vtterly forgetting theyr accustomed
tamenes, if at any time they happened to change
their olde maisters. They knowe who bee enemies
to theyr syde, in so much that in incountering in battell,
they runne vppon them with open mouth to byte
them. But this is a greater matter, that when they
haue lost theyr former Keepers whom they dyd caste
a loue vnto, they starue themselues for hungar. These
conditions are founde in the excellentest kinde of horses:
for those that are of the baser sorte, haue shewed
no examples of themselues.
            
               But because we will not séeme to take liberty to
speake more then we are able to auouche, wee will
propounde diuers examples.
            Great Alexanders horse which (eyther of the
stowrenesse of his looke, or of hys marke because hee
hadde a Bulles heade bronded on hys shoulder, or els
because certaine bunches like little hornes swelled in
hys forehead when he was angry,)Bucephalus the horse of great Alexander. was called Beucephalus,
whereas at all other times he would gentlie
suffer hys kéeper to ryde him, as soone as the kings
saddle was sette vpon his backe, hée disdained to beare
any man at all sauing his Lord and Master. He shewed
manie proofes of himselfe in battels, by bringing
Alexander safe, out of most sharpe incounters: for
which his desert it came to passe, that when hee dyed
in Inde, the king kept his funeralls, and made a costly
Tombe ouer him, and moreouer builded a Cittye
which in remembraunce of hys horses name he called
Bucephala.
            
            The horse of Caius Caesar would suffer no man to
take hys backe but Caesar.
               The horse of Caius Caesar And it is said, that his foreféete
were like the féete of a man, as shoulde séeme by
the Image of the horse, which was placed by hym in
that shape, before the Image of his mother Venus.
            
            When one that killed a King of Scythia in combatt
hande to hande,A Kings horse of Scythia. woulde haue spoyled hym, the Kinges
horse felled him with hys héeles, and tare him in péeces
wyth hys téeth. The Country of Agrigent also
hath many Tombes of horses in it, which buriall they
think was no more then the horses had deserued. The
sights in the great Theatre beare witnes y• they haue
a delight in pleasant thinges. For some of them at the
playing vppon shalmes, some at singing, some at the
varietie of colours, and diuers also at the sight of burning
Cressets, are prouoked to running.
            
               That there is affection in horses their teares doo
declare.The horse of king Nicomedes The horse of Centaretrius. After that King Nicomedes was slaine, hys
horse dyed for hunger. When Antiochus had vanquished
the Galathians in battel, as he was about to haue
gotten vppon the horse of their Captaine Centaretrius,
(who was slaine in the fielde) to haue vaunted himselfe
in a lustie brauerie: the horse did sette so little by
hys rayning of him, that falling downe for the nonce,
he threwe hymselfe and hys ryder both to the ground.
The sights that Claudius Caesar shewed in the greate
Theatre, declared the wytt of horses, for when y• wagoner
was ouerthrowne, they ouerranne theyr aduersaries
that contended with them, not more by swyftnesse
then by pollicie
                  •
                and after running theyr full
course orderlie, staied of themselues at the races ende,
as it were to claime the reward of victorie. Moreouer
hauing so cast of theyr Ruler (who was named Ratumena)
they forsooke the gaming place, and ranne full
flyght to the Capitoll, neuer stinting (although they

                  •
               ad manie lets by the way) before such time as they
had gone thrise about Iupiter Tarpeius righthandwise.
In this kynde of beast the Males are longest lyued.
We reade that a horse hath liued full thréescore and
tenne yéeres. And this is out of all question, that they
ingender till they be thrée and thirtie yéeres olde, and
that after the twentith yéere they are purposely kept
to couer Mares.A horse named Opus. Also we finde it noted, that a Horse
named Opus, did hold out in seruing the race, vntil he
was fortie yéeres olde.
            The lust of Mares is extinguished by shearyng
their manes: and in the foles there bréedeth a poyson
that prouoketh loue, which is in the Colts foreheade
when he is newe fol
                  •
               d▪ and is of colour yellowe lyke a
dry Figge, and it is namedIt is called the knappe. 
               Hyppomanes: and if the
same be taken from the Colt, the Damme wyll neuer

giue it su
                  •
               k. The 
                  ••
               ercer that anie horse is, and of greater
courage, the déeper dooth he thrust his nose into the
water when he drinketh. The Scythians neuer bring
horses to battell, but Mares: because the Mares can
state and ru
                  •
                neuer the lesse. Mares doo conceiue and
bring forth Colts by the wind, but those neuer lyue aboue
thrée yéeres.
         
         
            CAP. LVII.
            Of Assyria, and of the first comming vppe
of oyn
                  •
               ments.
            
               
                  THe beginning of
Assyria is Adiabene in a
part whereof is the Countrey
Arbelite,
               The place of encounter between Alexander and Darius which place
the victorie of great Alexander
will not suffer to bee
foreslipped. For there he vā
               quished
the power of D
                     ••
                  ius,
and 
                  〈◊〉
                him, and
in ryffling his Campe, among other of his princelye
furniture,Perfumes open the Gate to excesse. found a Caskettfull of Oyntments, which
thing afterward opened first the gappe of excesse vnto
the Romains, to delight in forraine perfumes. Neuerthelesse
we were defended for a while from the allurement
of vices, by the vertues of our auncestors, and
that euen vnto the Censureshippe of Publius Crassus,
and Iulius Caesar, who in the fiue hundred thréescore
and fift yéere of the building of the Cittie, forbidde by
open proclamation, that no ma
                  •
                should bring forraine
Oyntments into the Cittie. Afterward our vices gott
the vpperhand, and the Senate grew to such a delight

in the pleasantnesse of the sents, that they vsed them
euen in theyr 
                  〈◊〉
                Chambers: as it appeared by
Lucius Plo
                     •
                  ius the brother of Lacius that hadde binne
twise Consull: whom béeing proclaimed Traytor by
the Thréem
                  •
               n, the 
                  •
               ent of his oyntments be wrayed
where he lay hidden in a hole at Salerne.
            
         
         
            CAP. LVIII.
            Of the tree called Medica.
            
               
                  AFter this rowe of
Countryes followeth Media,
the Trée whereof hath
béene celebrated euē by the
verses of Virgill. It is a
great trée, and hath leaues
almost like the leaues of a
Crab
                  •
               e Trée, sauing onely
in this one poynt, that they
bee rough with sharpe pricks. It beareth an Apple
which is enemie to venim,The Apple of Media, of harsh taste, and of wonderfull
bytternesse▪ The sent of this odour is very
fragrant and excéedingly pleasant, and 
                  〈◊〉
                a farre
of. But the Trée is so plentifull of bearing, that it is
alwaies ouercharged with the burthen of his fruite.
For as soone as euer his fruite is ripe and falne of,
newe spring forth, and it tarrieth no longer without
increase, then while the first growne fruite may fall
of. Other nations haue endeuoured to plant these
Trées in their grounds, and slips and ymps haue béen
fetched from thence and graffed. But nature is so coye
in that behalfe, that no other soyle coulde borrowe that
benefite from the Land of Media.
            
         
         
            
            CAP. LIX.
            Of the Gates of Mount Caspius.
            
               
                  ALl the Caspian
Gates are a way cut out by
mans hande, eight myles of
length: and it is scarce so
broade as a Carte may goe
through. In these streights
among other things, this also
is verie difficult: that
ye stones on eache side which
are ragged, by meanes of the vaynes of salt that melt
in them, yeelde foorth moysture aboundantly, which
soone after beeing hardened by force of heate, congealeth
into Ise. By meanes whereof it becommeth so
slypperie, that no man can passe them. Moreouer, by
the space of eyght and twenty myles, all the Coaste.
which way soeuer ye goe from thence, hath no welles
nor springs, but dry ground without any reskewe against
thirst. Also the Serpents that bréede in all coū
               tries
there about, flocke thither as soone as euer the
spring time beginneth. Thus through the conspiracie
of the difficultnesse and of the daungerousnesse, there
is no comming to the Caspians but in the wynter.
         
         
            
            CAP. LX.
            Of Direum, and of the Countrey
Margiana.
            
               
                  FRom the Caspians
Eastwarde, is a place
that they cal Direum, to the
plentifulnesse wherof, there
is no place any where to be
cōpared: about which dwel
the Tapyres, the Anariaks,
and the Hyrcanes. There
bordereth also vppon it, the
Countrey Margiana, not able for the wholsomnesse of
the ayre,Margiana and commodities of the soyle, in so much as
in all that large Coast, y• Countrey onely hath vynes
It is enclosed round about like a Theatre with hyls,
the compasse of a thousand and fiue hundred 
                  •
               urlongs,
almost vnpossible to be come vnto, for the sandy desert,
which enuironeth it euery way round about, by
the space of a hundred and twenty myles. Alexander
the great liked so well of the pleasantnesse of this Region,
that he builded the first Alexandria there, which
was anon after rased by the barbarous people, and
repayed againe by Antiochus the Sonne of Seleucus,
who according to the name of hys progenie called it
Seleucia: the circuit of which Cittie containeth thréescore
and fiftéene furlongs. Into this Citie did Orodes
conuey the Romaines that were taken at the slaughter
of Crassus▪ Alexander reared another Towne also
among the Caspians, which was called Heraclea as

long as it stoode. But this also béeing beaten down by
the same nations, was afterward repayred by A
                     •
                  tiochus,
and (as it liked him best) was named Achais.
            
         
         
            CAP. LXI.
            Of the Ryuer Oxus, and the nations about it: of the
voyages of Liber Parer, Hercules and Semyramis,
of the bounds of King Cyrus, and of the
nature of Cammels.
            
               
                  THe Ryuer Oxus
               
springeth out of the Lake
Oxus, the brimmes wherof
are inhabited about by the
Henioches, Batenes, & Oxistages:
but the chiefest part
is inhabited by the Bactrians.
The Bactrians also haue
a peculiar Riuer of theyr
owne called Bactrus,
               The Bactrians▪
                and a Towne thereupon which
they inhabit named Bactrum. The nations that are
behynde this, are enuironed with the hyls of Paropamisus,
which endeth against the heade of the Ryuer
Indus: the rest is enclosed by the Ryuer Oxus.
               The bounds of Liber, Hercules, Se
                     •
                  yramis and Cyrus. Beyond
these, is Panda a Towne of the Sogdians, in the
borders of whom great Alexander builded the thyrde
Alexandria, to testifie the bounds of hys iourney. For
this is the place where Altars were erected first by
Liber Pater, secondly by Hercules, thirdly by Semyramis,
and lastly by Cyrus: and therefore it was counted
one of the greatest commendations of Alexander, that
he set out the bounds of his voyage so farre as y• place.
            
               The Ryuer Iaxa
                     •
                  tes disseuereth the borders of all
the Countryes that lie in that tract onely: which Ryuer
neuerthelesse the Bactrians onely call Iaxartes,
               The Ryuer Iaxartes. for
the Scythi
                     •
                  ns call it Silys. The Souldiours of great
Alexanders hoste, tooke this Iaxartes to be the same
Ryuer that is 
                  
                     •
                  anais.
               Demodam
                     ••
                  
                But Demodamas a Captaine of
Seleuchus, and Antiochus, a sufficient Author in thys
behalfe, passing ouer this Ryuer, went beyond the tytles
of all that were before him, and found it to be another
Ryuer then Tanais: in remembrance of which
hys renowmed enterprise, for the more aduaun
                  •
               ment
of his owne fame, he reared Altars to Apollo Didymaeus
in the same place. This is the battable grounde
where the Marches of Persia and Scythia, meete. The
which Scythians, the Persians in their language call
Saks, and the Scythians on the otherside name ye 
               Persians
Chorsars: and the Mountaine Caucasus they cal
Graucasus, that is to say white with snowe. Numbers
of people innumerable héere abouts keepe the same
Lawes and customs that the Parthians doo, if an vniuersall
consent from the beginning, without breaking
or alteration of order. Of which the famousest are the
Massagets, the Essedons, the Saks, the Dahes, and the
Assaeans. Beyond whom by reason of most cruell and
barbarous nations that lye betwixt, we finde great
vncertaintie in the reporte of the customes of other
nations.
            Out of Bactria come strongest Cammels,Of Cammels albeit
that Arabie bredde of them too. But this is the difference
betwixt them: that the Camels of Arabie haue
two bunches on theyr backs, and they of Bactria haue
but one.
            These doo neuer were theyr feete: for the féete of
the other haue as it were little palmes of fleshe turning
backe againe. By meanes whereof they haue a

contrary fault in theyr going, in that there is no help
for them to sette theyr feete stedfast vpon the ground,
They serue to double vse. For some bee good for the
burthen, and some are light & swyft in running. But
neither wyll those receiue more then a reasonable
burthen, nor these goe aboue their ordinarie pace. For
desire of generation they become madd, in so much as
they are outragious cruell when they woulde goe to
make. They hate horses, and they will forbeare drink
by the space of foure dayes together. But when the
time serues that they may drink, they hale in as much
as wyll bothe staunche the drought that is past, and
moyst them for the thirst that is long to come. They
couet soyled waters, and refuse the cléere. And if it bee
not muddie of it selfe, they will rayse vppe the mudde
with continual stamping, & make it troubled. They
endure an hundred yeeres, vnlesse it be so that they be
conueied into strange Countryes, and so the chaunge
of ayre make them diseased. The Females are prepared
for the warres, and meanes is found howe to
kill the desire of generation in them by gelding them.
For it is thought they become the stronger, if they be
kept from the Males.
         
         
            
            CAP. LXII.
            of the Seres and of theyr silks.
            
               
                  AS yee turne from
the Sythick Ocean, and the
Caspian Sea towarde the
East Ocean: from the beginning
of this Coast, firste
déepe snowes, then long deserts,
beyond that the Cannibals
a most cruell kind of
people, and lastly places ful
of moste outragious wilde Beastes, make almost the
one halfe of the way vnpassible. The which distresses
haue their ende at a Mount that butteth vppon the
Sea, which the barbarous people call Tabis, beyonde
which, the wyldernesses doo neuerthelesse continue a
great way on styll.Of Sylke. So in that Coast which faceth the
Northeast, beyond those waste & vninbabitable Countreys,
the first men that we haue heard of, are the Seres:
who sprinckling water vppon the leaues of theyr
Trées, doo by the helpe of that liquor kembe of certain
fléeces, and wyth moysture so carde that fine Cotten,
that they make what they wyll thereof. This is that
silke admitted to be worne commonly, to the hinderaunce
of grauitie, and wherewith the luste of excesse
hath perswaded first women, and nowe also menne to
apparell themselues, rather to sette out the bodyes to
sale then to cloth it. The Seres are meeke and very
quiet among themselues: but otherwise they eschew
the company of all men besides: insomuch that they

refuse to haue any traffick or intercourse of Merchandise
with other nations. For those that occupy y• trade
of merchandise with them, doo passe ouer the first Ryuer
of their Countrey: vpon the banks wherof (with
out anie communication of talke betwéene the Chapmen,
the Seres considering by eie-sight, the price that
they bid for the things laid downe, vtter theyr owne
wares, but by not ours.
         
         
            CAP. LXIII.
            of the Attacene Nations.
            
               
                  NOwe followeth
the Coast of Attacene, and
the nation of the Attacenes
who haue a singuler prerogatiue
for the temperat
                  •
               es
and gentlesse of theyr ayre.
The hilles kéepe of the hurtfull
blasts: which hils beeing
cast rounde about them
euery way, doo with theyr wholsome opennesse to the
Sunne, fence them from all pestilent ayres. And therfore
(as Amomaetus affyrmeth) their life and the life
of the Hyperboreans is a like. Betwéene these and Inde,
the skylfullest Cosmographers haue placed the
Cycones.
            
         
         
            
            CAP. LXIIII.
            of Inde, and the maners of the Indians of the temperate
ayre of that Country, of the Ryuers of Inde,
of the wonderfull beasts, trees, kynds of odours,
and precious stones in the
same.
            
               
                  INde beginneth
at the hyls called Emodii,
               The bounds of East India.
and extendeth from y• south
sea to the East Ocean, and
from the North to ye Mountaine
Caucasus, most healthfull
wyth the blastes of the
South west winde. It hath
Sommer twyse a yéere,
and twyse a yéere haruest: and in stedd of Wynter, it
hath the Eastern wyndes called Etesiae. Posidonius
placeth this Countrey directly against Fraunce, and
surely there is no doubt at all in the matter. For firste
béeing found by the warres of great Alexander, and
since hys time trauelled through and through by the
diligence of Kings, it is nowe come full and wholy to
our knowledge.
            
               Megasthenes hauing continued a good whyle among
the Kinges of Inde, wrate the acts of y• Countrey,
to the intent to leaue to his posterity the certaintie
of those things that himselfe hadde seene wyth hys
eyes. Dennys also (who in likewise was by king Philadelphus
sent to sée whither those things were true or
no,) wrytt the like.
            
               
               Bacchus was borne of Iupiters thigh. Without the
mouth of the Ryuer Indus, are two Ilands,Goldland 
               Chryse
andSiluer land 
               Argyre, so plentiful of mettals, that diuers haue
reported them to haue soyles of gold and siluer.The Manners and behauio
                     •
                  r of the Indians All the
Indians weare long hayre, stayned with a blewish or
yellowish colour. Their chiefe attyre is in precious
stones.
            No coste is bestowed in buriall of the deade.
Furthermore (as is expressed in the bookes of King
Iuba and King Archelaus) as much as the people disagrée
in manners and conditions, so great difference is
there in theyr attyre. Some weare lynnen garments
some wollen, some goe all naked, some couer but theyr
priuie members, and many goe clad in barks of trées.
Some people are so tall, that they wyll as easily vault
ouer Oliphants, as if they were horses. Many thinke
it good neyther to kill anie lyuing thing, nor to eate
anie flesh. Some eate only fish, & liue by ye Sea. There
are that make as it were a sacrifice of theyr Parents
and kinsfolke, before they become bare with sicknes
or age, and then make a feast wyth their flesh, which
thing in that Countrey is not counted a wyckednesse,
but a godlinesse.
            There are also that in extremitie of sicknesse, or
when diseases lynger vppon them, get themselues into
some secrete corner farre from resorte, and there
quietlie abyde for death.
            The Nation of the Aspagones
               The Aspagons haue goodly woods
of greene Bay and Box, and as for vynes and all other
trées, wherein is pleasure and beautie to delight,
it hath most plentious store of them. The Indians
haue Philosophers whom they call Gynmosophists,
               Gymnosophists
who from the rysing of the Sunne to the gooing down
therof, behold the Globe of that burning Planet with
fixed eyes, serching in that fierye circle for certayne

secrete thinges, and standing all day long vppon the
scalding sande, nowe on the one foote and nowe on the
other.Strange kynd of people. At the Hyll that is called Milo, dwell people
that haue their féete turned backward, wyth eyght
toes on eche foote.
            
               Megasthenes sayth, that in diuers Mountaines
in Inde, are Nations that haue hands like Dogs, armed
wyth talants, clad in hydes, hauing no likelihoode
of mans speeche, but vttring a noise of barking, wyth
rough chappes. We reade in C
                     •
                  esias, that certayne
Women beare Childe but once, and that the Babes
as soone as they be borne, become by and by grayheaded:
and that there is againe another nation which in
theyr youth are hoare headed, and wexe black in their
age, which endureth farre beyonde the race of our
yeres. We reade also of a people called Monoscelans,
               The Monoscelans or one legged people.
borne there wyth one legge a péece, of singuler swyftnesse:
who when they will defende themselues from
the heate, lay themselues downe vppon their backes,
and shadow them with the largenesse of theyr feete.
They that dwell at the fountaine of Ganges, néede no
maner of victuals to féede vpon. They liue by the sent
of stubfruite and Crabbes, and when they haue anie
long iourney to goe, they carry the same with thē for
theyr baite, to refresh themselues with the smel of thē
And if it happen them to take any corrupt ayre, certain
it is, that they die of it by & by. There is reported
also to be a nation of women which beare Children at
fiue yéeres of age, but their life endureth not aboue 8.
yeeres. There are y• want heades, and haue their eyes
in their shoulders. There are also wild menne, rough
skinned, toothed like dogs, & that make a terrible goarring.
But among them that haue some more care to
liue according to reason, many women are marryed
to one man, and when the husband is deceased, each of

them pleadeth before most graue Iudges, concerning
her deserts, & she that by the sentence of y• Iudges is
deemed to haue béene more dutifull & seruicable then
the rest, receiueth thys reward of her victory, that at
her pleasure shee may leape into the fire where her
Husbande is a burning, and offer herselfe as a sacrifice
vpon hys herse. The rest lyue wyth infamie.
            The hugenesse of theyr Serpents is so excessyue,The hugenesse of Serpents
that they swallow vp Harts, and other beasts of lyke
bygnesse whole, yea and as great as the Indian Ocean
is, they swym through it, and passe ouer into Ilands
a great way distant from the firme 
                  •
               ande to séeke feeding.
And the selfe same thing is a good argument to
proue theyr hugenesse, that they haue force to passe ouer
such a bredth of salt water, and to attaine to the
places that they ayme at. There are many and wonderfull
beasts, out of the which multitude I wyll pick
some to treate of.
            The Leucocrote passeth all wylde Beastes in
swiftnesse.The Leucocrote. It is of the bygnesse of an Asse, haunched
like a Stagge, breasted and legged like a Lyon, headed
like a Cammell, clouen cléed, mouthed vp to bothe
the eares, and wyth one whole round bone instéede of
téeth. Thus much as to his shape. In voyce hee counterfetteth
the spéech of man.The Eale. There is an Eale, otherwyse
like a horse, tayled like an Olyphant, of colour
blacke, chapped like a Bore, armed with hornes aboue
a cubit long, plyable to what vse soeuer he lyst to put
them. For they are not stife, but are bowed as neede
shall require in fighting: of which he putteth out the
one when he fighteth, and rolleth vp the other, that if
by any stripe the point of the one be blunted, the other
may succéede sharpe in hys roome. He is compared
to the Waterhorses, and to say ye truth, he delighteth
in waters to.
            
               The Bulls of Inde are of colour bright yellowe,The Bulls of Inde
excéeding wight of foote, with their hayre growing the
contrarie way, and as much mouth as head. These also
beare hornes plyable to what purpose they liste, so
hard hyded, that nothing is able to enter, so vnmercifullie
cruell, that béeing caught, they kill themselues
for moodinesse.
            Among these bréedeth also y• 
               Manticora,
               The Manticora▪
                wyth three
sette of téeth in his head checkquerwise one against another,
faced like a man, gray eyed, sanguine coloured
bodied like a Lyon, tayled like a Scorpion wyth a
stinging pricke in the ende, with so shrill a voyce that
it counterfetteth the tunes of pypes, and the harmony
of Trumpets. Hée séeketh most gréedilie after mans
flesh. He is so swift of foote, and so nimble in leaping,
that there is no space so long that may forslowe hym,
nor anie thing so broade that can let him of hys way.Strange Oxen
There are also O
                  •
               en with one horne and thrée horns,
whole hooued, and not clouen cléed. But the cruellest
is the Unicorne, a Monstar that belloweth horriblie,The Vnicorne▪
               
bodyed like a horse, footed like an Oliphant, tayled like
a Swyne, and headed like a Stagge. His horne sticketh
out of the midds of hys 
                  •
               orehead, of a wonderfull
brightnesse about foure foote long, so sharp, that whatsoeuer
he pusheth at, he striketh it through easily. Hée
is neuer caught aliue: kylled he may be, but taken he
cannot bée.
            The waters also bréede no lesse wonders.Strange Eeles Ganges
bréedeth Eeles of fortie foote long, and Statius Sebosus
saith, that the same Ryuer (among the chiefest miracles)
swarmeth with wormes bothe in name and colour
gray. These haue as it were armes not vnder
sixe cubits long a péece, so boystrous of strength, that
with the hande thereof, they take holde of Olyphants
that come thither to drinke, and hale them so rudelye,

that they pull them vnder the water. The Indian
Seas haue Fyshes called Thyrlpooles, aboue the bygnesse
of foure Acres of grounde. There are also which
they callSpowters 
               Physeters, which béeing huge beyonde the
measure of great Pyllars, lift themselues aboue the
sayleyards of Shyppes, and puffe out the water that
they haue haled in at theyr venting pipes, in such wise
that many times they sink
                  •
                the vessels wyth the rage
of water, that they let fall vppon the Marryners. Only
Inde bréedeth the Poppiniey,Popinieyes and Parrets. of colour gréene, wyth
a redde list about hys neck, whose byll is so hard, that
when he is throwne from high vpon a stone, he saueth
himselfe vppon his byll, vsing it as an extraordinary
defence of hys infirmitie. And his heade is so stronge
that if at any time he haue néede of stripes to put him
in mind of hys lesson, (for he learneth to speake like a
man) he must be knockt on the pate wyth a wande of
yron. While he is a Chicken, and as yet vnder two
yeeres old, he learneth the things that are taught him
more spéedilie, and beareth them more stedfastly in remembraunce.
Aboue that age hee is somewhat more
slow of taking, forgetfull, and v
                  •
               apt to be taught. The
number of toes maketh the difference betwéene the
nobler and the rascaller sorte. The better haue fiue
toes on a foote, the worse haue thrée. Hys tongue is
broade, and much broader then the tongues of other
byrds: and that is the cause of his perfection in vttering
words so distinctly. This na
                  •
               ure of his made the
Romaines to haue so great pleasure and delight in
him, that the barbarous people made a merchandise of
their Poppinieyes. The trées if Inde grow vp in such
an excessiue height, that they cannot shoote an arrowe
ouer them. The Orchyards haue Fig trées, the bodies
whereof are thréescore paces about,Of Figtrees and theyr boughes
shadow two furlongs euerie way, the largenesse of

their leaues is compared to the shielde of the Amazons,
and the fruit is of verie singuler swéetnes. The
Fenny grounds bring foorth a RéedeReedes. of such grosenes,
that betwéene knot and knot they make boates of thē
to rowe in. Out of the rootes whereof, is pressed a
swéete iuyce, as pleasant as honny.The prerogatiue of the Iland Tylos. There is an Iland
of Inde called Tylos, which beareth Date trées, bringeth
forth Olyues, and aboundeth in Uynes. It surmounteth
all landes in this one wonder, that what
tree soeuer groweth therein, is neuer without leaues.
            There beginneth Mount Caucasus, which wyth his
continuall ridge, peirceth through the most part of the
worlde. The same hyll on hys front that faceth the
Sunne, beareth Pepper Trées: which men affyrme
to be like the Iuniper Trée, and to bring forth sundrie
fruits.Of Pepper and of the Pepper-tree, That fruite that commeth forth first, is like the
agglets of Hasles, and is called long Pepper. That
which is vncorrupted, is called white Pepper. That
which hath the skynne wrinckled and scorched wyth
the heate, is called black Pepper. Lastly, that which
falleth downe and is parched with the burning Sun,
taketh 
                  •
               ys name of hys colour. But that which is
stripped of the Trée as it is, is called white Pepper.
And as onely Inde yéeldeth Pepper, so alonely yéelddeth
it Ebonye:
               Ebony, & yet not in all places but in a verie
little part of the Countrey doth it yéelde thys kynd of
woode.
            The Trée for the most part is slender, and growing
manie together, thin branched, swelling to the bignes
of the stock, with a houen rinde, and very full of holes
with open veines, insomuch that for all the vttermost
barke, the very wood is scarce couered with a thynne
rynde. All the woode of it is medicinable, & it is, almost
of the same fashion & colour that is in the Yeat stone.
            The Kinges of Inde haue theyr Scepters heereof,

and they make the Images of their Gods of none other
wood then Ebonye. They report also that no noysome
liquor can be contained in this kind of s
                  •
               uffe, and
that whatsoeuer is hurtfull, is disapointed by the touching
heereof. And for this pleasure they make Cups
of Ebonye, wherefore it is no maruell though it be
had in great price in forraine Realmes, considering
it is so much honoured in the place it comes from, and
where it growes. The great Pompey brought Ebonye
first out of Inde and shewed it in Rome, when he tryumphed
for vanquishing Methridates. Inde yeeldeth
also Calamus odoratus,
               Calamus odoratus. a special remedy against gréefes
in the bowels. It giueth many other swéete Odours,
acceptable for the pleasantnesse of their wonderfull
flauor.
            Of the Iewels of Inde, the chiefe preheminence is
in the Diamond,The Diamond and the 
                     •
                  undry sorts and natures of them, as which driueth away franticknes,
resisteth venims, and expulseth vaine feares from such
as haue qualmes comming ouer their harts. Thys I
though was to bee spoken first, of those thinges that
haue respect to profit. Now will shewe howe many
and what sorts of Diamonds there be, and what colour
is best to be liked in eche of them. In a certayne
kinde of Crystall, there is founde this kinde of stuffe:
which groweth after the likenes of most shéere water
gently gathering sharpe at both endes to a sixcornered
poynt, and it is neuer found aboue the bygnesse of a
Filberd kernell. The next vnto this is founde in the
excellentest golde, somewhat paler, and shyning more
toward the colour of siluer. The thyrd is found in the
veynes of Copper,The Syderite drawing towarde the coloure of
brasse: which is very effectuall in medicine, and is
called Siderites. The fourth is gathered in yrō mines,
of weightier substance then the rest, but not like them
in vertue. For bothe this and that which is founde in

Copper may be broken, and for the most part they are
peirced through with another Diamond. But those
that we spake of first, can neyther bee broken wyth yron
nor hurt with fire. Notwithstanding, if they bee
stéeped long in Goats blood, (so it be warme & freshe
bléeding from the beast,) at length (with the breaking
of some Hammers, and stythes before) they yéelde and
shyuer in péeces: which sparks are greatly sought for
of engrauers to drawe in any precious stone withall.
Betwéene the Diamonde and the Lodestone is a certaine
priuie dissention of nature,The Lodestone in so much as if they
bée layd néere together, the Diamonde will not suffer
the Lodestone to drawe yron vnto him: or if y• Lodestone
haue alreadie drawne a péece of yron to it, the
Diamond snatcheth and pulleth away as hys bootye
whatsoeuer the Lodestone hath taken hold of. Moreouer,
Inde bringeth forth the Lychnite, the freshnes of
whose light is furthered by the brightnes of burning
candles:The Lychnite or
Lampstone. and therfore the Greeks haue called it Lychnits.
There are of two sorts: for either it is of an orient
purple colour, or els it is shadowed somewhat
with a shéere scarlett. If it bee pure, it admitteth an
vnstayned cléerenesse through all the inward parte of
it. Also it if be heat wyth the Sunne beames, or catch
warmth by chasing betwéene ones fingers, it draweth
harde to it eyther the husks of chaffe, or the shreds of
paper, and it resisteth stoutly against engrauing. And
if at anie time it be engrauen, when a manne sealeth
therewith, it holdeth part of the wax still, as it were
some liuelie thing shold byte it. The Indians do grind
their Beryll in peeces sixe square, to the intent by reflexion
of the corners,The Beryll to chéere vp the dulnesse of hys
weake colour. Of Beryll are sundry sorts. The excellentest
doo with a certaine equall mixture of ruddines
and déepe blew, ouershadowed with a gréene, resemble

the grace of the pure Sea. A degrée beneath these
are the Chrysoberyes,
               The Chrysoberill, or goldberill The ch
                     •
                  ysoprase or golden
                     •
                  eeke The bastarde Iaci
                     •
                  ts, which hauing a fainter glosse,
are shadowed about wyth a golden clowde. The Chrysoprases
also (whose glosse is of golde and Léekgréene
mixed together) are iudged to the kinde of Beryll as
well as the other. The bastard Iacints, that is to say,
those which in manner resemble the Iacints, are also
allowed for Beryls. But as for those that are like Crystall,
and are stayned with little hayres running in
and out, (for that is the name of theyr fault) the skilfullest
Lapidaries haue accounted for y• meanest sorte.
The Kinges of Inde loue to fashion this kind of Iewels
into very long rols: & making holes through them
they hang them at the brystles of their Olyphants in
stedde of poytrels and trappers, or els at theyr eares,
on both sides of theyr heads, sette in bosses of golde, to
the intent to florish their withered colour with a more
fulsome brightnesse, by meanes of the mettall cunningly
wrought about them, (which as a foyle) may
cause them to gather a more glystring light.
         
         
            CAP. LXV.
            Of the Ile Taprobane, and by what meanes it came
first to knowledge: what manner of sayling is there:
what is the custome of that Countrey in choosing
theyr King, also of the shelfishes
Margarits, and perles.
            
               
                  VNtil such time as the rashnes
of man serching the Sea throughlye
found the trueth of the matter,The first discouerers of the Ile of Taprobane now called Zeilan, menne
thought a great while, that the Ile of
Taprobane had béene another world, and y• very same

which the Anticthones were beléeued to inhabit. But
the valiantnes of great Alexander, suffered not the
ignoraunce of the common error to continue any longar:
but he spred the renowne of his name euen into
these vnknowne places. For One sicritus Admirall of
the fléete of Macedonie serching out this land, brought
vnto our knowledge howe bigge it is, what it bréedeth
and in what case it stood. It extendeth seauen thousand
furlongs in length, and fiue thousande in bredth.
It is deuided into two parts with a Riuer. For part
thereof is replenished with beastes and Olypyants,
greater than Inde beareth, and the rest of it is possessed
by men. It is aboundantly stored with moother
Perles and all precious stones.Margarits or moother perle
                     •
                  
                It is situate betwéene
the Easte and the West. It beginneth at y• Easterne
Sea, and lyeth full before Inde. From the Parsians a
nation of Inde it hath béene twenty dayes sayling thither.
But forasmuch as they went in boates of Reede
and shyps of Nyle,
               A shalow Sea, it is now abridged to seauen daies
sayling of one of our shyps. Betwéene them and Inde
lyeth a shallow Sea, not aboue sixe fathom déepe, and
yet in certaine Channels of such an excéeding depth,
that there was neuer Ancor yet that coulde come to
the bottome thereof. There is no héede to bee taken of
the starres in sayling there. For neither is Charles
wayne séene there, neither doo the seauen stars called
They bee also called Pleiades and Athlantides▪
                
               Vergiliae at any time appeare there. They sée the
Moone aboue the earth, only from the 8. day to the 16.
There shineth Canopos a bright star, & of very great
largnes. They haue the sun rising on their right side,
and ye sun setting on their left.Sayling by the flight of birds Wherefore as there is
nothing for men to obserue whereby they may saile to
arriue at ye appointed place: birds lead thē whose flight
in making to y• landward, they vse as a lodestar to direct
their course. Ther is no sailing thither but 4. momoneths

monethes in all the yéere. Héere is all that we knewe
of Taprobane vntill the raigne of the Emperor Claudius,
at which time fortune opened a wyder gappe of
knowledge. For one that late before was the seruant
of Annius Plocamus (who then was customer of ye red
Sea) as he was sayling toward Arabie, was dryuen
by violence of the North wynde along the Coaste of
Now called Rasigut 
               Carmanie, and the fiftéenth day arriued at this shore
and tooke harbrough in a Hauen called Hyppuros.
There learning the language in sixe moneths, and being
admitted to the Kinges spéeche, hee brought worde
againe, what he had found. That is to say, howe the
king wondred at the mony that was taken with him,
because the same béeing stamped with diuers faces,
had neuerthelesse like weight. At the contemplation
of which equalitie, when hee coueted more earnestlye
the fréendhip of the people of Rome, he sent Ambassadours
to vs,A description of the personages and manners of the people of 
                     〈◊〉
                  . of whom the chiefe was Rachias, by whō
all things were brought to our knowledge. Those
men excelled all others in talenesse of personage, and
making. They dye theyr hayre, they are gray eyed,
grym of countenance, and haue a terrible réere in speaking.
            Such of them as are short liued, continue to the age
of a hundred yéeres: all others liue much longer, and
farre beyonde the reache of mans frailtie. They sléepe
not from before the day breake till the night be shutte
in, for they euer ryse before day. They make theyr
houses but a little height aboue the grounde. Corne
holds alwayes at one stay. They knowe not what
Uynes meane. They haue aboundaunce of Apples,
and such other kind of fruites. They worshyp Hercules
for theyr God.The choosing of theyr king In choosing theyr King, nobilitie
auaileth not, but the generall consent of the Country.
For the people chooseth such a one, as is of approoued

good behauiour, and rooted in gentlenesse from hys
cradle, and at that time an olde man. And this is chieflie
requisite in him, that he haue no children. For hée
that is a Father, though his life be neuer so vertuous
he is not admitted to the kingdome. And if perchance
in the time of his raigne he beget a childe, hee is deposed.
For aboue all thinges this is most straightly obserued,
that the kingdome goe not by inheritance.The executing of Iustice Furthermore,
although the King séeme to be neuer so good
a Iusticer, yet they will not let him haue the Law in
his owne hande. And therefore hee admitteth fortye
Moderators, because he shall not sitt alone vpon matmatters
of life and death. Yea and if the iudgment
shall then also be misliked: appeale is made to ye people,
who appoint thréescore and ten Iudges, to whose
determinatiō there is no remedy but they must nedes
stand. The King is apparelled in rayment vnlike the
common fashion,The King is subiect to the Lawes, called Syrma, a robe wherewyth we
sée Liber Pater was wont to be clad. If it happen that
the King himselfe be taken tardie in any offence, and
thereof conuicted, he is punished with death: howbe
it, not so that any man layeth handes vppon him.
But by the common consent of the whole Realme, hée
is vtterly forbidden the vse of all thinges: yea euen
communication wyth any manne is denyed him after
he is cast.Theyr pastyme
                     •
                  
                They giue themselues to good nurture vniuersallie.
Sometime they spende the time in hunting,
and that of no rascall game, for they séeke onely for
Tygers or Oliphants.Monstrous Se
                     •
                   Tortoyses Moreouer they ransacke the
Seas in fishing, for delight to catch the Sea Tortoyses:
the hugenesse of whom is such, that the shell of
one of them wyll make a house able to receiue a great
housholde of many persons wythout pestring. The
greater part of this Ile is parched with heate, and endeth
in waste wyldernesse.
            
               
The Sea that beateth vppon the one side thereof,
groweth so full of shrubs (and those of very gréene colour)
that sometime the tops of the trées are brushed
away with the sternes of shyps. From the toppes of
their Mountaines they beholde the Sea cost of y• 
               Seres.
They delight greatlie in golde: and to garnishe
their Cups withall, they set them full of all kynde of
Iewels.Of the Margarite or Moother perle, Of Perles, They hewe out Marble that is checkered,
and gather great store of Moother perles, and those of
the greatest sort. They be shelfishes in whome thys
kinde of stones is sought, which at a certaine time of
the yéere when desire of conception pricketh them forward,
doo thirst after the deawe as after their milter:
for desire whereof they gape, and when the Moone
sheadeth most aboundance of moisture, they draw the
desired humour by a certaine sucking, whereby they
conceiue and are great with youg, and according to
the qualitie of the thing they haue glutted in, such is
the disposition of the perles that they bréede. For if it
bee pure that they haue taken in, their little rounde
stones are white: if it were troubled, either they haue
a faint pale colour▪ or els are stained with a red. Thus
haue they their séede rather of the ayre then of y• Sea.
Finally, as often as they receiue in the morning dew
the pearle becommeth cléerer: and when they suck in
the euening dewe, they become dimmer, and the more
they haue haled in, so much the stone groweth greater
If it chaunce to lighten vpon the suddaine, they shutte
for feare, and closing fast for suddaine fearefulnes, they
take in that which they loose againe ere it be ripe: for
then they haue very small stones, or els none at all.
And the shelfishes themselues haue a kinde of vnderstanding,
for they are afraide to haue their issue stayned:
insomuch as when the day is at y• hotest, because
their stones shoulde not bee dimmed with the heate,

they ducke vnder the water, and diue into the déepes
to saue them from the heate. Neuerthelesse, age forestandeth
this foresight of theirs. For the whitnes decayeth
by age, and as the shelfishes wexe greater, the
perles wex
                  •
                more yellowe. While the perle is in the
water it is soft, and as soone as it is taken out of the
shell it becommeth harde. There are neuer founde aboue
one in shell, and therefore the Latins call them
Vnions.
               Vnions They say they be neuer found aboue halfe an
inche big. The shelfishes are afraide to be layde for by
the Fyshers: and thereon it comes to passe, that they
hide themselues for the most part, eyther among the
Rocks or els among the Dogfishes. They swymme in
scoles. Some one is Captaine of the whole scole. If he
be taken, euen those that escaped returne into the nett
againe. Inde yéeldeth perles,Perles and so doth the Seacoast
of Brytaine, as Iulius Caesar (by the inscription y• was
written vpon if) witnesseth, that the brestplate which
be dedicated to his mother Venus in her Temple, was
made of British perles. It is a thing cōmonly knowne
that Lollia Paulina, the wy
                  •
               e of the Emperour Caius,
had a gowne of perles valued then at foure hundred
thousande Sestertius: through couetousnes in getting
whereof, her father Marcus Lollius for spoyling the
Kinges of the East, offended Caius Caesar the sonne of
Augustus, and was put out of the Princes fauor, for
sorrow whereof 
                  •
               e poysoned himselfe. This is also registred
by the diligence of old men, that perles were
first brought to Rome in the time of Sylla.
            
         
         
            
            CAP. LXVI.
            The Iournall of Inde.
            
               
                  FRom the Ilande
               In stedde of Ausea it shoulde be Taprobane 
               Ausea there is a directe
cut to the firme land. Therfore
from the Iland Taprobane
let vs returne back to
Inde: for the thinges of Inde
are worth the seing. But
if I shoulde make tariance
about the Citties & nations
of Inde, I should passe the bounds of my prepurposed
abridgment. Next vnto the Ryuer Indus, they had a
Cittie named Capissa,
               Arachosia which Cyrus rased. Arachosia
standing vppon the Ryuer Arachota was builded by
Semyramis. Alexander the great builded the Towne
of Cadrusi
                     •
                  
                by Mount Caucasus▪
                wheras also is Alexandria
which is thirty furlongs wyde. There are manie
other also, but these are of the most renowmed.
After the Indians theFisheaters 
               I
                     •
                  thyophags possesse the Hill
Countryes: whom great Alexander subduing, forbad
them to eate fish, for they liued thereby before. Beyond
these are the deserts of Carmania, then Persia,
and so a iourney by Sea,The Iland of the Sunne wherein is the Iland of the
Sunne which is alwayes red, and not able to be come
vnto by any liuing creature: for it killeth all lyuing
things that are brought into it. As men returne out
of Inde, the first sight that they haue of Charlsis waine
is at Hy
                     •
                  anis a Ryuer of Carmania. They say that the
dwelling of Achaemenides was in this Coaste.Rasigut Betwéene
the Promontorie of Carmania and Arabie, is

fifty miles. Then are there thrée Iles: about which
there come forth salt water Snakes of twenty cubits
long.The way from Alexandria in Egypt vnto Ind
                     •
                  
                H
                  •
               ere it is to be declared, howe the way lyeth
from Alexandria in Egypt vnto Inde.
            
            Fyrst yée must goe by water vppe the Nyle wyth a
Northeast wynde vnto Copton. Then by lande vnto
Hydreum. From thence passing ouer certaine mansions,
ye come to Berenice wheras is a Hauē of the red
Sea. After that, ye must arriue at a Hauen of Arabie
called Ocelis. The next arriuall vnto that is Muzirū,
a Marte Towne of Inde, diffamed for Sea Rouers.
Afterward by diuers Hauens yée come to Cottonare,
to which Towne they conuey theyr pepper in boates
made of one whole Trunke. Those that goe to Inde
take water eyther before the beginning of the dogge
dayes, or immediatly after the beginning of them, in
the mids of Summer. And when they come backe againe
they saile in December. The spéediest wynd out
of Inde▪
                warde is the Northeast. But when they come
to the Red sea, then must eyther a Southeast or a full
South winde serue. The largenesse of Inde is reported
to be seauen thousand and fifty myles. The space
of Carmania is a hundred myles, a part wherof is not
wythout Uynes. Moreouer, they haue a kind of men
that liue by nothing els but by the flesh of Tortoyles,
rugged and hayrie all sauing the face, which alonelie
hath a thynne skinne, and they be clad in skynnes of
fishes. They are namedTortoys
                     •
                  ater
                     •
                  
                
               Chelonophages.
            
         
         
            
            CAP. LXVII.
            of the Gulfe of Persia, and the Gulfe of Arabie,
and of the Azanian Sea.
            
               
                  THe red sea breaketh
into these Coasts, and
is deuided into two Gulfs.The Gulfe of Persia,
Whereof, that which is toward
the East, is called the
Gulfe of Persia, because the
Persians inhabit that coast.
It is in compasse sixe thousande
and twenty myles about.
The other Gulfe oueragainst which lyeth Arabie)
is called the Arabick Gulfe,The Gulfe of Arabie and the Ocean that
floweth in there, is called the Azanian Sea. Uppon
Carmania ioyneth Persia,
               Persia, which beginneth at the Ilande
Aphrodisia, welthy of sundry sortes of ryches,
translated sometime into y• name of Parthians, stretching
fiftie myles along the sea coast, where it faceth the
West. The noblest Towne of that Realme is Susa,
               Susa,
in which is the temple of Susia Diana. A hundred and
fiue and thirty myles from Susa, is the towne Babytace,
all the inhabiters whereof (for the hatred they
beare to golde,) doo bye vp this kynde of metall, and
delue it déepe in the ground, to the intent they shoulde
not be defiled with the vse thereof, and so worke vnrighteously
for couetousnesse sake. Héereabouts is
most vncertaine measuring of grounds,The vncertaintie of measuring in Persia, and not wythout
cause, inasmuch as some nations about Persis méet
theyr lands by Schaenes, some by Parasanges, and othersome

after an vnknowne manner, so that theyr
vncertaine order in méeting, maketh that a man cannot
tell what measure to trust vnto.
         
         
            CAP. LXVIII.
            of Parthia, and of King Cyrus tombe.
            
               
                  PArthia is so large
a Country, that on y• southside
it encloseth the red sea,
and on the North side the
Hyrcanian Sea. In it are
eightéene Kingdoms which
are deuided into two parts.
Eleuen of them which are
called the vpper kingdoms,
beginne at the borders of Armenie, and passe along
the Caspian sea coast, to the land of the Scithians, with
whom they liue like good peaceable neighbors. The
other seauen nether kingdoms (for so they terme thē)
haue on the East the Aries and Arians, on the South
Carmania, on the West the Medes, and on the North
the Hyrcanians. And Media
               Media▪
                if selfe, running ouerthwart
on the west side, encloseth both the kingdoms
of Parthia. On the North it is bounded with Armenia,
on the East it beholdeth the Caspians, on y• South
Persis, and from thence this Coast passeth foorth to a
Castle which the Wysemen call Passargada, and here
is the Tombe of King Cyrus.
            
         
         
            
            CAP. LXIX.
            of Babylon, of the Athlantish Ocean▪ of the Ilands
of the Gorgons, and of the
fortunate Iles.
            
               
                  THe heade of the
Countrey Chaldea is Babylon,
               Babylon,
builded by Semyramis,
so renowmed that for
the noblenesse thereof, both
the Assyrians and Mesopotamians
yéelded into the
name of Babilon. the Cittie
is in compasse thréescore
myles, enuironed wyth walles two hundred foote
hygh and fiftie foote broade, euery foote béeing longer
then the foote which we measure wyth, by the bredth
of thrée of our longest fingers. The Ryuer Euphrates
runneth through it. There is the Temple of Belus
lupiter whom euen the religion it selfe that beléeueth
there is a God, reporteth to haue béene the founder of
that heauenly discipline.C
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  ipho
                     •
                  
                In spyght of thys Citty, the
Parthyans builded Ctesiphon. But nowe it is time
to retyre to the Coasts of the Ocean, and to call backe
my penne into Aethyop. For as wee haue alreadye
tolde howe the Athlantish Sea taketh his beginning
at the west and at Spayne: so it is also conuenient to
be declared, from whence hee beginneth first to beare
the name of Atlas in these partes of the worlde also.
The Azanian Sea holdeth on vnto the Coaste of Aethyop.
The Aethiopian Sea continueth from thence

to the Promontorie Mossylicum, and from thence
forth it taketh againe the name of the Athlantish Ocean.
Therefore, whereas many haue helde opinion,
that all that part is not possible to bee sayled by reason
of the excéeding heate: Iuba auoucheth the contrarye.
And for assured proofe that the matter is so indéede,The nauigation from I
                     •
                  de to Spayne hée
maketh a rehearsall of the Nations & Ilandes by the
way: giuing vs to vnderstande, that all that Sea is
saylable from Inde vnto the straights of Marrock: so
as it be when the wynde lyeth Southwest & by west,
the blast whereof is able to driue anie Nauie by Arabie,
Egypt, and Mauritanie, so they direct theyr course
from that Promontory of Inde which some call Lepten
acran, and othersome name Drepanum. Moreouer,
he added the places of harbrough and the distance
of them one from another. For from the promontorie
of Inde to the Ilande Malachus, they affyrme to bee
fiftéene hundred myles. From Malachus to Scaeneon
two hundred twenty fiue miles. From thence to the
Ilande Sadanus a hundred and fiftie myles: and so is
made to the open Sea, eyght hundred thréescore and
fiftéene myles.
            The same I
                     •
                  ba so striueth against the opinion of
manie which saie that most parte of this Coast is vninhabitable
of mankind by reason of the heate of the
Sunne, that he affyrmeth the Merchantmen to bee
troubled in their passage out of the Iles of Arabie,
which the Arabians called Ascitae possesse,
               For Askos in Greeke signifieth a bottle or a Tubbe. who haue
that name of their dooings. For they ioyne borders together,
and couer them ouer with Leather, and sayling
forth in this kinde of Shyppe, assaile the passeng
                  •
               rs
with venom
                  •
               d Darts.
            And hee affyrmeth also that the scorched Countries
of Aethiop are inhabited by the nations of the I
                     •
                  thyophages
and Troglodits, of whom the Troglodits
               The Troglodits are

so swift a foote, that they ouertake the wilde Beastes
whom they chace. The Icthyophags are able to swim
in the salt water as well as the verye Beastes of the
Sea.
            In serching the Athlantish Sea euen to the west
bee maketh mention of the Iles of the Gorgons
               The Gorgon Iles. also.
The Gorgon Iles (as we vnderstand) are ouer against
the Promontorie which wee callThe westerne horne. 
               Hesperionkeras.
These are inhabited by the Monstars called Gorgons:
and surelie a monstrous nation possesseth them
yet. They are distant from the maine land two dayes
sayling. Xenophon Lampsacenus hath reported that
Hanno King of the Afers wasted ouer into them, and
founde women there as swyft as byrds and that of all
the number that were séene, but two could bee taken,
which were so rough and rugged of bodye, that for a
remembraunce of the strange sight, hee hung vp theyr
two skinnes for a wonder among other gyfts in the
Temple of Iuno, which continued there vnto the destruction
of Carthage.
            
            Beyond the Gorgons are the Iles of the Hesperides,
which (as Sebosus affyrmeth) are withdrawn fortie
dayes sayling into the innermost hart of the Sea.
They report that the fortunate Iles lye against the
left side of Mauritanie,
               The Canaries which Iuba sayth are situate
vnder the South, but next vnto the West. By reason
of the names of these, I suppose a great wonder is
looked for: but the matter is not equall to the same of
the worde.
            In the first of them which is called Ombrion, neither
is nor hath béene anie houses. The toppes of the
Hyls are watry with Pooles. Réedes growe vp to the
bygnes of Trées. Those of them that be blacke, when
they be pressed yéelde a most bitter liquor, but thos
                  •
               
that bée white, yéeld a iuyce good to make drinke of.

They say that another of those Iles is named Iunoma,
wherein are a fewe cotages ilfauoredly pyked at
the toppes. The third is néere vnto this and of y• same
name, but all is bare and naked. The fourth is called
Goateland 
               Capraria, which swarmeth beyond al measure with
monstrous great Lucerts.
            
            Next followethSnowland 
               Niuaria, where the ayre is thick
and clowdie, and therefore euer snowing. And lastlie
Dogland 
               Canaria replenished with Dogs of excéeding hugenesse,
whereof two were presented to King Iuba. In
that Ile remain some foundations of buildings. Ther
is great plenty of byrds, fieldes full of fruitful Trées,
places bearing Dates, great store of Pyneapples, aboundance
of Honney, and Ryuers swarming wyth
Fyshes called Silures.
               Much like a Sturgion Also it is sayde that the wauing
Sea casteth vppe monstrous beastes vppon the land,
which lying styll there and rotting, infect all thinges
wyth an horrible stinche, and therefore the qualitie of
those Ilands agrée not altogether to their name.
            FINIS.
         
      
   