
      
         
            
            
            THE ARTE OF
GVNNERIE. Wherein is ſet foorth a number of ſeruiceable
ſecrets, and practical concluſions, belonging
to the Art of Gunnerie, by Arithmeticke skill to be
accompliſhed: both pretie, pleaſant, and profitable
for all ſuch as are profeſſors of the ſame
facultie. Compiled by THOMAS SMITH of Barwicke vpon
Tweed Souldier.
            
               LONDON,
Printed for VVilliam Ponſonby.
1600.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
HONORABLE PERIGRIN BERTIE
KNIGHT, LORD WILLOVGHBIE
Beake and Earsby, Lord Gouernour of her Maieſties
Towne and Caſtle of Barwicke vpon Tweed,
and Lord VVardon of the Eaſt marches of England,
for and anempſt Scotland, &c.
            
               IT is a common opinion Right
Honourable amongſt a great
number, who may be tearmed
more wayward then wiſe, that
the Art of Soldiery may perfectly
be attained in two or
three moneths practiſe, and that any common
man in a few weekes trayning, hauing ſeene two
or three skirmiſhes may be called an expert ſoldier.
Not conſidering that a Mariner may ſaile
ſeuen yeares, and yet be far from a Nauigator.
A number of Mechanicall Artificers may labour
diuerſe yeares, and yet be far from perfection;
and a number of Souldiers may ſerue many
yeares, and yet haue but the bare name of a ſouldier.
He may well be called a trained ſouldier,

that knoweth by the ſound of Drum, and Trumpet,
without any voice, when to march, fight, retire,
&c. that is able in marching, embattelling,
encamping, and fighting, and ſuch like, to performe,
execute, and obey the lawes and orders
of the field, that hath ſome ſight in the Mathematicals,
and in Geometricall inſtruments, for
the conueying of Mines vnder the ground, to
plant and mannage great Ordinance, to batter
or beat down the wals of any Towne or Caſtle,
that can meaſure Altitudes, Latitudes, and Longitudes,
&c. ſuch a one may be tearmed in my
opinion an expert ſouldier, though he neuer
buckled with the enemie in the field.
            Such perfections is well knowne to be in your
Honour, that you are furniſhed with theſe and
many morare qualities in the Art Militarie, and
aboue all with wiſedome and noble courage, to
performe and execute any honorable enterpriſe
whatſoeuer for the honour and ſeruice of
God, your Prince and countrie, the which our
proud enemies haue felt to their paine and your
euerlaſting fame.
            And although I my ſelfe be but one of the
meaneſt ſouldiers in this Guariſon now vnder

your Lordſhips gouernement (whom we pray
long to gouern ouer vs) being brought vp from
my childhood vnder a valiant Captaine in Militarie
profeſſion, in which I haue had a deſire to
practiſe and learne ſome ſecrets touching the
orders of the field, and trayning of Souldiers: as
alſo concerning the Art of Managing and ſhooting
in great Artillerie. I haue thought it good
(hearing of no other that hath done the like before)
to frame together certaine Arithmeticall
and Geometricall rules, to ſhew in part how neceſſarie
Arithmeticke and Geometrie is for our
profeſſion, the which I haue ſet downe in two litle
bookes, the one intituled Arithmeticall Militarie
Concluſions, the other; The Art of Gunnerie:
the firſt I wrote two or three yeares ſince,
and beſtowed on my Captaine, Sir Iohn Carie
Knight, the which (God ſparing life) I meane to
correct & enlarge, & perhaps put to the Preſſe:
This other I haue thought it my part, to offer to
your Lordſhips good conſideration, to be ſhrouded
vnder your Honourable buckler, to beare
off the blowes of enuious tongues, which are euer
ready to ſpit their ſpite againſt any vertuous
exerciſe: which although it be vnworthie to paſſe

vnder ſo honourable a protection, I hope your
Lordſhip will in indifferent ballance weigh my
willing mind, to do my countrie good, and your
Honour any ſeruice my poore abilitie is able to
performe, which if your Honour allow of, I ſhall
thinke my paines well employed, and ſhall encourage
me hereafter to bring this new found
Art into ſome better perfection, ſo farre as my
poore abilitie is able to put in practiſe, or my
ſimple skill in the Art will reach to. Thus loth to
be tedious, I ceaſe: beſeeching God to preſerue
your Honour with much increaſe of honour, to
Gods glorie and your hearts deſire.
            
               Your honours dutifully at command,
Thomas Smith Souldier.
            
         
         
            
            TO ALL GENTLEMEN, SOVLDIERS,
GVNNERS, AND ALL FAuourers
of Militarie Diſcipline, Thomas
Smith wiſheth increaſe of happineſſe.
            
               GENTLEMEN, there was neuer Author
nor practiſed Gunner euer able (as I am perſwaded)
to deſcribe at full, or could shew perfectly
the efficacie and force that Gunpowder
is able to accomplish, it being a mixture of
ſuch a wonderfull operation and effect, as by dayly experience
we find. And although diuerſe men in diuerſe ages, haue
inuented diuerſe engines and Ordinance for offenſiue and
defenſiue ſeruices by Gunpowder to be perfourmed, yet none
hath nor could euer attaine to that full perfection, to know
preciſely what ſtraunge effects the ſaid mixture is able to
worke. Alſo diuers learned men haue inuented many excellent
rules pertaining to the Art of Gunnerrie, and a great
many of them haue and do erre in the principals of their inuentions:
and the cauſe is, for want of due practiſe therein.
For the Art of Gunnery doth require great practiſe and experience,
to declare the rare ſecrets thereof; which is not for
meane men to attaine to, for that the charges is great.
            And albeit, I am the leaſt able of a great many to take any
matter in hand, pertaining to the ſame Art, being but a
ſworne ſcholler thereto, and my abilitie far vnable to put in
practiſe that I would: yet becauſe I haue ſerued a prentizehood
twiſe told ſince I tooke my oth, and neuer hearing of any
that hath compiled any Arithmeticall rules or ſecrets
(which is the fountaine head from whence all Arts or ſciences
do ſpring) into one volume, I thought it my part and duty
(according to my skill) to do the best I could therein, for the

benefit of others, and that in the plaineſt maner I could, that
ſuch as are not well ſeene in numbers Art, might the ſooner
vnderſtand the ſame. And albeit I haue herein shewed but a
few Arithmeticall concluſions belonging to the Art of Gunnerie,
yet the experienced Gunner or skilfull Mathematitian,
by theſe few may deuiſe a great many moe, for ſeruice
offenſiue and defenſiue, by Arithmeticke and Geometrie to
be performed. All which concluſions (gentle Readers) I haue
thought beſt to frame in eaſie queſtions, shewing the anſwers
or reſolutions thereof. And although they be but meanly framed,
I hope you will accept the ſame in good part, the rather,
for that they are a yong Gunners practiſes. And if there be
ought herein that may profit you, yeeld me your friendly cenſure,
I craue no more: or if in any place I haue erred, either
gently correct it, or paſse it with ſilence, or in friendly ſort admonish
me thereof, I deſerue no leſſe.
            There is a great many that can ſpie a mote in another mans
eye, that had neede to haue a beame pulled from their owne:
ſome wil ſcan verie curiouſly, and ſooner find two faults then
amend one. If you be of that mind (friendly readers) I mind
not to make you my iudges.
            The widowes mite was aſwell accepted as the gifts of the
wealthie. A ſouldier in Alexanders campe, in the dry deſert
preſented the king his helmet full of cold water, ſaying, if I
could haue gotten better drinke, your Grace should haue had
part: the which the king gently accepted and liberally rewarded,
anſwering, I wey not thy gift, but thy willing mind.
But I ſeeke no reward for my trauell, but onely you will wey
my mind is willing to do my countrey good, and to profite the
readers: and not to carpe with Momus, nor diſdaine vvith
Zoilus, nor ſooth vvith Zantippus. In ſo doing you shall encourage
me to ſet penne to paper, and to flie a higher pitch

pertaining to this new found Arte. Othervviſe, if you ſpit
out your ſpite against me for my good vvill, I will as meanely
account of your malice, and ſo as I find you, looke to haue of
me. 
            
               From my poore houſe in Barwicke vpon Tweed this 2.
of May, 1600.
                
               Your friend and welwiller,
Thomas Smith Souldier.
            
         
         
            
            PETER LVCAS CANNONNIER
in commendation of the Authour and
his booke.
            
               SHake ſilly pē to write of arte, to him where arte doth dwel,
               And ſay, the want of Eloquence doth ſo thy hand repell,
               That farre thy Muſe vnable is to praiſe the Authors skill:
               Nor canſt thou paint thy mind, nor finely tell thy will,
               But as there needs no ſigne at dore, whereas the wine is pure,
               So need not I commend this worke, it all men will allure,
               To loue the Smith that forg'd this worke, who hath ſuch Art
in ſtore,
               That better is then Arte which trieth gold from ore,
               As our proud foes haue found, and felt by Ordinance might,
               And ayde of the almightie Ioue, who doth defend our right.
               Therefore good Zeale go post-haſt vnto Fame,
               And bid her giue this booke an euer-liuing name.
            
            
               Peter Lucas Gunner.
            
         
         
            
            Richard Hope Gentleman in commendation
of the worke.
            
               TO tell a tale without authoritie,
               Or faine a fable by inuention,
               The one proceeds of quicke capacitie,
               The other shewes but ſmall diſcretion.
               Who writes concluſions how to vſe a peece,
               In my conceipt deſerues a golden fleece.
            
            
               VVho takes in hand to write of worthie warre,
               And neuer marched where any warre was made,
               Nor neuer hopes to come in any iarre,
               But tels the triall, knowing not the trade,
               To write of warre, and note not what it is,
               May well be thought a worke begun amiſſe.
            
            
               But he that by his ſtudie makes it knowne,
               VVhat thing warre is, and whereof it proceeds,
               Defenſiue and offenſiue reaſons shewing,
               To thoſe that gape for honor by their deeds,
               A worthie worke who doth not count the ſame,
               In my conceit he doth a Souldier shame.
            
            
               If ſo: Smiths trauell cannot well offend,
               For ſo he meant before he ſet it forth,
               And if it chaunce to come where Souldiers wend.
               He it commaunds to ſeeme of litle worth:
               For what he writes, he writes to honor thoſe,
               VVhich wade in warres to triumph ouer foes.
            
            
               Richard Hope Souldier.
            
         
         
            
            Richard Rotheruppe Gentleman
in commendation.
            
               THat man whom Martiall attempts
               May raiſe to honor hie,
               Let him peruſe with learned skill,
               
                  Smiths worke of Gunnerie.
            
            
               That fountaine which ſuch ſprings ſends forth,
               Can neuer drie remaine:
               I meane the Ground of Arts, from which
               All ſcience we attaine.
            
            
               As Grammer, Muſicke, and Phiſicke,
               VVith high Astronomie:
               And other Artes Mathematicke,
               And braue Geometrie.
            
            
               This Art of Gunnerie likewiſe,
               Amongst the reſt let ſtand,
               VVhoſe god-father this Author is,
               VVhich tooke the ſame in hand.
            
            
               Whoſe knowledge in this famous Arte,
               Deſerues eternall fame,
               For his concluſions excellent
               Doth well deſerue the ſame.
            
            
               Richard Rotheruppe Souldier.
            
         
      
      
         
            THE ART OF GVNNERIE.
         
            A Table shewing the deminite parts vſed
for menſuration.
            FOraſmuch as ſome of theſe meaſures are to be vſed in
the treatiſe following, it is requiſite that I ſhew what
kinde of meaſures are commonly vſed and now in force,
beginning with a barly corne, frō whence all theſe hereunder
and a great many moe do proceed, as

                  An inch,
                  cōtaineth 3 barley cornes layed end to end.
                  a finger bredth,
                  cōtaineth 4 barley cornes in thickneſſe.
                  a hand bredth,
                  cōtaineth 4 fingers.
                  a foote,
                  cōtaineth 12 inches.
                  a yard,
                  cōtaineth 3 feete.
                  an ell,
                  cōtaineth 5 quarters of a yard.
                  a ſpan,
                  cōtaineth 3 handbredths.
                  a foote,
                  cōtaineth 4 handbredths.
                  a geometricall pace,
                  cōtaineth 5 feete.
                  a fadome,
                  cōtaineth 6 feete, or 2 yards.
                  10 fadome,
                  cōtaineth a ſcore, or 20 yards.
                  a furlong,
                  cōtaineth 123 paces.
                  our Engliſh furlong
                  cōtaineth 132 paces, or 660 feete.
                  a pearch or rood,
                  cōtaineth 5 yards ½ or 16 feet ½.
                  an aker,
                  cōtaineth 160 perches, 528 paces, or 2640 feet
                  a league,
                  cōtaineth 1500 paces.
                  an Italian or Engliſh mile,
                  cōtaineth 8 furlongs, or 1000 paces, or 5000 feet.
                  a Germane mile,
                  cōtaineth 32 furlongs.
                  a ſcore,
                  cōtaineth 20 yards.
                  an hundreth,
                  cōtaineth 600 feet, after 5 ſcore to the 100.
                  24 grains of wheate dry,
                  cōtaineth one penie of Troyes weight.
                  20 pence,
                  cōtaineth one ounce.
                  12 ounces,
                  cōtaineth one pound.
                  20 graines of barley,
                  cōtaineth one ſcruple of haberdepois weight
                  3 ſcruples,
                  cōtaineth one dramme
                  8 drammes,
                  cōtaineth one ounce.
                  16 ounces,
                  cōtaineth one pound.
                  112 pound,
                  cōtaineth 100 weight.
                  a tunne,
                  cōtaineth 20 hundreth
               
            
         
         
            
            A Table ſhewing how to weigh a great deale
with few weights.
            You may way
any number of
pounds from 
                  one to 40 with
theſe 4 weights,

                        1.
                        3.
                        9.
                        27.
                     
                  
                  1 to 121 with
theſe 5 weights

                        1.
                        3.
                        9.
                        27.
                        81.
                     
                  
                  1 to 364 with
theſe 6 weights,

                        1.
                        3.
                        9.
                        27.
                        81.
                        243.
                     
                  
               
            
            This rule of weighing many things with few weights
proceedeth of Geometricall progreſſion. The pounds to
be weighed, are wayed with as many namelike weights,
to be done either double or three-fold, ſometime by adding
one weight to another, and ſometimes by taking
away and adding to the contrary ballance. Example in a
double reſpect: All termes to 15 are weighed with 4
weights of pounds: as, 1. 2. 4. 8. ſo in a triple reſpect, all
pounds to 40 may be weighed with 4 weights, as 1. 3. 9.
27. All pounds from 1 to 364 are to be weighed with
theſe 6 weights, 1. 3. 9. 27. 81. 243. and ſo infinitely.
         
         
            
            Meaſures.
            THe varietie of meaſures are in a maner infinite, and
yet are all comprehended vnder three general kinds,
proceeding from a point in Geometrie, as Arithmeticke
doth from an vnite: that is to ſay, Lines, Superficies,
Bodies.
            Lines hauing but only length without bredth of thickneſſe,
do meaſure onely Altitudes, Latitudes, and Longitudes,
&c.
            Superficies, being limited by lines, bearing length
and bredth, without depth or thickneſſe, in theſe are
knowne the contents of Pauements, Glaſſe, Boord,
Land, &c.
            Bodies, being bounden by Superficies, & containing
length, bredth, and thicknes, do make knowne the quantitie
of all ſolide or maſſiue things, as timber, ſtone, &c.
All which requires the aide of Arithmeticke, to be truly
meaſured. The definitions, termes, and orderly working
of theſe and all other, the Elements of Geometrie will
teach you.
            Here I thought to haue written briefly, or rather to
haue glaunced at the wonderfull ſtrange effects that Arithmeticke
is able to worke and attaine to, but finding
that that learned and famous man Maſter Iohn Dee, in
his Mathematical preface vpon Euclids Elements, doth
notably touch the ſame, ſhewing the rare properties and
incredible myſteries that numbers Art can reach to, affirming
that the effects thereof, of man is notable fully
to be declared, it ſoone ſtrake me in the dumps, feeling
my ſelfe farre vnable to ſoare ſo high.
         
         
            
            How to finde the cubicall radix or
roote of any number.
            AS in my booke of the Art of warre, entituled Arithmeticall
militarie concluſions, I began with the extraction
of ſquare rootes, being a ſpeciall rule to worke
diuerſe feats belonging to the ſayd Art: So in this Treatiſe
I haue thought beſt to begin & ſhew how to extract
Cubicke rootes, for that diuerſe concluſions are to be
done by the ſayd rule, in the worke following letting
paſſe all former rules, as leſſe neceſſarie, the which are
commonly knowne to euery child, that hath any ſight in
the Art of numbring.
            To finde the radix or roote cubicall of any number,
you muſt note how many figures or numbers be in the
totall ſumme thereof, and then as is ſhewed in the rule
how to extract the ſquare root of any number, you make
a pricke or point vnder euery other number, beginning
at the firſt number towards your right hand: euen ſo in
this rule, in ſearching for the cubicall roote of any number,
you muſt put a prick vnder the firſt number towards
your right hand, and ſo increaſe your number of prickes,
vnder euery third number, towards your left hand, and
your quotient will containe ſo many figures as there be
prickes.
            If your number propounded be cubicall, multiplie
your quotient cubically, the product of that multiplication
will be the number that was propounded.
            To multiply cubically, you muſt do as this example
ſheweth. 5 multiplied in himſelfe is 25, which 25 multiplied
againe by 5, makes 125, and is a cubick number.
            A cubicall figure, is proportioned as theſe figures

ſheweth, for a cube is a ſolide body of ſixe equal ſquares
or ſides like a die.
            
               Example.
               
               It is requiſite in learning to extract rootes, to haue in
perfect memorie all thoſe cubicke rootes of digit numbers
and the cubes they do make, the which will be a
great helpe in working, the which I haue here ſet downe
in a table after M. Records order.

                     
                        1
                        1
                     
                     
                        2
                        8
                     
                     
                        3
                        27
                     
                     
                        4
                        64
                     
                     
                        5
                        125
                     
                     
                        6
                        216
                     
                     
                        7
                        343
                     
                     
                        8
                        512
                     
                     
                        9
                        729
                     
                  
               
               Now to ſeeke for the firſt figure
or roote, your table will ſhew you
what number ſhal ſtand in the quotient,
being due to the laſt prick, towards
your left hand, which figure
ſo ſet in the quotient, multiplied cubickly,
if it be equall to the number
or numbers aboue that laſt pricke,
it doth ſhew that the ſaid number or
numbers are cubicke; but if it bee
more then a cube number, then abate
the greateſt cube number, that the quotient will
make from the ſayd numbers, and cancelling the ſame,
let the remaine ſtand ouer the head of the ſaid numbers,

as is done in deuiſion of common numbers, and ſo haue
you done with the firſt pricke.
               
                   Secondly, triple your roote, ſetting the ſaid tripled
number one place nearer from the laſt pricke, towards
your right hand.
               
                   Thirdly, multiply the ſaid triple, by the ſaid quotient,
the numbers ariſing thereof is your deuiſor, to ſet vnder
your firſt tripled number.
               
                   Fourthly, find out a number to be placed in your quotient,
that may ſhew how often times your deuiſor is cō
                  tained
in the deuident, or numbers ſo remaining ouer it.
               
                   Fiftly, you muſt multiply your deuiſor, by the number
laſt placed in your quotient, firſt drawing a line vnder
your deuiſor, and that which ariſeth of the ſaid multiplication
muſt be placed vnder the ſaid line.
               
                   Sixtly, you muſt ſquare the number laſt placed in your
quotient, and multiplie the ſaid ſquare by the triple of
your firſt quotient number, & the ſumme ariſing of that
multiplication ſet vnder the line, one place nearer tow
                     •
                  rds
your right hand.
               
                   Seuenthly, multiply the number laſt placed in your
quotient cubickly, and ſet the ſame cube numbers vnder
the line, beneath the other numbers, one place nearer
towards your right hand: and then drawing a line vnder
the ſame, adde all thoſe numbers together; the ſumme
ariſing abate from the other pricke that ſtandes toward
the right hand in your deuident, and if nothing remaine,
the number propounded is a cubicke number: but if any
thing remaine, the number propounded is no cubicke
number, but yet the quotient doth ſhew the neareſt cubicke
roote in the propoſition.
               In this order you muſt worke by euery pricke, how

many figures ſoeuer the nūbers propounded containeth.
            
         
         
            To find a Denominator to the cubicke remaine.
            If the number propounded be not cubicall, and that
you deſire to know the true denominator to the cubicall
remaine, you muſt ſquare your cubicke roote, and then
triple the ſaid ſquare, and after triple the roote, adding
all thoſe ſummes together, and to the totall of the ſayd
addition, adde one vnitie, ſo haue you the true denominator
cubicall, the which you may abbreuiate into leſſer
termes by Abbreuiation, according to your deſire.
            Or you may find the denominator cubicall, by multiplying
the roote in the triple of another number that is
more by one vnite, nor the ſaid roote: and then adding
one vnite to the product of the ſaid multiplication, you
haue your deſire.
            
               An example how to worke, to find the
cubicke roote.
               Admit the ſumme or numbers, whoſe cubicke roote
you deſire to know be 32768. I ſet the pricke vnder 8, and
vnder the figure 2 ſtanding in the fourth place, as in the
worke here you ſee, and I finde that the greateſt cubicke
number in 32 is 27, and 3 is his roote, which 3 I place
in the quotient, and his cube being 27, I
ſubſtract from 32, ſo reſteth 5. And ſo I
haue done with the firſt prick towards my
left hand, as here in the work you may ſee.
               
                  
                     〈 math 〉
                  
               
               Then I triple the quotient 3, & it is 9, which I ſet one
place from the laſt pricke nearer towards my right hand.

And then I multiply the triple of the quotient being 9,
by the ſaid quotient 3, ariſeth 27, the which I place vnder
57, drawing a line vnder my deuiſor 27, and then I ſeeke
how oft I can haue 27 the deuiſor in 57, which is a
part of the deuident, the which I can haue but 2 times,
which 2, I place in the quotient, and
by the ſayd 2 I multiplie the deuiſor
27, ſo ariſeth 54, which I place vnder
the line vnder the deuiſor, as here you
ſee.
               
                  
                     〈 math 〉
                  
               
               And then I ſquare the number laſt placed in the quotient
being 2, and it is 4, which ſquare I multiply by the
triple of the firſt quotient number being 9, ariſeth 36,
which I place vnder 54, one place nearer towards the
right hand, as here you may ſee. And
then multiplying the digit 2. cubickly
ariſeth 8, to be ſet vnder the line one
place nearer towards the right hand, &
adding all theſe ſums together, there
ariſeth 5768, the which ſubſtracted frō
the number belonging to the firſt prick
there remaineth nothing, ſo I ſay that
32768 is a cubicke number, and 32 is
the true root thereof. You may proue it by multiplying
the quotient cubickly, and abating the product from
the number propounded, there will remaine nothing.
               
                  
                     〈 math 〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            To find the neareſt root of a number not cubicke.
            
               Queſtion.
               I demaund the true cubicke root of 117884.
            
            
               Reſolution.
               The pricks placed in order as before, I find there will be

but 2 figures in the quotient, & that the cubick nūber of
117 is 64, whoſe cubick root is 4, which 4 I place in the
quotient, and his cube 64 being abated from 117, there
remaines 53 to be placed ouer the laſt prick: then tripling
the quotiēt 4, ariſeth 12 to be ſet down one place nearer
towards my right hand, & then multiplying the quotient
by the ſaid triple, doth ariſe 48 for a deuiſor, which I ſet
in his place, drawing a line vnder him as in the former
worke you ſee. And then I make ſearch how oft I can
haue 48 in 538, which I can haue many times, but more
then 9 times I muſt not take; and therefore I ſet downe
9 in the quotient, and multiplying the ſame by the deuiſor
48, ariſeth 432, to be placed vnder the line vnder the
deuiſor, then I do multiply the ſaid 9 ſquarely, ariſeth 81,
the which multiplied by 12 being the triple of the firſt
quotient, ariſeth 972, the which I ſet down
one place nearer towards my right hand;
and then I multiply 9 cubickly, ariſeth 729
to be ſet downe yet one place nearer towards
my right hand: and adding all thoſe
ſums together, the totall is 53649, which
abated from 53884, reſts 235. And thus I
affirme, that 49 is the neareſt cubicke root
in whole numbers of 117884, as here by
the worke you may ſee.
               
                  
                     〈 math 〉
                  
               
               Now to find a denominator for the 235 remaining, I
ſquare the roote 49, ſo ariſeth 2401. Then I triple the
ſayd ſquared number and there ariſeth 7203, and then I
triple the roote 49, ariſeth 147, to which I adde one, and
it makes 148. Al which ſummes ioyned together, makes
7351, aud ſo the true cubicke roote of 117884 is 49 and
235/7351 partes of an vnite.
               
                  
                  Theormes ſhewing the true proportion that a bullet
of one mettal beareth to the like bullet of a cōtrary mettall,
as alſo the proportion that the circumference of any
buller or globe &c. beareth to the diameter, and of
the ſuperficiall content thereof to the diametrall ſquare
thereof, the which according to Archimedes are thus
proued.
               All circles are equall to that right angled triangle,
whoſe containing ſides, the one is equall to the ſemidiameter,
the other to the circumference thereof.
               The proportion of all circles to the ſquare of their
Diameter, is as 11 to 14.
               All globes beare together triple that proportion that
their Diameters do.
               The circumference of any circle, is more nor the triple
of his Dyameter, by ſuch proportion as is leſſe then
1/7 and more nor 10/27.
               A bullet of iron, to the like bullet of marble ſtone is
in proportion as 15. to 34.
               A bullet of lead to the like bullet of iron, is in proportion
as 28 is to 19.
               A bullet of lead to the like bullet of marble ſtone is in
proportion as 4 to 1.
               The Diameter of any bullet &c. is in proportion to
the circumference as 7 to 22.
            
         
         
            How by knowing the true weight of any one bullet, and the
diameter of the peece due for the ſaid bullet, to find out
the weight of any other bullet belonging to a
contrarie peece of Ordinance.
            
               Queſtion.
               Admit a Demy Cannon of 7 inches Diameter ſhoot

an yron bullet of 32 pound weight, I demaund what
weight ſhall that bullet be of, that ſerues a Cannon of 9
inches diameter?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               To anſwer this and ſuch like, there is a generall rule;
for Ewclid in his ſixt booke of geometricall elements,
hath demonſtrated and proued that all globes are in triple
proportion to their Diameters, therefore I multiply
the proportion of each bullet cubically, and I find the
cube of 7 is 343, and the cube of 9 is 729. Then by the
rule of proportion I ſay, if 343 yeeld 32 pound weight,
what ſhall that bullet weigh whoſe cube is 729? So multiplying
729 by 32 pound, the weight of the leſſer bullet,
ariſeth 23328. which deuided by the 343, being the
cube of the leſſer bullet, yeelds in the quotient 68 poūd
& 4/343 parts of a pound, ſo much ſhall that bullet, weigh,
that ſerues a Cannon of 9 inches diameter, as by working
the rule you ſhall find.
            
         
         
            Another eaſie concluſion, how by the weight of a ſmall bullet
knowne, to find out the weight of a greater.
            
               Queſtion.
               A bullet of 3 inches diameter weighing foure pound
weight, what ſhall a bullet of the ſame mettall weigh
whoſe diameter is twiſe the height of the former (that is
6 inches high?)
            
            
               Reſolution.
               I worke in the order of the former concluſion, multiplying
the diameter of each bullet cubically, and deuiding
as afore is ſhewed, the quotiēt is 32 pound weight,
ſo much ſhall the greater bullet weigh.
            
            
               
               Example.
               In the laſt concluſion the weight of the greater bullet
weighed 32 pound, being 6 inches diameter, how ſhall
I find the weight of a bullet of the ſame mettall that is
but halfe that height.
            
            
               Reſolution.
               I find the cube of 6 is 216, and the cube of 3 is 27, ſo
framing the conuerſe rule of 3, I ſay: if 216 yeeld 32
pound weight, what will 27? And multiplying 27 by 32,
and deuiding the product by 216, the quotient yeelds 4
pound, the true weight of the leſſer bullet. And note that
if you know the diameter and weight of any bullet, and
would know the weight of one that is but ½ the height of
the firſt, the leſſer ſhall be in weight but the ⅛ part of
the greater. Or knowing the weight of any bullet, if you
would know the weight of another of the ſame mettall,
being twiſe the height of the former, the greater ſhall
weigh 8 times as much as the leſſer, as in a figure demō
                  ſtratiuely
hereafter drawne you may ſee.
            
         
         
            How by knowing the weight of any bullet whoſe diameter
containeth both whole inches and partes of whole, how
you should worke to find out the true weight
of another whoſe diameter ends
with a fraction.
            
               Queſtion.
               If a Sakeret ſhoote a bullet of 2 inches ¾ diameter, of
3 pound weight, what ſhall a Culuering ſhot weigh of
5 inches ¼ diameter?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               To anſwer this or ſuch like, I reduce each bullet into

his proper fraction, and I find that the bullet of 2 inches
¾ diameter will be in a fraction 11/4 or 11 quarters, and the
Culuering bullet of 5 inches ¼ height, will be 21/4 then I
multiply each of theſe 2 fractions cubically, and I find
that the cube fraction of the leſſer bullet is 1331/4 and the
cubike fraction of the greater is 9261/4 which knowne, I ſet
down vnder three pound (the weight of the leſſer bullet)
the vnite 1, and it will repreſent a fraction thus 3/1, and
then multiplying and deuiding by the golden rule in fractions,
I find that the weight of the Culuering ſhot of 5
inches ¼ diameter will weigh 20 pound weight and almoſt
¾ pound, as in the working you may find.
            
         
         
            How by knowing the diameter and weight of an yron bullet,
to find the weight of a bullet of marble ſtone of the like diameter:
or how by knowing the weight and height of a
bullet of marble, to find out the weight of an
iron bullet of like height.
            
               Queſtion.
               Admit an iron bullet of 4 inches height weigh 9
pound, I demaund what ſhall a bullet of marble ſtone
weigh of like diameter.
            
            
               Reſolution.
               In a theoreme afore mentioned, I find that a bullet of
yron to the like bullet of marble ſtone, ſhall beare ſuch
proportion as 34 is to 15. And therefore I multiply the
weight of the iron bullet knowne being 9 pound by 15,
(the proportion the ſtone bullet beareth thereto) ſo ariſeth
135, which deuided by 34, the quotient is 3 pound,
and 33/34 parts of a pound: that is, 4 pound wanting 1/34 part
of a pound, ſo much ſhall the bullet of marble ſtone
weigh that is in Diameter and circumference, equall to

the like bullet of iron. In like order reducing the weight
of the ſtone bullet into his proper fractiō, you ſhal haue
135/34 pound, which deuided by 15, the proportiō the ſtone
bullet beareth to the like bullet of iron, your quotient
is 9, the nūber of pounds that the iron bullet weigheth.
            
         
         
            How by knowing the height and weight of an iron bullet, to
find out the weight and height of the like bullet of lead, or
how to find the weight of an iron bullet, by knowing
the weight of a leaden bullet of like diameter.
            
               Queſtion.
               There is a Cannon that ſhootes an iron bullet of 72
pound weight, what ſhall a bullet of lead of the ſame diameter
weigh?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               To worke this, I note that the theoreme before ſaith,
that a bullet of iron to the like bullet of lead, ſhall beare
ſuch proportion as 28 is to 19, therefore I multiply 72
(the pounds which the iron ſhot weigheth) by 28, ſo ariſeth
2016, which deuided by 19, the quotient is 106
pound 2/19, ſo much will a leaden bullet weigh that is proportionall
to an iron bullet of 72 pound weight.
               In this order by working as I haue ſhewed in the end
of the laſt concluſion, you may by knowing the weight
of the leaden bullet, find out the weight of the like bullet
of iron.
            
         
         
            How you may find out the weight of any ſtone bullet of marble,
by knovving the vveight of the like bullet of lead, or
hovv by knovving the vveight of the stone bullet
to find out the vveight of a leaden bullet
of like proportion.
            
               Queſtion.
               If a bullet of lead weigh 106 pound, what ſhall a bullet

let of marble ſtone weigh of the ſelfe like proportion?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               To anſwer this, I find that a bullet of lead to the like
bullet of marble, beareth ſuch proportion as 4 to 1.
Therefore multiplying 106 by 1, and deuiding the product
by 4, the quotient will be 26 pound & ½ ſhewing
the true weight of a ſtone bullet, that is proportionall
to the like bullet of lead.
               And now to find out the weight of the leaden ſhot,
by knowing the weight of the ſtone ſhot, reduce the
ſtone bullet into his properfraction, you ſhall haue 53/2, &
ſetting 1 vnder 4 fraction wiſe, multiply the numerators
together, and likewiſe the denominators, and deuiding
the product ariſing of the numerators by the product of
the denominators, your quotient will be 106 pound,
ſhewing the true weight of the leaden bullet.
               If you haue or do know the weight and true height of
a bullet of ſtone, or any other mettall, and is deſirous to
know the weight and height of another bullet that is
greater or leſſer, and of the ſame mettall, in working as
the firſt concluſion ſheweth, you ſhall haue your deſire.
            
         
         
            To find out the circumference of any circle
or bullet.
            
               Question.
               I demaund how many inches is about the circumference
of that bullet whoſe diameter is 9 inches.
            
            
               Reſolution.
               To worke this or any ſuch like, there is a generall rule,
as thus, that the proportion of the diameter to the circū
                  ference

is as 7 to 22, therefore multiplying the diameter
9 by 
                     •
                  2 ariſeth 198, which ſumme deuided by 7, the
quotient is 28, 2/7 ſhewing the true number of inches about
the circumference of a bullet of 9 inches diameter,
as the figure here demonſtrated ſheweth.
               
                  
               
            
         
         
            How you may by knowing the circumference of any bullet,
find out the height or diameter of the ſame.
            
               Queſtion.
               The circumference of the bullet in the laſt concluſion,
contained 28 inches 2/7 as in the demonſtration you
may ſee, I would know how I ſhould worke to find how
many inches the diameter of the ſame is.
            
            
               Reſolution.
               To anſwer this and all ſuch like, I muſt worke contrarie
to the former concluſion, firſt reducing the whole
number and broken being 28 inches 2/7 into his proper
fraction, and it will be 198/7 then multiplying by 7 according
to Archimedes doctrine, and deuiding by 22, the
quotient will be 9. ſo many inches is the diameter of the
ſame bullet.
               
                  
In this order you may find out the diameter and circumference
of all other bullets.
            
         
         
            How to find out the ſolid content of any bullet, &c.
            
               Queſtion.
               There is a bullet of iron whoſe diameter containeth
9 inches, how many ſquare inches is in the ſolid content
thereof?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               To know this and all ſuch like, there is a generall rule,
as thus, to multiply the diameter in his ſquare, I meane
cubically, and then multiply that product by 11, deuide
the totall ſumme by 21, the quotient ſheweth the number
of ſquare inches in that ſpherical globe or bullet, for
9 multiplyed cubically ariſeth 729, which augmented
in 11 is 8019, that totall deuided by 21, yeeldeth 381
inches, and 6/7 ſo many ſquare inches of iron will be in a
bullet of 9 inches diameter.
            
         
         
            To find the true content of the ſuperficies of any circle
drawne vpon a flat, as on a table or paper, &c.
            
               Queſtion.
               There is a circle whoſe diameter is 21 inches, I demaund
how many ſquare inches is contained within the
circumference of the ſame?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               To reſolue this ofr ſuch like, there is a generall rule,
in taking ½ the diameter, and multiplying it in ½ the circumference,
or ſquaring the diameter, and multiplying
the product by 11, and deuiding the reſult by 14, the

quotient ſheweth the Area or content of all the ſuperficies
within the circumference thereof. Example:
               
               The ſquare of 21 is 441, which multiplied by 11 is
4851, that deuided by 14, yeeldeth in the quotient 346
inches ½. Or other waies, take the halfe of 21 inches, that
is, 10 inches ½, and take ½ of the circumference, which is 33
inches, reduce them into fractions according to the rule,
you haue 21/2 for the diameter and 33/1 for the circumferēce,
then multiplying the one by the other, the product is
1386/4, which deuided by the denominator 2, yeeldeth in
the quotient 346 ½ as before. In this order you may find
out the content of the plaine of any circle.
            
         
         
            To find out the circumference of any bullet or globe diuerſe
and ſundrie waies.
            
               Queſtion.
               How many inches is about the circumference of that
bullet or globe, whoſe diameter is ſuppoſed to be 21 inches
high?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               After you haue with your callaper compaſſes, found
out the height of the diameter, multiply the ſame by 22,
ſo there will ariſe 462, the which deuided by 7, the quotiēt
wil be 66 inches, the true meaſure of the circūferēce
            
            
               Another way.
               Triple your diameter, and thereto adde the 1/7 part of
the ſame, your product is the circumference. Example:
               
               The triple of 21 is 63, and the 1/7 part of 21 is 3, which
added to 63 is 66 inches, as before.
            
            
               Another way to worke the ſame.
               Looke how many times you can haue 7 in the diameter,
ſo many times muſt you haue 22 in the circumference.
Example. The diameter being 21 inches, deuided
by 7, yeelds in the quotient 3, by which if you multiply

22, your product will be 66 inches, for the circumference,
as before. In this order you may find out the circumference
of any bullet, or ſphericall body, &c.
            
         
         
            To find out the ſuperficies of any round body, as bullet,
globe, &c. diuerſe and ſundry waies.
            
               Question.
                I haue a demy Cannon bullet of 7 inches
diameter, I demaund how many inches the ſuperficiall
content therof is?
            
            
               Reſolution.
                To anſwer this and all ſuch like, I muſt in
the order before ſhewed, find out the circūference of the
bullet, and I find that a bullet of 7 inches diameter, ſhall
cōtaine 22 inches in circūference, which circumference
being multiplied in the diameter, ariſeth 154 inches, the
true number of inches contained vpon the ſuperficies of
a bullet of 7 inches diameter.
            
            
               Another way.
               Multiply the ſquare of the diameter of any bullet or
globe by 22/7 the product is your deſire. Example: The bullet
whoſe diameter was 7 inches being ſquared, the
ſquare thereof is 49, which multiplied by 22, yeelds 1078
which ſum deuided by 7, the quotient is 154 inches as
before.
            
            
               Another way.
               Deuide the ſquare of the circumference of any bullet
by 22/7 your quotient nūbers will ſhew you the ſuperficiall
meaſure of the ſame.
            
            
               Example:
               The circumference of the bullet aforenamed of 7 inches
diameter containeth 22 inches, the ſquare thereof
is 484 inches, that number deuided by 22/7 as you do in fractions,
in ſetting an vnite vnder the ſquare number thus,
484/1 and multiplying the ſaid ſquare number by the denominator
of the other fraction being 7, ariſeth 3388,
which deuided by the numerator 22, the quotient

is 154 inches, the ſuperficiall content thereof, as before.
            
         
         
            How you may find out the ſolid content or craſsitude of any
round bullet or globe, &c. diuerſe wayes.
            
               Question.
               In the queſtion before propounded of the bullet, whoſe
diameter was 21 inches, I would know how many inches
is in all the ſolid or maſſiue content thereof?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               I multiply the diameter cubickly, and after multiplieth
that cubicke number by 11, ſo ariſeth 101871, the
which deuided by 21, my quotient is 4851, ſhewing
there is ſo many inches iu the ſolid content of a bullet or
globe of 21 inches diameter.
            
            
               Another vvay.
               Multiply the cube of ½ the circumference by 49, and
deuide the product ariſing thereof, by 363, your quotient
will ſhew your deſire. Example: The circumference
of a bullet whoſe diameter is 21 inches, containeth 66
inches, the ½ thereof is 33 inches, the cube whereof is
35937, that ſumme multiplied by 49 is 1760913, which
deuided by 363, the quotient is 4851 inches as before.
            
         
         
            Hovv you may by knovving the diameter and vveight of
any bullet, or other round bodie, find out the diameter
of any bullet or globe that vveigheth tvviſe
the vveight of the former.
            
               Queſtion.
               There is a demy Culuering bullet of 4 inches diameter
weighing 9 pound, I demaund the true height of

that bullet which weigheth 18 pound weight.
            
            
               Reſolution.
               To worke this and all ſuch like demaunds, this rule is
generall in multiplying the height of the leſſer bullet
whoſe weight is knowne cubically, then doubling that
ſumme, and extracting the cubicke roote thereof, the
quotient will anſwer your queſtion. Example. The bullet
afore named of 4 inches diameter being multiplied cubically
is 64, that ſumme doubled is 128, the cubicke
roote thereof is 5 inches and a fraction remaining ſcarſe
the 1/30 part of an inch, ſhewing the true height of a bullet
that weigheth 18 pound. In this order if you haue a bullet
that is 3 times as heauie as another of like mettall,
whoſe weight is knowne, and that you deſire to know the
diameter of the greater bullet: in tripling the cubicke
number of the leſſer bullet whoſe diameter is knowne, &
extracting the cubicke roote thereof, you ſhall find out
the true height of the greater bullet. Or if you would find
out the height of any bullet of like mettal, that weigheth
4 times as much as an other bullet whoſe weight is
knowne, quatriple the cubicke number of the diameter
of the leſſer bullet, and extract the cubicke root thereof,
your quotient will ſatisfie you. Or if 5 or 6 times &c. in
working as I haue ſhewed you may find your requeſt.
            
         
         
            How you may Geometrically find out the diameter of any
bullet, that weigheth twiſe as much as another
knowne bullet.
            Take the true height or diameter of the leſſer bullet
whoſe weight you know, and ſquare the ſame as you ſee
in the figure following. Then draw a line that may deuide

the ſaid ſquare in 2 equall partes, in the 2 oppoſite angles,
and that line ſhall be the diameter of a bullet twiſe
the weight of the other: then deuide that diametrall line
in 2 equall parts, ſetting one foote of your compaſſe in
the center or mids thereof, and with the other foote draw
a circle, and that circumference wil repreſent the proportion
of a bullet, twiſe as much in weight as the leſſer.
            
               
            
            
               How you may Arithmetically prooue
this concluſion.
               The dyameter of the leſſer bullet is 5 inches, the
ſquare of it is 25. that ſome dubble is 50. the ſquare roote
of 50, is 7. 1/7 and ſo much is the diameter of the greater
bullet, as in the figure here drawne you may ſee.
            
            
               Another way Geometrically, to find the diameter
of any vnknowne bullet that is double the
weight of a knowne bullet.
               Draw a ſtraight line of what length you thinke good,
as you ſee the line A. B. then draw another croſſe line
perpendicular to the ground line as you ſee the line C.
D. note the meeting or croſſing of the lines, as is the
pointe E. This done, open your compaſſe the iuſt length

of the diameter of the leſſer bullet whoſe weight you
would double, ſetting one foote of the compaſſe in E. and
the other in D. and meaſure towards B. twiſe that diameter,
as is done in the points F. G. Then deuide the line E.
F. in 2. equall parts in the point H. and after deuide the
line E. H. in 2 equall halfes, as in the point I. And laſtly
deuide the line I. H. in 2 equall partes in the point K.
Which done, open your compas, placing one foote in K.
and the other in G. draw ½ a circle, as you ſee, I do the
ſemi circle L. C. G. After deuide the line C. D. in 2 equall
partes in the point M. and opening your compaſſe the
iuſt widenes of one of thoſe parts, ſet one foote in M. and
with the other foote draw the line C. N. L. Which done,
the bullet whoſe diameter is the line L. E. wil weigh twiſe
as much as the bullet whoſe diameter is the line E. D. as
Ewclid in his 6. booke of Geometricall Elements doth
demonſtrate and proue.
               
               The greater circle O. doth ſhew the proportion of a
bullet that weigheth twiſe as much as the leſſer circle N.
both the ſaid bullets being caſt of one like mettall.
            
            
               
               Another demonstration to proue the former
concluſion by numbers.
               In a concluſion before ſet downe, where the bullet of
a demy Culuering of 4 inches diameter weighed 9
pound, I proued that a bullet whoſe weight was 18
pound ſhould be more then 5 inches diameter. Euen ſo I
haue hereunder deuided the line E. D. of the former concluſion,
being ſuppoſed to be the diameter of a bullet
whoſe weight is knowne, into 4 equall parts or inches.
And likewiſe deuiding the Diameter F. E. into the like
diuiſions it containeth 5 of thoſe parts, and almoſt the
1/30 part of an inch more, ſhewing the true height of a bullet
that is twiſe as much in weight as the leſſer bullet of
4 inches diameter, as this figure ſheweth.
               
               As the vpper face or ſide of any ſquare being doubled,
the ſquare ariſing of that doubled ſide ſhall be in proportion
iuſt 4 times as much as the firſt ſquare was, whereas

a great many would thinke it wold be but twiſe as much.
Euen ſo the diameter of any circle being doubled, the Area
or ſuperficiall content of the flat of the ſame circle ſo
doubled, ſhall be foure times as much as the other. Alſo
any cube, globe or bullet, whoſe diameter is in double
proportion to another, the ſolide content of that bullet
whoſe diameter is ſo doubled, ſhall be in weight 8 times
as much as the leſſer, as theſe two examples in the concluſions
following figuratiuely drawne ſheweth.
            
         
         
            How by knowing the ſuperficiall content of the plaine of any
circle, to finde out the ſuperficiall content of another
that is twiſe the diameter of the firſt.
            
               Queſtion.
               There is two circles drawne, the one 7 inches diameter,
the other 14 inches: how much is the content of the
greater circle more then the leſſer?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               To anſwer this or the like, by the theoreme afore
mētioned, I ſquare the diameter of the leſſer circle being

                  
ſeuen inches, ſo ariſeth 49 inches, that ſquare multiplied
by 11, yeelds 539, the which deuided by 14, the quotient
is 38 inches ½ ſhewing the ſuperficiall content of
the circle of 7 inches diameter. Alſo working in the
ſame order, I find the content of the greater circle of 14
inches diameter to containe 154 inches, which deuided
by 38. ½ the quotient is 4, ſhewing that the ſuperficiall
content of the greater circle is iuſt 4 times as much as
the leſſer.
            
         
         
            By knowing the weight and height of any one bullet to find
out the weight of another of twiſe the height of the former.
            
               Question.
               If a bullet of 4 inches diameter weye 9 pound, how
much ſhall a bullet of 8 inches height weye.
            
            
               Reſolution.
               To know this or the like, multiply the diameter of ech
bullet cubically, and I find the cube of 4 is 64, & the cube
of 8 is 512, which knowne, I frame the rule of proportion
ſaying, if 64 yeeld 9 pound, what will 512? and in
multiplying and deuiding according to the rule, my quotient
is 72 pound, the weight of the greater bullet, (that is
iuſt 8 times the weight of the leſſer bullet.) For further
proofe behold theſe 2 figures in cubick forme, where
you may ſee that the greater figure whoſe ſide is in double
proportion to the leſſer, doth containe 8 times the
quantitie of the leſſer.
               
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            An eaſie rule to find out the diameter of any bullet,
and how to know how much one bullet is
higher then another by Arithmeticke
ſkill, without any callaper
compaſſes.
            If you want a paire of callaper compaſſes, take a line
or a garter &c. and gird the bullet or bullets whoſe
height you deſire iuſt in the mids, laying that meaſure
to an inch rule, noting how many inches or other meaſure
the ſame containeth, then multiplying the ſaid meaſures
by 7, and deuiding by 22, the quotient will ſhew
you your requeſt. And then abating the leſſer diameter
from the greater, the remaine will ſhew you how much
the one is higher then the other.
            
               Example.
               Suppoſe the circumference of the one bullet be 16
inches, and the circumference of the other 26 inches,
in working as aboue is taught, I find the diameter of
the leſſer bullet is 5 inches 1/11 and the diameter of the
greater bullet 8 inches 4/11, ſo abating the leſſer from the
greater, the remaine is 3 inches and 3/11 partes of an inch,
ſhewing the greater bullet is ſo much in height more
then the leſſer. The like is to be obſerued with any other.
               By this rule you may know how much the circumference
or any part of your peece is higher then another.
            
         
         
            
            A table ſhewing the weight of all yron bullets
from the Fawconet to the Cannon in
Habberdepoiz weight.
            
               
                  
                     Height of the
ſhot in inches
and parts of inches.
                     Weight of the
ſhot in pounds
and partes of
poundes.
                  
                  
                     Height.
                     Weight.
                  
                  
                     2.
                     1. 2/7
                  
                  
                     2. ¼
                     1. ¾
                  
                  
                     2. ½
                     2. ⅓
                  
                  
                     2. ¾
                     3. 3/7
                  
                  
                     3.
                     4. ½
                  
                  
                     3. ¼
                     5.
                  
                  
                     3. ½
                     6. 2/9
                  
                  
                     3. ¾
                     7. 6/7
                  
                  
                     4.
                     9.
                  
                  
                     4. ¼
                     10. ¾
                  
                  
                     4. ½
                     12. ⅔
                  
                  
                     4. ¾
                     14. 5/8
                  
                  
                     5.
                     16. ¼
                  
                  
                     5. ¼
                     19. ⅔
                  
                  
                     5. ½
                     22. 1/7
                  
                  
                     5. ¾
                     25. ⅚
                  
                  
                     6.
                     29. ½
                  
                  
                     6. ¼
                     32. ⅛
                  
                  
                     6. ½
                     36. ⅝
                  
                  
                     6. ¾
                     40. ¾
                  
                  
                     7.
                     46.
                  
                  
                     7. ¼
                     52. 6/7
                  
                  
                     7. ½
                     56. ⅝
                  
                  
                     7. ¾
                     64. ½
                  
                  
                     8.
                     70.
                  
                  
                     8. ½
                     76. ⅔
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            How you may Arithmetically know the true breadth
of the plate of the ladle that is due for any
peece of Ordinance▪ by knowing the
height of the bullet fit for the
ſaid peece.
            Take a line and compaſſe the bullet in the mids, laying
the ſame meaſure to an inch rule, deuide the ſame
meaſure into 5 equall parts, 3 of thoſe parts is the iuſt
bredth you ought to make your plate of, which being orderly
placed on the ſtaffe, and bent circularly, ſerues to
hold the powder in: the other ⅖ partes being cut and taken
away, and ſo left open, ſerues to turne the powder
into the peece, the which to do Gunner like, as ſoone as
you haue filled the ladle ſo full that you may ſtrike the
ſame with a rule, and put the ſame into the mouth of
the peece, fixe your thombe vpon the vpper part of
the ſtaffe, towards the ende next the tampion or head
thereof, and ſo thruſting the ladle gentlie home to the
breech of the peece, turne the rammer ſtaffe, ſo as your
thombe fall directly vnder the ſtaffe, and ſo ſhall you
empty your ladle orderly.
            Now to know the ⅗ parts of the bullets circumference,
that you may make the plate of your ladle orderly, and of
that iuſt breadth, lay the meaſure of the whole circumference
to an inch rule, and then multiplie the ſame by
3, and deuide the product by the denominator 5, your
quotient will tell you truely the breadth that the plate of
your ladle ought to be of.
            
               Example.
               A Cannon whoſe bullet is 7 inches high, will be 22

inches in the circumference, that multiplied by 3 is 66,
which deuided by 5 the quotient is 13 inches ⅕, the true
breadth that the plate for a cannon ladle of 7 inches diameter
ought to be of.
               The length of the ladle is to be made according to the
length, height, and weight of the peece for which it is
made, which in a table in the ende of the booke you may
find ſet downe for all ſorts of peeces.
            
         
         
            How to make a ladle for a chamber-bored peece.
            Open your compaſſe the iuſt diameter of the chamber,
within ⅛ part of an inch thereof. Deuide that meaſure
in 2 equall partes, then ſet your compaſſe to one of
thoſe parts, and with the one foote fixed on a paper or
ſmooth boord, draw with the other foote a circle, the diameter
thereof will be a iuſt quarter of an inch ſhorter
then the diameter of the chamber-bore, by the circumference
whereof, you may find out the true breadth of the
plate of a ladle that is fit for ſuch a chamber-bored Cannon,
by the rule afore ſet downe how to find the true
breadth of the plate of any ladle, for any other peece of
Ordinance, in taking the ⅗ partes of the circumference
thereof, the length ought to be twiſe the diameter, and
⅔ partes, to hold at 2 times the iuſt quantitie of corne
powder that is due to charge ſuch a chamber-bored cannon
with
            
               Example.
               The diameter of the circle drawne for any cannon
whoſe chamber-bore is 7 inches containeth 6 inches ¾9
the circumference whereof is 21 inches 6/7, the ⅗ partes
thereof is 12 inches ¾, and ſo much ought that ladle to

be in breadth, and in length it ought to be 18 inches ⅔. In
this order you may worke to make a ladle in length and
breadth for any bel-bored Cannon: and to find out the
thicknes of the mettall at the touch-hole, or the height
of the bore thereof, the concluſion following will ſhew
you.
            
         
         
            How to find out the height or diameter of the chamber,
in any chamber-bored Cannon, or other
peece of Ordinance, and how to find out
the thicknes of the mettall round
about the chamber thereof.
            Take your priming yron, or elſe a ſtraight peece of
wyer, and bow the end thereof in manner of a hooke, and
then put the ſame into the touch-hole, downe to the
loweſt part of the concauity of the peece, and then with
your knife or elſe with a peece of chalke, make a ſtroke
vpon the wyer hard by the vpper part of the mettal, without
the peece at the touch-hole, then meaſure by your
inch rule, how long the wyer is from that ſtroke to the
end. After put in the ſame wyer againe, and pull it vp, ſo
as the bowed end may reſtor ſtay within the cilinder or
concaue of the peece: and make an other marke or ſtroke
on the ſaid wyer, hard by the vpper part of the mettal, the
diſtance betweene thoſe 2 ſtrokes, is the iuſt thicknes of
the mettall, round about the chamber, the which abated
from the length of the wyer (I meane from the firſt
ſtroke to the loweſt end) the remaine is the true diameter
of the chamber-bore in that peece.
            
               Example.
               Admit the length of the wyer from the end of the concauity

to the firſt ſtroke containeth 15 inches, and the
diſtance betweene the 2 ſtrokes is 8 inches: then thoſe
8 inches is the iuſt thickneſſe of the mettall about the
chamber; which abated from 15 inches, reſtes 7 inches,
the iuſt diameter of the chamber in ſuch a peece.
            
         
         
            By Arithmeticke skill, how to know whether the caryage
for your peece be truly made or no: or how
the caryage for any other peece of
Ordinance ought to be made.
            Meaſure the iuſt length of the Cilinder or bore of
your peece, the plankes of your caryage ought to be
once and a halfe that length. Alſo meaſure the diameter
of the peece, and the ſayd plankes at the fore end ſhould
be in deapth 4 times the diameter, and in the midſt 3
times and ½ the diameter, and at the ende next the
ground, two times and ½ the diameter, and in thickneſſe
once the diameter.
            
               Example.
               Admitte a Culuering of ſixe inches diameter is in
length in the bore thereof 20 times that meaſure (that
is 10 foote long,) then I ſay that the plankes of her caryage
ought to be 15 foote in length; and at the fore
end next the peece 2 foote in breadth, and in the midſt
one foote three quarters, and at the loweſt end next the
ground one foote and a quarter: and in thickneſſe halfe
a foote. Alſo euery caryage ought to haue foure tranſomes,
and ought to be ſtrengthened with ſtrong yron
boltes.
               
                  
The holes or centers wherein the trunions ought
to lye, ought to be three times and ½ the diameter from
the fore end of the caryage, and in depth ⅔ parts of the
thickneſſe of the trunions, which depth you may eaſily
find out, as thus: take the height or diameter of the trunions,
and multiply the ſame meaſure by 2, and deuiding
by the denominator 3, the quotient will ſhew
your deſire.
            
         
         
            How by knowing the weight of any one peece
of Ordinance, to find out the weight
of any other.
            
               Queſtion.
               If a Saker of foure inches diameter weigh 1600
pound weight, what will a Culuering weigh that is ſixe
inches diameter?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               Some would thinke that the rule of proportion plainly
wrought, would anſwer this queſtion: but in that they
are deceiued, for the content of ſolide bodies being
maſſie, are Sphericall or Cubicall inproportion, therefore
you muſt multiply the diameters of euery peece
cubically, & ſet downe the weight of the peece knowne
in the middle number, and ſo working according to the
rule of proportion, you ſhall find out the true weight of
the greater peece.
            
            
               Example.
               4 inches the diameter of the leſſer peece, multiplied
cubically, ariſeth 64 inches. Likewiſe the cubicke number

of the diameter of a Culuering of 6 inches high, is
216 inches: then framing the rule of proportion, I ſay, if
64 being the cube of 4 yeeld 1600 pound weight, (being
the weight of a Saker of 4 inches bore) what will
216 being the cubicke number of 6 inches, ſo multiplying
216 by 1600, ariſeth 345600. which deuided by 64
yeeldes in the quotient 5400 pound weight, ſo much
weigheth the Culuering of 6 inches diameter.
               In working by the conuerſe rule of proportion, you
may not onely prooue this concluſion, but alſo may find
out the weight of any leſſer peece of ordinance, by knowing
the weight of a greater.
            
            
               Example.
               If 216 being the cube of 6 inches, yeeld 5400 pound
in weight, what will 64 being the cube of 4 inches? ſo
multiplying 5400 by 64 there ariſeth 345600. which deuided
by 216, the quotient is 1600 pound weight, ſhewing
the true weight of the Saker of 4 inches diameter, as
before.
               Or if the diameters of the peeces whoſe weight you
would know, containe both whole numbers and broken,
in reducing each diameter into his proper fraction, and
multiplying the ſame cubically, ſetting down the weight
of the peece knowne, in the middle place, for the ſecond
number, and multiplying and deuiding as afore is taught,
the quotient will ſhew you your requeſt, as the concluſion
following will teach you.
            
            
               Queſtion.
               If a demy Culuering of 5 inches ¼ diameter weigh
2600 pound weight, what will a Cannon of 7 inches ¾
diameter?
            
            
               
               Reſolution.
               I reduce the diameter of each peece into his proper
fraction, and I find that the broken number of 5 inches
¼ diameter containeth 21/4, which multiplied cubically ariſeth
9261/4. Likewiſe I reduce the diameter of the Cannon,
being 7 inches ¾ into his fraction, and it is 31/4;, whoſe cube
is 29791/4;: then 1 ſet an vnite I vnder 2600, and it doth repreſent
a fraction thus 2600/1. Now to find out the weight
of the greater peece, I ſet down theſe 3 new made fractions
in the order of whole numbers, and working by the
rule of proportion, I finde the greater peece weigheth
8363 pound, and almoſt ¾ of a pound: for in multiplying
29791 by 2600, there ariſeth 77456600, the which augmented
by the denominator 4 maketh 309826400 for
the deuidēt or number to be deuided. Likewiſe the fraction
of the leſſer peece being 9261, multiplyed by his
denominator 4, makes 37044 for a deuiſor, which deuident
being deuided by the deuiſor, yeeldeth in the quoent
8363 pound, and certaine partes of a pound, ſo much
will a Cannon of 7 inches ¾ weigh being proportionall in
mettall to the other peece.
            
         
         
            How you may be Arithmeticall skill, know how much
of euery kind of mettall any braſſe peece of
Ordinance containeth.
            
               Question.
               Euery Gun-founder doth commonly vſe for euery
100 pound weight of copper, to put in 10 pound weight
of lattine, and 8 pound weight of pure Tinne: I demand
how many pound weight of euery of thoſe mettals is

in a Culuering of 5600 pound weight?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               To anſwere this or all ſuch like, I ioyne all the ſeuerall
mixtures together, and they make 118 pound, which
I reſerue for my deuiſor. Then I multiply the weight of
the peece by euery mixture ſeuerally, and there ariſeth
of the 100 weight of copper being the greateſt mixture,
560000, the which ſum is to be deuided by the deuiſor
common (to wit, 118 pound) and the quotient is 4745
pound and 90/118 partes of a pound: ſo much copper is in
the ſaid peece. Now to know how much latin is in the
ſame, I multiply the whole weight of the peece by 10
the ſecond mixture, and the product is 56000, which
number deuided by the deuiſor common, the quotient is
474 pound 68/118: ſo much latin is in the ſame peece. And
laſtly to know how much Tin was in the ſame peece, I
multiply the weight of the peece by 8, ariſeth 44800,
which deuided by the deuiſor 118, the quotient is 379
78/118: and ſo much Tin was put into the ſaid peece.
               Now to proue the worke if it be truely wrought or
not, I adde all the 3 quotients together, and becauſe
they doe all make the true ſum of the whole weight of
the peece according to the propoſition, I affirme the
ſame to be truely wrought.
               The Gun-founders do hold and affirme,Note. that the lattin
doth incorporate, and cauſeth the peece to be of a
good colour, and the Tin doth ſtrengthen and bind the
other mixtures.
            
         
         
            
            How you may know how far any peece of Artillery wil conuey
her bullet at the best of the randon, by knowing the
vtmoſt range and point blancke of another peece,
and how to proue the ſame: by which rule,
you may know how far any peece will
reach at point blancke and
vtmost range.
            
               Queſtion.
               If a Saker at point blanke conuey her bullet 200 paces,
and at the beſt of the randon ſhoot 900 paces, what
will that Cannon do which at point blancke ſhoots 360
paces?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               To reſolue this or the like, I ſet downe the numbers
proportionall according to the rule, multiplying 900 paces
(the vtmoſt randon of the Saker) by 360 paces, (the
point blanke of the Cannon,) ſo ariſeth 324000, which
deuided by 200 the number of paces the Saker ſhoots at
point blanke, the quotient is 1620. And ſo many paces
will a Cannon ſhoot at the beſt of the randon, that at
point blanke rangeth 360 paces, as by working you may
find, and by experience better vnderſtand.
               You may proue this concluſion by the conuerſe rule
of proportion, multiplying 900 the number of paces the
Saker ſhoots at the beſt of the randon, by 360, the paces
that the Cannon ſhoots at point blanke; and deuiding
that product 1620 the number of paces the Cannon
ſhoots at the beſt of the randon, the quotient is 200.
ſhewing the number of paces that the Saker ſhall ſhoot
at point blanke. In this order you may worke the like
concluſion by any other peece of Artillery, and finde out
the point blanke and vtmoſt range thereof.
            
         
         
            
            To know how much a bullet of yron will out flie a bullet
of lead of the like diameter, being both diſcharged
out of one peece, with one
like quantitie in powder.
            
               Queſtion.
               If a bullet of lead of 24 pound weight, being ſhot
out of a peece with ⅔ partes of the ſaid bullets weight in
powder, range at pointe blanke 240 paces, how far will
a bullet of yron of like height range, being diſcharged
out of the ſaid peece at point blanke with the like quantitie
of powder?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               The proportion betweene a bullet of yron and a bullet
of lead of the ſame height, I haue ſhewed by the
theoremes and concluſions afore ſet downe: by which I
finde that a bullet of yron being of equall diameter to a
leaden bullet of 24 pound weight, the ſaid yron bullet
ſhall weigh 16 pound 2/7 partes. And for as much as the
leaden bullet is ſhot with ⅔ parts in powder of his weight,
that is, with 16 pound of powder, which is very neare
the full weight of the yron bullet, I find that the ſaid bullet
of yron ſhall out flie the leaden bullet ⅓ part of the
leuell range (that is) the yron bullet ſhall flie being
ſhot as afore at point blanke 320 paces, that is, 80
paces further then the leaden bullet rangeth at point
blanke. But if the peece out of which the ſaid bullets
were ſhot, had beene mounted at any number of degrees
of randon, the range of the yron bullet would
ſhorten ſomewhat of the ⅓ of the ouerplus of the ſaid
range: ſo that if the peece were mounted to the beſt
of the randon, the ſaid bullet of yron would not out
flie the leaden bullet, not the ⅕ part of the ſaid range.
            
         
         
            
            By knowing how much powder is ſufficient to charge
any one peece of Ordinance, to know how much
of the ſame powder will charge any other
peece of Ordinance.
            
               Queſtion.
               If a Saker of 4 inches diameter▪ require 5 pound of
corne powder for her due loading, how much of the
ſame like powder will charge a Cannon of 7 inches diameter?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               The plaine rule of proportion cannot reſolue this
concluſion, except you multiply euery number cubically,
and then the quotient will ſhew you your deſire.
            
            
               Example.
               The cube of 4 is 64, and the cube of 7 is 343. which
multiplied by the weight of the charge of powder due
to load the leſſer peece, ariſeth 1615, which deuided by
the cubicke number of the diameter of the leſſer peece,
yeelds in the quotient 25 pound and almoſt ¼ part of a
pound: ſo much corne powder muſt a Cannon of 7 inches
diameter haue to charge her with. And note, that
for as much as now the ſhooting with Serpentine powder
is not vſed, being of no great force, and the making of
corne powder neuer better knowne, nor of more force
then now it is made & daily vſed in ſhooting in great Ordinance;
as alſo the great Ordinance now caſt, not ſo fully
fortified with mettall as they ought to be, being made
more nimble and lighter then in times paſt, therefore the
experienced Gunners do obſerue as a generall rule to
abate ¼ part of the ordinarie charge of corne powder in
all peeces aboue 6 inches bore.
            
         
         
            
            How by knowing how much Serpentine powder will charge
any peece of Ordinance, to know how much corne powder
will do the like, or contrariwiſe by knowing how
much corne powder will charge any peece of
Ordinance, to know how much Serpentine
powder will ſerue.
            
               Queſtion.
               I demaund how much corne powder will charge that
Culuering that ſhoots 24 pound of Serpentine powder
at a ſhoot?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               You muſt note for a generall rule, that 2 partes of
corne powder will doe as much as 3 partes of Serpentine
powder: ſo that the proportion betweene the quantities
or charges of theſe powders, is as 2 to 3, therefore
I multiply 24 by 2, ariſeth 48, which deuided by 3, my
quotient is 16 pound: ſo much corne powder will charge
the ſaid Culuering. Or if you know how much corne
powder will charge her, you may know how much Serpentine
powder will ſerue, in multiplying 16 pound
the due charge of corne powder, by 3, and deuiding the
product by 2, your quotient is 24, as before. In this order
you may doe the like by any other peece. And note
that her due charge of corne powder, will leſſe hurt the
peece, then of Serpentine powder, for if Serpentine
powder be ramd any thing hard, it is long a fiering. And
a little heate long continued (which the Serpentine
powder will doe) dangereth the peece more then a
great heat preſently gone, which effect corne powder
works.
            
         
         
            
            How by knowing how far your peece will shoot with her
due charge in powder and shot, how to giue a neare
eſtimate how far she will shoot with a charge
more or leſſe then her common charge.
            
               Question.
               Admit a Culuering ſhoote a bullet of 18 pound
weight 900 paces, being charged with ⅔ parts in powder
of the bullets weight, I demaund how far ſhould the
ſaid peece ſhoot that bullet if ſhe had been charged
with as much powder as the bullet weighteth?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               By the rule of proportion I find ſhe ſhould ſhoot ⅓
part further then ſhe did at the firſt ſhot, being charged
with ⅓ part of more powder, that is 1200 paces: yet it is
knowne ſhe will not driue the bullet full out the ⅓ part
of this range further, although ſhe will come very neare
it, and the reaſon is, becauſe the bullet flieth in a circular
proportion more or leſſe, a part of the range, after the inſenſible
ſtreight line or motion of the bullet be paſt, according
to the degrees of randon the peece is eleuated
at. Alſo the concaue of the peece being filled vp with
the powder, wadd and bullet, further then it ought to
be, is a hinderance to the range of the bullet in proportion
according to that litle quantitie of the concaue
which the ouerplus of powder and wad filleth vp; which
though it be but little in compariſon of the whole concauity
to the range, yet it is a great hinderance in the
bullets range, for that the bullet being ſo much nearer
to the mouth, is driuen into the ayre before the powder
be all fiered, and haue effected his force thereon: ſo that
giuing the peece her bullets weight in corne powder, ſhe

will ſhoote much further nor with an ordinary charge,
but it will both put the peece in danger of breaking, and
thoſe that are neare thereto in danger of their liues, if the
peece be not all the better fortified with mettall.
            
         
         
            How by knowing how much powder a few peeces of Ordināce
haue ſpent, being but a few times diſcharged, to know how
much powder a greater number of the ſame peeces
will ſpend to be often diſcharged.
            
               Queſtion.
               If 4 Cannons being twiſe diſcharged at any ſeruice,
ſhoote 240 pound of powder, how much powder will
charge 5 Cannons to ſhoote euery one 6 ſhots?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               Worke by the double rule of proportion, ſaying; If 4
Cannons ſhoote 240 pound of powder, what will fiue
Cannons? your quotient will be 300 pound: then ſay againe,
if 2 times diſcharging yeeld 300 pound of powder,
what 6 times? and your quotient being 900 pound
weight, ſheweth that ſo much powder is due to 5 Cannons,
to ſhoote euery one 6 ſhots.
            
         
         
            To know how much powder euery Cannon ſpent
in the former concluſion at one shoote.
            
               Queſtion.
               If 5 Cannons burne 900 pound weight of powder, being
but 6 times diſcharged, how much powder did euery
one ſhoote at one ſhoote?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               Multiply 4 the number of peeces firſt propounded by
2, the times they were diſcharged, ariſeth 8, by which deuide

240 the number of pounds in powder ſpent, the
quotient is 30 pound, and ſo much powder did euery
Cannon fire at one ſhoote. Or elſe you may multiply the
other 5 Cannons by the times they were diſcharged, and
deuiding that product by the powder ſpent, you ſhall
haue 30 pound weight of powder in your quotient alſo.
            
         
         
            How to know how much powder euery little caske or firken
ought to containe, and how many of thoſe caskes makes
a Laſt of powder, and how many shots any
quantity of powder will make for any
peece of Ordinance.
            Euery little caske or firken being empty, ought to
weigh 12 pound, and being filled ought to hold an hundreth
pound weight of powder: ſo that the full caſke
ought to containe 100 of Habberdepoize weight, and
24 of thoſe caskes or firkens filled makes a Laſt of power.
            
               Queſtion.
               How many ſhots will one of thoſe caskes filled with
powder make to a Culuering that ſhootes 15 pound
weight of corne powder at one ſhot?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               Deuide the 100 pounds of powder in each firkē by 15,
the quotient will ſhew you that 100 weight of powder
will be 6 ſhots to a Culuering that burnes 15 pound of
powder at a ſhoote, and 10 pound to ſpare.
            
         
         
            How by knowing how many shots a firken of powder will
make for a Culuering, to know how many shots a
Laſt of powder well make for a Canon.
            
               Queſtion.
               If a firken of powder of one hundreth weight charge a

Culuering 5 times, ſhooting 20 pound of powder at
euery ſhot, how many of thoſe ſhots will be in a Laſt of
powder (containing 24 hundreth weight) to a Cannon
that ſhoots 30 pound of powder at euery ſhot?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               Reduce 24 hundreth weight into pounds, you haue
2400 pound; then ſay by the rule of 3 direct; If 100
pound weight of powder be but 5 ſhot, what will 2400?
and you ſhall haue in the quotient 120 ſhot, for the ſaid
Culuering that ſhoots 20 pound weight at one ſhoote.
And whereas the queſtion ſayes the Cannon ſhooteth
30 pound of powder at a ſhot, you muſt frame the backer
rule of 3, and ſay if 20 beare proportion to 120. what
will 30? ſo multiplying 20 by 120, and deuiding by 30,
the quotient is iuſt 80: ſo many ſhots of powder will be
in a Laſt for any Cannon that ſhootes but 30 pound
weight at a ſhot. The like is to be done with any other.
            
         
         
            To know how many ſhots of powder will be in a Graund
barrell for any peece of Artillerie.
            
               Queſtion.
               If an ordinarie Culuering ſhoot 15 pound weight of
good corne powder at one ſhoote, how many times
will a Graund barrell full of powder ſerue to charge her,
the ſaid holding 300 weight?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               Deuide 300 by 15, the quotient is 20, your deſire:
the proofe is eaſie; for multiplying 20 by 15, you haue
300 the number firſt propounded: the like is to be done
if you would know how many ſhoots will be in a graund
barrell, for any other peece of Ordinance, in deuiding
the poundes of powder contained in the ſaid Barrell

by the number of poundes of powder due to charge the
ſaid peece.
            
         
         
            To know Arithmetically what proportion of euery receit
is to be taken to make perfect good powder, what
quantitie ſo euer you would make at a time.
            
               Queſtion.
               The beſt ordinary corne powder made in theſe daies,
containeth 12 partes of Mr. 3 partes of cole, and
2 partes of Sulphur. The order how to compound and
make the ſame is not peculiar to this treatiſe, being meer
Arithmeticall; I demaund how many pound weight of
euery ſort is to be taken to make 1000 pound weight of
powder?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               Adde all the parts or pounds of the receits together,
ariſeth 17 pound for your deuiſor. Then frame the golden
rule ſaying, if a mixture of 17 pound weight of powder,
require 12 pound of the Salt-peter, what will 1000
pound weight? In multiplying and deuiding according
to the rule, the quotient will be 705 pound, and 15/17 parts
of a pound: ſo many pound of the Mt. is to bee taken
to make 1000 pound weight. Againe, ſay by the ſame
rule, if that a mixture of 17 pound weight, do require
2 pound of Sulphur, what will 1000? your quotient will
ſhew you, that 117 pound and 11/17 is to be taken. And
laſtly by the ſaid rule ſay, if a mixture of 17 pound
take 3 pound of Cole, what will 1000 pound take? and
your quotient will tell you that 176 pound and 8/17 parts
is to be taken. The which 3 quotient numbers being all
added together, will be iuſt 1000 pound weight, and ſo
proues the worke to be truly done.
               
                  
And note that the goodnes or badnes of powder may
be knowne diuers waies, as by the colour, the taſt of
the toung, the quicke burning, &c. Alſo the brimſtone
is that materiall ſubſtance that is moſt apt to kindle
with any ſparke, the cole moſt fit to continue or maintaine
the flame, and the Mr. being reſolued into a windie
exhalation worketh the effect, as cheife and principall
of the three.
               Before I frame theſe concluſions following, of the
randon or range of the bullet, and the diuerſitie thereof,
it is requiſite to make knowne to the Reader, how
that diuers haue written, and ſome will vaunt that by
the range or flight of the bullet out of any one peece
of Ordinance knowne, they will or can tell the vtmoſt
range of all other, thinking that the range of the bullet
out of any one peece, ſhould be proportionall to the bullet
and charge of powder out of any other peece. Alſo
ſome do affirme, that out of any one peece of Ordinance
diſcharged with ſundry quantities of powder, they can
tell the vtmoſt range of the bullets diſcharged; and
their reaſon is, that the range of thoſe bullets ſhall be
proportionall to the weight of powder wherewith they
were charged. And hereupon ſome haue giuen out rules
which are falſe and full of errors: for the diuerſity of proportions
cannot by the plaine rule of proportion be reſolued,
as they affirme: but this may they do; Out of any
one peece of Ordinance charged with one and the ſame
like charge in powder and bullet, find by the rule of proportion,
the neare difference or ranges of the bullets, the
peece being mounted or diſmounted at any degree of
randon; or by knowing how many paces, yards, feete, or
other meaſure any peece will reach at point blanke, by

knowing the point blanke and vtmoſt range of another
peece of Ordinance, they may find the furtheſt range of
the firſt. Or contrariwiſe, by knowing the vtmoſt range
and point blanke of one peece, and the vtmoſt randon
of another peece, they may find out the point blanke of
that other peece, as by the rules following ſhalbe proued.
               And it is to be noted that any peece of Ordinance being
mounted to the beſt of the randon or higheſt degree
of the quadrant, the mouth and hollow cilinder of the
ſaid peece, muſt be erected to 45 degrees, that is at the
6 point of the ſkale in the quadrant (as the moſt part
of quadrantes now are made:) but ſome peeces will
ſhoote as far at the 5 point, or at 41, 42, or 43 degrees
according as the winde is of calmeneſſe, for if any
peece be mounted higher then 45 degrees, ſhe ſhall
ſhoote ſhorter in euery degree about the 1/45 part of her
vtmoſt range. And therefore to know how to worke
theſe concluſions, you muſt buy an inſtrument Geometricall,
or by ſome line of meaſure truely deuided,
meaſure the diſtance from the peece to the place where
the ſhot firſt fell or grazed, noting how many pearches,
paces, yardes, or other meaſure that diſtance is; which
knowne, deuide that diſtance by the degrees in the beſt
of the randon, being 45, your quotient will tell you how
many paces, yardes, feete, or other meaſure your peece
will ſhoote further or ſhorter in mounting or diſmounting
a degree: the which knowne as I haue ſaid, by one
truely meaſured, you may before you ſhoote, know very
neare how far or ſhort your peece will ſhoote, at the raiſing
or diſmounting of any degree, allowing one and the
ſelfe like proportions in charging, both with powder,
bullet and wad.
            
         
         
            
            How by Arithmeticke ſkill you may know how with one and
the ſelfe ſame like charge in powder and ſhot, how much
far or ſhort, any peece of Ordinance will ſhoote, in mounting
or diſmounting of any degree: whereby you may
know how far your peece will ſhoote at any
degree of the randon, by knowing the diſtance
ſhe ſhoots at the utmoſt grade.
            
               Queſtion.
               If a Cannon at her vtmoſt randon (that is, at 45 degrees)
carry the bullet 1440 paces from the peece, how
far ſhall the ſame peece ſhoote being diſmounted but
one degree?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               To anſwere this or all ſuch like, I ſet downe the numbers
according to the rule of proportion, and multiplying
and deuiding accordingly, I find ſhe ſhall ſhoot
ſhort in diſmounting a degree, 32 paces, or 53 yeards,
or 160 foote, which ſubſtracted from 1440, reſts 1408
paces; ſo far ſhall the Cannon ſhoote in diſmounting
her one degree of her furtheſt range. Or you may do the
like in framing the golden rule, ſaying: If 45 degrees
range 1440 paces, what will one? and you ſhall haue 32
paces in your quotient as before.
            
         
         
            How by knowing the diſtance to the marke, by the concluſion
or rule before, you may know whether your peece will ſhoote
ſhort, or ouer the marke, or you may know how far it is from
your platforme to any marke, within the reach of your
peece, onely by knowing the vtmoſt range of
your peece, and the degrees ſhe is
eleuated at.
            
               
               Question.
               Admit the ſame Cannon in the former concluſion,
which ranged at the beſt of the randon 1440 paces, hauing
the like charge in powder, ſhot and wad, is laid to
ſhoot at a marke being mounted at 30 degrees, I demaund
how far it is from the peece to the ſaid marke,
or how far the ſaid peece doth carry ſo mounted?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               To anſwere this, I multiply the paces my peece
reacheth at the beſt of the randon, by thoſe degrees in
the propoſition (to wit) 30 degrees, and there ariſeth
43200, which deuided by 45, my quotient is 960 paces,
(that is 40 paces leſſe then a mile) ſo far will that
peece ſhoot being mounted at 30 degrees. And if you
would know how much this is ſhort of the vtmoſt
range, abate the ſame from the ſaid range, the remaine
is your deſire. As 960 paces abated from 1440, reſts
480 paces, ſo much doth ſhe ſhoote ſhort of her beſt
randon. In this order by 2 ſhoots knowne, you may
know what any peece of Ordinance will do being mounted
aboue 10 degrees to the beſt of the randon, but vnder
10 degrees you ſhould erre ſomething in this
practiſe, becauſe the range of the bullet flieth a great
part of the way in an inſenſible ſtreight line, and the
peece mouth eleuated aboue 10 degrees, ſhootes or
driues the bullet in a more circular proportion.
               The range or flight of the bullet by the draught in
the next leafe may be vnderſtood. And note that in
ſeruice there is no peece of Ordinance lightlie mounted
aboue 15 or 20 degrees, except morter peeces, and
ſuch like.
               
                  
                  
                     The direct straight range at 90 degrees
                     This draught here drawne doth ſhew you the range or motion
of the bullet through the ayre, ſhot out of any peece of Ordinance
at any degree of the randon.
                  
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
            
         
         
            
            How to make a table of randons, or go very neare to know the
true range of the bullet out of all ſorts of peeces, being
mounted from degree to degree.
            Many Authors haue taught how to make a table of
randons, whereas ſome of them neuer ſhot in any peece
of Ordinance in their liues. And for aſmuch as I find
their writing and reaſons differing, I thinke it will be
a very hard matter to make a perfect table of randons, except
the ſame be tried and experimented with ſome
peece of Ordinance in ſome conuenient ground. I neuer
heard nor reade of any that hath as yet fully put the
ſame in practiſe, the which would be much auailable to
euery Gunner, to know what euery peece would do at
the mount of euery degree or point in the quadrant, the
motion or range of the bullet being ſomething variable
at the mount of euery degree. You ſhall very neare find
out the true range or randon of the bullet ſhot out of any
peece of Ordinance, the peece mounted at any degree
of randon, as thus:
            Charge your peece with her due loading, in powder,
ſhot and wad, laying the peece at point blanke, which
you may eaſily try, by putting the rule of the quadrāt into
the peece mouth, & coyning the peece at the breech, ſo
as the plūmet may cut the quadrant in the line of leuell,
as you ſee in the firſt figure hereafter drawne, that peece
lyeth point blanke: which done giue fire, & marke where
the bullet firſt grazeth, after bring your peece to the
ſame platforme, ſo as the wheeles and cariage ſtand neither
higher nor lower then they did the firſt ſhoote: and
being charged with one & the ſelfe like quantity in powder,
bullet & wad as before, the peece being of like tēper
raiſe her mouth one degree, as the ſecond figure ſhoweth:

diſcharge her, and marke where the pellet falleth or
grazeth firſt; then meaſure how farre the firſt graze of
the ſecond bullet is beyond the graze of the firſt bullet,
ſo much will the peece conuey the bullet further at
the mount of euery degree, or very neare thereto. But being
mounted aboue 20 degrees, ſhe will ſhoote ſhorter
& ſhorter, a litle at the mount of euery degree to the beſt
of the randon, according to the height & circular motiō
of the bullet. If the peece be mounted to the beſt of the
randon, the plummet will cut the 45 degree of the quadrant,
as the 3 figure ſheweth. Or you may make a table
of randons like the other, as thus: Meaſure the diſtance
the peece cōueyeth the bullet at the beſt of the randō, frō
which abate the diſtāce the peece cōueyeth her bullet at
point planke, deuide the remaine by 45, the quotient will
ſhew you how far the ſhoote is caried at the mount of euery
degree: or deuiding the ſayd remaine by ſo many degrees
as you would eleuate your peece at, the quotiēt wil
likewiſe ſhew you how far the bullet doth range beyond
point blanke.
            
               Example.
               If a Cannon at point blanke range 300 paces, and at
the beſt of the randon ſhoote 1500 paces, how farre ſhall
ſhe ſhoote at the mount of one degree?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               Abate 300 frō 1500, reſts 1200, which deuided by 45,
the quotient is 26 2/3, ſo many paces ſhall ſhe ſhoot at the
mount of euery degree.
               This concluſion or rule, I do not affirme to be cleane
without error, for that I neuer tried the ſame, yet it will
come very neare to this proportiō, being tried on a plain
groūd that is water leuel, for the peece being moūted frō
1 to 10 degrees, conueyeth the bullet with litle bending

at the fall thereof, and from 10 degrees to 20, as the motion
of the bullet decreaſeth: ſo it falleth more bowing
then in the firſt 10 degrees. And mounted from 20
grades, to the beſt of the randon, conueyeth the bullet
in a more circular courſe. And it is to be noted, that any
peece of Ordināce hauing her due charge, will driue the
bullet more ground mounted at 20 degrees, then from
20 grades to the beſt of the randon. And being truely
loaden and diſcharged at the beſt of the randon, will
driue the bullet 5 times the diſtance of her leuell range,
or rather better.
               
            
         
         
            
            How you may Arithmetically know how much wide, ouer,
or short, any peece of Ordinance will shoote from
the marke, by knowing the diſtance to the
marke, and how your peece is laid to
shoote at the ſaid marke.
            
               Queſtion.
               If a Culuering or Cannon of 10 foote long, be ſhot
at a marke 700 yardes from the peece, the mouth of the
ſaid peece planted an inch wide, how far ſhall the bullet
light wide of the marke?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               Reduce the meaſure of the length of the peece into
inches, becauſe the denomination of wideneſſe is by inches,
and the peece of 10 foote length, will yeeld 120
inches. Likewiſe reduce the length from the peece to the
marke into inches, you haue 25200 inches. Then by the
rule of propotion: ſay, if 120 inches ſhoot wide one inch,
what will 25200 inches? And in multiplying and deuiding
according to the rule, you ſhall find in your quotient
210 inches, that is 17 foote ½: ſo much ſhall the
bullet light wide of the marke. For this is a generall rule,
that looke how many times the length of the cilinder or
concaue of the peece is to the marke, ſo many inches
ſhall the peece ſhoote amiſſe, being laid ouer one inch,
or vnder, or wide of the marke, if the winde doe not alter
it. The like is to be done of any other.
            
         
         
            A remedie to lay your peece ſtraight, if she lie either
ouer, vnder, or wide of the marke.
            Let a plumbe line fall perpendicularly ouer the middle
part of the breech of the peece, and with a hand-ſpike

or leuer, winde the carriage of the peece too and fro till
you eſpie the middle part of the mettall at the mouth
of the peece, and the ſaid line deuide the marke in 2
equall partes: ſo ſhall you make a ſtreight ſhot, giuing
the peece her true diſparture and length.
            
               Another way.
               Or you may take the true diameter of the concaue
at the mouth of the peece, laying an inch rule to the
ſame, deuide the ſaid diameter in 2 equall partes; to
the point of which deuiſion being the center of the
cilinder of the peece, let a threed and plummet fall, or
elſe erect a ſquire, ſo as the containing angle touch the
center or middle point of the diameter, by the edge of
which rule or ſquire draw a line with the point of your
knife, from the height of the mettall at the mouth: that
line would croſſe in the center if it were continued,
and it is a perpendicular or plumbe line to the other,
by which line or ſtrike ſo drawne, with a litle peece of
ſoft waxe, ſet vp a ſtraight ſtraw, to reach a litle aboue
the mettall. And knowing likewiſe the midle mettall
at the breech of the peece, it is an eaſie matter to make
a ſtraight ſhot, if the 2 ſights (to wit) the ſight at the
breech and mouth be laid ſo as they deuide the ſaid
marke in 2 partes: for this is generall, that any three
thinges that the eye can comprehend at once, being
equall with the eye, are in a ſtreight line from the eye,
whether the ſame be at aſcent or deſcent.
               The line or ſtrike thus drawne at the mouth of the
peece, will ſhew you preſently where and how to ſet vp
your diſparture of your peece at any occaſion.
            
         
         
            
            In shooting without diſparting your peece at any marke
within point blanke, to know how far the bullet
will flie ouer the marke by knowing the
diſtance to the marke.
            
               Question.
               A Cannon or Culuering of 12 foote in length, hauing
three inches more mettall at the breech on each
ſide then at the mouth, ſhooting at a marke ſuppoſed to
be within the leuell range, and 600 yeards from the
mouth of the peece, being ſhot without her diſparture,
how much ſhall the ſhot flie ouer the marke?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               It is a generall rule, that looke how much the peece
is thicker of mettall, in any one ſide at the breech,
then at the thickeſt part at the mouth, as alſo looke how
many times the length of the peece is to the marke,
ſo many times that ouerplus of thickneſſe ſhall the bullet
flie ouer the marke, being no higher then the
peece, and the ſaid peece diſcharged without her diſparture.
            
            
               Example.
               Deuide 600 yeards (being the diſtance from the
peece to the marke) by 4, (the length of the peece)
your quotient is 150, which multiplied by 3 inches the
ouerplus of mettall, ariſeth 450 inches: ſo much ſhall
the bullet flie ouer that marke, the marke being placed
on the ſide of a hill or bearing banke, and within the
leuell range of the peece.
               In like manner ſhooting at anie marke within

½ the vtmoſt range of the peece, and not diſparting your
peece, you ſhall ouer ſhoote ſomthing, giuing the peece
her due length and due loading.
            
         
         
            How you may lay your peece point blanke
without inſtrument.
            If you bring the height of the mettall at the mouth
of the peece, and the height of the mettall at the breech,
equall with the horiſon, the hollow cilinder of the peece
will lie point blanke.
         
         
            How you may Arithmetically diſpart any peece of
Ordinance truely diuers waies.
            If you meaſure with a paire of Callapers the greateſt
height of mettall at the mouth of the peece, and likewiſe
at the breech, abating the leſſe out of the greater, ½ the
remainder is the iuſt diſparture.
            
               Example.
               A Culuering that is 19 inches high at the greateſt
part of mettall in the breech, will be 13 inches high at
the greateſt part of mettall at the mouth: which 13 inches
abated from 19, reſts 6, which deuided in 2 equall
parts, the quotient being 3 inches ſheweth the true diſparture
of that Culuering.
            
         
         
            Another way to diſpart any peece without Callapers.
            Take a line and meaſure the greateſt circumference
of mettall in the breech, then multiply that meaſure by
7, deuiding the product by 22, the quotient is the diameter,
or height of the circumference. Likewiſe meaſure
the greateſt circumference of mettall at the mouth,
multiplying that meaſure by 7, deuide by 22 as before,
the quotient will ſhew the diameter of the mettall at the

mouth: ſubſtract that diameter laſt found, from the diameter
at the breech ½, the remaine is the true diſparture.
            
               Example.
               A Culuering whoſe greateſt circumference of mettall
at the breech containeth 66 inches, and at the mouth 44
inches, I demaund how high is the diameter of the mettall
both at the breech and mouth, as alſo what is the
true diſparture of that peece?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               Multiply 66 by 7, ariſeth 462, deuide by 22, the quotient
is 21, the height of the mettall at the breech: likewiſe
multiply 44 by 7, you haue 308, deuide by 22, the
quotient is 14, the height of the mettall at the mouth,
which 14 abated from 21 reſts 7, the which 7 deuided in
2 equall parts, yeelds 3 inches ½ for a part, the true diſparture
of that Culuering.
               This is one of the principalleſt points belonging to
a Gunner, to know truely how to bring the concaue of
the mettall of his peece euen: diuers other waies there
is to do the ſame. As for chambred peeces, there is no
perfect or generall rule, but is to be conſidered according
to the chamber or concaue of the peece. Euery reaſonable
Gunner may iudge in that caſe.
            
         
         
            How by Arithmeticall skill you may mount any great
peece of Ordinance by an inch rule vnto 10 degrees
of the quadrant, if you want a quadrant
or other inſtrument.
            Firſt you muſt meaſure the iuſt length of the Cannon
or bore of the peece: reduce that meaſure into inches,
and double the ſame: afterwards multiply the number of
inches ſo doubled by 22, and deuide by 7, and note what

the quotient number is, which quotient deuided by 360
the degrees contained in the whole circumference of euery
circle, the laſt quotient number will ſhew you the
number of inches, and parts of an inch, that will make a
degree in the quadrant for that peece.
            
               Example.
               Admit there is a Saker or Fawcon, whoſe concaue or
bore containeth iuſt 7 foote in length, and that you deſire
to know what parts of an inch rule will mount her to
one degree of the quadrant, you muſt reduce 7 foote into
inches, and you haue 84 inches, that 84 doubled is
168, the which multiplied by 22 ariſeth 3696, the which
deuided by 7, the quotient will be 528; that quotient
number being deuided againe by 360, wil yeeld 1 7/15 (that
is) one inch and ½, wanting 1/15 part of an inch. So I affirme
that any peece of Ordinance whoſe chaſe or bore is but
7 foote long, being mounted by an inch rule one inch
and 7/15 parts, that peece ſhall lye iuſt the height ſhe wold
haue done if you would haue mounted her one degree
of the quadrant. The like order is to be obſerued in
mounting any other peece of Ordinance by an inch
rule, of what length ſoeuer. And note that in mounting
any other peece of Ordinance, to any degree of the quadrant,
by a Geometricall quadrant, you muſt put the
rule of the quadrant into the peece mouth, lifting the
peece vp or downe with a leauer or hand-ſpike towards
the breech, till the plummet cut iuſt vpon that degree of
the quadrant you deſire.
               But to mount her by an inch, you muſt place the rule
vpon the higheſt part of the mettall at the breech of the
peece, coyning the peece vp or downe, till through the
ſight or ſlit in your rule (be lifted to that part or deuiſiō in

your rule that anſwereth the degrees you deſire) you
eſpie the Carnoize or higheſt part of the mettall at the
mouth of the peece, and the marke, all 3 in a ſtreight line.
               If you would mount the ſame peece to 2 degrees of
the quadrant by an inch rule, you muſt multiply the meaſure
in your rule laſt found, being 1 inch 7/15 parts by 2, in
the order of fractions, and you ſhall haue 44/15, the which
44 being the numerator of the fraction deuided by 15
the denominator, the quotient being 2 inches 14/15 is your
deſire; ſo may you affirme that 3 inches by the rule wanting
1/15 part of an inch, will make 2 degrees by the quadrant.
               And note, that looke how much you would haue your
peece mounted by an inch rule for to anſwer any number
of degrees vnder 10, either multiply that number by
the number of inches and parts of an inch, that makes a
degree of the quadrāt, or elſe working as you did the firſt
concluſion, multiplying the firſt product by the number
of inches deſired, and deuiding that product by the
numbers afore mentioned, your laſt quotient will reſolue
you of your deſire.
            
            
               Example.
               I demaund how much the peece afore mentioned
ſhould be eleuated by an inch rule, to anſwere to 8 degrees
of the quadrant?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               Reduce the length of the bore of the peece into inches,
as afore is ſhewed, doubling that meaſure, and it makes
168, as you ſee in the 1 concluſiō: which 168 inches multiplied
by 22, yeeldeth 3696 inches, the which product
afterwards multiplied by 8, ariſeth 29568, which ſumme
deuided by 7, the quotient is 4224: the ſame deuided

by 360, yeelds in the quotient 11 inches 11/15 parts of an
inch, ſo many inches and partes of an inch muſt the ſame
peece be eleuated to with an inch rule, to anſwere to 8
degrees of the quadrant, as by triall you may find.
            
         
         
            How by Arithmeticke skill you may know the true
thicknes of mettall in any part of any
peece of Ordinance.
            Take a paire of callapers, and meaſure the height of
the out ſide of the mettall in that place of the peece
whereas you deſire to know the thicknes of the mettall,
then with an inch rule, or elſe a paire of ſtreight compaſſes,
meaſure the diameter of the bore, or concaue of the
peece, abating the height of the ſaid diameter from the
height of the whole thicknes of that part of the peece ſo
meaſured. And note the remainder, the which deuide in
2 equall parts, and the one of thoſe parts is the iuſt meaſure
of the thickneſſe of the mettall in that part of the
peece.
            
               Example.
               I prooued this concluſion with a Culuering, whoſe
bore or concauity at the mouth was 5 inches ½ height,
& I found that the thicknes or height of the whole circū
                  ferēce
of the ſayd peece at the touch-hole, was 16 inches
⅓, from the which I abated 5 inches ½ (fraction wiſe) reſts
10 inches ⅚ parts of an inch: that deuided in 2 equal parts,
the quotient is 5 inches, and 5/12 or 5 inches ½ wanting
the 1/12 part of halfe an inch, ſo thicke was the mettall of
that Culuering at the touch-hole.
               Likewiſe I ſearched for the thickneſſe of mettall in the
ſame peece at the end of the trunions, and I found that
the thicknes or height of the ſuperficies of all the mettall

there contained 13 inches, from which I abated the diameter
or concaue at the mouth, being 5 ½ inches, reſted
7 ½, which deuided in 2 equall parts, the quotient being
3 inches ¾ ſhewed the true thickneſſe of the mettall at
the trunions. In this order you may find the true thickneſſe
of mettall in any part of any peece of Ordinance.
            
         
         
            Another way to know the thickneſſe of mettall in
any part of any peece of Artillerie.
            Take a letherne girdle, and gird about that part of the
peece you deſire the thickneſſe of mettall, lay the ſame
meaſure to an inch rule, and note how many inches or
other meaſure the ſame containeth: then multiply that
meaſure by 7, and deuiding the product by 22, your
quotient is the true meaſure of the whole thickneſſe of
the peece in that place. Thē ſubſtracting the diameter of
the bore or concauity of the peece from that quotient,
note the remainder. Deuide that remaine in two equall
partes, the one of thoſe parts is the thickneſſe of the mettall
in that part of the peece ſo meaſured.
            
               Example.
               I prooued this concluſion with a demy Cannon of
ſixe inches diameter, in girding the ſame about with a
line hard behind the trunions, and laying the ſame to an
inch rule, it cōtained 44 inches, which ſumme multiplied
by 7, amounted to 308 inches: that ſumme deuided by
22, my quotient was iuſt 14. And ſo many inches was
the height of the whole mettall in that part of the peece,
out of which quotient I did abate the diameter or bore
of the peece being 6 inches, and the remaine was 8 inches,
which deuided in 2 equall partes, my quotient
being 4 inches, ſhewed the true thickneſſe of mettall

in that part of the peece, being hard behind the trunions
towards the breech.
               And it is to be noted, that euery peece of Ordinance
if it be truly fortified with mettall, ought to containe as
much mettall in thickneſſe round about, ſo farre as the
chamber where the powder and wad lyeth, as the bullet
is in height.
            
         
         
            How to make a good shot in a peece that is not truly bored:
or to know how much any peece will shoote amiſſe,
that is thicker of mettall on the one ſide then
on the other, if you know the diſtance
to the marke.
            
               Queſtion.
               A certaine Gunner hauing ſhot diuers times in a
Cannon at a marke ſuppoſed to be 500 paces from the
peece, findeth ſhe ſhooteth ſtill towards the right hand,
& ſearching whether the fault were in him ſelfe, or ſome
impediment in the peece, he findeth that the peece is 2
inches thicker of mettall on the right ſide then on the
left. And therefore requeſteth how to lay the concaue of
the peece (being 9 foote in length) equall with the marke,
ſo as he may make a ſtraight ſhot.
            
            
               Reſolution.
               To do this or the like, there is a generall rule, that
looke how oftentimes the length of the cilinder or concaue
of the peece is to the marke, which is eaſily done by
deuiding the diſtance to the marke, by the length of the
concaue of the ſaid peece. And knowing likewiſe how
much the one ſide of the peece is thicker then the other,
the one halfe of that ouerplus being multiplied by the
quotient firſt found, the product will ſhew you how

much the peece ſhooteth wide of the marke. And this is
a generall rule: that looke which ſide of the peece is
thickeſt of mettall, towards that ſide ſhall the bullet fall,
for that the thinner ſide is more ſmart, and the thicke
ſide more dull in heating.
            
            
               Example.
               The Cannon in this concluſion, is ſaid to be 2 inches
thicker of mettall more in thickneſſe on the right ſide
then on the left. And the diſtance to the marke is ſuppoſed
to be 500 paces, (that is, 2500 feete) the which deuided
by 9 feete, being the length of the hollow cilinder
of the Cannon, yeeldeth in the quotient 277 feete
7/9, the which multiplied by ½ the ſuper fluitie of the mettall
being one inch, makes 272 feete 7/9 ſtill, and ſo much
wide of the marke ſhould the ſaid peece haue ſhot at ſuch
a diſtance, although ſhe had beene laid full againſt the
mids thereof.
            
         
         
            How to remedie your peece being thicker of mettall in one
part then another to make her shoote ſtreight.
            You muſt firſt ſearch your peece with an inſtrument,
to know which is the thicker ſide, then deuide the ouerplus
of mettall in 2 parts, ſetting the diſparture of your
peece one of thoſe parts towards the thickeſt ſide of the
peece mouth, and bringing the midle part of mettall at
the taile of your peece, that diſparture and the midle of
the marke, all in one ſtreight line, giue fire and you ſhall
make a ſtreight ſhot But beware of ouercharging of ſuch
peeces, for they are dangerous.
            If the thickeſt part of the mettall be aboue, then you
ought to make your diſparture one inch more: if vnder (I
meane towards the carriage) an inch leſſe.
         
         
            
            To know the different force of any two like peeces of Ordinance
planted againſt an obiect, the one being further
of from the ſaid obiect then the other.
            
               Queſtion.
               Admit there is a Caſtell or Fort to be battered, being
ſituate vpon a hill, which hill is 50 paces in height,
and that 140 paces from the ſaid Caſtell there is another
hill, of equall height to that hill whereon the Caſtell
is built, and Ordinance planted thereon to beat or batter
the Caſtell wall, and in the valley at the foote of the
ſaid hill 180 paces off from the Caſtell hill, there is Ordiance
planted, and mounted at 20 degrees, to ſhoot
and beat downe the ſaid caſtell: I would know whether
the Ordinance in the valley being 180 paces diſtance
from the Caſtell, and mounted at 20 degrees, or the Ordinance
on the height of the hill, lying leuell to ſhoote
a litle aboue the baſe of the wall, being diſtant therefrom
140 paces, ſhall worke the greateſt effect in battering
downe the ſaid Caſtell wall, the ſaid peeces being of like
length and height, and hauing like charge in powder and
bullet?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               To reſolue this or the like, a man would thinke that
the peece planted on the height of the hill, lying leuell
to ſhoote a litle aboue the ground-worke of the Caſtell,
would batter ſoreſt, becauſe ſhe is neareſt: yet by experience
we find the contrary, for the Caſtell being a great
way within the reach of both the peeces, that peece ſhall
not onely ſhoote much further, that is any thing eleuated,
but alſo pierce much ſorer, by ſo much as ſhe is able
to ouer ſhoot the other ſelfe like peece that lyeth leuell:

albeit the ſaid peece ſo eleuated, be planted furtheſt off
from the ſaid reſiſting obiect: for euery Gunner knoweth,
and reaſon and experience doth teach euery reaſonable
man, that no peece of Artillerie will ſhoote ſo far at
point blanke, as when the ſame is eleuated at any number
of degrees; becauſe the bullet being ponderous, flieth
more heauily and ſooner declineth, being ſhot out
of any peece lying leuell, then out of any ſuch like peece
mounted at any degree of the randon. So that of force
it muſt needs follow, that the peece planted in the valley
180 paces off from the Caſtell, ſhall pierce and batter a
great deale ſorer then the like peece planted on the
height of the hill being but 140 paces from it.
            
            
               Example.
               
                  
               
            
            
               
               Example.
               Suppoſe a Cannō or Culuering at point blanke ſhoot
240 paces, and being mounted at one degree outſhoote
the ſame 30 paces, what will the ſayd peece do being
mounted 20 degrees?
               By proportion I find, that if at the mount of one degree,
any bullet range 30 paces beyond the leuell range,
that at 20 degrees if ſhall outflie the ſame 600 paces: albeit
the ſayd bullet range not in euery degree a iuſt like
number of paces, yet the proportion will be very neare
thereto. And becauſe the peece at the foote of the hill
is ſayd to be 40 paces further from the Caſtell, then the
like peece planted on the height of the hill, I abate 40
out of 600, reſts 560 paces: ſo farre would the peece in
the valley out ſhoote the other like peece on the hill; ſo
that it muſt needs follow, her bullet ſhall pierce ſoreſt,
for that it hath moſt ſtrength to flie furtheſt.
            
            
               Another exmaple or triall of the former
concluſion.
               The peece planted vpon the hill, is ſayd to be 140 paces
from the Caſtell, and the like peece at the ſoote of
the hill 180 paces. Now ſuppoſe each of thoſe peeces
being layd at point blanke, would not range aboue 240
paces, abate 140 paces (the length to the marke of the
peece on the hill) from 240 paces her leuell range, and
the remaine is 100 paces; and ſo many paces ſhall that
peece ſtrike the marke before the end of her leuell range.
               Now to find the like in the peece planted in the valley
180 paces from the Caſtell, mounted at 20 degrees,

I find by the concluſion afore ſet downe, that ſhe ſhall
out ſhoote the other 600 paces: ſo that abating the diſtance
from the peece to the Caſtell, being 180 paces
from 840 paces, her whole range mounted at thoſe degrees,
there remaines 660 paces. And foraſmuch as the
ſayd peece eleuated at 20 grades, doth ſtrike the marke
660 paces before the full end of the range of her bullet,
it muſt of force pierce or batter ſorer then the other
peece whoſe bullet beates the marke but 140 paces before
the full end of his range.
            
         
         
            How you may hauing diuerſe kinds of Ordinance to batter
the wals of any Towne or Caſtell, &c. tell preſently
how much powder will loade all
thoſe Ordinance one or many
times.
            
               Queſtion.
               There is a Caſtell beſieged, and to batter the ſame
there is appointed 4 Cannons, 6 demy Cannons, 6 Culuerings,
8 demy Culuerings, and 5 Sakers: theſe
peeces are charged euery time with corne powder, the
whole Cannons ſhootes at euery ſhot 32 pound of powder
a peece, the demy Cannons 18 pound, the whole
Culuering 16 pound, the demy Culuering 12 pound,
and the Sakers 6 pound a peece. All which peeces being
10 times diſcharged, did make a breach ſufficient
for 9 or 10 men to enter in by ranke (a breach of ſuch
a wideneſſe is thought ſufficient to be aſſaultable,)
I demaund how much powder was ſpent before the
breach was made?
            
            
               
               Reſolution.
               To anſwere to this demaund, I multiply the number
of euery ſort of peeces, by the weight in powder that
one of them ſhootes, and the product ſheweth me how
much powder euery ſort of the ſaid peeces did ſpend at
one bout: then I adde euery number together, and the
totall of that addition ſheweth me how much powder
will loade all thoſe peeces one time, which addition multiplied
by 10, being the times they were ſuppoſed to be
diſcharged, the product ſheweth the iuſt quantitie of
corne powder occupied at the ſaid ſiege by the great
Ordinance.
            
            
               Example.
               I multiply 32 pound the weight of powder due to
loade euery Cannon by 4 the number of Cannons, ariſeth
128. Likewiſe 18 pound of powder being the duety
of euery demy Cannon multiplied by 6 the number of
the ſame peeces, ariſeth 108, and 16 pound of corne
powder being the duety of euery Culuering multiplied
by 6 the number of thoſe peeces, is 96. And 12 pound
of powder being the due loading of euerie demy Culuering
multiplied by 8. the number of the ſame is
96. And laſtly 6 pound of powder the duety of euerie
Saker, multiplied by 5 the number of that ſort of peeces,
is 30. Theſe ſummes or additiōs put together makes
458 pound weight of powder: and ſo much will diſcharge
all thoſe peeces one time; the which ſumme multiplied
by 10, is 4580 pound of powder, that is, two
Laſt of powder wanting 220 pound. In this order if
you haue 20 Laſt of powder, by knowing the number
of euery ſort of ſeuerall Ordinance, you may preſently

know how many ſhots, or how many times the ſaid
powder will loade all the ſaid Ordinance, as this table
ſheweth.
               
                  
                     
                        Names of the Peeces.
                        Number of each ſort of Peeces.
                        Powder due to loade each ſort of Peeces one time.
                     
                     
                        Cannons.
                        4.
                        128.
                     
                     
                        Demy Can.
                        6.
                        108.
                     
                     
                        Culuerings.
                        6.
                        96.
                     
                     
                        Demy Culuer.
                        8.
                        96.
                     
                     
                        Saker.
                        5.
                        30.
                     
                  
               
               Summe 458 pound of powder, which multiplied by
10, makes 4580 pound weight.
               And it is worthy the noting, that in planting of Ordinance
to batter or beate downe any curtaine, wall, or
Cullion point, you muſt plant the ſame in 3 or 2 ſeuerall
places at the leaſt, frō the thing to be beaten downe; ſo as
the ſaid Ordinance be a pretty diſtance from other, vpon
conuenient platformes, hauing Gabbions or Baskets,
about 8 foote high, ramd full of earth conueniently placed
betweene each peece, to ſaue the Gunners and Laborers
from the danger of the enemies ſhot: which Ordinance
would be planted within 200 or 240 paces of the
obiect to be ouerthrowne, if it be poſſible to haue conuenient
platformes and to bring them ſo nigh the ſaid
obiect. The which Ordinance (if ſo you haue made 3

mounts or platformes, the Ordinance from the 2 ſide
mountes doth coine or cut out that which the Ordinance
from the midle mount doth batter or pierce, or
ſhake, as this draught here drawne ſheweth.
               
               
                  
The beſt ſhooting to batter downe the broad ſide or
curtaine of any wall, is to leuell ſomething vnder the
midle part of the wall, and after to ſhoote 2 or 3 foote
higher: for the lower part being beaten downe, the
height or vpper part of the ſaid wall muſt fall of neceſſitie.
And a ſpeciall regard muſt be had to giue fire
from each platforme or mount at one inſtant, for
that the bullets beating all together, do more ſhake
and batter the ſaid wall, then lighting now one and then
another.
               In the figure or draught which I haue drawne
ſhewing how Ordinance may be planted to ding
downe or batter the broade ſide or curtaine of any wall,
Caſtell or Fort, the middle Ordinance placed on
the middle mount or platforme, directlie againſt the
obiect to be beaten downe, are called the peircers,
and are onely to ſhake and beate the wall, and the
Ordinance on the two other ſide mounts, or platformes
ſhooting ſomething ſlanting, are to coyne or
cut out that which the Ordinance from the middle platforme
doth ſhake or looſe. The Baskets ramd full of
earth being placed betweene each peece of Ordinance
are to defend the Gunners and Laborers from hurt of
them that are beſieged, as afore I haue ſaid.
               And further it is to be noted, that to batter the
coyne or cullion point of any wall, two places is
ſufficient to plant your Ordinance in. Alſo you may
batter and beate downe the wall of a Towne or Caſtell
as well by night as day, ſo as the enemie ſhall
haue no time to builde vp in the night that which
was dung downe in the daie, as thus: Lay your
peece or peeces, to the marke in the day light, and note

well what degree of the quadrant ſhe lieth at, which is
ſoone done in putting the rule of your quadrant into the
peece mouth, ſo laid againſt the marke, letting a line and
plummet fall to the ground from the ſaid point of your
quadrant, and at the lighting of the plummet on the
ground, there driue in a ſtake or wooden pin; and letting
a plumbe line fall likewiſe from the midle part of the
taile or breech of your peece to the ground, driue therein
another ſtake into the ground, then ſtretch a line from
the ſaid 2 pinnes, ſo as the ends of the ſaid line may
reach 2 or 3 yards further then the pinnes at each end.
And there make them faſt in driuing a pin of wood or
yron into the ground at each end, then bringing your
peece or peeces to lie ſtreight aboue the ſaid line or
lines ſo drawne (which is eaſily done hauing a lanterne
with a cloſe couer) you may both charge and recharge,
and ſhoote aſwell by night as day, according to
your deſire.
            
         
         
            How you may know the true weight of any number of
shot, for ſeuerall peeces of Ordinance, how many
ſoeuer they be, and how many Tun
weight they do all weigh.
            
               Queſtion.
               Suppoſe a Ship is loaden with Bullets to be caried
to the ſiege of a Towne, &c. in which ſhip is 500 ſhot
for whole Cannons, 800 demy Cannon ſhot, 900 Culuering
ſhot, 1000 demy Culuering ſhort, 1100 Saker
ſhot 1200 Minion ſhot, and 1400 Fawcon ſhot,
the queſtion is to know the true weight of all the ſhot,
and how many Tun they do all weigh.
            
            
               
               Reſolution.
               In the beginning of this treatiſe, I ſhewed how to find
out the weight of any vnknowne bullet, by the weight of
a knowne bullet of the like mettall, ſo that multiplying
the number of euery ſeuerall ſort by the weight that one
of them weigheth, and adding all the products into one
ſumme; and then deuiding that totall by 2240 pound,
which is the pounds in a Tun, the quotient will ſhew you
how many Tun all thoſe bullets weigheth.
            
            
               Example.
               Admit the Cannon ſhot weigh 60 pound a peece,
by which I multiply 500 (the number of that kind of
bullet) ſo ariſeth 30000 pound weight, and then there
is 800 demie Cannon ſhot of 32 pound weight a peece,
which multiplied as before, makes 25600 poūd weight.
And then there is 900 Culuering ſhot of 16 pound
weight a peece, which makes 14400 pound weight.
And then 1000 demie Culuering ſhot of 10 pound
weight a peece, which makes 10000 pound weight. And
then 1100 Saker ſhot of 5 pound weight a peece, which
makes 5500 pound weight. And then 1200 Minnion
ſhot of 3 pound weight a peece, which makes 3600
pound. And laſtly, 1400 Fawcon ſhot of 2 pound
weight a peece, which makes 2800 pound weight.
All theſe ſummes added together makes 91900 pound
weight, which deuided by 2240, yeelds in the quotient
41 Tun, and 60 pound weight remaining.
               In this order you may know how many Tun weight
any number of ſhot weigheth, ſo that knowing how many
Tun any ſhip is of burthen, you may eaſily know how
many ſhot will loade the ſaid ſhip.
            
         
         
            
            How any Gunner or gunfounder may by Arethmiticke
skill, know whether the trunions of the
peece be placed rightly on
the peece or not.
            Meaſure the length of the bore of the peece, from the
mouth to the breech, deuide that meaſure by 7, and
multiply the ſumme that commeth in the quotient by 3,
the product will ſhew you how many inches or other
meaſure the trunions ought to ſtand from the end of the
loweſt part of the concauity of the ſayd peece at the
breech.
            And note that the trunions ought ſo to be placed, as ⅔
parts of the circumference of the peece may be ſeene in
that place whereas the trunions are ſet.
            
               Example.
               Admit the cilinder or concaue of a Cannon, or other
peece of Ordinance be 10 foote ½ long, I demaund
where the trunions of the ſayd peece ought to ſtand?
            
            
               Anſwere.
               Reduce the length of the concaue of the peece into
inches, you haue 126 inches, the which deuided by 7,
the quotient is 18, that multiplied by 3, makes 54 inches,
or 4 foote ½, ſo farre ought the trunions to be placed
from the breech or loweſt part of the hollow concauity
of the ſayd peece.
            
            
               Another way.
               Or multiplying the length of the concaue of the
peece by three, and deuiding the product by 7, the quotient
will ſhew the true place, how farre the trunions

ought to ſtand from the loweſt part of the bore or concauity
of the peece.
            
            
               Example.
               126 inches the length of the concaue of the peece,
multiplied by 3, makes 378 inches, which number deuided
by 7, the quotient is 54 inches as before.
               And note that the trunions of euery peece were inuented
to hold the peece vp in her cariage, to moue her
vp and downe to make a perfect ſhot, and to hold her
faſt in her cariage, after ſhe is diſcharged: for if the trunions
be placed too neare the mouth, the peece will be
too heauy towards the breech, ſo as the Gunner appointed
to ſerue with her, ſhall haue much adoe to raiſe her,
to coyne her vp or downe, or being placed too neare the
breech, the contrary will happen.
            
         
         
            How you may know what empty caske is to be prouided
to boy or carry ouer any peece of Ordinance ouer
any riuer, if botes or other prouiſion
cannot be gotten.
            It is thought ſufficient that 5 Tun of empty caske will
ſwimme and carry ouer a Cannon of 8 or 9000 pound
weight, 4 Tun will carry ouer a demy Cannon, 3 Tun
a Culuering, and 2 Tun a Saker, accounting all prouiſions
to be made faſt thereto, as plankes, ropes, &c. ſo
that knowing what number of Ordinance is to be ferried
or caried ouer any riuer, adding all their weights
into one ſumme, by framing the Golden rule, you may
preſently know what empty caske is to be prouided to
ferry ouer all the ſayd Ordinance at one inſtant.
            
               
               Example.
               If a Cannon of 8000 weight require 5 Tun of empty
caske, how much emptie caske is to be prouided to
carry ouer ſo many Ordinance as is ſuppoſed to be
100000 weight?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               I multiply 100000 by 5, ſo ariſeth 500000, the which
being deuided by 8000, the quotient is 62 ½, ſo many
Tun of emptie caske is to be prouided to carry ouer ſo
many Ordinance as weigeth 100000 pound weight. The
which empty caske made faſt head to head a row on each
ſide, by ſuch as haue skill in ſuch ſeruices, and planked
aboue, would ſerue for a bridge to carry ouer a whole
Army with all prouiſions thereto belonging.
               All which neceſſaries in time of ſeruice, and many
more, belongeth to the Maſter of the Ordināce his office,
to haue in readineſſe, as alſo to be prouided of Trunkes,
Arrowes, Balles, and all kind of fire-workes, wet or drie,
and the receits for making thereof. As alſo engines for
mounting or diſmounting of Ordinance, wheeles, Axeltrees,
Bullets, Powder, Ladles, Sponges, Ropes, Shouels,
Anckors, &c. Alſo it is the duety of the Maiſter of
the Ordinance, the Maiſter Gunner, and euery chiefe
officer or quarter Maiſter vnder them, to be expert in the
Arte of Gunnery, the better to teach and inſtruct their
inferiors, the which without ſome practiſe in Arethmiticke
and Geometry they cannot well accompliſh. They
ought to haue ſome ſight in the Mathematicalles, the
better to teach and inſtruct ſuch as would ſhoote at all
randons, to know what Ordinance is conuenient for an
Army, or to batter or beate downe the walles of any
Towne or Caſtell, to know what powder and ſhot is to be

prouided for that or ſuch like purpoſe, what cariage
horſes, labourers and other neceſſaries is to be allowed
for the ſame. They ought to practiſe all Geometricall
inſtruments, for the meaſuring of heights, lengthes,
breadthes, depthes, &c. To practiſe how to conueigh
mines vnder the ground, and how the ſame ſhould be
truely wrought, to blow vp any Towre, Caſtell, &c. To
know what length the mine will containe with all his
windings to and fro to the place appointed. To haue
skill, in the handling of all engines and inuentions belonging
to the Ordinance. To appoint to euery peece of
Ordinance in time of ſeruice', Gunners that know
perfectly how to mannage their peeces, to charge, ſhoot,
clenſe, ſcoure, wad and ram the ſame, and what laborers
are to attend thereon. To know in euery platforme
appointed, how to place the baskets or gabbions, and
what proportion of wideneſſe, height, or thickneſſe they
ought to containe: and that the loopes haue their due
proportion of wideneſſe. To ſee that euery Gunner be
able to diſcharge his duety, and not for fauour or affection
to preferre ſuch as can ſay moſt, and doe leaſt: but
that euery man be preferred to place of credite, and
eſteemed according to his honeſt behauiour and skill in
this ſingular Arte. That none be permitted to the profeſſion
of a Gunner, but that he be firſt truely inſtructed
in the principals of the Arte, by ſuch as haue skil therein.
And not to make or ſuffer euery tagge and rag to be a
Gunner, as is too much vſed in theſe daies in Townes of
garriſon, who was neuer practiſed in the Arte, nor bath
diſcretion nor deſire to practiſe therein: a great number
of ſuch haue but onely the bare name of a Gunner, although
their ſtanding hath bene of long time: for as a

great many of Marriners haue ſaild 7 or 8 yeeres and yet
farre from a Nauigator, ſo a great many ſuch haue continued
in pay a large prentiſe-hood, and yet farre from a
good Gunner. Such in time of ſeruice would worke as
the builders did at the Towre of Babell, when one cald
for one thing, he had deliuered a contrary thing. In ſeruice
the Prince by ſuch is not truely ſerued, the Arte leſſe
eſteemed, and themſelues diſcredited.
               The Arte is like to a circle without end, or like to a Laberinth,
wherein a man being well entred in, knoweth
not how to get out againe, and therefore it muſt be exerciſe
and induſtrie that muſt make a perfect Gunner.
Many things here could I write pertaining to the duety
of a Gunner, and euery officer pertaining to the Ordinance,
but for as much as the ſame is not peculiar to
this Arethmeticall treatiſe, and ſufficiently handled by
other Authors, I omit.
            
         
         
            How to know the true time that any quantitie of Gunmatch
being fiered, shall burne, to do an exploit
at any time deſired.
            Take common match, and rub or beat the ſame a litle
againſt ſome poſt or ſtoole to ſoften it, and then either
dip the ſame in ſalt-peter water and drie it againe in the
ſun, or elſe rub it in a litle powder and brimſtone beaten
very ſmall and made liquid with a litle Aqua vitae, and
dried afterwards. Now when you would occupie the
ſame, trie how long one yarde will burne, which ſuppoſe
to be ¼ part of an houre, then 4 yards will be a iuſt houre
in burning. Now ſuppoſe you haue laid ſome powder or
balles of wilde fire to burne ſome houſe, ſhip, mine,
corne-ſtacks, &c. or that you haue placed the ſaid powder

or balles in ſome ſecret place to burne ſome thing
you are deſirous to ſpoile, and that you would be going
from the place 3 houres before it effect, then binding
the one end faſt to the balles, laying looſe powder vnder
& about the ſame, or wrapping the one end like a wreath
amongſt the powder looſely, draw out the other end, or
lay it crookedly, or wrap it ſoftly about ſomething, ſo as
one part doe not touch another, and fire it at the other
end: which match ſo drawne or rolled, being iuſt 12 yards
in length, ſhall kindle the thing you would burne at the
end of 3 houres, according to your deſire: for the rule
of proportion ſheweth, that if one yard require a quarter
or ¼ of an houre, that 12 yards of match will burne out
in 3 houres. The like order you may obſerue, to anſwer
to any time appointed.
         
         
            How by Arithmeticall skill you may know what number of
men, horſes, or oxen, is ſufficient to draw any peece
of Artillerie, and how much euery one draweth
a peece, ſo as they all draw together.
            
               Queſtion.
               If 90 men be able ſufficiently to draw a Cannon of
9000 pound weight, accounting carriage and all, I demaund
how many men is able to draw a Culuering of
2500 pound weight, and how much euery man drew for
his part?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               I anſwere: If a Cannon of 9000 pound weight, require
90 men, the quotient ſheweth me that a Culuering
of 2500 weight requireth 25 men to draw the ſame:
and deuiding the weight of the peece to be drawne by
the number of men appointed to draw the ſame, the
quotient will ſhew you how much euery man drew to
his part (to wit) 100 weight.
            
         
         
            
            To know how many horſes is to be prouided to draw any Peece
of Ordinance, and how much euery one draweth.
            
               Question.
               If three horſes draw a Fawcon of 900 weight, how
many horſes will draw a Culuering of 3000 weight?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               I ſay as before, if a peece of 900 weight require 3
horſes, what will a peece of 3000 weight? and in working
according to the rule, the quotient is 10, ſhewing
that 10 horſes muſt be prouided to draw a Culuering
of 3000 weight. Alſo deuiding 3000, the weight of the
ſaid peece, by 10 (being the number of horſes) there will
ſtand in the quotient 300, ſhewing the draught of each
horſe.
            
         
         
            To know how many Oxen is to be prouided to
draw any peece of Artillerie.
            It is to be noted that 3 yoake of oxen is thought to
draw as much as three horſes, and that 3 yoake of oxen
is ſufficient to draw a Saker of 1400 weight.
            
               Queſtion.
               How many oxen muſt be prouided for a Cannon of
8000 weight?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               In working as before, I find that 34 oxen, or 17 yoake
of oxen, will ſerue to draw a Cannon of 8000 pound
weight. And note that whereas there doth remaine 2/7
parts of a whole number, neither men, horſes, nor other
cattell, can in any ſuch millitare queſtions be brought
into a fraction, but yet the rule it ſheweth that 17 yoake
of oxen is ſufficient for the draught of a Cannō of 8000
pound weight, when 3 yoake of oxen ſerue for to draw a
Saker of 1400 pound weight.
               
                  
If you deuide the weight of the whole Cannon being
8000 pound weight by 34, the oxen appointed to draw
the ſame, the quotient is 235 pound 5/17: ſo much did
euery oxe draw.
            
         
         
            How you may wanting both oxen and horſes to draw any peece
of Ordinance, know preſently how many men is
able ſufficiently to draw the ſame, either
on plaine or marrish ground.
            
               Queſtion.
               I ſhewed in a concluſion before, that 3 yoake of oxen
would draw a peece of 1400 pound weight, and that 90
men would draw a Cannon of 9000 pound weight; now
if there want both horſes and oxen, or that you are occaſioned
to draw the ſaid peece through ſome marriſh
ground, whereas horſes and oxen cannot paſſe, I demaund
how many men is ſufficient to hale a Saker of
1400 pound weight through the ſaid mariſh ground?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               If a Cannon of 9000 weight require 90 men to draw
the ſame, I find that a Saker, weighing 1400 pound
weight muſt haue 14 men to draw the ſame, and euery
one ſhall draw 100 weight for his part.
               In drawing Artillery through any ſoft marriſh ground
it is requiſite to haue in readineſſe, in the Maiſter of the
Ordinance his carts, which carrieth the prouiſions for
the Ordinance certaine hurdels of boords, or rather
flat bottomed boates, in which any peece of Ordinance
may be placed carriage and all, and by force or ſtrength
of men may be drawne as eaſily, as to draw the ſaid
peece on the firme land, for that the ſaid boate is apt to

ſlide or ſwimme on the ſoft owiſh, the ropes being made
faſt to the foreſtearne or ſides of the ſayd boates, which
boates do ſerue alſo for cariage of the Ordinance, and
all things thereto belonging, ouer any riuer or ſoft owiſh
ground, &c.
            
         
         
            How you may by the rule afore, know how many oxen
will draw any peece of Ordinance, if
you want men and horſes.
            I ſhewed that 90 men is able to draw a Cannon of
9000 pound weight, and that three yoake of oxen will
ſerue to draw a Cannon of 1400 pound weight: now
wanting men and horſes, I ſay if a Saker of 1400 pound
weight require 6 oxen, what will a Cannon of 9000?
and in multiplying the weight of the Cannon by 6, the
number of oxen appointed to draw the Saker, and deuiding
that product by the weight of the leſſer peece, the
quotient is 38 oxen or 19 yoake, ſo many muſt be
prouided to draw a Cannon of 9000 pound weight,
which weight deuided by the 38 oxen appointed to
draw the ſame, the quotient ſheweth that euery oxe
drew 236 pound weight.
         
         
            How you may wanting men and oxen to draw
any peece of Ordinance, know how many
horſes is requiſite to
draw the ſame.
            Alſo I noted before, that 3 horſes would ſerue to draw
a Fawcon of 900 pound weight: I demand how many
horſes will ſerue to draw a Cannon of 9000 pound

weight? In working as before, the quotient is 30, ſo mamy
horſes is requiſite for that purpoſe: which peece, her
weight deuided by the number of horſes appointed to
draw the ſame, the quotient ſheweth that euery horſe
drew 300 pound weight. In this order you may know
what number of men, horſes, or oxen, is able to draw any
peece of Ordinance, and what euery one ſeuerally
doth draw.
         
         
            How to know how many 100 of Haberdepoize weight
any peece of Ordinance, or other groſſe
weight containeth.
            In the concluſions afore ſet downe, thou muſt note
gentle reader, that euery 100 weight of moſt things, is
accounted after fiue ſcore to the hundreth: but if thou be
deſirous to know how many hundreth of Haber depoize
weight any peece of Ordinance or other groſſe weight
cōtaineth, thou mayſt by Arithmetike ſoone be reſolued,
for euery 100 of Haberdepoize weight containeth 112
pound, the halfe hundreth 56 pound, the quarter 28
pound, and the pound 16 ounces: ſo that deuiding the
weight of any great peece by 112, thou mayſt eaſily know
how many hundreth of Haberdepoize weight the ſame
containeth.
            I would know how many hundreth of Haberdepoize
weight is in a Cannon of 9000 pound weight, I deuide
the ſame by 112 as aforeſayd, and the quotient being 80
40/112, ſheweth that a Cannon of 9000 pound weight containes
80 hundreth of Haberdepoize weight, one quarter
and 12 pound.
            A Tun containeth 2000 of Haberdepoize weight.
         
         
            
            How you may proportionally prooue all ſorts of peeces
of Artillerie for ſeruice whether they
will hold or no.
            All peeces that ſhoote a bullet vnder 10 pound
weight, and duely fortified with mettall, being ſhot 3
times, firſt with the whole weight of the yron bullet.
Secondly with 5/4 partes thereof, and laſtly with 3/2 partes
of the ſame, will hold for any ſeruice, being charged
with her ordinarie charge, albeit the ſaid peece were diſcharged
100 times in one day.
         
         
            How you may find out the proportionall charge
afore named as thus.
            Suppoſe a peece ſhoote a bullet of 6 pound weight,
and that you deſire to know what 5/4 partes in powder of
the weight of the bullet is: multiply the weight of the
ſaid bullet by the numerator 5, and deuide by the denominator
4, the quotient is your deſire.
            
               Example.
               6 multiplied by 5, is 30: the ſame deuided by 4, the
quotient is 7 ½. The like order you muſt vſe in giuing her
3/2 parts in powder to the weight of the ſhot, and your
quotient is 9 pound.
            
         
         
            How to prooue any peece that shooteth a bullet vnder
50 pound weight, and aboue 10 pound weight.
            Any peece that ſhooteth a bullet aboue 10 pound in
weight, and vnder 50 pound, would for the firſt ſhot be
charged with ⅔ parts in powder of the pellets weight: for
the ſecond ſhot with ⅚ partes, and laſtly with the whole
weight of the bullet.
            
               
               Example.
               Admit a peece ſhoote a bullet of 40 pound weight,
the ⅔ partes thereof is 26 pound ⅔, and ⅚ partes thereof
is 33 pound ⅔ parts.
               And note that in proouing any peece of Ordinance,
whether ſhe be ſeruiceable or not, her mouth would be
mounted to 20 or 30 degrees of the quadrant, or thereabout.
            
         
         
            To know how much one coyler rope, for the draught of
any peece of Ordinance is bigger then another,
and how thicke any of them is.
            Take the compaſſe of the leſſer, and likewiſe the circumference
of the greater, abating the leſſer out of the
greater, the remaine is your deſire, which knowne by the
rule of proportion you may find out the height or thickneſſe
of the leſſer.
            
               Example.
               Suppoſe you haue a coyler rope of 6 inches compaſſe,
and another of 4 inches compaſſe, abating 4 inches from
6 inches the compaſſe of the greater, reſts 2 inches, the
diameter or height of the greater: which knowne, frame
the rule of proportion ſaying: If 6 yeeld 2, what 4? the
quotient is one inch ⅔ parts, ſhewing the true thickneſſe
or height of the leſſer.
            
         
         
            To know how much one coyler rope is more then another.
            Take the compaſſe of your rope, and multiply it in it
ſelfe, and looke how much you would haue the other
greater, augment your product by the ſame proportion,
extract the ſquare roote, you haue your deſire.
            
               Example.
               A coyler rope of 6 inches compaſſe ſquared, makes

36 inches. Now if you would haue one 3 times as much,
then multiply 36 by 3, the product is 108, the ſquare
roote thereof is 10 inches and ſomething better, and ſo
thicke ought a rope to be that is 3 times the compaſſe
of the other.
            
         
         
            How by knowing the waight of a faddome of one
rope, to know the weight of a faddome
of any other.
            A cable or coyler rope of 10 inches compaſſe weighing
16 pound euery faddom, how much will a faddom
of that rope weigh, that is 15 inches compaſſe, and made
of the ſame ſtuffe? I multiply the greater in it ſelfe, ariſeth
225, and that multiplied by 16 pound the weight of a
faddom of the leſſer rope, ariſeth 3600, the which deuided
by 100, being the ſquare of the leſſer rope, the
quotient is 36 pound, and ſo much will euery faddome
of the greater rope weigh. In this order by knowing what
a faddome of the greater rope weigheth, you may ſoone
find what a faddome of the leſſer rope weigheth.
         
         
            How by knowing the quantity or compaſſe of any ſmall
rope, to find out the ſame in another that is
many times that bigneſſe.
            Admit I haue a ſmall rope of 3 inches compaſſe, and
that it is required to know the height of another that is
5 times that compaſſe. I ſquare the number 3. ariſeth 9,
which multiplied by 5 makes 45, the ſquare roote
thereof is 6 inches ¼ ſo high is the greater. The like is
to be done of all ſuch like demaunds.
         
         
            
            To know the weight of a whole coyler rope for the
draught of any peece of Ordinance.
            
               Queſtion.
               There is a coyler rope of 8 inches compaſſe weighing
12 pound euery faddome, I demaund the whole weight
of that rope being 20 faddome long?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               Multiply the number of faddoms in the rope (being
20) by the weight of one faddome, the product is 240
pound weight, your deſire.
               The length of a coyler rope for a whole Cannon ought
to be 70 faddome or thereabouts.
               For an ordinary Cannon 64 or 66 faddome, and for
a demy Cannon 60 faddome or thereabouts.
               For a Culuering 40 faddome, a demy Culuering 36
faddome, and a Saker 30 faddome, &c.
            
         
         
            To find out the ſuperficiall content of the
hollow concauity of any peece
            If you multiply the length of the cilinder or bore of
the peece, by the circumference of the hollow concaue
about the mouth, the product will ſhew you the ſuperficiall
content of the cilinder of the ſaid peece.
            
               Example.
               A Cannon of 7 inches diameter hauing her concaue
or hollow cilinder 12 foote in length, how much is the
ſuperficiall content thereof?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               Reduce the length of the hollow concaue of the
pecce into inches, ariſeth 144 inches, which multiplied
by 22 inches, the circumference of the concaue
at the mouth of the peece, ariſeth 3168 inches, the

ſuperficiall content of the mettall compaſſing the concaue
of the peece.
            
         
         
            To find out the craſsitude or ſolid content of the
cilinder or concaue of any peece.
            Firſt you muſt by the rules taught in the beginning of
the booke, find out the content of the baſe or plaine of
the concauity at the mouth of the peece, in multiplying
½, the diameter in halfe the circumference or elſe ſquaring
the diameter and multiplying that product by 11,
and deuiding the reſult by 14, the quotient will alſo ſhew
you the content, the which multiplied in the length of
the cilinder of the peece, the product is your deſire.
            
               Example.
               The Cannon aboue named of 7 inches diameter,
wrought as is ſhewed, yeeldeth 38 inches ½ at the baſe
or circular content of her mouth, which multiplied by
144 inches, the length of the cilinder, yeeldeth 8280 inches,
the ſolid content of the concaue of the ſaid peece.
               If you deſire to know how many foote in ſquare meaſure
the ſolide content of the empty or hollow concauity
of the peece aforenamed or any other doth containe,
you muſt worke thus; deuide the number of inches in
the ſolide content thereof by the number of inches in a
foote ſquare being 1728, the quotient is your deſire.
            
            
               Example.
               The ſolide content of the peece of 7 inches diameter
aboue named, containeth 8280 inches, which deuided
by 1728, the quotient is 4 57/72, that is 5 feete in ſquare
meaſure wanting 15 inches. The like is to be done in
any other peece, or in meaſuring the cilinder or Cone
in any other ſolide body.
            
         
         
            
            How you may Arithmetically know how much any peece
of Ordinances is taper-bored, or whether the
ſame be taper-bored or not.
            Put vpon your rammer ſtaffe a tampion of wood, that
is iuſt the height of the hollow concaue of your peece,
and thruſt the ſame home into the peece; if it go not
home to the breech, then the peece is taper-bored, if it
go home the peece is not taper bored: if ſhe be taper-bored,
then put on ſuch a tampion of wood vpon your
rammer ſtaffe, as may fill the concaue of the peece in the
narroweſt part where ſhe is taper-bored, and be ſure that
it go home to the breech of the peece, and afterwards
with your compaſſes, meaſure the diameter of either
tampion, abating the leſſer meaſure out of the greater,
the remaine is your deſire.
            And note that the tampion at the end of euery rammer
ſtaffe, is to thruſt home the wad and bullet cloſe to
the chamber or place where the powder lyeth, and euery
rammer ſtaffe ought to haue a ſponge at the one end, to
cleanſe the peece with, and a tampion of wood at the
other end, to put home the bullet and wad with, in the
center of which ought to be a hollow ſcrew wherein the
Gunner may ſcrew in a wad hooke to vnloade any peece
at his pleaſure.
         
         
            How to shoote in any morter peece.
            Morter peeces were inuented onely to annoy the enemy,
when other Ordinance cannot be vſed againſt them,
as being charged with ſtone to beate down the houſes
of the enemy, or to fal amongſt men being aſſembled
together, or charged with balles of wild-fire to burne the

enemies ſhips, houſes, or corne. To make a perfect ſhot
in one of theſe peeces, it is requiſite you know 2 things
belonging to the ſame (that is to ſay) how farre your morter
peece will carry a bullet, or a ball of fire-worke, as ſhe
is to ſhoote at the beſt of the randon: and likewiſe how
far it is from your peece to the marke you intend to ſhoot
at, which knowne you may make a perfect ſhot, as thus.
            
               Example.
               If a morter peece ſhoot a bullet or fire-worke 700
paces, and that the marke which you intend to ſhoote at
is but 500 paces; I demand at what degree of the quadrant,
ſhall the peece be layd at, to make a good ſhot?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               To anſwer this and all ſuch like, reaſon and experience
teacheth, that the leſſer ground you intend to ſhoot, you
muſt raiſe the mouth of your morter peece ſo many degrees
aboue the beſt of the randon, as is ſufficient to
reach the marke deſired: and therefore I ſay if 700 paces
require 45 degrees of the quadrant, what will 500? and
the quotient tels me, that at 63 degrees of the quadrant
the mouth of the ſayd peece muſt be eleuated at, to cauſe
the bullet or fire-ball to light accordingly.
               If you abate 45 degrees (being the beſt of the randon)
from 63 degrees, that the peece was eleuated at, the remaine
is 18 degrees, & ſo many degrees of the quadrant
was the mouth of the morter peece eleuated at to reach
the marke.
            
         
         
            To know how farre or short any morter peece will shoote
further or shorter, at the mount or diſmount
of one or many degrees.
            
               Queſtion.
               A morter peece that ſhoots 450 paces at the beſt of

the randon, I would know how much ſhorter ſhall ſhe
ſhoote, being eleuated one degree aboue the vtmoſt
range?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               Deuide the diſtance of the vtmoſt range being 450
paces, by 45 the degrees in the beſt of the randon, the
quotient is 10, ſo many paces will the ſayd peece ſhoote
ſhorter, her mouth eleuated one degree.
            
         
         
            How you may know verie neare how farre from your peece
the bullet shall light, the ſayd morter peece mouth
being raiſed to what degree you
thinke good.
            
               Queſtion
               Suppoſe there is a Caſtell &c. beſieged, and that the
Gunners had brought their Ordinance as neare as they
would wiſh, ſo that hauing diſcharged the morter peece
in the former concluſion, at the mount of 60 degrees,
they find that the bullet fals in or about the mids of the
ſayd Caſtell or Fort. The queſtion is how farre it is betweene
the peece and the fall of the ſayd bullet?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               You muſt firſt ſeeke what difference of degrees is betweene
60 and 45, and you ſhall find 15, then by the
rule of proportion ſay, if one degree abate 10 paces, what
will 45? and you ſhall find 150 paces in your quotient.
And in this order by the help of Arithmeticke
you may find how farre it is from the peece to the
marke.
               Alſo it is poſſible to ſhoote ſo directly vpright in a

quiet, faire, and calme day, that the bullet ſhot out of
your morter peece, ſhal fall into the peece mouth againe
or hard beſides the ſame, if you raiſe the peece mouth
iuſt to 90 degrees of the quadrant, which albeit it be
not ſeruiceable, yet it is poſſible to be done: For this is a
generall rule, that no peece of Ordinance whatſoeuer
can ſhoote a bullet to continue ſtill in a ſtreight line, during
the motion of the ſaid bullet, except you eleuate or
raiſe the concaue of the ſaid peece directly towards the
zeneth of the skie, or elſe plumbe downe towards the
center of the earth.
               The diameter of the chamber mouth in euery morter
peece, ought to be equall to the ſemi-diameter in the
mouth of the ſaid morter.
               The length of euery chamber in a morter peece,
ought to be once and a halfe the diameter of the chamber.
               The mettall at the breech of euery morter peece,
ought to be fortified equall in thickneſſe to the diameter
of the mouth of the chamber within, and at the trunions
to the ſemi-diameter, and at the fore-part or necke
of the peece, to the ⅓ part of the diameter of the chamber
mouth.
               To mount a morter peece by the quadrant, ſome vſe
to put the rule of the quadrant into the peece mouth,
cloſe to the mettall, or inſide of the peece, noting at what
degree the plummet hangs; but for as much as there be
many morter peeces a little taper-bored at the mouth,
(I meane the diameter at the mouth is ſomething wider
then it is within) therefore it is the beſt to haue a rule
made for the purpoſe, which among the experienced
Gunners is common, the ſaid rule being about 18 inches

length, at the middle point or pricke whereof is
another ſhorter rule, framed artificially about a foote
long, ioyned cloſe, and falling perpendicularly on the
longer rule, whoſe containing angle lighteth iuſtly on
the middle point or mids of the longer rule, from which
point is drawne by Arte the ⅛ part of a circle, and deuided
into 45 equall deuiſions or degrees, ſo as the 90 degree
ſtands iuſt on the center or middle point of the
longer rule: ſo that laying the longer rule croſſe the
mouth of the peece, you ſhall preſently know at what
degre the ſaid morter peece is eleuated at by the plummet,
the peece being mounted at any grade aboue 45.
And thus may you mount your morter peece, to ſhoote
at what degree you thinke good. The patterne of the rule
this figure ſheweth, plainely drawne.
               
               
                  
The orderly flight or motion of the bullet or fire-ball
ſhot out of any morter peece, by the figure or draught
hereunder may be perceiued.
               
            
         
         
            
            Hauing planted Ordinance vpon any mount or platforme, to
beſiege any Towne, &c. and that you deſire to make ſome little
trench or ditch about the ſame for the defence thereof,
how you may know how much the earth and turfe that is caſt
out of the ſaid ditch, shall raiſe a wall in height, being
laid orderly at the brim of the ſaid ditch, on the
inſide thereof, making the ſame wall
to any proportion aſſigned.
            
               Question.
               Suppoſe the Generall commaund the captaine of the
Pyoners, that a ditch be made about the mounts or platformes
where the Ordinance plaies, making the ſame 18
foote in bredth at the brim, 12 foote in bredth at the
bottome, and 8 foote in depth, and that the earth and
turfe digged out of the ſaid trench be laid orderly in the
inſide thereof at the brim of the ſaid ditch, ſo as a wall
may be made in bredth at the bottome 12 foote, and at
the top 8 foote, I demaund how high ſhall that wall be
when it is finiſhed?
            
            
               Reſolution.
               To worke this, there is a generall rule, (as thus.) Adde
the wideneſſe or breadth of the brim, and the breadth or
wideneſſe at the bottome together, the ½ of that addition
multiplied by depth of the ditch the product of
that multiplication ſhall be your deuident, or number
to be deuided. Now to find the height of the wall, adde
the thickneſſe of the bottome of the wall which you
meane to make, to the thickneſſe or bredth that you
intend to make it at the head; the ½ of that addition
ſhall be your deuiſore, which deuident deuided by the

deuiſor, the quotient will ſhew you the height of the
wall.
            
            
               Example.
               The trench in this concluſion is ſaid to be 18 foote
broad at the mouth or brim thereof, and 12 foote at
the bottome, which 2 numbers being added, makes
30, the halfe whereof is 15 feete, which 15 feete multiplied
by 8 feete being the depth, ariſeth 120 feete for
my deuident. Likewiſe, adde twelue foote (the thickneſſe
of the wall at the bottome) to 8 foote the bredth
you meane to make it at the head, ſo ariſeth 20 feete,
the ½ thereof is 10 feete for my deuiſor, (and ſo thicke
the ſaid wall will be in the mids: the which deuident being
120, being deuided by the deuiſor 10, the quotient
is 12, and ſo many foote in height ſhall the earth and
turfe caſten out of the trench aforeſaid, make a wall being
12 foote broade at the bottome, 8 foote at the head,
and 10 foote in breadth at the mids: the ſaid trench being
18 foote broad at the brim, 12 foote broad at the
bottome, and 8 foote deepe.
               In this order you may find out the height, bredth,
or depth of any ſuch like wall or ditch, in making the
ſame after any proportion aſſigned.
            
         
         
            Briefe obſeruations of certaine principals in
the Arte of Gunnery, for euery Gunner
to conſider of, to practiſe
and learne, viz.
            To know what diſparture euery peece of Ordinance
ought to haue in ſhooting either at or within point
blanke, or with an inch rule at any aduantage.
            
               
To vſe a mediocrity in ramming and wadding, and in
giuing euery peece her due loading in powder and bullet.
            To know the goodneſſe and badneſſe of powder, and
how to mixe and make perfit good powder, and how to
fine the peter, &c.
            To conſider the wind, whether it blow with you or againſt
you, or on any ſide of the peece, and how to weather
your peece to make a good ſhot.
            To conſider the platforme, whether it be flat, or elſe
declining for the recoile of your peece, and whether the
marke be higher or lower then your platforme, as alſo
to know the diſtance thereto.
            To know whether your peece be truly bored or not,
and how to make a perfect ſhot in a peece that is not truly
bored.
            To conſider whether the one wheele be more glad or
reuerſe faſter vpon the axle-tree then the other, or
whether the one wheele ſtand higher then the other,
leſt you do ſhoote wide.
            To know whether a ſhort peece will outſhoote a long
peece or not, keeping the length of the marke by the like
degrees of the quadrant.
            To know that leuelling with the quadrant towards a
hill (the marke ſtanding higher then your platforme)
you ſhall ſhoote ſhort: and ſhooting into a valley, you
do ouerſhoote the marke, but ſhooting on a leuell
ground you keepe the length with the quadrant, and how
you ought to lay your peece to make a perfect ſhot with

                  •
               he quadrant at euery marke.
            To know that giuing leuell with an inch rule (which
ſome call the rule of flat) it is erronious in ſhooting in

                  •
               eeces of contrary length, as alſo at ſeuerall markes: obſeruing

one method.
            To learne to know the diſtance to the marke, and
what diſtance your peece will ſhoote at point blanke, or
mounted from degree to degree (which is the beſt rule
to ſnoote by.
            To know whether the cariage or ſtocke of your peece
haue her due length or not, and whether the peece be
truly placed therein or not.
            To conſider that in ſhooting diuerſe peeces from one
platforme, to diſcharge that peece which ſtands to the
ley wards firſt, and to ſet your match or fire euer on the
ley ſide, and your powder on the wind hand.
            To know the true order in mixing and making all
kind of fire-workes, wet and dry.
            To know the height and weight of all peeces of Ordinance,
and whether the ſame lye ſtreight in the cariage
or not.
            To know the height and weight of all bullets of like
mettall, and the circumference thereof: and what proportion
a bullet of one mettall beareth to the like or vnlike
bullet of a contrary mettall.
            To know how much Serpentine or corne powder is
requiſite to charge any peece of Artillery.
            To know what neceſſaries belongeth to any peece of
Ordinance, being in ſeruice by land or ſea; as ladles, ſponges,
hand-ſpikes, ropes, coines, &c. and what labourers
ſhould attend the ſame.
            To know likewiſe what men, horſes, or oxen, is able
to draw any peece of Ordinance in ſeruice, or on the
ſudden.
            To be circumſpect of lighted matches and candles
&c. for feare of powder, being in ſea-ſeruice: and to

keepe a perfect regiſter of euery thing pertaining to
your Ordinance, both what you haue preſent, and what
you haue ſpent, to keepe your Ordinance drie within,
and to haue in readineſſe all kind of ſeruiceable fire-workes,
which fire-workes ought to be made either in
the boate or on land, but not in the ſhip for feare of
had I wiſt.
            To know the vſe of all Geometricall inſtruments belonging
to the profeſſion of a Gunner, as alſo to haue
ſome ſight in Arithmeticke and Geometry, thereby to
ſhoote at all randons, and how to mannage and handle
all engines, for the mounting or diſmounting of any
peece of ordinance, in or out her cariage, &c.
            To know that euery peece ought to be as thicke of
mettall in euery part from the loweſt part of the concaue
at the breech, to that part of the chamber that
holds the powder, as the bullet due to that peece is in
height.
         
         
            A breuiary of certaine ſecrets in the Art of Gunnery.
            A bullet violently driuen out of any peece of Ordinance
by the force of the powder, flieth ſwifteſt and
ſtreighteſt from the mouth, till it be paſt ½ the diſtance
of the leuell range.
            The great noiſe or rore that the peece makes in deliuering
the bullet (or diſcharged without bullet) ariſeth
betweene the ayre within the peece, violently driuen out
into the open aire by the force of the fire (the Petre or
Maiſter being reſolued into a windie exhalation.) And
according to the quantity of the fire and aire, burſting
out of the peece, ſo is the cracke more or leſſe.
            Any bullet ſhot out of a peece lying leuell, doth

flie more heauily, and worketh leſſe effect in piercing an
obiect, then when the peece is eleuated at any degree or
degrees of the randon.
            A heauy bullet violently mouing pierceth ſorer then a
lighter bullet, hauing the like motion.
            A bullet of lead ſhall worke as great effect againſt an
obiect, as the like bullet of yron, hauing the like motion,
by reaſon of his ouerplus of weight.
            A bullet ſhot out of any peece of Artillery, will pierce
more againſt any thing ſtanding firme, then againſt a
moueable obiect, and ſhot at an obiect a reaſonable diſtance
from the peece, will pierce more effectually, then
ſhot at the ſame nearer hand.
            Euery bullet doth make a long or ſhort range, according
to the eleuation of the peece out of which it is ſhot.
            A bullet flieth euer furtheſt in his ſtreight motion (or
in an inſenſible ſtreight line) the higher that the peece
is eleuated at the mouth.
            Any peece diſcharged twiſe with one and the ſelfe like
quantity of powder, wad, and bullet, hauing one and the
ſelfe like proportion in ramming and wadding, and
ſhot at one like degree of randon, the peece of like temper
at either ſhot ſhall make like ranges, but the ſayd
peece diſcharged as afore, but not of like temper, ſhall
make ſeuerall grazes.
            Two peeces in all reſpects equall, ſaue onely that the
one is ſomething longer then the other, diſcharged with
one like quantity in powder and bullet, ſhall make ſeuerall
grazes, according to the length of the cilinder of the
peece, the longer ſhall outſhoote the ſhorter.
            Two peeces in all reſpects equall, ſaue onely in
length, diſcharged at a marke of equall diſtance from

each peece, and being within the range of both peeces,
the bullet ſhot out of the ſhorter peece, ſhall graze or
beate the marke, before the bullet ſhot out of the longer
peece.
            Two peeces proportionall in all reſpects, being diſcharged
with one like quantity and kind of powder, but
differing in bullet, as the one yron: the other lead,
and both bullets of like height, ſhall make ſeuerall ranges,
the yron bullet ſhall outflie the leaden bullet, but diſcharged
with a bullet of mettall, and afterwards with a
like bullet made of wood, obſeruing one and the like
quantity in powder at euery ſhot, the bullet of wood
ſhall not flie ſo farre as the like bullet of mettall.
            A peece any whit eleuated at the mouth, will ſhoote
further in an inſencible ſteight line, then lying leuell:
and by how much more any bullet is driuen more ſwifter
through the ayre, by ſo much it is made the more
lighter in the mouing or drift thereof.
            Two peeces a like in euery reſpect, ſhot with one like
bullet, but different quantity of powder, ſhall make ſeuerall
ranges. Alſo the ſayd peeces and bullets equall in
all reſpects, and the powder alſo in quantity equall, ſauing
that the mixtures of the ſayd powder is not alike,
ſhall make ſeuerall ranges.
            One peece diſcharged diuerſe times with one like bullet,
firſt with the quarter of the weight of the bullet in
powder, after with halfe the weight, thirdly with ⅔ parts
of the weight, and laſtly with the whole weight of the
bullet in corne powder, and the ranges differing at point
blanke noted, the ranges at the vtmoſt randon differing,
ſhall be proportionall, one method in charging, &c. being
obſerued.
            
               
To euery peece of Ordinance, according to the proportion
of the diameter, length of the cilinder, and
weight of the bullet belōging thereto, there is a due quā
               tity
of powder to be allowed, ſo that charging the peece
with more or leſſe then the ſayd due proportion, ſhall rather
hinder then further the bullet in his furtheſt range.
            By how much the mettall of any peece is made hotter
by often ſhooting, then it was before you made the
firſt ſhot, by ſo much is the concaue or bore of the peece
made more attractiue, the mettall more dulled and the
peece worketh leſſe effect then in the beginning.
            All peeces in whoſe mettall is mingled moſt tin, lead,
or copper, is more attractiue a great deale then thoſe
peeces in whom is put moſt bel-mettall.
            A braſſe peece made hote with often ſhooting, is
more apt to breake then when it is cold; and any peece of
Artillery is more apt to breake at the firſt or ſecond ſhot
in a hard froſt being cold, then made hote with often
ſhooting.
            Any peece of Ordinance diſcharged, hauing her full
charge in powder, will range and pierce further, then
wanting any part thereof; and hauing a little quantity
more then her due charge in powder, will ouerſhoot the
other, but it will daunger the peece; but doubling the
weight of the bullet in powder, ſhall ſhoote leſſe ground
then hauing a meane proportionall charge in powder
(to wit betweene ⅔ parts and the whole weight of the
bullet) for that the cilinder of the peece is too much
choked, and the bullet driuen out into the open aire before
the powder be all fired.
            Euery peece of Artillery ought to haue her conuenient
length and weight of mettall, according to the

proportion of the diameter or bore of the ſame, and being
made longer or ſhorter then her ſayd due length, will
rather hinder then further her vtmoſt range.
            Any peece of Ordinance made hote through much
ſhooting, will neither range ſo farre, nor pierce ſo deepe,
as being temperatly cold.
            No peece of Artillery can ſhoot a bullet to range ſtill in
a perfect ſtreight line, except you ſhoote the ſame either
directly vpright towards the zeneth of the skie, or elſe directly
plumme downe towards the center of the earth.
            The right line of the vtmoſt randon in all peeces, is
more then the right line of the leuell range; and the right
line of the vtmoſt range, is not ſo much as the right line
of 90 degrees.
            The vtmoſt range in all ſorts of peeces, is not at iuſt
45 degrees of randon, as Tartallia and diuerſe others do
affirme, but ſhooting with the wind in a quiet or calme
day, is at or about 45 degrees, but the wind againſt, or
on any ſide, or rough, or the aire thicke, &c. will range as
farre at or about 40 degrees.
            Two peeces in all reſpects equall ſaue onely in length,
diſcharged with a like quantity in powder, wad, & bullet,
and ſhot at a marke within the reach of both peeces,
mounted at like degrees of randon with the quadrant, the
ſhorter peece ſhall outſhoote the longer.
            The right lines made by any 2 peeces at one degree of
randon diſcharged, are proportionall to the ranges of
their bullets at the ſame degrees of randon, and the right
lines made by any 2 peeces at any randon, are proportionall
to their vtmoſt ranges.
            Any peece of Ordinance firſt diſcharged with the
whole weight of the bullet in Serpentine powder, & after

diſcharged with ½ the weight of her bullet, in ſuch corne
powder as ſhall cauſe the peece to range the ſame
ground: and laſtly diſcharged with halfe the quantity
of either ſort of powder, the ſecond ranges ſhall not be
equall, although the manner of charging and temper
of the peece be all alike.
            Three peeces in all reſpects equall, ſaue euery one exceeds
other in like proportion in length, the vtmoſt ranges
of their bullets ſhall not be alike proportionall, although
the forme of charging be vniforme and alike.
            A peece twiſe charged, firſt with an yron bullet fit for
the ſame peece, and after with a leaden bullet of the like
weight, but differing in height, and with one and the like
quantity in powder and wad, at either time the yron bullet
ſhall outflie the leaden bullet.
            A peece diſcharged firſt with an yron bullet, and after
with a leaden bullet of like height, and at either time
diſcharged with the weight of the bullet in Serpentine
powder, ſhall make vnequall ranges.
            A peece twiſe diſcharged at like degree of randon,
firſt with an yron, and then with a leaden bullet, and after
diſcharged with any other quantity of powder, the
ranges of the bullets ſhall not retaine the ſame proportion.
            If 2 peeces of one length but differing in bore, the
one diſcharged with an yron, the other with a leaden bullet
at one like randon, hauing the weight of either bullet
in courſe powder, do range both alike ground, and
the ſayd peeces after diſcharged with halfe the weight of
their bullets, of the ſame or any other powder, ſhall not
range one like diſtance of ground.
            Two peeces of one mettall and length, but of different

bullets equally mounted, diſcharged with any like quantity
of one powder, ſhall not range iuſtly one diſtance of
ground.
            The proportion of the different ranges, that yron and
leaden bullets make, being found by experience in any
one peece of Ordinance, the ſame proportion will not
hold in all other peeces of Ordinance of contrary length,
that ſhootes the ſame like bullet.
            Any peece of Ordinance being thicker of mettall on
the one ſide then on the other, diſcharged at a marke, will
caſt the bullet towards that ſide, that is thickeſt of mettall.
            Two peeces of contrary length, but of like diameter,
hauing both one like charge, being ſhot off at a marke
within the reach of both peeces giuing leuell with an inch
rule, at one like height of the rule, ſhall make ſeuerall grazes,
the ſhorter peece ſhall outſhoote the longer.
            Any peece of Ordinance will conuey the bullet more
ground, her mouth eleuated at 18 or 20 degrees, then
from the ſayd grades to the beſt of the randon, although
there be 7 degrees vantage in the latter.
            Any peece of Ordinance hauing her due loading will
conuey the bullet more then fiue times the diſtance of her
leuell range.
         
      
      
         
            
            A Table ſhewing the contents of this booke.
            
               
                  A Table of the deminite parts vſed in menſurations. 1.
               A table ſhewing how to weigh any great quantity vvith fevv
weights. 2.
               How to extract the cubicke radix or roote of any number, and how to
find a true denominator to the cubicke remaine, and how to proue if
you worke right or not. 4.5
               Theoremes, ſhewing the proportion betweene a bullet of one mettall, to
a bullet of contrary mettall, and betweene the diameter and circumference
thereof, &c. 8.
               How by knowing the true weight of any bullet, and diameter of the
peece due for the ſame, to find the weight of any other bullet of like
mettall belonging to a contrary peece of Ordinance. 8.
               How by the knowne weight of any ſmall bullet, you may find out the
weight of a greater, and how to proue if you worke right or not. 9.
               By knowing the weight of any bullet, whoſe diameter containeth both
whole numbers and broken, how to find the weight of any other of
like mettall. 10
               By knowing the diameter height and weight of an iron bullet, to find
the height and weight of a bullet of marble ſtone: or contrariwiſe,
by knowing the height and vveight of a bullet of marble ſtone, to
find the vveight of the like bullet of iron. 11.
               By knowing the weight and diameter of an iron bullet, to find the
height and weight of a leaden bullet of the ſame proportion: or contrariwiſe,
by knowing the vveight of a leaden bullet, to find the
vveight of an iron bullet of like height. 12.
               To find out the weight of any bullet made of marble ſtone, by knowing
the weight of the like bullet of lead, or elſe by knowing the vveight of
any leaden bullet, to find out the vveight of a bullet of marble of like
diameter. 12.
               To find out the circumference of any bullet or round body, &c. 13.
               By knowing the circumference of any bullet, how to find out the diameter
thereof. 14.
               To find the ſolid content of any bullet or globe. 15.
               To find the ſuperficiall content of any bullet, &c. 15.
               
                  
To find out the circumference of any circular body diuerſe vvaies. 16.
               Hovv to find the ſuperficiall content of any round body, as bullet or
globe diuerſe vvaies. 17.
               Hovv to find the craſſitude or ſolid content of any bullet, &c. diuerſe
wayes. 18.
               By knowing the diameter and vveight of any bullet, &c. to find the diameter
of another of like mettall, that is twice the vveight of the
first. 18.
               Hovv you may diuerſe vvaies Geometrically find out the vveight of any
vnknowne bullet, that is double the vveight of a knowne bullet, and
hovv to proue the ſame concluſions by numbers. 19. 20.
               By knowing the ſuperficiall content of the flat or plaine of any circle, to
find out the ſuperficiall content of another, that is twiſe the diameter
of the firſt. 23.
               By knowing the vveight and height of any one bullet, to find out the true
vveight of another that is twiſe the height of the former. 24.
               Hovv you may Arithmetically find the diameter or height of any bullet,
and to knovv hovv much any one bullet is higher then another,
vvithout any callapers. 25.
               A table ſhewing the vveight of all iron bullets, from the Fawconet to
the Cannon, in Haberdepoize vveight. 26.
               Hovv you may Arithmetically knovv the true bredth of the plate of
any ladle due to any peece of Ordinance, by knowing the diameter of
the bullet fit for the peece. 27.
               Hovv to make a ladle for a chamber-bored peece. 28.
               To find out the height of the diameter of the chamber in any chamber-bored
Cannon, or other peece: and hovv to find out the thickneſſe of
mettall, round about the chamber thereof. 29.
               Hovv you may Arithmetically knovv vvhether the cariage for your
peece be truly made or not, and hovv the cariage for any peece of
Ordinance ought to be made. 30.
               By knowing the vveight of any one peece of Ordinance, to find the
vveight of any other. 31.
               Hovv by Arithmeticke skill you may knovv hovv much of euery kind
of mettall is in any braſſe peece of Ordinance. 33.
               Hovv to knovv hovv farre any peece of great Artillery vvill conuey
her bullet at the beſt of the randon, by knowing the vtmoſt range

and point blanke of another peece, and by the ſame rule hovv you
may knovv hovv farre any great peece vvill range at point blanke
and vtmoſt randon. 35.
               To knovv how much a bullet of yron vvill flie further then the like
bullet of lead, being diſcharged the one after the other out of any
great peece, vvith one like quantity in powder. 36.
               By knowing hovv much powder is ſufficient to charge any one peece of
Ordinance, to knovv hovv much of the ſame powder vvill charge
any other peece of Ordinance. 37.
               By knowing hovv much Serpentine powder vvill charge any peece of
Ordinance, to knovv hovv much corne powder vvill do the like: or
contrariwiſe, by knowing hovv much corne powder vvill charge any
peece, to knovv hovv much Serpentine powder vvill ſerue. 38.
               By knowing hovv farre any peece ſhootes vvith her due charge of powder,
to giue a neare estimate hovv farre the ſayd peece vvill ſhoote,
vvith a charge more or leſſe in powder then the other. 39.
               Hovv by knowing hovv much powder a fevv peeces of Ordinance hath
ſpent, being but a fevv times diſcharged, to knovv hovv much
powder a great number of the like peeces vvill ſpend to be often
diſcharged. 40.
               Hovv to knovv hovv much powder euery little caske or firken
ought to containe, and hovv many of thoſe caskes doth make a Laſt
of powder, and hovv many ſhootes any quantity of powder vvill be
for any great peece of Artillery. 41.
               By knowing hovv many ſhootes a firken of powder vvill make for a
Culuering, to knovv hovv many ſhootes a Laſt of powder vvill
make for a Cannon. 41.
               To knovv hovv many ſhootes of powder vvill be in a graund barrell,
for any peece of Ordinance. 42.
               Hovv you may Arithmetically knovv vvhat proportion of euery receipt
is to be taken to make perfect good powder: vvhat quantity ſoeuer
you vvould make at a time. 43.
               Hovv by Arithmeticke skill you may knovv hovv vvith one and the
ſelfe like charge in powder and bullet, hovv much farre or ſhort any
peece of Ordinance vvill ſhoote, in mounting or diſmounting her
any degree, vvhereby you may knovv hovv farre your peece vvill
ſhoote at any degree of the randon, by knowing hovv farre ſhe vvill

reach at the vtmoſt randon. 46.
               By knowing the diſtance to the marke by the concluſion aboue, you
may know whether your peece vvill ſhoote ſhort or ouer the
marke, or you may know hovv farre any marke is from your platforme,
being vvithin the reach of your peece, onely by knowing the
diſtance of the vtmoſt range of your peece, and the degrees ſhe is
eleuated at. 46. 47.
               Hovv to make a table of randons, or go very neare to knovv the
true range of the bullet, out of all ſorts of great peeces of Artillery,
being mounted from degree to degree. 48.
               Hovv you may Arithmetically knovv hovv much vvide, ouer, or
ſhort any peece vvill ſhoote from the marke, by knowing the diſtance
to the marke, and hovv your peece is layd to ſhoote at the
ſayd marke. 51.
               Hovv to lay your peece to make a ſtreight ſhot at any marke. 51.
               In ſhooting at any marke vvithin point blanke, not diſparting your
peece, to knovv hovv farre the bullet vvill flie ouer the ſayd
marke, onely by knowing the diſtance to the marke. 53.
               Hovv to lay your peece point blanke vvithout iustrument. 54.
               Hovv you may Arithmetically diſpart any great peece of Artillery
diuerſe vvaies. 54.
               Hovv by Arithmeticall skill you may mount any great peece by an
inch rule to 10 degrees of the quadrant, if you vvant a quadrant
or other inſtrument. 55.
               Hovv you may knovv the true thickneſſe of mettall in any part of any
great peece of Ordinance diuerſe vvaies. 58. 59.
               Hovv to make a good ſhot in a peece that is not truly bored, or to
knovv hovv much any peece vvill ſhoote amiſſe, that is thicker of
mettall on the one ſide then on the other, if you knovv the diſtance
to the marke: & hovv to remedy your peece, being thicker of mettall
in one part then another, to make her ſhoote ſtreight. 60.
               To knovv the different force of any 2 like peeces of Ordinance planted
againſt an obiect, the one being further off from the ſayd obiect
then the other. 62.
               Hovv you may hauing diuerſe kinds of Ordinance to batter the
vvals of any Towne or Caſtell, &c. tell preſently hovv much
powder vvill loade all thoſe Ordinance, one or many times. 65.
               
                  
Hovv you may knovv the true vveight of any number of ſhot for ſeuerall
peeces of Ordinance, hovv many ſoeuer they be, and hovv
many Tun vveight they do all vveigh. 70.
               Hovv any Gunner or gunfounder may by Arithmeticke skill
know vvhether the trunions of any peece be rightly placed on the
peece or not. 72.
               Hovv you may knovv vvhat empty caske is to be prouided to boy
or carry ouer any peece of Ordinance ouer any riuer, if boates or
other prouiſion cannot be gotten. 73.
               Hovv to knovv the true time that any quantity of gun-match, being
fired ſhall burne to do an exploite, at any time deſired. 76.
               Hovv by Arithmeticke skill you may knovv vvhat number of men,
horſes, or oxen, is ſufficient to dravv any great peece of Artillery,
and hovv much euery one draweth, ſo as they all do their indeuor.
77.
               To knovv hovv many hundreth of Haberdepoize vveight any peece
of Ordinance or other groſſe vveight containeth. 81.
               How you may proportionally proue all ſorts of peeces of Artillery for
ſeruice, vvhether they vvill hold or not. 82.
               To knovv hovv much one coyler rope is more then another, for to
dravv any great peece of Ordinance. 83.
               By knowing the weight of a faddome of one coyler rope, to know the
vveight of a faddome of any other. 84.
               By knowing the quantity or compaſſe of any ſmall rope, to find out
the ſame in another that is many times that bigneſſe, and hovv to
find out the vveight of a vvhole coyler rope, for the draught of
any peece of Ordinance. 84.
               To find out the ſuperficiall content of the hollovv concauity of any
peece. 85.
               To find out the craſſitude or ſolid content of the cilinder or concauity
of any peece, and how much the ſame containeth in ſquare
meaſure. 86.
               How you may knovv how much any peece of Ordinance is taper-bored
by Arithmeticke skill, or vvhether any great peece of Ordinance
be taper-bored or not. 87.
               A table vvherein you may knovv the names of all peeces of Artillery,
their height and vveight, and thickneſſe of mettall in any

part of them, and vvhat men, horſes, or oxen, is ſufficient to draw
the ſame, and the height, vveight, and compaſſe of the bullet belonging
to euery peece: and hovv much powder vvill charge euery
of the ſayd peeces, and the length and breadth of the ladle fit
for any peece, and hovv thicke, broade, long, or deepe, the cariage
of euery peece ſhould be, and hovv long euery coyler rope ſhould
be, for the draught of any great peece of Ordinance. 87.
               Concluſions for ſhooting in morter peeces. 87.
               To knovv hovv much further or ſhorter any morter peece vvill
ſhoote at the mount or diſmount of one or many degrees. 88.
               To knovv very neare hovv farre from your peece the bullet ſhall
light, the morter peece raiſed at what degree you thinke good. 89.
               Notes to be learned concerning morter peeces. 89.
               To know how much the earth and turfe that is digged & throwne
out of any ditch, ſhall make a defencible ramper or vvall at the
brim of the ſayd ditch, making the ſame to any proportion aſſigned
for the better defence of the Ordinance in time of ſeruice. 93.
               Certaine briefe obſeruations of certaine principals of the Art of
Gunnery, to be knowne of euery gunner: with a breuiary of certaine
ſecrets of the ſame Art, very neceſſary for all profeſſors of
the Art of Gunnery. 94.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   