
      
         
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
            SIR Thomas Smithes VOIAGE and Entertainment in Rushia.
            With the tragicall ends of two EMPERORS, and one Empresse, within one Moneth during his being there: And the miraculous preseruation of the now raigning EMPEROR, esteemed dead for 18. yeares.
            Si quid nouisti rectius istis Candidus impertié si non, His vtere mecum.
            Printed at London for Nathanyell Butter. 1605.
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            
               REader, the discourses of this voyage (at the comming home of the Gentleman that was chiefe in it and his company into England) affoorded such pleasure to the hearers, by reason the accidents were strange and Nouell, that many way-laid the Nevves, and vvere gladde to make any booty of it to delight themselues, by vvhich meanes, that which of it selfe being knit together was beautifull, could not chuse but shevv vilde, beeing so torne in peeces. So that the itching fingers of gain laid hold vpon it, and had like to haue sent it into the world lame, and dismembred. Some that picke vp the crums of such feasts, had scrapt togither many percels of this Rushian commoditie, so that their heads being gotten vvith child of a Bastard, there was no remedy but they must be deliuered in Paules Church-yard. But I taking the truth from the mouths of diuers gentlemen that vvent in the Iourney, and hauing som good notes bestovved vpon me in vvriting, vvrought them into this body, because neither thou shouldst be abused with false reports, nor the Voyage receiue slaunder. I have done this vvithout consent either of Sir Tho. himselfe, or of those gentlemen my friends that deliuered it vnto me: So that if I offend, it is Error Amoris to my Countrey, not Amor erroris to do any man wronge. Read and like, for much is in it vvorthy obseruation. Farevvell.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            Syr Thomas Smiths Voyage into Rushia.
            
               TRaffike is the golden chain concatenation, that tyes kingdoms together in mutuall Amitie: It is the very Cement that conioynes the harts, the handes, yea the soules of Nations different in shapes, disagreeing in manners, in speech, in religion, with Neves not to be broken. The tongue of which harmony sounding sweetest in the eares of those Princes, who loue the Palme and Oliue tree ensignes of Peace, better than the knotted Oake, (Emblem of Warre.) Allude the Maiesty of England (our Royall Soueraigne King Iames) to allowe all those ports and Hauens to stande still open, which (in the dayes of his deere late deceased sister) nourished entercourse and negotiation betweene this kingdome and the Rushian. For his princely confirmation whereof, congratulations formerly interchangably passing betwixt his maiesty and the Emperour of Rushia, through the hands of Maister Iohn Mericke now agent there, Sir Tho. Smith knight, (a religious and discreet Gentleman) was thought fit to be chosen and commanded by his Maiestie, to go vpon an Embassie thither: which (according to duty) he entertained: making such speedy preparation for the iourney, as the shortnesse of time squred out vnto him, could minister.
            
               All things therefore being ripe for his departure, sir Tho. accompanied with sir Thomas Challenor, and S. William Wray knights, diuers Gent. and his own attendants, repaired to the Court vppon the tenth of Iune 1604. then lying at Greenwich, where (by the right Hon. the Earle of Salsbury) he was brought to his Maiesties presence: who in very gracious language demaunded of sir Thomas the length of the voyage, the time of his returne, the nature of the Climate, with some other questions touching the countrey: vnto all which sir Thomas aunswered accordingly. But the king wondring that the detention there would be so long, (for Sir Thomas said it would be full xv. moneths, by reason of the winters cruelty, whose Frosts were so extream, that the seas were not at those times Nauigable) pleasantly said, It seemes then that Sir Thomas goes from the Sun: vpon which the right Hon. the Earle of Northampton standing by replyed, He must needes go from the Sunne departing from his resplendant Ma. At which the king smiled, giuing sir Thomas his hand to kisse, and bestowing the like grace vpon all the Gentlem. that were for the voyage.
            The next day S. Thomas with some of his followers, tooke his leaue of the Prince: and then being fully furnished with his Commission, and all other instructions from the Ea. of Salsbury at White-hall, the day following, being the 12. of Iune, about ten a clocke, the wind sitting fayr, all the ships fel down to Graues-end, whether S. Tho. came, accompanied with sir Valentine Knightly, sir Fran. Cherry, many

merchants, &c. staying there til next morning. Then after conference with the Gent. Mer. and maisters of ships about his departure: sir Thomas calling all his followers about him, thus spake.
            GEntlemen, and the rest who haue resolued to acompany and attend me in this Ambassage from his Excellent Maiesty to the Emperor of Rushia, &c. I haue conferred with the Merchants, maisters of ships & others, vpon the stay or speed of our voyage, finding the wind fauorable, all our company as I think heere, & no importune busines to stay vs, haue resolued to go on boord this present night, and so deliuer our selues as alvvaies into the protection of the Almighty: so now to his mercie in the mercilesse Seas, where vvee shall (especiallie the vnexperienced, vvherof I presume to haue manie) meet with a number of crosses the difference betvveen Land and Sea as of tvvo contrary elements: So that being of a contrary nature, I must giue you my knowledge herein, and the rather considering you are of seuerall prefermentes vnto mee, and consequently vnknown to one another. I desire you like christians and fellovv Brethren to loue and delight each in other, and expresse your loues in helping and cherishing in time of distresse, sicknes, or distemperature: so as if God please to laie some sick & others health: the strong to helpe the vveak, as fearing daily hee may fall into the like need. As often as it shall please God to send vs vveather that we may visite one another, I shall be glad to see you aboord my Shippe, vvhere happily you may be entertained vvith something your selues desire,

and I vvill easily affoord. I shall take it an argument of your loues, your dayly (if daily might be your visitations) as he that shall esteeme you the best ghesse that I can long expect. For the preseruation of your owne healths, beware of drinking: for your profit, of Gaming: for your ease, of quarrelling: and for Gods glory of swearing. All which, oft-times Sea-company makes men subiect vnto. Surely there is no such remedy against these, as dayly, according to the Ship-custome, to serue God: presuming I haue none in my company otherwise minded or brought vppe. Thus armed, let vs in his name, who in his secret wisdome hath ordained vs to this voyage, begin vvith honest and iust minds that our successe may be prosperous, and our end glorious: protesting, I shall be best serued when God is most honoured, desiring nothing of any, but what befits my place, and his duty. Thus in the name of God let vs goe on Boord.
            The Ambas. led the way himselfe, going aborde the Iohn and Francis Admyrall, after him al his followers: hauing euerie man aboord, himselfe with some others went againe on shore, there taking little rest, for the time was spent in very speciall businesses with the Merchants, whoe stayed still about two in the morne. Then after a warning peece shot, and some little stay for the long boate, which vvas not come downe, wee hoysted our sayles vvith the rest of the ships (in number foure) and hauinge a gallant gale, we easily sternd the tide, hauing taken leaue of the small rudder, and novv trusting to the hopefull helme (which God be thanked vvell guided

vs, hauing for two daies and one night a good gale and faire: But the 15. daye of Iune, beyonde Nevvcastle, that night the winde seased, so as wee must bend our course Easterlie. In the night, wee left behind vs one of our ships, named the Minion, which with a side wind could not holde course with vs. Whereupon our Mayster came to the Ambassador to know his pleasure, whether he would staye or no, alledging withal, it was their custom to prick forwardest, and with euerie winde to make the best aduantage of their ships: But the Ambassador commanded him to tacke about, and stay til the Minion were come vp, which hee obeyed: And surelye the Ambas: herin shewed his great care and loue to the Gent. with the rest: for me thinketh it a great comfort on the Sea, to behold neighbor-ships, yea (and if occasion should require) it would proue wisdom and good discretion, when either the vvant of one ship, or that one ship might vnhappily for his fellowes, be diuersly lost or cast away, as is too often found to be true.
            But for Sea accidentes, it is not my purpose to make perticular relation, beeing neither pertinent to my course, nor to any a matter of much validity: but as if our Ambas. were againe in the Tovver of London, as he is in the ship: now tost, then becaulmed: in feare and hope within one moment, wher sometime God Neptune like a Prince, will haue his subiects know his force, and feele his rigor: where vvhen Fogges and mists appeare (like stratagems and pollicies) to make men imprisoned tremble,

man then can see that he otherwise cannot see, danger in present deliuerance, deliuerance and helpe in| present daunger. For ordinary policies are like Mount Lybanus fogges, then most palpable, when least discerned: but as God brought him out with much honor and praise, onely by the benefit of patience, clothed in Innocency, so shall I by the help of God, deliuer our selues safely at our Port and hanen, by the gaining of time out-running miserie: for the Sea is a miserable commonwealth to liue in, (If without much patience) where mens eies must euer be open to al dangers: and this is there a preseruation against all dangers, where men rest most in vnquietnes and stand safest, when the winde like Hu-an-cry, driues them forward for feare of worsse weather, but to them that loue the Sea, I wish helth, and my selfe euer to stande well on dry ground: to behold one of the 3. gallant spectacles in the world, A Ship vnder sayle, loming (as they tearme it) indeede like a Lyon pawing with his forfeet, heauing and setting, like a Musco Beare bayted with excellent English dogs. But the comming on boord of some Gent. and others to my L. ship, (we being becalmed) invites me to turne my best wit to bid them welcome. Who are so honourably intertained by the Ambas. as hauing of his perticular frends much, of his owne more, of the company of marchaunts most, and very bountifuly of either, inough for any; did therewith feast them were invited at Graues-end, to be welcome about Shotland; It shal be honor sufficient to the Ambas. and comfort inough to his

folowers, that they neuer came, but they found him like a good hous-keeper at home, and like a bountifull sir, command them the best cheare. In a word, the Ambas. own and ordinarie praise shall ease mee of more labor in prouing it, al must confesse necessarily, which vvas this: That al the prouisions whatsoeuer (yea his purse likewise) was euery ones & no one, no not himselfe for all. But the wind riseth, & they refreshed with wine and vvind, are abord their owne ships. Thus they that came (who as often as they could did com) needed not depart til the weather whistled them thence: and surely on the sea, a faire gale is better than feasting, as where a mannes mind is as great as his stomach: nor can a man on the seas be alwaies so couragious (though manie heroycal spirits seeme to breath there) but the wind will coole him (especially in danger) if it blowe on the right side. Now being far entred the Northren Seas, I could here feed you: yea, make you a feast royall with little cost: and after that disport you excellent strangely, with Water-Tylts and Barryers: bringing in the Leuyathan with his Oystershel-armed shield, like greene, wilde and sauadge men, castinge out smoke to terifie the behoulders, obseruing their time and measure, like the M. of a daunsing school, indeed like a right Lo. roming and raunging without feare, to feare. The gallant Sea-fight betwixte the huge Whale, the Sword-fish, and the Thresher: Two against one, Rapyer and dagger against your two-hand-sworde: Or I might speake verye muche to little purpose of the STVRGEON, whose Rowes

makes the Italians delightfull Caviare, of which this Nation makes the most and best of any. The Porpus, Belluga, Sharke, Seale, Grampas, Salmon, &c. But I feare too many whilst they haue gazed after them, haue bene made giddie, and others presuming to haue made profit of them, haue fed them: then, were it not vnkindlye and vnnaturall to feede you, with those creatures, that rather are satisfied with men, whereby it would proue a harde disgestion. B
                  •
               sides, I might discourse the Witchcraft of the Seas (as I may tearme it) when one Ship shall be becalmed, and Diuers haue excellent gales or vndergoe the description of the Capes, Sandes, Shel
                  •
               es, Islands, Rockes, Whirlepooles, &c.
            But these are for a strange language, wherein men may not blushe but Poetise: who in our Countrey are not so well (so ill are our affections) esteemed of, as Beastes, much lesse as Lordely Fishes, who swim and play aboue the Water, where and when they please: onely herein they are like them, they haue the world like a Sea, to wade and sport themselues in, and yet vnlike fishes, are often themselues drowned in their owne Ellements. But I am verye willingly drawne out of this fury of Makers, who yet certainly deserue much, especially remembring the curse the moste woorthy Knight of the Muses wisheth those do not honor them, (as out of the vyolence of the salt Seas at any time) principally now, after almost 40. daies tossing, and tumbling, being with a sweet dreame after a golden slumber, entred vppon the faire and pleasant Riuer of Dwnia, from

which I suddainely awaked with the vnknowne language of a Pilate, sent from the Emperor to conduct my Lord vpon the Riuer: which is, (or at least they thinke) to vs it is a dangerous passage: which Pilate excused his no sooner comming for want of knowledge of the Ambassadors being so nie.
            But now come (when to our Iourneys sickly certaine end we are so neere come) howe thinke you, must he not be welcome? I assure you fresh Water is a more excellent companion then your salte humoryst: and I shall loue fresh water-Souldiers for my Trauaile on the Seas, while I liue: wishinge, when euer I fight, to haue fresh water on my side to comfort me, which wanting I shal be more wo-be-don, then being in a wood, (though in Rusland, or Leisland.
            
            The 22. of Iuly beeing come within a mile of Tharch-angell, we ankerd, whether came at 11. of the clocke in the night, a Gentleman (Captain of 500. gunners, named Maxim Vrin: a man of good complement, and of indifferent stature and presence,) aboard the Ambassadors shippe, being mette with two Gentlemen and others, he was brought into his Lordships Cabin, where after rehearsing the Emperours and Princes Title (which is euer their custome,) he declared to the Ambassador, that his L. and Maister and the young Prince, had sent him, to knowe of his Maiesties health of Englande, the Q. and Princes, which the Ambassador answeared vnto: then demaunded of his owne, and the Gent.
            The Ambassador, somewhat woondering what

this Gent. should be (considering former Ambassadors Entertainment) presently was by him resolued with this, prosecuting his former speeche: That whereas the Emperor vnderstanding of the Ambassadors comming, to shewe his great loue to his Maiesty of England, the desire of peace and Amity, (as with his deere and louing Sister Elizabeth of happy memory late Queene of England) contrary to any custome of his Maiesties heeretofore, who neuer tooke knowledge thereafter, had sent him to bee his Prestaue, to prouide the Ambassadours house, and victuals, and to garde him from the Iniuries of a strange nation: desiring that his seruice therein might expresse his thankefulnes to his Ma. for so great an honour, and likewise be pleasing to the Ambassador. Both which to deserue, he would endeuor the best lay in his power.
            The Ambassador (though somewhat be-woondered or gratiously preuented) verye kindely and thankfully accepted of this truly honourable fauor: saying, It behooued two such great Princes to vse the best meanes for Amity and friendship. So the Prestaue banquetted as befitting his place, was dismissed that night, but yet before he went, came aboorde, the Ambassadors Shippe, the Agent Maister Iohn Mericke, diuers Marchants, and other English men to see his Lordship, as to welcome him to that Port of his desire: who after some houres discourse, priuately betwixt the Ambassador and the Agent, tasting of his wine and Beere, with halfe a score good peeces they were sent away.
            
               Truely herein, the extraordinary beginning was hope of a prosperous conclusion: for this was a fauor neuer manifested to any heretofore, who after their arriuall at the Castle, staide and that very vntowardly) till a poste were dispatched, from the Gentleman or Gouernor of the Towne to the Musco, (which is 1000. Myles,) and his return with the Emperours further pleasure for his direction and warrant.
            The 23. of Iuly the Prestaue, the English Agent, Marchants and other, being come to bring the Ambassador with honor into his lodging, he withall the Gent. before him, and his Liueries before them, two and two together, accompanied as is aforesaid, landed at the Castle: in the road whereof, then beeing many English, French, and Dutch Ships, they discharged a mighty peale, (or rather many peales of Ordinance.) Thus the Ambassador came safely to his first lodging in Rushia. The Prestaue takinge a solemne leaue, went to see the Prouisions which were laide in before, to be good, as also to prouide necessarie lodginges, for diuers which were to bee lodged abroad, and others not as yet Landed, for it was 4. daies before all our Ships came vp.
            Here the Ambassador laie some fourteen dayes, or lesse, where in the meane time, there was demanded a particular note of the names of all the Ambassadors traine, fyrst of the Kings Gentlemen, (which name not onely the Emperor, but the Great Turke, Persian & Moroco Princes do highly account of) as indeed soothing their own greatnes therwith, and

we who were his seruants, and highly graced by kissing the Princely hande of our royall K. meeting herein with any others, trauailing in the same kind: as also by our particular births, not beeing lesse (so vnexpectedly required of vs) did vnder-goe the name, as which we could not vvithout dishonor to the Ambassador, and disaduantage to our Being refuse, it being giuen by an Emperor, who should be in that kingdome so great as not to allow it, though he would (which none could) disproue? Secondly, of the Ambassadors Gent, and thirdly, of al the rest that attended, which forthwith was deliuered to the Prestaue, and sent vp by him to the Emperor: the reasons hereof are, as may be gathered, to esteeme the state and honor of the Ambassador thereafter: also, to prouide accordingly for houses, horses, and other prouisions, and perhappes to learne thereby what names of great houses are amonge the kinges Gent.: as particularly now they did inquire after. Here, it pleased the English agent M. Iohn Mericke, (truely a wise, honest and kinde Gent.) to inuite all the Gentlemen to their house to dinner: whether he would haue vvillingly invited the Ambas. if hee might haue presumed thereupon, and of the fitnes, considering that as yet letters were not secondarilie come from the Emperor, for the gent. farther proceeding: whereby he woulde happily haue made a question there of; as also for the Ambass. greatnes, (the towne then so ouercharged with many Nations) it could not be performed according to the respect ambassadors are vsed with there, nor perhaps

would it be well agreeing to their more priuate fashion, who hold it greatest glory for greatest men, rather to be reported of, then seene, &c.
            But we were very bountifully feasted and as kindly and hartily welcome, as an honest mind (rather indeed with vertue then formality) might expresse, the Ambassadour hauing many daintye dishes, sent home to his owne house. Now the whole company of Ships safely arriued, and all the Ambas. followers landed some daies before: it came forthwith into the care and loue of the Ambas. (being by the Agent well informed of diuers vices, customes, and Obseruations, fit either to be followed or auoyded) who was euer desirous to keepe an honorable opinion to himselfe, and an honest name in his followers, as in his going vp to the Court, so, euer after also to ingraue within their memories, their happy deliuerance from the Sea, before his departing the Arch-angel, very honorably thus to aduise & counsell them.
            
               SInce it hath pleased the Almightye of his great mercy, safely to protect vs in our dangerous trauaile vpon the Sea, and to bring vs on Land, euen all of vs, without any the least misfortune, let vs thinke it a very great blessing, and the remembrance of the dangers, and perils past, let them be euer before vs, as before those, that not onely vvil liue accordingly, but vvhich must assure themselues; are to returne the same vvay againe: knovving, that God doth oftentimes vse his creatures (and none oftner then the Sea) to execute his Iudgements: let vs then be hartily

thankefull for our deliuerance, and shew our obedience thereafter in our liues, especially in a strange Country, where he is not rightly knowne: a people and Nation very subtle and crafty, likewise inquisitiue after euery strangers actions, and this place the Port where al nations doe come to: where many vnderstande our language, let vs be wise and very circumspect what wee speake, of what, and to whom, for much cause of speech will bee giuen vs, because the people as well as their maners, customes, & salutations, are not onely strange, (as with modestie I may speake somewhat rediculous) and the rather since we bring the message of pe
                     •
                  ce and Amity, Let vs shew towardes them loue and curtesie.
               To be curteous, as it is a vertue beyond Enuy, so is it an aduantage without losse. I am likewise to require you, and that earnestly, to auoide Dicing and carding: which games, besides that they are among the better sort heere, accounted very base and odious, to me it shall be offensiue, and in the end to your selus great discommodity: as when some will carry that in his purse, his fellow should haue clothed his backe with: especially, if you vvithall do but remember the colde Climate you are to liue in Drukennes is rather here a custome, then a vice: yet themselues hate it in other. Bee then conquerors, if in this, in any thing, & make your wisedome, out of their vile beastlinesse herein, that you can refraine that, I hope you were neuer acquainted vvith all.
               Also Whoring in this Countrey is so common a sin, as their eies, can soone obserue it in straungers: for the peace of your ovvne Consciences, the strengthe of

your ovvne bodies, abhorrè it as the most vnnaturall vvickednes: and rather, in respest they are not onely herein monstrous impudent, but impudence it selfe. Be it euer loathsome the thoughte thereof vnto you all. Thus if your carriage be, it vvill be an honor vnto our God, and he vvill honor you. It vvill be a glorye vnto your Countrey, adde reputation to me, and quyetnesse to your ovvne Consciences, and I shall be gladde to revvard them are carefull herein, as ready to punish the offenders. But I hope my speech shall onely serue to testifie my desire, and not bee the letter, to punishe any hereafter vvithall: yet, let not any one presume vpon my leanity or gentlenes, for I assure them I vvill euer prefer my protestations in the seruiee of God, if it lye vvithin my povver as these things novv do.
            
            The Prestaue Maxim Vrin hauing a new commission from the Emperor, accordingly prouided fiue Loddies, two with Cherdecks and all other necessaries. The Ambas. tooke his leaue of the Castle the sixt of Aug. and with some 30. men to a Boate, we were towed against the streame, when the winde was contrary: and thus changing our permiearies euery 10. vers, we came to Colimgro, where the Am. lay at the English house, two daies, and went forward vpon the faire and pleasant riuer of Dvvyna, tell within some 30. vers of Oysticke. My Lorde was met vpon the riuer with one other Prestaue, named Constantine Petrovvich Artishoue, a man of farre much better esteeme then the former. A graue, honest, and peaceable gentleman, a happines to any Ambassadour, and as necessarie in this Countrey

as may be, the contrary whereof other Ambassadors and the laste that honourable and renowned Gen. Sir Richard Lea, found his greatest crosse, for pride, opinion, and selfe will, is inherent to any Russe put in place of honor.
            This Gentle. being come within a quarter of a Myle, sent to the Ambas. to giue him notice, that the Emperor had sent him as his Prestaue, and hee desired to see his Lordship, as well to know of him concerning his health, his vsage, and his prouision, as to let him vnderstand the Emperors especial fauor towards him, in sending him presently vpon Newes of his arriual, with a larger commission, and that at all Yames and Townes of quality, he had deliuered letters for his receyuing of horses and prouission of diet, and what he would desire. So two of the K. Gen. fetched him on boord the Ambassadors Doshonicke, where he was honouraly entertayned, and indeede he was a kind Gentleman, as who knowes this Countrey people might easily acknowledge, whence after halfe an houres drinking and eating he departed: presently after his departing, the Ambas. sent sixe of his Liueries, and his Enterpreter or Tolmatch to his boat, with a banquet, which he very kindly and thankefully accepted: so we passed along on our Iourney, which was as pleasant and delightfull, wheather you consider the admirable straight pine, tall Cedar, or fyrre woods; Alablaster Rockes, or the pleasantnes of walkes, in sweet Meadowes, and fair pastures, than which, for 1000. vers cannot be more welcom in the whole world, which

we fully Towed and sayled in the Dvvina, Soocana, and Vollagda. I must leaue many faire townes, and great Presents, where we lay and rested, because it will bee rather an Hyperbole, than a receiued truth: and I desire to escape those smal rubbes, that others may the easier fall vppon them, being safely come within fiue vers of Vollagda, the sixt of Septem. and vnwilling to forsake so pleasant a passage, we the 7. day, acompanied with many Du. and Gentlemen, and for the Am: a faire horse from the great Bish. there. As for the Kings Gent. and some others, we rode to a very fair and large house prouided for the Ambas. where they lefte him, not as then willing to take or taste of his goodnes (as the Russe termes it) partly, it is to be supposed for that the many are neuer in sodain accidents of one resolution, and partly, for that it was to be thought, the Ambas. was not so well prouided for them, as afterwards being setled he would be. In this great towne we easily found the Emperors commaund, for our better dyet, and liberty to ride, was withall willingnes performed, where the Ambassador first, (as in euere place after) was more gratiously entertained.
            The 12. of Septem. the Ambas. accompanyed with diuers Gentlemen, tooke his trauell by Land, himselfe riding in his owne Coatch, with a spare horse led by at his pleasure, with 150. horses, with the carriages. So by easie Iourneyes, wee passed a pleasant and faire trauell, as is or can be for so many vers, in the whole world, without any rainy daies, or foule vvaies, resting euery Sabaoth day, as the Ambas.
               
had by water before done, not indeed missinge two Sermons at any time, no (hardlye at the Sea though our Preacher were the sickest man.) Such was his care and zeale, and truely he was an honest quiet man, and a sufficient Scholler, named Maister Samuell Sotheby.
            
            Thus we passed from Yam, to Yam, vppon excellent Post-horses, till we came thorogh many well scituated, and pleasant townes, vnto the Cittie of Yerri-slaue, which we came vnto, the 19. of Sept. where we were receiued with a multitude of people. After we had rowed in a very great Barge, ouer the famous Riuer of Volga, (wherevnto adioyning this citty on a hill is scittuated) a rich and pleasant Citty where the Ambassador was lodged in the house of Gregory Euannovvich Micolin, late Ambassador, to her Maiesty of England.
            
            It might be fitting for me to speake somewhat of this famous Riuer, as is I thinke for length, and bredth, any (one) excepted in the world, but so many excellent writers, as in the worthy labors of Master Richard Hacklyute, haue made particular mention therof, as it induseth me, to leaue the description of this Riuer and towne, to those that haue largely and painfuly wrote of such things: especially to M. Doct. Fletchers true relation, sometime Ambas. to this Emperor. The 21. of September, we went from Yeri-slaue being well accompanied from the Citty, passing through Shepetscoy, (where wee lay) and dwels an English gentleman named Georg Garland, sometime seruant to that Noble but vnfortunate

               E. of Essex, of whom many through the world, do make in diuers kinds, but (as that learned and heroycall Poet Sir Phil. Sidney speaks of Prince Plangus) neuer any can make but honorable mention.
            The next day we came to Rostoue, an ancient, but a great ruinous town, wherof is one of their Metropollitanes named. Here in a faire house the Ambassa. lay 2. daies: in which time the Emperors Mate. wrote to our Prestaue, that the Ambas. and the Kings gentlemen should haue ambling horses from the Monasteries, and that we should take as easie Iourneyes as we pleased: with commaund, to giue content to euery ones desire. And certainly, had not the Emperor as then bin taking a Prograce to the Monastery of Troiets, (which foure times a yeare for Religious causes he doth) we had receiued more especiall fauors. Yet he that hath but trauailed to know what Monasteries are, and how prouided of al things, may easily esteeme it, a great ease, and especiall honour to haue there horses. The 25. day we came to Perri-slaue, a long decayed towne, where in a rich merchants house, new builded, the Ambas. lodged. Here (in regarde of the Emperors and Princes being at Troytes, which was but of our easie trauell two daies iourny) we lodged 3. daies, & then departed throgh Doobna to Troites, that fair and rich Monastery, so to Bratte-sheene, and Rostouekin, 5. vers from the great city of Musco: where in a Churchmans house, the Ambass. that n
                  •
               ght lodged, and the rest in verie good houses, for so small a Dereuena.
            
            
               This night the Agent hauing bin with the chancellor came to visit his Lordshipp, and let him vnderstand, that the next morning about nine of clocke, he should be honourably brought into the Musco, whereupon euerie man prepared accordingly.
            The next morow, being the 4. of October, the Prestaue came and declared to his Lordsh. it was the Emperors pleasure, he should come into the Mosco that forenoone: presently after came M. I. Mericke Agent, with some twenty horses to attend his Lord ship, and informed him his vnderstanding, in his comming into the Mosco, and that he shoulde presently be sent for, which forth-vvith was performed. Then we did ride, till we came within a little mile of the many 1000. of Noblemen and Gentl. on both sides the way, attended on horseback to receiue his Lordsh. Where the Ambassador alighted from his Coatch, and mounted on his footcloth horse, and so rode on with his trumpets sounding. A quarter of a mile farther, met him a proper and gallant gentleman a foote of the Emperors stable, who with cap in hand, declared to the Ambassador, that the Emperor, the young Prince, and the maister of the horse, had so far fauored him, as to send him a Iennet, very gorgeously trapped with gold, Pearle, and pretious stone▪ and particularly, a great chaine of plated gold about his necke, to ride vpon. Whervpon the Ambassador alighted, imbraced the gentleman, returned humble thanks to them all, and presently mounted. Then he declared that they likwise had sent horsses for the kings Gentlem. which

likewise were very richly adorned, then for all his followers: which ceremony or state performed, & all being horssed, he departed, wee riding orderlye forward, till we were met by three great Noblmen, seuered from the rest of the multitude, and the Emperors Tolmache or interpreter with them. Of which state the Ambassador it may seeme, had for-knowledge, (it being in this Countrey a custome vsed) but with more or lesse Noblemen, as is the Emperors fauour and grace.
            Likewise vnderstanding of the strange Ceremony of first allighting from their horses, (as who eyther hath read sir Ierome Bowes his formality and obseruance hereof, or sir Richard Leaes painefull standing vpon the priority herein) may thinke the Emperors command is very strait therunto, and as they thinke much honour is loste to dismount first: but they being within speach, thus began that Oration they could neuer well conclude: Which was, That from their Lorde and Maister the mighty Emperour of Rushia, &c. they had a message to deliuer his lordship. The Ambassador then thinking they would be tedious and troublesome with their vsuall Ceremonies; preuented their farther speeche with this (to them a Spell) That it vvas vnfitting for subiects to hold discourse in that kinde of complement, of tvvo such mighty and renowmed Potentates on horsbacke. They hereby not only put by their ceremonious saddle-sitting, but out of their paper instructions for the state thereof ashamed (as was proude Artexius, stepping aside in the daungerous fight

with Zealmene) they allighted sodainly, as men fearing they were halfe vnhorsed, and the Ambassador presently after them, comming very courteously all three, saluting the Ambass. and the kings gentlemen, taking them by the hands. Thus like a scholler, too olde to learne by rote (the Duke named K. Volladamur Evanywich Mavvsolskoy) with his Lesson before him, declared his message, which was, that he with the other twoe Noblemen, were sente from the Great Lord, Emperor and great Duke Borys Phedorvvich, selfe-upholder, great L. Emperor, and great Duke of all Rushia, Volademer, Moskoe and Novogorode, king of Casan and Astracan, Lord of Vobskoe, great Duke of Smolenskoe, Tuer, Huder, Vghory, Perme, Viatsky, Bolgory, &c. Lord and great duke of Novogorod in the Lovv-countries, of Chernigo, Rezan, Polotskey, Rostoue, Geraslaue, Bealozera, Leifland, Oudorskey, Obdorskey, Condingskey. King of all Syberia and the North coasts. Commander of the contreys of Iversky, Grysinsky, and Emperor of Kabardivsky, of Chirkasky, and of the vvhol countrie of Garskey, and of many other countries and Kingdomes lord and Emp. to know of his Ma. health of England, the Qu. and Princes. The second, being a capt. of gunners (the Emperors guard) named Kazarine Davydovvich Beaheetchoue, pronouncing the Emp. and princes tytle, said he was sent from them to knowe his Lordsh. health and vsage, with the kings Gent. The third, was one of the Secretaries, named Pheodor Boulteene, obseruing the former order, did deliuer what he had in command from the Emp. prince

and Empresse, to informe the Ambassador of their much fauor towards him and the kings Gent, in prouiding for his honorable intertain and ease, a fayre large house to lodge in: Also, that they three were sent from the Emp. Prince, and Empresse, to be his Prestaues, to supply the Emperors goodnes toward him, to prouide his necessaries, and deliuer anye sute it pleased the Ambassadour to make to the Emperour. To all which the Ambassador very wiselie gaue answere (as they made report vnto the Emp.)
            So we all presently mounted again, the Prestaues on either hand of the Amb. his horse and footcloth being led by his Page, som small distance, his cotch behind that, and some 6000. Gallants after behind all: who at the Ambas. riding thorough the guard, that was made for him, very courteously bowed him selfe. Thus was he followed by thousands, and with in the three vvalles of the Citty, many hundreds of yong Noblemen, Gentlemen, and rich merchants well mounted, begirt the wayes of euery side: diuers on foote also, euen to the gate of the house where the Ambassador was to be lodged, which was some two myles. Whether being come, hee was brought into his bed-chamber by the Noblemen his Prestaues, where with many thanks for their honorable paines; they vvere dismist, betaking themselues to their further affayres. The next morn cam three other Prestaues with the former, to knovve of his Lordships health, and hovv he hadde rested the night past: vvithall, that if his Lordshippe wanted any thing, they all, or any one of them, were as

commaunded, so ready to obey therein. These, with the Enterpreter and six Gent. were most within the walles, lodged in a house ouer the gate, besides wee had fifty Gunners to attend, and gard vs in our going abroad.
            The 8. of Octob. being the 4. day after our comming to Musco, the Prestaues came to his Lordship to let him vnderstand, they heard he should goe vp the next day: wherefore they desired his speech and Ambassage to the Emperour: and the rather, that the Enterpreter might (as they pretended) translate it. To this purpose, very earnestly at seueral times they made demaund. The Ambassador answered, that he was sent from a mighty Prince, to be his Ambassa. to their Emperor, hauing with no small danger passed the Sea, and a second water trauaile, with a long land Iourney, and stil was comforted, with hope to see his Maiesties cleere eyes, that for a welcome was the tidings thereof vnto him? Especially, to haue audience within so short a space as he might not lesse do then ackcowledging the Emperors great fauour towards him: and being sent to their maister, he deemed it, not onely a dishonor to him, but a weaknes in them, to require that at his hands, (which besides that he would never do) he could not, being to speak that in the deliuery was according as it pleased god, to giue him time, occasion, memorie, and courage, being to come before a strange and mighty Prince, where what he said, was to be interpreted as pleased their Tolmatch.
            
            This, peremtorely, and finally was his aunswere.

Yet, whensoeuer he did go, as he was both willing and ready at all houres, 
                  •
               e desired to haue certaine horse and other things, which without them, hee could not be so well prouided of. So, after banqueting departed away rather discontented, then satisfied. Surely it is a custome (not so wise as auncient) for thē to fal out into bad language, if they canot haue their willes, which to many would be, as simple a demaund, as it were folly in the Ambassador to graunt: Especially, if men knew how vndiscreete a man they woulde thinke him to be, woulde please their humors herein. For it is but a Stratigem they vse to vndermine withal, that they may report the magnanimity or pusillanimity of the Ambas. vnto the Emperor.
            
            The 10. of October, his Prestaues brought word as from the Lord Chaunsellor▪
                that he thought, (for they wil neuer tell any thing to come for certainty) his Lordsh. should go before the Emperor the next morrow, therfore prayed him to prouide: also, that he should haue the Em. horses to ride on, & of his guard to helpe carry vp his present, of which they had (after dem
                  •
               unde) a particular.
            The 11. of October his Lordship being sent for by his Prestaues ther waiting, hauing excelent Iennets for himselfe, the Kings Gentlemen, and good horses for the rest
                  •
               . as likewise two gallant white Palfreis to carrie or draw a rich Chariot, one parcell of the great present, with his followers and the Emperors guard, carrying the rest At his gate many gallants attending for his receipt, rode to the

Court, accompanied on each hand with his Prestaues, and some others following him, with manie Gentlemen behinde them. Thus we rode a shorte vers beheld with thousand of eies: on each side the streets standing the Emperors guarde with peeces in their hands well apparrelled, to the number of two thousand by esteeme, many messengers posting betwixt the Court and our Prestaues. Thus with much state, softly riding, tell wee came vnto the vtmost gate of the court, (hauing passed thorogh the great Castle before) there his Lordsh. dismounted. Then met him a great Duke (named Knase Andriay Metowich Soomederoue) with certain Ge. to bring him vp. So in order as we rode, we assended the staires and a stone gallery. where on each side stood many Nobles, and Courtiers, in faire coates of Persian stuffe, veluet, Damaske &c. At the entry to the great chamb. two Councellors incountred the Ambassa. to conduct him thorogh that roome, rounde about which sat many graue and richly apparrelled personages. Then we entred the Presents, whether being come, and making obeysance, we staide to hear, but not vnderstand, a very gallant Nobleman, named Peter Bas-man, deliuer the Emperors title: Then the particular of the Presentes, and some other ceremonies: which performed, the Ambassa. hauing liberty, deliuered so much of his Ambassage, as the time and occasion then affoorded: After which the Emperor arising from his throne, demanded of the King of Englands health, the Princes, and Queenes: then of the Ambassadours and the Kinges
               
Gentlemen, and how they had bene vsed since they entred within his dominions: to al which with obeysance we answered as was meete. Then the young Prince demaunded the very same.
            The Ambassador hauing taken the Kings Letter of his Gentleman Vsher, went vp after his obeysance to deliuer it, which the Lord Chansellor would haue intercepted. But the Ambass. gaue it to the Emperors owne hands, and his Maiesty afterwards deliueit to the Lord Chaunsellor: who tooke it, and shewing the superscription to the Emperor and Prince, held it in his hande openly with the seale towardes them. Then the Emperor called the Ambassador to kisse his hand, which he did, as likewise the Princes, and with his face towards them returned. Then did he call for the Kings Gentlemen, to kisse his hande, and the Princes, which they after obeysance made, did accordingly. Afterwards, his Maiest. invited his Lordsh. the K. Gent. and the rest to dine with him, as likewise M. I. Mericke Agent by name, who gaue his attendance there on the Ambas. and was now (as diuers times) very gratiously vsed of the Empe. and Prince: no stranger (that I euer heard of) like him in al respects. Then we departed the presents, accompanied with diuers Noblemen, and passed on into the Councel-chamber vvhere vve vvil leaue them.
            Being entred the Presence, we might behold the excelle
                  ••
                Maiestie of a mighty Emperor, seated in a chaire of golde, richly embrodered with Persyan stuffe: in his right hande he helde a golden, Scepter, a Crowne of pure Golde vppon his heade,

a coller of rich stones and Pearles about his necke, his outward garments of Crimson-veluet, Embrodered very faire, with Pearls precious stones, and Gold: On his right side, (on equall hight to his throne) standing a very faire globe of beaten gold, on a Pyramedis, with a faire crosse vppon it, vnto which before he spake, he turned a little and croste himselfe. Nigh that, stoode a faire bason and Ewer, which the Emperor often vseth daily.
            Close by him in another throne sat the Prince, in an outward garment like his Fathers, but not so rich, a high blacke Fox cap on his head, worthe in those Countreyes fiue hundred pound, a Golden staffe like a Fryers, with the likenes of a crosse at the top. On the right hand of the Emperor, stood two gallant Noble-men in cloath of Siluer garments, high blacke Fox cappes, great and long chaines of Gold, hanging to their feet with pollaxes on their shoulders of gold. And on the left hād of the Prince two other such, but with Siluer pollaxes. Round about the Benches, sat the Counsell, and Nobility, in Golden and Persyan coates, and high blacke Fox caps, to the number of two hundred. The ground beeing couered with cloath of Arrasse, or Tapistrie. The presents standing all the while in the Roome, within little distance of his Maiestie, where hee and the Prince often viewed them. The Emperors fauor, complection, and disposition with the Princes, I shall defer (tell vnhappily before our departing I decla
                  •
               e the manner of his death.) Beeing now by our Prestaues and others come for to dinner, who led vs

through much presse and many Chambers to one very faire and rich roome, where was infinite store of massy plate of all sortes. Towards the other ende stoode the Emperors vnkle, named Stephean Vaselewich Godonoue, Lord high Steward, being attended with many Noblemen and Gentlemen. Vnto whom my Lord in his passage saluted, which with an extra ordinary countenance of aged Ioy, hee receiued, making one of their honorable Noddes. Thambassador entred the dining roome, where wee againe viewed the Emperor and Prince, Seated vnder two chaires of State, ready to dine, each hauing a scul of pearle on their bare heades, but the Princes was but a Corronet. Also their vestments were chaunged.
            The former Duke, that for that day was Thambassadors Prestaue, came, as commaunded from the Emperor, and placed the Ambassador at a Table, on the Bench side some twenty foote from the Emperor. Then the Kings Gentlemen, Maister Mericke, Maister Edward Cherry, and al the rest were placed, so that our eies were halfe opposite to the Emperor. Ouer against the Ambassador sat his Prestaues vpermost, also in this large place sat the Pri
                  •
               y Counsel, to the number of 200. Nobles at seuerall tables. In the midst of this hall might seeme to stand a great Piller, round about which, a great heigth stood wonderfull great peeces of plate, very curiously wroght with all manner of Beastes, Fishes and fowles, besides some other ordinarye peeces of seruiceable plate.
            
               Being thus set (some quarter of an houre as it were, feeding our eyes with that fayre Piller of plate) we beheld the Emperors table serued by two hund. Noblemen, all in coates of cloth of gold. The Princes table serued with one hun. yong Dukes and princes of Cassan, Astrican, Syberia, Tartaria, Chercasses, & Russes, none aboue twenty yeares olde.
            Then the Emperor sent from his table by his noble seruitors, to my lord and the kings Gent. 30. dishes of meate, and to each a loafe of extraordinary fine bread. Then followed a great number of straunge and rare dishes, some in Siluer, but most of massie gold: with boiled, baked and rosted, being piled vp on one another by halfe dozens. To make you a perticular relation, I should do the entertainment wrong, consisting almost of innumerable dishes: Also, I should ouercharge my memory, as then I did mine eyes and stomache, little delighting the Reader, because Garlicke and Onions, must besauce many of my words, as then it did the most parte of their dishes.
            For our drinkes, they consisted of many excellent kindes of Meandes, besides all sortes of Wine, and Beere. I assure you I had rather drinke to you a daily health in them, then make you long after their pleasantnesse, considering the colde and sower voyage you must vndertake, before you tast of their vigor and sweetnesse.
            Diuers times by name, the Emperour sente vs dishes, but in the midst of dinner he called the Ambass. vp to him, and dranke our kings health, where

the Emperor held som discourse of our king & state. But at one time (striking his hand aduisedly on his breast) Oh, saide he, my deere Sister Queen Elizab. whom I loued as mine own hart, expressing this his great affection almost in a weeping passion. The Ambassador receiuing the cup from his Princelye hand, returned againe to his owne place, where all of vs standing, drank the same helth out of the same cup, being of fayre Christall, as the Emperor had commanded, the wine (as farre as my iudgement gaue leaue) being Alligant.
            Thus passing some foure houres in banquetting, and refreshing our selues too plentifully, all being taken away, we did arise. The Ambassador and the kings gentlemen beeing called by name to receyue from his Emperiall handes, a cup (or rather as they call it a Yendover) of excellent redde Meande, a fauour among them neuer obserued before, which cups for they wer great and the Meand very strong, we often sipped at, but without hu
                  •
               ting our memories, we could not say Amen vnto: which the Emper. perceiuing, comanded them to be taken away, saying: He was best pleased with what was most for our healthes.
            Thus after our lowe courtesies performed, wee departed from his presence, riding home with the same former guarde and attendance to our lodgings, where our Prestaues as for that instant lefte vs, but shortly after they cam again, to accompany

a great and gallant Duke, one of them that held the Emper. golden Polaxes, named Knes Romana Phedorovvich Troya Narove (whoe was sent from his maiestie, to make the Ambassador, and the kinges Gentlemen merry: likewise hauing instructions to drinke their Emperors, our King, and both the Princes healths, and diuers Princes else, which hee did himselfe verye freelye and some of vs, as many of them as we could with our owne healths, there being such plenty of Meandes and other drinkes, as might wel haue made forty Russes haue stumbled to sleepe. Thus light-headed, and well laded, especialy if you take knoledge of y• 30. yards of cloth of gold, and the two standing cups with couers, which the Ambassador rewarded him withall, before he departed. And surely a wise Duke shall he euer bee, that couers his backe with his belly, and by taking a cup or two extraordinary can swallow down a hundreth Markes in siluer and gold, to recouer his P
                     •
                  pemeli
                     •
                  , as they call it: I say his wits withall, but he had it giuen him with a verye good will, and with a better mind, then he had that did so lightly carry it away.
            Now there was after our first being at the Court, much inquiry made whether the Ambassador would go home by the Narue and so ouer land, but vpon what reasons I know not, only I vnderstood his Lo. should haue had a second audience forthwith, after he had deliuered by writing to the Em. those things he did not speake before, being sent vnto for them the next day, perhaps the heads wherof he did send to the Emper. that his councell might aduise vpon

them. But vnwelcome newes within four daies after our audience so vnhappilye came, as not onlye our affayres but any else, except counsell against present danger, was not regarded. For this was held for currant, that one who named himselfe Demetre Evanowich Beola, as the son of their late Emperor, Evan Vasillovvich, he that in the raigne of Pheodor Evannovvich his brother (at what time Boris Pheodorvvich now Emperour, then Protector) was in his infancy (as was thought) murthered at Ougleets, is now reuiued againe, and vp in Armes for his right and inheritance: so did he distract the Emp. & kingdome, such a world of tales troubled the commons that the Ambass. must necessarily bee in some feare, because the Emp. and State were in all, and thought he would bee perswaded it was but deceipt, yet the butchering of him, or at least the intent, much ter
               
                  •
               ified his soule and conscience: wherupon presently was sent an army of 200000. souldiers, eyther to take or sley him. But hee was so strengthened vvith Poles, Cassackes, &c that a number of Russes yealded to his obedience. Insomuch as he hath byn the author of more bloudshed, then hath beene there of many yeares (although these Emperors haue continuall warres with diuers Nations.) Notwithstanding the Emperors fauour was much, and greater euery daie then other to the Ambassador and the kin, Gentlemen. For we had liberty to ride at our pleasure, and to this ende had the Emperors sleades or horses vpon demaund, with one of our Prestaues, & other gent. to accompany and guard vs.
            
               So as vpon the 21. of Nouember, 
                  〈◊〉
                Prince of an auncient custome goi
                  •
               g to a C
                  •
               urch within Musco, the Kings Gent. vppon knowledge thereof, (Th
                     •
                  mbas. being vnwilling to be seene publike, as also for that the Emp. hims
                  •
               lfe did not go as he was accustomed) went and attended where his excellency might see them, and they safely beholde him, who rode in a very faire and rich slead, hauing a gallant Palfrey led by two groomes to drawe it, many hundreds running before to sweep the snow away where he should passe, and were said to be slaues, which I verily beleeue, because certainly they were his subiects. Then came the Prince richly apparrelled with two tartar Princes standing before one his slead and two young Dukes behind, with 200. sleds following him, who when he came against the place, the Kings Gentlemen gaue their attendance, made a stande, gratiously questioning them of the Ambas. healthe and their own, which with lowe courtesie they made answere vnto: so his Maiesty departed, and they expected his return, which wold be within one houre, then came before the Lord Chaunsellor, and wished them to stay, very honorably and kindly bespeaking them, and Maister Iohn Merick (who attended there with them) so the Prince returning made a seconde stay: then giuing knowledge he woulde send them home a present, willing his commendations to bee remembred to the Ambas. and so passed in. Within 4. houres after came a Gent. one of the Emp. chiefe Butlers, named Bactayer from the Prince, vnto the Kings Gent. with a great present.
            
               After their entertainment to the Gentlemen, and drinking of our Princes healths, they brought him into the Ambassadors bed-chamber, who gaue great thankes to the Prince, on the Kings Gentlemens behalfe, they giuing him at the Ambassadors appointment, a peece of siluer and gilte plate worth twenty markes, and very thankfully returning their seruice to the Prince for his royal present, and to himselfe much thanks for his paines.
            The Ambassador kept here a great Christmas hauing a good company, not without some sports befitting his state, and the present time.
            Vpon New-yeeres day, he was very honourably presented with New yeers-gifts, from master Doct. Christopher Writtinger, the Emperors chiefe Physitians some of the Kinges Gentlemen, Maister Iohn Mericke and his wife, and many other English Marchaunts: wherein they expressed their good wil, and loue, as to him, not onely had or would deserue it, but accounted it a vertue, not to be vnthankfull or vnmindfull of any kindnes bestowed on him.
            The 8. of February the Emperor sent vs sleds to ride abroade, and this day the rather, that we might behold a reported victorie, against the reputed Rebell Demeatry &c, So we the Kings Gentlemen did behold three hundred poore prisoners, seuenteene Ensignes, and eleuen drummes, brought in, vvith more glory, then victorie.
            About this time returned Peter Basman, one of the generals, who had performed very honourable seruice, and certainely, he was the man of greatest

hope and expectation in the whole Empire, who was brought into the Musco, with all the Counsell, Nobles, Gentlemen, and Marchants, a grace neuer performed before to any Subiect. But not without suspicion of some extraordinary secret herein, and besides particular fauors, bountifull rewards, and a promise he should neuer go againe vntill the Emperor himselfe went, he was being but a young man, made a Priuy Counsellor, foorthwith one thinge I will you shall obserue the Emperors fauor, and his then Noble spirit, he making diuers times sute (as was thought) because they were in great daunger to go againe to the vvars once prostrated himselfe, to obtaine his desire, but falling downe too humblie, he could not easily rise againe, whereby the Emperor vnd
                  •
               rstanding of his many and great vvoundes, was said to weepe, rysing himselfe vppe to raise and help him vp, but extraordinary causes, haue the like effects, as hereafter you shall vnderstand.
            Among other times of our taking the ayre, wee be
                  •
               ing lodged in that large house builded for the Entertainment of 2000. Poles, with as many horse, attending the great Chaunsellor of Letto: The firste Ambassador of (but of a strange) peace, concluded about the time, Sir Richard Lea, was Ambassadour there, for her late Maiest. of England: the same house the yong Prince Iohn of Denmarke, Brother to that King, and our now Queene of England did lodge in, who would haue married the young Princes Oucksinia, the Emperors onely Daughter, but that hee vnhappily there died of a surfet, as I was creadible Informed

of one of the Em. Doctors.
            The Ambassad. as Plaid lying in the same house, but not in any those lodgings: for it is a custome there, that where a Prince dies (especially a straunger) not of long time after to let anye other lodge there: yet we savv, and after walked in those lodg. though they were for the most part barred vp and kept close: which often seeing of the chamb. where he departed, being brother to our Noble and vertuous Quee. wroght a desire in vs to see his toomb. The kings gentlemen and some others, hauing the Emp. horses and sleads, rode to their Sloboda, as we call it Suberbes, wher in the Chancell of the dutch Church he vvas interred, with a great and Princelie obsequy: the Emp himselfe and Prince, attending the corps to the first g
                  •
               te, but all his Councellors, Nobles, gentlemen, &c, following to the Church where they stayed tyll the Sermon was ended. Hee had a large toombe couered with blacke veluet, many banners and Scutcheons hanging about the body of the Church and chancel, with his Armes and Creast, and considring the countrey, very princely.
            Now the Ambassador vnderstanding of the conuenience of his passage down by slead way, also fearing (as wise men had cause) what the yssue of these warres would be, knowing the state here vsed in any sutes, bethought himselfe aduisedly that it vvas hie time being the midst of February, to desire a second audience for his sooner dispatch, which he foorthwith requested, and wrote a letter to that purpose, vnto the L. Chancellor, whom he knew must necessarily

shew it vnto the Emp. but within twoe daies, the Chancellor was himselfe to go vnto the camp, vpon businesse of great importance, so as it would consequently be vpon his returne, before he could haue audience: for that none would nor could
                  •
               , so well and willingly supply that office, of dispatch for Ambassadors, as Ofod Nasse. His return accordingly, the Ambassad. by his Prestaues, put him in mind of his dispatch, which he said directly should forthwith be performed: so as within ten daies a
                  •••
               r, the Amb. had his second audience very gratiously and honourably as thus: Hauing notice giuen of the day, he was accordingly sent for with the Emp. own slead for his own person, and horses for the kinges Gent. and the rest, as was desired by them.
            Vpon the 10. of March, the Ambas. with the kin. gentlemen all richly apparailed, and all his followers decently attending, very honourably (as before) and with the like recourse of beholders, and guard of Gunners, (but that they were said to be Citizens by reason of their wars, put in like apparell) was attended to the Court, being receiued with the former grace, or more, he ascended the Presence: the Emp. and Prince holding their wonted state, onely changing their vestments with the season, but for the riches nothing inferior.
            So soone as the Ambass. and the kings gent. were come opposite to his throne, he commanded seats that they might sit downe: then with a Maiest
                  •
               cke countenance, representing rather constraint, then

former cheerfulnes, he declared, that he, his sonne, and Councel, had considered his Maiesties letter, the Maiestie of king Iames of Eng. as also on whatsoever else was desired, and in token of his ioyful receiued amity with the renowmed king of England, as with his predecessor, he had wrote his Princelie letters to that purpose. Herwith the Chancel from the Emp. deliuered the Amb. his Highnesse letters to his excellent Ma. Withall vnderstanding by the Chan. he had some farther matter to intreat of, then in his breefe to his maiest. was remembred: therfor he had appointed foure principall Councellors to consult with him of his requests, which was doone. After, the Ambas. ye
                  •
               lding curteous thanks for his Maiest fauour, his Lordsh. attended by many Nobles, proceeded to the Councell chamber, whether presently after came fou
                  •
                Councelors, and the Em. Tolmach: who after salutations, we withdrew to the next chamber, wher we passed away an hour in discourse, among many young Nobles, hauing the Ambass. enterpreter. In the end, after three or four goings and returns of the Chancelor from the Em. we went again before him (where after he had commanded vs to sit downe as before) by the mouth of the Chauncel
                  •
               our was openlye deliuered a briefe of the whole Embassie (and that d
                  •
               yes perticuler desire according to the Ambassadors request confirmed) Also in good and pleasing language, vvas declared the great desire that the Emperor hadde, for the continu
                  •
               nce of p
                  •
               ace and amiti
                  •
                with the renowmed Iam
                     •
                  s king of Eng. as with the la
                  •
               e Q. Eliz.
               
with all that in due time (all accidents well ended,) he would send an honorable Ambas. for further affaires, as likewise to congratulate with our King of his happines in so applausable comming to his right and inheritance: Farther, that of al demands, their graunts, or reasons why not graunted he would send the Ambas. a role. Also of the grant of 600. robles, which for the loue of the King of England, and at the Ambas. earnest request, he commaunded should be paid backe againe. Likewise, a graunt of a new Priuiledge for the company, which he saide should be vnder the golden seale &c.
            Which ceremonius speech ended, the Emp. called for the Ambas. and the Kinges Gent. to kisse his hand, and the Princes: which done, with the Empe. Nod or bowing to vs, as likewise the Princes, desiring the remembrance of his and the Princes commendations to his Maiesty, the Prince, and Queene of England, we were dismissed, but not before the Emp. said he would send home to vs. Thus we tooke our last leaue of the Emperors Court, being more gratiously, and especially entertained then before, or then euer any would take knowledge Ambas. were vsed withall. At which I do not a litle wonder, considering the heauines of times, and the bad succ
                  •
               sse of his new entertained wars, and no doubt the secret trouble, and griefe of his conscience: but hee that was from his Infancy, (then being a subiect) esteemed and accounted subtile and ingea
                  •
               ious, now being an Emp. experienced with many straunge plots and stratigems, to his number of yeares and imploiments,

could he lesse be, or lesse seeme th
                  •
               n a wise polititian? But we are honorably attended home, and a Duke of great account named Knas Euan Euannowich Courletev, cals me at this time (from Princes proceedings) to attend him, that was attended with many of the Emp. seruants within our gates: following him a dinner, sent from the Emp. by some 200. persons, consisting of 300. severall dishes of Fish, (for it was now Lent) of such strangenes, greatnes, and goodnesse, (for their number) as it were not to be beleeued by any report, but by a mans owne eyesight, with infinite store of Meandes, and beere, in Massy plate.
            The Duke sat at the tables end by the Ambas. hauing euery dish deliuered him by the name, which was enterpreted to the Ambas vvhere hauing long sat, and well feasted, vve rose, and obseruing theyr Countreys fashion, after the roome was deasentlie beseene, the Ambas. dranke the Emperors health in a small gilte cup couered: then our Kings and the two Princes, all vvhich the Duke pledged willinglye, although his cups held foure times the Ambassa: besides, the drink vvas as different, the one being beer or Meand, the others alligant, Sacke and Muskadell. After them, the Prestaues, the Kinges Gent. and others of the Emp. servantes being there did the like. Thus som four or fiue hours was soone stolne away, night before diner hauing sent his borrowd torches to light vs, when the Duke having receiued a woorthy present of the Ambas. was lightly (whether you consider the torches, his drinking, or the Ambassa.
               
bounty) sent away, and so this feastiuall daies-night was concluded.
            The 17. of march, the Ambas. being before often inuited by this Agent, now after so honorable a dispatch, was willing to see the English house: hauing the Emp. sleds and horses, one of the Prestaues, the Tolmatch, and some Simboyarskes or Gentl. we rode thither: where his Lordship had a bountifull feast, a harty welcome, and as good company. After diner, the Ambas. his Prestaus, & the Tolmatch, went forth of the dining roome to see Mistris Merick, (for their fashion wil not admit any women at tabl
                  •
               ) who had prouided an excel
                  •
               ent banquet of English stuffe, and was much reioyced to see the Amba. (whom she knew before) at her house in so far a Country. There the honest and kind Agent (by the faire hands of his vertuous wife) after the banquet, presented his Lord ship with a faire standing gilt cup and couer, worth thirty pound, likewise his Prestaue and Enterpreter, very bountifully, so returning to the comp. for that time we left. One obseruation I there made, of the great desire and often offer of the Prestaue when hee saw Mistris Mericke, to be gone: saying, it befitted him not to behold such creatures. But the Enterpreter (being a Dutch-man) borne to our English fashions, and acquainted with the Agent, perswaded him to Patience, both to his profit, pleasure, and belly delight. Thence (after a like bountiful supp
                  •
               r) about 10. in the night we departed. One honorable kindnesse of the Chaunsellor I must not forget, who imagining the Kinges Gentlemen woulde that daye

               
                  •
               ide abroad, sent to vs to make offer of his Horse and sleds at our command, but we not minding to leaue the Ambassador for our pleasures, returned humble thankes to his Lordsh▪ for his honorable kindnesse, not resoluing as that day to take more then sufficient.
            The 18. of march, the Empe. sent by Vassilly Gregorewich Telepnoue, the role wherin was the demands of the Ambas. and the particulers of the whole negotiation, as there at large appeares.
            The 19. his Maiesty sent by Mensboy Buldec
                     •
                  ue, vnder Treasoror, a royal present to the Ambas. of many perticulars, also to each of the Kings Gent. being rewarded, he departed.
            The 20. of march, being honorably accompanied with thousands of gallants of each side the streets al along as we passed, the Ambas. departed from the Citty of Musco.
            
            Surely a great and (according to their woodden building a faire Citty) with the whole numbers of horsemen still becking vs, till we came a short Myle on this side the Citty where we made a stande, and after some complement betweene the Ambassa. and his kind and honorable Prestaue, the Duke Vollag demor, with almost weeping on his part, the Ambassa. went from the Emp. fled, to his coatch set vppon a sled, and we alighted from the Emp. horses, and beto
                  •
               ke our selues to our easie and pleasant passage in sleds, such a passage as this part of the world would wonder at, in which a man though he go a Hackney pace, maye as easilye reade, as sleepe: Hauing

according to the Amb. request, one of our sonnet Prestaues, named Constantine Petrowich Arteshove, then whom the Emperor could not affoord a more humble or dilligent Gent. with him a Dyack, named Patricke Nasonove, and three of our former Sunboy arskeis, vvith their seruants.
            Thus accompanied with Maister Iohn Mericke, M. William Russell, somtimes Agent for the Dutch, and many other merchants, vve easily rode that nighte to Bratteshin, 30. myles from the Musco. The next morow taking leaue of them all, vve continued our iourny 50. and 60. vers a day easily. Our Prestaue had in command to let our Ambas. see any Monasterye or place hee desired, in his trauayle: also to lodge in vvhat houses it pleased him, in any Cittye or Tovvne: and where the English Merchants had houses, that the Ambas. might haue them, which indeed hee desired, aswell in respect they vvere the fayrest and most at his command: as also to vnderstand their courses, dealings, and behauiour of the seruants that kept them, and other speciall thinges, which but by personally there being, he should neuer truly haue vnderstood. And for the generall good of the company, I know he did that Seruice, that while it stands and he liues, they neede not fall into any vnaduised courses, if by him they will but be councelled, being furnished euery way with a ful vnderstanding and iudgment to that honorable intent. Especially, meeting here vvith so honest & discreet an Agent, so well beloued of the Emp. Prince and Nobility, so approued of by the merchants, in

as good esteeme of al other, so thoroughly experienced in affaires, as well concerning their trade, as their customes, and demeanure, hauing a mind and ability, I am perswaded for the good and benefit of the whole company, as neuer had nor will succeede a fitter man.
            The 23. of march we came to Yery-slaue being satterday, and there rested our Saboth, where the company hath a very faire and tight house, which we lay in, and surely an honest discreet seruant then kept it. From hence we tooke our Iourney the 25. because we feated the breaking vp of the way, we made great but very pleasant iourneys, so as the 29. we came to Vollagde, wher the Ambas. lay at the English house, within the walles whereof it hath a great many of roomes, as chambers, worke-houses and the lyke, but the house it selfe is very old, and stands with an humble body as though it vvoulde shortly kisse the earth, at our being here the company had many ser. and the Amb. tooke a course they should thriue by his there lodging, allowing them for their beere for himselfe and the Kings Gent. their whole diet: being desirous to 
                  •
               o the company good and their seruants no hurt. After Easter weeke was passed, the Prestaue came to desire that the Ambas. would appoint some to go and make choise of boates which then lay vpon the Riuer, that they might be fitted for his Lordship. which accordinglie verie carefullie was performed, the Gouernor of the towne hauing a Letter from the Emperor to giue the Ambassa. ful content, as indeed without detraction we had, to the wonderment

of the common people. Within few daies after we heard Newes certainly of the Emp. suddaine and vntimely death: which considering, neyther the Prestaue, the gouernor, or Bishop, had not or would not of ten da
                  •
               es after take knowledge, we might in the meane time haue doubted of, but that his Lordship had it from Maister Iohn Mericke by letter particularly. which news as indeed ther was great cause was very il welcome to the Ambas. much troubling him for diuers respects, wherfore vpon mature deliberation, as whose thoughts then only were intended that way, he resolued forthwith to send vp to the Musco, to this end: therfore early bestirring the next morne he sent for his Prestaues, who came willingly and chearfully to heare that with great heauines and sorrow, which yet they were so wise as not to beleeue though the day and houre of his death, with the maner of his enterring, were to them by the Am. own mouth deliuered: but he beleeued it, and therefore gaue them to vnderstand he would send vp post, and write to the Prince, their expected Emp. and others concerning affaires of importance. To that end he demanded poste horses and convoy accordinglye: which demand, though yet for the suddainnes and heauines did somewhat distract their heads, haue sildome easie resolutions but to sleeping: yet after desiring an houres liberty, and therin consulting with the Bish. and Gent. of the towne, it was effected. So then his Lordsh. requested M. Edw. Cherry (thogh he was best to be commanded) as being vsed to ride poast, hauing the language, knowing the factions

of the Countrey, and an easie command in euerie town because of his bountifulnes, himself no doubt well pondring the waighte of his message, with the care and speed therein to be vsed, indeed as the onely he, whether you consider the intrest the Amb. had in him, or his seruiceable minde, often manifesting his duty to his Lordship: euen from his first going from the Arch-angell to this present. Thus hauing al thinges meete and fit for their speedie iourney, and weightie busines he with one of the Emperors Gentlemen vnderwent this dangerous and hard trauaile.
            Here it might be befitting this my relation, to declare somwhat at large the Emp. death, the cause or disease, his nature, stature, complexion, and stratigems. The Princes succeeding, the Nobles mourning, and the commons censuring, each of which I could with litle labor perform, but I know that man is made to vndergo much enuie, doth vndertake to vvrite of Princes persons or pollicies: which vvhosoeuer hereof vvrites truely must necessarily incur, it being as a fit subiect for another Plato to write of: so for a free born spirit to vvade in, my selfe protesting rather a vvill to be reputed timorus, then a desire to haue the least detraction, only because I vvil not be thought dumbe in such a speaking age, (the time so falling out at my being there) nor to want intelligence sufficient to tell the truth, I shal say something, as accounting him a foole, vppon a iuste occasion sp
                  •
               ake
                  •
                nothing. His death was very suddaine, and as it was in it selfe, verye straunge: for within some two houres after dinner hauinge (as hee vsuallie

had) his Doctors with him, who lefte him in theyr Iudgements in health, as the good meale hee made could witnes, for he dined well, and fed plentifully, though presently after as may be thought, feeding ouer much, he felt himselfe not onely heauy, but also pained in his stomacke: presently went into his chamber, laid himselfe vppon his bed, sent for his Doctors (which alwaies speeded) yet before they came, he was past, being speechles and soone after dying. Before his death (as speedy as it was) hee would be shorne, and new christned, what the cause was otherwise then the griefe, inward sorrow, with diuers distractions about the wars, and their badde successe, fearing the worste on his part, onely God knowes: yet who, so remembers Gods iudgements, or Princes pollicies for kingdomes, with mans inherent sinfulnes: and considereth the one vvith the other, may be satisfied, if not contented. It is reported, and I am to the truth thereof rightly perswaded, that being, in this present not being, some of his Counsellors and Nobility demaunded, if he woulde not swear them a new to the Prince, and whether he shold not be their Em. his answer (with much trembling) was, as it pleased God, and the Commons thereby, presuming of the sufficiency, of their former oaths, but dispairing of the commons, if not with
                  •
               l fearing gods iudgments. For the Princes succeeding I must defer that to hereafter, but for the mourning, who doth consider the fodaine losse in that time
                  •
                
               
                  •
               f rebellion, of their best, chief, and wisest heads, whose first election was frō their own applause, the youth,

with the inocency of the Prince, herewithal remembring many strang plots long time vsed by the hous of the Godonoves, and flattring themselues in theyr good successe, and novv the general opinion in the right of Demetre, whereby all their hopes ended, may thinke there was moorning, sorrow and feare, as in those whose consciences are compacted all of feare. For this many headed-beastes of the multitude, none caring how nor vvhat hee spake, beeing naturally euer suspicious of the best, howe coulde they digest this, which of all other was the vvorst? The rumor of the Emperors poisoning, with his reuiuing, Demetres Crowning, the Princes imprisoning, the Nobles fighting, most of the councellors reuolting, and the Merchants flying: vvith the variety, the likelihood, the necessitye, the desire, the hope, the feare, being all as nothing to them, liuing vnder that gouernment, which least needeth to care who gouern them so they be ouer-ruled in anye other more ciuil Nation. A subiect might haue loste his toong to haue spoken al: his eares to haue herd al, & his life to haue beleeued and defended al.
            For the Em. person, he was tall and well bodyed, teaching out of his authority obedience, of an excellent presence, black and thinne haired, well faced, round and close shaued, strong limbed, A Prince framed betweene thought and resolution (more fit for a kingdom then a king) as being euer in labour, but ne
                  •
               er till death deliue
                  •
               ed: neuer acting (though euer plotting) but in his closet or councel chamb. One rather obeyed than loued, being feared where

he was not serued, protected by the mighty, rather than any particular, perhaps vnder pretence of continuall wars, to oppresse his poore subiects, couching tyranny vnder pollicy, as one whom long experience (in opposite actions, had made as fit to rule thereby, as by cquity and conscience) But gaining that Crowne with much cunning, that hee had no right vnto, held it great wisdome accordinglye to maintaine the same: esteeming it lesse blame, so to win a kingdome, then any other meanes to lose it: doubtlesse vpholding a true Maiestie and gouernment in euery part, but in his owne mind: that it is a question, whether he were more kind to strangers, or seuere and iust to his Subiects, or most hatefull and terrible to his enemies. In his entertainments, making royaltie and state, giue place to fashion and custome.
            A father and a Prince, whose wordes, councels, obseruacions, pollicies, resolutions, and experiments, were but the life of his deere son, neuer aduising, entertaining, no not praying without him: In all Ambassies & negotiations, remembring his sons name with his own, louing him (being louely) for that himselfe would be loued, vnwilling to spare his presence, desirous to haue him at all occasions before his eies. I shal not doe amisse, to giue a taste of the fruit sprung from so stately a tree. Being by a learned and wel trauailed gent. diuers times partic
                  •
               
               larly aduised, to let the Prince take some mo
                  •
               e (then no recreation) by which meanes hee might aswell prolong his life, as instruct his iudgment and delight

his mind. Oh, would the Empe. answer, one son is no son: nay I am perswaded, three sons to me is but halfe a son. But had I sixe sons, then I might safely say I had one, howe then shoulde I part with that at any time, I know not to be mine for any tim. This may giue satisfaction to anye vnderstanding both of his feares and gelousies: his great loue, and much care. Another saying of the Emperour was this, and then let any iudg what I haue writ, & why. It was a vsuall speech with the Emp. vpon good reason: to say he was the Lord and father of his sonne, yet withall, That he was not only his seruant, but his very slaue. And thus he proued it That hee might command him, and that he begat him. For the second, that all his actions were onely for his seruice though not commaunded by him, yet in his owne nature and affection vrged therunto. For his chiefe good he was his addopted Prince, and that he knew it was his duty, he remembred euer more he was his father as his Soueraigne able, and as his father obliged. For the third that he was his Slaue, he woulde alleage for him in many kindes, he knewe that hee had done that, could not but from a Tyrant, bee required of his vassals, and the greater was his subiection heerein, that he was forced to commit that no Potentate could exact (I say neither by law nor Conscienc
                     •
                  
               ) from his Slaues, neither any could therevnto be commaunded.
            This being spoken from him, who best knew his owne secretes, may be euerie way held enough for

any to vnderstand sufficiently by: yet that hee is to be registred among none of the worst Princes, that could with such ease attain so great an Empire, hauing no iust Tytle therunto: but on the contrary, to be recorded among the famous (I leaue to saye wherfore.) vpon what groūd of reason was his greatnesse in the late Emp. daies, especially in the sonnes gouernment, being Protector. The pollicie of that time when he aymed at the kingdome, his election by generall consent, after the death of Pheodor Euaniwich, and the resignation of the Empresse his sist. Irenia Pheodurna. His many refusals to be Emperor, with the generall and perticular desire that he must take it: the necessity that one must speedily be chosen: his conditions in taking it, with entytling his son after him: the form of their Oaths to them both so soon as he was established: his wife-seeming and applausible Raigne, till the late demaunde made by Demetre, when he had gouerned 8. yeares, & thervpon his sudden death and other occurrents, whoe wisely scans, must acknovvledge him (but only in his finall and fatall iudgment) a prudent & pollitik Prince, as any times make mention of, & that if his latter end ansvvered not the expectation of so happy a begining, with a like prosperous continuance, It is in the like case to be demanded, why Acbitophel murdred himselfe, because (in but one th
                     •••
                  
               ) his councell was not followed: the true eccho returnes, (because his councell was not followed) and why Iudas would hang himselfe when he had betraied his master: the reason vvas (He had betrayed his Mayster.)
            
               Of this Emperour it is reported by Sir Ierom Horsey, in his writinges in M.Hacklayts workes, that the aforesayd Emperour when he was a Subiect, had 12000. li. yeerely, besides his places of Honour; as beeing Protector, Gouernour of the Kingdomes of Cozan and Astracan, &c. Vnto which, Doctor Fletchers report agrees; whereof 3500. Marks was giuen him by Pheodor Euanch at one time in one Sheire: And howsoeuer towards his ende, he grew very myserable and couetous; which was not the least cause of his ouerthrow: insomuch as it was obserud, himselfe would often take notice of the passage to his Seller and Buttery. Not much vnlike (in that kind) one writes of the French King:
            
               
                  Il▪ feit d'argent auec ses dens,
               
               That he made Mony with his teeth.
            
            Yet when he aspired to the Empire, note his greatnesse, with his bountie; first to Sir Ierom Bowes when he was there Ambassadour: then to Sir Ierom Horsey, when he was there Messenger, (recorded by themselues) yea euen to her late Maiestie of blessed memorie: the particulers are set downe in the fore-mentioned Booke of Voyages: notwithstanding what the lord of Pibrac obserues in his Quadrones, is fulfilled in this Emperour▪ viz. Petite Source ont les grosses Riuieres: &c.
            
            
               Euen as from smallest Springs the greatest Riuers rise:
            
            
               So those that rore aloud, and proud at first,
            
            
               Runne seldome farre; for soone their glorie dies
            
            
               In some neere Bogg, by their selfe-furie burst.
            
            
               Two pollecies of the sayd Emperour, I shall willingly acquaint you with, for diuers reasons. One was, when hee caused fire to be kindled in foure partes of Moskoe; whereat himselfe was noted to be very diligent, with all his Nobles and Courtiers: and after it was quenched, he sent his Bountie to them all, that builded anew their Houses, and repayde all their losses: And this was but to stopp the Rumour then was so common, of his strange gayning the Empire: by which Stratagem of his, when his people were readie to Mutanie, they were created anew, good Subiectes; yet did admire his not onely Care, but goodnes towards them all.
            A second, was at that time the Land was visited with a mighty Famine, and as great a Plague (some foure yeares since) whereof a third of the whole Nation is rate
                  •
                to haue dyed: and the murmuring multitu
                  •
               e sayd the cause was, their el
                     •
                  cting of a Murder
                     •
                  r to the Empire; wherefore God did thus visite them: Wher
                  •
               vpon, he caused G
                  •
               lleries to be bui
                  •
               ded round about the vtmost wall of the great cittie of Moskoe, and there appoynted d
                  •
               yly to be giuen to the poore, twentie thousande pounds sterling: which was accordingly performed for one Month; Wherevpon the Common peoples mouthes and bellies were well stopped. Yet notwithstanding he dyed, and that v
                  •
               timely; as a Noble man of Fraunce well sayth: Men seldome see Tyrants or vsurpers, liue long or temperatly; or die well and naturally.
            
            
               Now if I can be thought blame worthy, which I conf
                  •
               ss
                  •
               , no not of them m
                  •
               st partiall; yet the mo
                  •
               t that Natio
                  •
                can (if they would) say any thing to mee, reueren
                  •
               i
                  •
               g an
                  •
                approouing their owne prouerbes, is this: (As the Dogge doth barke, the Winde carries it away): In answere whereof, I say; it is the true nature and qualitie of a Dogge to barke, yet he seldome hurtes that so barkes: for our auncient Prouerbe is, The barking Dogge bites least, as the curstest Cow hath the Shortest Hornes.
            
            Heere we lodged till the 6. of May, beeing wearied with the inconstancie and ill-come newes of flying reportes, wherevpon the time of the yeere req
                  •
               iring, the Ambassadour re
                  •
               olued to passe downe the Riuer to Colmigro, as well that he might the sooner haue newes from England, as happely to be out of feare of any disaster, the rumours being so innumerable and vncertaine, as they were doudtfull, and fearefull; and indeed the extraordinary care for the Ambassadours prouision, especially the large and well builded Boats, neuer the like i
                  •
                memorie before, wrought in the peoples opinions many contrarieties, as obsurde as vntrue: One, that the young Prince necessarily, and personally, must bee, and was in English apparrell, within the Ambassadours lodging: Else, that it was vnpo
                  •
               sible, that Great men should so willingly obey, and so earnestly commaund, for the ful content 
                  •
               f all, in all thinges: Likewise else, where it was reported, that the Prince would come downe, and go ouer into England with the Ambassadour:

Also, farre of from vs, it was sayd, that the Prince and the Ambassadour, were in Cheines to be sent vp to the Moskoe: But it repenteth me of relating thus much; onely you may obserue hereby, their willingnes to rebell: also the wilfulnesse of the Commons, to be as great as their ignoraunce; if not as sencelesse as their Intelligence: But we are on the faire and pleasant Riuer, within fiue faire and conuenient Boates, with two great Loddyackes for prouisions, rowing with winde and streame, from the ouerflowing Tyde of these reports; and within twelue dayes are safely arriued at Colmigro, where we lodged at the Comp house; surely the largest, tytest, and fairest in all the Countrie; and of Ware-houses, Ambarres, & Workhouses as well accommodated.
            For our being at Colmigro, it was not much vnlike (for the strangenes of reports, troublesomnes of the State, and mutable euents of time) to that one, and the only vnhappie day of the vnfortunate (too sudden rysing) Earle of Essex; wherein most mens mindes: for as many dayes as wee weekes, weare bewondred as much, with the not well directed beginning, as the vnhallowed sucsesse, or the bemoaned, (Oh be it euer lamentable, such conclusions: but as farre different is the rarenes, as the goodnes betweene them) ill-aduised well-intended, euer-good-resolutions in the one: ill-intended worse-enacted, neuer-good-conclusions in the other: One, as the vnhappie time-falling of

a great Noble, with some others; But by the goodnes of God, and the gratiousnes of our renowned King, within short and memorable time, restored in his posteritie, and theires. The other, the fatal
                  •
                and finall ouerthrow of a mightie Emperour, and his all posteritie and famelie, neuer till the Resurrection, to be raysed: and then, Oh then, it is to be feared, to a terrible Iudgement for their high-offending, Heauen-crying-sinnes.
            Now I shall tell you of a 18. yeare esteemed dead Princes reuiuing of an other Pri
                  •
               ces (that twise 18. yeares might haue lyued) poysoning, like (and indeed not vnfit for the same) Stage crowners, within one day dying and reuiuing; as it were to make Time a lyer, who is the Sonne and Heire of Trueth.
            
            Of the Almighties prouidence, by the benefite of Patience, Innocencie of past-yeares, Right of Inheritaunce, and his iust Iudgement vpon the contrarie; and to the eternall happines of this neuer yet ciuill Nation, in effecting his exceeding mercie (that Ages wonderment) this last yeere: But it will be a Laborinth to mee, as it were to rauish my selfewith, if not a Dylemma wherein I may (not hauing the Art of Logicke or Rhetoricke) needlesse, if at any time (to my tyme and discourse, though incident to the general) rather confound my selfe, then satisfie the Readers expectation, or euery particuler proprietie, it not onely beeing very tragicall and comicall in the euent:

But as all such State-pollicies are beyond ordinary intellig
                  •
               nce, or a writers honest patience; but what Trueth hath been seruant, and my Ea
                  •
               es subiect vnto, I will without either flatterie to the liuing, or enuie to the dead, c
                  •
               mpendiously diliuer.
            Aft
                  •
               r the suspitious death of the old Emperour Boris Pheodoricke, &c. by the appoyntment of the Prince (then their exp
                  •
               cted Emperou
                  •
               ) and the Cou
                  •
               sell, Peter Basma
                     •
                  
                (that noble Sparke) was speedely dispatched and sent a Generall vnto their ill 
                  •
               ucceeding Warres, as their last hope, (in deed hee prooued so in a co
                  •
               trary sence) and the onely refuge to the Commons: Wh
                  •
               ther being come, (bemeeting as you may imagine) he insenced the Counsell, A louing and belou
                  •
               d Prince, of such heroyicall spi
                  •
               it, so worthy selfe-acting and politiq
                  •
               e a Souldier, so generally good a Scholler, as being rep
                  •
               rted to be both well Letterd, well traueld; as great a Linguest as he was Statist; feared, as being aleyed; hee for speciall grace and fauour, who
                  •
               e bount
                  •
               e & curtesie, sent Defiance to Pride and Extortion; in whom Industrie & Labour were twins, Innocensie and Freedome brothers; that held Wisedome as his rest, True Valour as his Seruant, Flatterie as his Enemie, and Enuie as his Slaue; not being him
                  •
               elfe s
                  •
               bi
                  •
               ct to any greater Potentate. but Princely poue
                     •
                  tie; Hee (I say) reuiewing the Maiestie of his person, and compari
                  •
               g the age of his Youth with the gray heades of his Honour: not in all, but in eue
                  •
               y particuler her
                  •
               of, not lesse to this Nation then a Phenix; was resolued, hee

could not lesse be than (beeing a Prince of so many Vertues) the Heire of the Kingdome, his Emperour, Lord and Maister: whereupon hee speeded with the winges of Hope, Honour, and Confidence, to deliuer himselfe in such an infected and pestiferous a time, to the handes of him either whose Enemie beeing, he was without beeing; or whose Subiect and Patient receiued, hee might well fall away; but neither from his right Soueraigne, nor Loyaltie: Also he prostrate
                  •
               , or presented most of his Commaund, as many as freely would offer themselues: Vnder which, were all the English, Scots, French, Dutch and Flemings, whatsoeuer: and with him, or rather before him (as lea
                  •
               t suspected) Ries Vasili Euanch Goleeche, the other Generall a man of great birth, and in the prioritie of place, to be receiued before P. Basman.
            
            All which, the now well knowne newly opinionated Emperour very gratiously receiued, happely not without some iealowsie of many particulers; as of the Generals, the world surmizing a former correspondence to be hel
                  •
                euer since a Parle ha
                  •
               , at what time he was besiedged, and is aforesaid to performe very honorable seruice; and for the same had so applausable a receiuing by the olde Emperours appoyntment into the Moskoe.
            
            After this Generall, from the Prince and Counsell was foorthwith sent many thousand Rolles or Markes, they euer hauing the discretion of wi
                  •
               e and politique States to account it as the Nerues

and Sinewes; but now were perswaded it would prooue the Soule and Hart of the Warres: but the generall receiued, he could not accept it and his Generall, being offered it by the faythfull treasorers, would not, but gaue them this answere.
            Hee would, they that sent that (though in-directly to him) should know, Hee who had the Patience to forbeare a Tyrant vsurper, sitting vpon his Throne so long; And hitherto of himselfe (by his stranger Friends) had thus happely and farre, entered into his Right, could not now want that should incourage those noble Spirites, fought with him in so iust a quarrell: neither did he hold it Princelike, to receiue, from his Enemie in that kinde, especially by their hands could not shew their face without blushing to their commaunding Lord: Yet when hee came to receiue the Crowne and Kingdome, (which he assured himselfe and them, would be very shortly) hee doubted not this monegs would be then infinitely increased, as should be his honour, and their affection.
            So hee let them haue safe conduct to depart.
            This falling away of them, the State so greatly blinded vpon (especially Peter Basman, whom I neither dare commend, nor will condemne, because I am not studious in his arguments: and the answere from the Emperour) with the many continually doubts of the issue, hastied the last breath of the once hoped-for Prince, as from him that (though an Fmperour, was much hoodwinck
                  •
                by his politique kinsmen great counsellours) now might easilie discerne those times to outrun his,

and must notoriously know (though happely his youth and innocencie shadowed the reflection) that his Sonne was setting or beclouded at noone-dayes, and that the right heire was (and would be when he was not) apparant: that his fathers Empire and Gouernment, was but as the Poeticall Furie in a Stage-action, compleat yet with horrid and wofull Tragedies: a first, but no second to any Hamlet; and that now Reuenge, iust Reuenge was comming with his Sworde drawne against him, his royall Mother, and dearest Sister, to fill vp those Murdering Sceanes; the Embryon whereof was long since Modeld, yea digested (but vnlawfully and too-too viue-ly) by his dead selfe-murdering Father: such and so many being their feares and terrours; the Diuell aduising, Despaire counselling, Hell itselfe instructing; yea, wide-hart-opening to receiue a King now, rather than a Kingdome; as L. Bartas deuinely sayth: They who expect not Heauen, finde a Hell euery where.
            
            These wicked instruments, the whole familie of the Godonoues, their adherents and factors, making a second (but no deuine) damned Iurie; these deiected and abiected, as not knowing how to trust any, they so distrusted themselues, like men betweene murdering others, and being massacred them selues; holding this their onely happinesse, that they were then onely myserable (Noblenesse yet esteeming any preferment felicitie, but Honorable imployment): As those whose vnmercifull

greatnes gayned a pittifull commiseration, accounting Securitie neither safetie, nor reward; Indeed they were like Beastes, that haue st
                  •
               ength, but not power.
            Oh for some excellent pen-man to deplore their state: but he which would liuely, naturally, or indeed poetically delyneare or enumerate these occurrents, shall either lead you therevnto by apoeticall spirit, as could well, if well he might the dead liuing, life-giuing Sydney Prince of Poesie; or deifie you with the Lord Salustius deuinity, or in an Farth-deploring, Sententious, high rapt Tragedie with the noble Foulk-Greuill, not onely giue you the Idea, but the soule of the acting Idea; as well could, if so we would, the elaborate English Horace that giues number, waight, and measure to euery word, to teach the reader by his industries, euen our Lawreat worthy Beniamen, whose Muze approues him with (our mother) the Ebrew signification to bee, The elder Sonne, and happely to haue been the Childe of Sorrow: It were worthy so excellent rare witt: for my selfe I am neither Apollo nor Appelles, no nor any heire to the Muses: yet happely a younger brother, though I haue as little bequeathed me, as many elder Brothers, and right borne Heires gaine by them: but Hic labor, Hoc opus est.
            
            I am with the late English quick-spirited, cleare-sighted Ouid: It is to be feared Dreaming, and thinke I see many strange and cruell actions, but say my selfe nothing all this while: Bee it so that I

am very drowsie, (the heate of the Clymate, and of the State) will excuse mee; for great happinesse to this mightie Empire is it, or would it haue been, if the more part of their State aff
                  •
               yres had been but Dreames, as they prooue phantasmaes for our yeares.
            But imagine (as trueth is in the imagination) the new receiued Emperour hath written twise or thrise to the Ould and new Emperours, (if so be I may 
                  •
               ow call them) and their priuie Counsell, (which Letters you must know are intercepted by the Godonoues, and their Secreataries) wherein he demaunds his Right and Inheritance; and prooues himselfe Heire very directly, with their resolution herein; and that he was therevnto not onely vnanswered, but his Messengers retayned, tortured; and some executed: wherevpon (much troubled) he con
                  •
               ulted with his Nobles, and many great Associates new come vnto him, and yet resolueth once more to send vnto their supposed Emperour, and many the great Boyeryres priuie Counsellors perticulerly: for so he did, and writ his Princely Letters to them, sending them by men of courage, birth, and wisedome; also giuing them authoritie thereafter, who beeing dispatched, are come into their Slobada or Suburbes, where the multitude of the Commons (retyred long before within the first Gate) came flocking vnto them without Authoritie, demaunding what they were: (For you must vnderstande this was as a Cittie besiedged within it selfe, and

at warres within her owne walles: her Engine (if so he could bee that is now their Emperour) beeing 200. verse from them: also, they required what their Message was: (Ignoraunce now not beeing the Mother of Deuotion, but the Father of Peace) and to whom they were sent, and (out of order) from whom?
            It was aunswered, that they were sent from their right & lawfull Emperour D. E. Vandh. &c. to the Vsurpers Sonne, and many of the Priuie Counsell; and that if in obedience to their lawfull Prince, they would guarde them into the Cittie, and safe conduct them to a cheefe Street therein, they would not onely satisfie them in reading those letters so neerely conscerning them all, but they should be then most happie, when they vnderstood how vildly and slauishly that had been vsed by the Godonoues; and how by the Almighties power, their right K. was lyuing, and required their obedience herein: and hee that late gouerned them, to be an Vsurper, and his Sonne but as heire thereunto.
            Thus the Commons, who euer are desirous of change and nouelties; and knew full illy, well they could not haue a more Tyrant: also, seeing them to be resolute and confident (as any wise man, considering their beeing) must confesse, & also knowne men of great birth; and also of the late Boris his Enemies: indeed thereunto ledd by the Spirit of God, as they were strengthed with his all-sufficient

power, (if I might so speake) they in infinite numbers, brought them safe into the spacious Plaine before the Castle gate: within which, as dayly they did vse, so now were all the Counsellers in consultation; but happily not in a secret Counsayle; also wherein was the Emperiall Court.
            There these Boyeryns made demaunde for many of the Counsellers, especially for the Godonoues, to come to heare their right K. D. E. speaking vnto them by Letters▪ Who yet after refusall (and I cannot condemne all) many came; the Commons being resolued, else to fetch them out; all alleadging, their guiltines to be so great, and to bee so ashamed as they were astonished, with the long deluding and mocking the common and their new tryall of all their treasons.
            But one, by the mouth of the golden tonged Chaunsellor or Secretarie (hee thereunto commaunded by the P. and Nobilitie then in counsell) indeed the onely Orator and Populer man among them, was required the reason of that strange assemblie, tending to little lesse (indeed too much more) then a Mutinie: also the Boyeryns countenauncing them herein; alledging they needed not so to assemble themselues vndutifully and disobediently, that by petition might haue any request aunswered, as hauing so mercifull, milde, and humble-harted a Prince; As when the time mourning for his deare Father was performed, (which is 6. weekes) and his Coronation, with his former

Princes magnificense and state obs
                  •
               rued, they all should conf
                  •
               sse him to bee, till 
                  •
               hen th
                  •
               ir Cou
                  •
               
               trie L
                  •
               wes did not a
                  •
               mit of publicke or priuate suites in 
                  •
               xtra
                  •
               rdinary persons or particulers, &c. but in such Language this was deliuered, as hee might well supply t
                  •
               e Tongues office: But the affection of the heart powred not out this Oration. Then, by the Boyeryers aloude was read the Emperours Letters, to this effect.
            That hee much woondred at that time, wherein expedition was to be accounted safest pollicie, hauing s
                  •
               nt many Letters & Messengers to them, concerning their approouing him to be their lawfull Prince, as beeing the Sonne of Euan Vasulrach their late Emperour, and the onely brother of Pheodor Euanchers selfe-vpholder, of happie memorie, both with inuincible argumentes and direct reasons to the manifesting thereof, they (notwithstanding his long patience and gratious remisness
                  •
               ) were not onely so proude as not to answere his Princely Letters, but so presumptuous as to retaine his Messengers, whereby they made themselues apparantly to be no lesse Vipers to the State in obscuring him, then Traytors to himselfe the true and right Emperour, by defrauding them: yet giuing him a strong Argument by their Silence, of their guiltinesse; also allowing thereby, time and opportunitie (if he had not been their true-borne Emperour, and with the naturall Mother, tendered the life of her deare Children) to haue conquered & destroyed the whole Nation;

a
                  •
               ding thereunto, the loue of the many and dayly falling to his side of the Mightie; whilst they like either vnworthy, or vnwise Counsellers (blinded with Honour and partialities) securely slept in their particuler strength, ignorant of this Principle, That where the Members are disioynted and broke, the Head and Heart suffer of necessitie.
            
            All which notwithstanding, hee (beeing confident in his owne conscience, of his iust Tytle, made the Prince of patience and humilitie from his former many great myseries and dangers) had in his princely wisedome and clemencie againe wrote these (but certainely his last Peace-requiring, and Grace-offering Letters: yea, was content to desire them hee might,) and doubted not shortly but hee should commaund, onely ayming at the good of the Common-wealth and State in generall; as he that without much shedding of his Subiectes blood, desired the Kingdome.
            Also to this end hee had sent 
                  •
               en of great birth, viz. Rues Pheodor, Euanrich Methithsosky, and Rues Demetre, Euanrich Suskey; and giuen them Commission to displace his Enemies, and prestaue the Godonoues, & others, till his further pleasure were knowne, consuming those monstrous blood-suckers and Traytors, with returne of the Commons answere therevnto: Likewise to demaunde his Messengers, and they to be brought before the Commons, whom he had reason to beleeue, were ill intreated, if not murthered; withall, that if they did submit themselues now to him, as to their

lawfull Prince and Soueraigne, (which he was truely resolued their Consciences were guiltie of) that yet they should finde him a gratious and mercifull Lord; if otherwise, a seu
                  •
               ere and iust Reuenger of them, and their many misdeeds towardes him, as hee that had his Sword euer vnsheathed to execute his vengeance on them all: and was easely perswaded they were not ignorant of the many Victories hee had obtayned, formerly against them, when they would seeme able and willing to fight with his Souldiers: and how afflicted and troubled herewith they all were: But that now, hee had their chiefe & strongest heades and armes in his owne hande, the whole world might not betroth him they durst once speake openly against him, as assured all (excepting a very few, and they of the worst) in heart, were his loyall Subiectes.
            Of all these premises, hee wished them from the highest to the lowest, seriously and considerately to aduise and reinforme their iudgements, for that hee was foorthwith determined, and that peremptorily of a course, as greatly to their terrifiyng and horrour, as verily not agreeable to his nature and Princely disposition: and how vehemently and earnestly hee desired of God, to regaine his Inheritaunce, and to be Inthroned in his Fathers and Mothers Empire without blood; hee onely was the witnesse to his Conscience, should bee the Iudge of his Innocencie, if it did so come to passe withall, that hee had humbly beseeched of the

Almightie, that as he had miraculously and wonderfully preserued him from many dangers, sorrowes, and myseries, to this happie time; so that it would please him to graunt him wisedome, patience, and mercifuln
                  •
               sse, to si
                  •
               t in his Fathers and Mothers Throne without shedding of innocent blood, if possible to the shedding of one drop. &c.
            But before this Princely Letter was halfe read, the hearts and hands of the multitu
                  •
               e were strangly combinde together, not one speaking, but all confusedly like letterde and chayned Horses stamping; being indeed without any feare, but of not doing mischiefe enough, all (as one) running violently into the Castle (where meeting two of the pitifully tormented Messengers) they paused to heare them as sufficiently as their insufficiencie would permit them delyuer the vil
                  •
               e manner of their torturing whipping & rosting, which was in deed a Whippe and Spurre to driue them without witte or humanitie, as if they had been fyred like Gunpowder with the very spa
                  •
               kes of heate: Such barbarous crueltie, beastly actions, and inhumane spectacles, as without the great Diuell had been there generall, no particuler could haue enacted; laying violent handes on all they met: but not killing (the great mercie of God!) any man of account.
            Thus the whole Cittie was in an vproare, all

the Couns
                  •
               ll
                  •
               rs Houses Sellers, and Studies, ransacked, begi
                  •
               ning with the Godonoues; spoyling, r
                  •
               nting, and s
                  •
               ealing all they met with; but carrying little away but drinke, that they could not carrie away; for beginning to stagger in the Sellers, they left their Wittes in the Butteries, and layde downe th
                  •
               ir eyes in the Kitchens; so as the 
                  •
               ext day, by reason of th
                  •
                many were madd and dead druncke, this day well-nigh 
                  •
               oo▪ persons ran into forgetfulnesse, beeing past life by their former lesse of vnderstanding.
            The Commons (no doubt) would haue made this day little infe
                  •
               iour to the Mass
                  •
               cre of Paris, so violent & diuelish were their sudden resolutions; but that the Nobles (b
                  •
               st beloued and obeyed) intreat
                  •
               d, where none could commaund: others perswading; all wishing an ende to this most myserable and neuer exampled mischiefe. But the multitu
                  •
               e did what they would and could; especially on the greatest, which certainely were the worst: So as the Empresse flying to a safer Lodging, had her Col
                  •
               er of Pearle pluckt from her necke, & yet a happie creature that she so escaped; which she not easily did: but the young P. in
                  •
               eed ha
                  •
                no greater punishment or disgrace (too much for a P. to beare) profered him, than to be pittied by such Slaues, that had not the sence of E
                  •
               uie of the Nobles: many lost Peards and Havre, as if the French Disease had possest them; surely twas no inferiour Euill that did worke this.
            
               Few mens houses, as the Stranger Doctors, or Marchants with their owne, escaped ransacking: yea, such was their miserable pouerty, they stript many to their very skinne, that a man might haue seene an Armie of Adams covering, (and in their transgressing Gardens) their Nakednesse, with Leaues, as ashamed not onely for their poore beeing, but their inhumane suffering; Parents intreating, Children we
                  •
               ping, Wiues raging, the Richer punished, whilst the pittifull poore ouerruled: And though the Nobles kept many places, and made strong the chiefest, they could not resist the multitude there, thought such a drunken kind their onely heauen, lyuing many yeares without the vse and effect thereof: But weeried & woried with their owne long deuotion in God Bacchus Temples, many slept, the more sufferd, whilst the most least repented their bringing this stra
                  •
               ge Iudgement to a happie vnhappie conclusion.
            Then the Prince, Emperour, and Princ
                  •
               sse, were prestaued (a second Commaund beeing come from the Campe) with the Godonoues, and many others that were suspected most: The Nobles ioyning in one Counsell for the present ordering of these suddaine accidents, and for answere to the P. Dem. Euanich, who suddenly was by generall consent concluded (by the perticular knowledge of Bodan Belskey a great Counseller, that was pri
               
                  •
               ie to his departure, and some others) to be their right and lawfull Emperour, only a few excepted,

that could be true subiectes to none, because vnfaythfull to themselues, such were imprisoned forthwith. Thus began the greatnes of Demetre; and his right became apparant: but as it happens for the more part in such vnvsuall and rare accidents (as the deposing of Princes and States-men) Tragicall eue
                  •
               tes fail one in the necke of another so n
                  •
               cessarily here▪ for now whilst the good were in consulting for the well ordering of this yet perplexed state, the euill were plotting more mischeefe by new stratagems and pollicies: for the verie soule of Enuie was crased in this body, that the twins of Tirannie and Crueltie, stroue for prioritie of byrth. And not more ingenious & industrious were some in deuising for the raysing of the old Emperour and his posteritie in times past, than (to be accounted constant) now the same villanous States-men were laborious and wickedly wilfull to ouerthrow them: hauing no reason but a selfe-norishing pittie, to be accompanied to the place of of Repentance and Punishment. So as the young Prince was by many (but particulerly by his mother Iezabell) counselled to leaue the Kingdome vtterly, before it forsooke him; to follow his Fathers good example in murdering himselfe, and herein his Mother (that Mapp of Miseries, that Cradle of Crueltie) and his on
                  •
               ly deare Sister, would associate him.
            Letters were deuised, and Messengers framed to effect this desperate Treacherie on his innocent life; so as in very few dayes (for Mischiefe

hath the winges of Thought and Resolution, they three did consent (an vnhappie coniunction) to destroy themselues; and rather to laye violent handes vpon their hate-full liues, then make an Enemie seeme cruell in executing Iustice on them: which yet certainely this Emperour neuer dreamt of, but determined the Prince should be within himselfe, not lesse then Absolute, and in a very great Dukedome: Yet behold, nor Hope, nor Pittie, nor Greatnes once comforted them; but as if selfe-Crueltie had been equiti
                  •
                of Conscience, the Mother omitting the tender affection of her Children, the Sonne neglecting the naturall loue to his Mother, the Sister condemning her selfe in eyther: Man forgetting (besides the 4. cardenall vertues) his principall vertue, Patience: Women despising Modestie and Bashfulnesse, would giue the wanton world a president to runne Death out of countenance without selfe-blushing: They would (Oh vnspeakable myserie that they did) poyson themselues. The Princely mother began the health of Death to her noble Sonne, who pledgd her with a hartie draught, therein so much strength did he add to his vild wicked obedience, that he prooued a Banquerour presently: Yes hand in hand (as hart in hart) imbracing each other, they fell, and dyed as one, the Mother counselling and acting, whilst the child bethought and suffered: Yet see Prouidence and Commisseration, Constancie and Obedienc
                  •
               ; the Princesse dranke, but like a Virgin temperatly: so as (the want of modesty (which was the death of the Moth
                  •
               r) now proued the life of the daughter.
            
               Presently after this Tragedie came into the Chamber, many great men where they were saluted with a dol
                  •
               fall welcome, the Emperour that might haue been, and his Mother (that was) imbracing each other euen in the kinde armes of death, 
                  •
               ast all hope: but the young, Princesse only groueling, and assured of breath therein, to bee a motherlesse and brotherlesse Virgin, from whom was learnd 
                  •
               he maner of their behauiour; which is sayd to be very resolute in the Empresse, pittifull in the Emperour, lamentable in both. Certainely a wicked Tree was it to beare such faire but vntimely Fruite.
            Vpon the ground was a seald Letter from the dead Emperour to the living (some report it was sent before his poysoning, not answered before he poysoned, it being forthwith; but it matters little the time or circumstance, onely the trueth is necessarie): and to this purport it was written by his owne industrious handes.
            Though the vaine world may innocently condemne vs of pusilla
                  •
               ymitie, that beeing the true Sonne and Heire to so great aud mightie an Emperour (as our late Father of happie & sweete remembrance Boris Pheodorich, of all Rushia Emperour and selfe-vpholder was), hee being there vnto elected by so generall a consent, and the like importunitie and besech of the Byshops, Counsellours, Nobles, and Commons of their Empire, vndertaking the gouernment thereof meerely of pittie, without the least motion of pride or popularitie,

onely to sati
                  •
               fie them all in generall, rather then in any p
                  •
               rticular to please himselfe, but in happying and blessing them withall his Princely and contionerie conditions thereafter: that wee his onely Sonne so beloued of the mightie and many, so reuerensed of the good and religious, will f
                  •
               r many princely arguments approued of by our selfe and our grauer Counsell (notwithstanding a double oath of the most to our Emperiall dignitie, lawfull succession and inheritance) in person come into the field with an inuincible Armie to make good our cause against thee: yet doth it not befit such a mightie Prince as thou eyther art, or wouldest bee thought, so cruelly and vniustly to determine of our selfe, our royall Moth
                  •
               r, and no lesse deare and princely Sister; of which wee are informed, thou thy selfe of vs art resolued.
            Thou shouldest wisely and thankefully haue remembred thy ow
                  •
               e hard fortunes, and as myraculous a prese
                  •
               uing, with our inn
                  •
               censie and youth: and that wee b
                  •
               th were or have thought our selues (if so to bee wee are yet worthy) great Princes Sonnes, and Christians: yea, and more happynes and glory would it haue been to thee, sitting on thy deare Fathers Throne to rule his p
                  •
               ople with equitie and iustice, then to haue b
                  •
               en accounted his Sonne in tyrranie a
                  •
               d blood.
            Litle cause shall this Nation haue to hope of a mercifull and iust Prince, that begins thus to terrifie and condemne the Innocent. What 
                  •
                it were

graunted? Wee haue no right; yet our Father was el
                  •
               cted? Doe wee resist thee? Dost thou not (or will not blood-thirstie greatn
                  •
               ss let thee) vnderstand what an Innocent in yeeres and Counsell wee then were, and yet haue been? What if wee were perswaded thou art the right, yet there are many, many, that neuer will bee? and the greater are their arguments, as thy cruelties a
                  •
               d pollicies. But that thou shalt perceiue wee neuer did resolue to keepe thee from thy Inheritaunce (if of thy Iustice and true Title thereunto wee were but reasonably le
                  •
               ) notwithstanding our Princely and safe Intelligence, behold for thee our only Enimy we sacrifize our selfe: behold how Innocencie & Youth, like the Twins of affection, are ma
                  •
               e guiltie in themselues, and wee are an Vsurper to our selfe onely: Yet be not thou hardned here with, nor yet reioyce herein, least neither bemeetes thy dignitie: but bee thou rather (if not at least) the true heire to Vertue, yet like a King in Pittie: and assure thy selfe, wee die not for feare of thee, but for loue to our selfe: not desparing of thy mercy, but for our preuenting thy iustice, as he that thinks hopelesse benefite a comfort, then presumption; fo
                  •
                wee die but to conteyne our owne burthen: yet with a much better resolution, then eythe
                  •
                sel
                  •
               e-co
                  •
               ceite, or inthrald cowardize can be witnes of, as he that had much rather be condemn
                  •
               d, than by accusing En
                  •
               mies spared to be ius
                  •
               ified inde
                  •
               d on
                  •
               ly for thy expected Seruants, our beloued and louing Subictes, who wee know

dearely would purchase our life and libertie, for them wee doe thus lay violent hands on our p
                  •
               ttied, but not hatefull l
                  •
               fe, as hee that esteemes it more worth to die an innoce
                  •
               t, then liue, it but deemed death worthy: for greater sorrow shoul
                  •
                wee sustaine to suffer without desert, then thus to die without compassion.
            Shall not the Earth say, Thou weart the cause? yes, yes. All Pri
                  •
               ces wordes are Lawes, or should be; yet oft times vnlawfull or vnmercifull be their entents and actions. May the world report wee were our owne murderer? If they can, yet let them remember onely if our selfe iustice, but of our innocent selfe: and better were it for any one Innocent, then many Innocents should perish: for so thy freinds shall be more and thy loue greater when, wee that are thy Ryuall are departed: yet imagine with what ioy or sorrow wee imbrace death, that breath our last in that bosome wee first receiued our beeing; and be perswaded our selfe, our deare Mother and sweete Sister, drinke onely for thee this Cupp of Lyres; So bee thou a King, and thy posteritie Princes, as thou hast right to our late Empire, and art iust to thy Enemies, louing to thy Subiectes, mercifull to the poore; and so be thou euer p
                  •
               osperous: Thus thou mayst be assured of vs. Lo thus wee dearely go to Heauen.
            These Funerall speeches being afterward deliuered to the Emperour, h
                  •
               e fell into teares vppon

reading them, mixing much gracious language of the young Prince, amongst his bemoninges of his fortunes: And hearing some speake vnreuerently of his Father, hee checkt them in these wordes.
            It ill beseemeth any, much lesse his Subiectes, and those who had elected him, to wound his Honour (now hee lyes dead) whom lyuing they kneeled to, as their lawfull Emperour, if not as right Heire, but as approued by the generall voyces of the States.
            Then he gaue commaundement, that all those who had the keeping of the yong Prince, should be imprisoned till his further pleasure were knowne; and that the Mother and Sonne, should bee basely and obscurely huried: which accordingly was done. The old Emperour Borris his body being likewise taken from the royall Monument where it first was layde, to bee buryed with theirs in a meane Church within the Mosco.
            
            Before we carry you any further, it shall not bee amisse to place before your eye the picture of the young Prince: who was in countenaunce effeminate, in tongue faire and quicke: his speach (like his body) high and great: charitable to the poore (which his Father was not) bountifull to the mightie; an indifferent rewarder both of the Vertuous and Valorous.
            
            The lyuing thus hauing made the dead serue as

Stayres to lift him vp into a Throane, each one held 
                  •
               t safest insudome to flye (with the formost) into 
                  •
               he Campe, there to make their peace: by which meanes they flocked in troopes; beeing dryuen therevnto eyther through feare of present dangers, or of tempestes to come.
            But their rightfull Emperour (casting behinde him all thoughts of precedent actions) onely 
                  •
               pplyed himselfe to the present receiuing those that came vnto him, with princely, and kind embracementes, esteeming himselfe then to be an absolute Prince; when hee could so subdue his owne affections, as to forgiue his Enemies; yea those that were accounted Arch-traytors and Bloody-tyrantes.
            Besides, hee held it a good part of wisedome, not to detaine any by force (as his predecessors did) within the Countrey, not suffering any to enter; but rather made it knowne, that all his Dominions should be free for euery Subiect to goe foorth, and euery Stranger to come in: by which meanes (besides the honour of beeing styled the First Emperour that made the State Free) he should (through commerce with other nations) inrich his owne, and propagate the fame and greatnesse of his name and Empire.
            Thus suddenly he became of a Poore and il-attended Prince, a mightie Emperour: his Commaund reaching and swaying almost as much as a

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
third part part of Europe comes to; colleaguing himselfe to many potent Princes, especially the mightie Polacke, (heretofore the most mortall Enemie to the Russie) and euen from his Campe (now his royall Court) hee wrote his Princely Letters to all Citties, Townes, and Villages, appoynting Noblemen to take their Oathes to his Maiestie: which in all places was willingly performed. In the number of all which Letters, taking knowledge of an English Ambassadors residence in the Country (tho 2000. myles from his Campe) and calling to minde the peace and amity held betweene the Princes of England and his predecessors, he wrote vnto the English Agent; who was departed from the Mosco towards the Sea side: but by good fortune (vpon some speciall occasion) returned backe againe, and receiued this gratious Letter, presenting himselfe at that time, before the Counsell: Which being translated out of the originall, is here set downe.
            
               
                  
                     Demetrie Euaniwich Emp. and great Duke of all Rushia, selfe-vpholder, &c. to Iohn Merick Agent for the English Marchants. &c.
                     VVHereas by the mighty hand, infinite mercie, and almighty prouidence of God, we are happily, and with the full consent of all our louing Subi
                           •
                        ctes, not without admiration to the world, receiued and betrothed to our Right and dignitie, euen the Throne and Communion table of our Regall Father

                        Euan Valsiliwich, and our noble Brother Pheodor Euanriuch, both of happie and famous memorie, selfe-vpholders: Wee, remembring the Amitie and friendship first concluded in the raigne of our deare Father Euan Vasiliwich, famous with all Christian Princes, especlally with the noble Princes of England are resolved of our Princely dispositiō, to be in greater league and amitie now with this renowned King Iames, then any our predecessors haue been with all Princes: And to that purpose resolve to fauour his Seruantes and Marchantes more then any our predecessors; and forthwith after our personall Coronation, are determined to send our Ambassadours to his excellent Maistie to that purpose. Further, that thou Iohn the Sonne of W. after the receipt of these our Princely Letters, and the dispatch of thy Marchant-affaires, at our Castle of the Ark-Angell, then to returne to our greart and famous Cittie of Mosco, there to behold our cleare and Princely Eyes: And to this purpose we haue giuen order for Post-horse for thee, as also for thy appearaunce before our Chancellor Offonasse Euanouch Naseueo.
                     
                     
                        Written at our Royall Campe at Tode. 
                           8. Iune. 7103.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            The Agent (vpon receipt of these Letters) with M. Russell (sometimes Agent for the Dutch, and his now Brother in law) prepared to meete the Emperour before he should come to the Mosco; before whom being brought by the Chancelor, the Agent (in name of his Brethren) deliuered vnto him a

worthy Present; which he graciously accepted, and withall, vttering thus much in effect.
            That whereas it had pleased God so miraculously to preserue him, and so gloriously to establish him in the Throne of his Auncestors: It would please him, to looke vppon the English Merchauntes, with the same eyes as they haue done: In doing which, hee should not onely merite their loues, but no Nation would be more thankefull vnto him. &c.
            The Emperour returned many gratious words, much to the effect of his former Letters, but more amply; and then inuited them to dinner in his royall Tent (beeing set vp of purpose to entertaine a King of the Tartares, that was his Subiect.
            So after a bounteous Feast, many noble speeches, and a Princely welcome, they were dismissed for that time: but within few dayes after, the Agent delyuered (in the name of the Ambassadour) somuch as he had Commission and instructions for, of him: which Message was most acceptable, and receiued with protestations of desired Peace and Amitie with the King of England; for which purpose, hee had alreadie appoynted one of his Courtiers speedily to poast vnto the English Ambassadour.
            Vpon our departure from Colmogra, to the Ark-Angell, the Agent came to the Ambassadour

from the Emperour, with order for his free Post-horse and Men to conducte him; and that no Custome should be demaunded of any Englishman, appertayning to the Ambassadour. And that the Courtier (who was to be sent) should follow him very speedily: for the English Shippes had been at the Castle fourteene dayes before: wherevpon, the Ambassadour rowed downe the Riuer, and the next day following, came to the Ark-Angell; where wee were met with many Shipmaisters and Muskets to the number of an hundred: The Shippes (aswell English as Dutch) discharged their Peeces lyberally: But this Triumph was altered in a moment into Sadnesse. For vppon our landing, a fayre new Shippe (called the Globe) the Maister, Maister and his Father, beeing owners of her, was vtterly lost in our sight, by meanes of a Mynion bursting in the Gun-roome; where foure Barrels of Powder standing by, one of them beeing not well couered, the rest tooke fire, blew vp all the Sterne, slew the Gunner and his Mate; hurt the Maister, his Mate, and some sixe others, whilst the Shippe splitting in sunder, suncke presently; to the exceeding sorrow of all the beholders.
            Hither (within few dayes after) came from the Emperor a Courtier, named Gauarello Samollorich Sallmanoue, that had been Ambassadour to the K. of Denmarke: (a Gentleman of great birth, and

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
well in yeares) to signifie to the Ambassadour the Emperours desire to enter into Bondes of peace and amitie with the King of England: And this was an extraordinarie grace of the Emperour done to the Ambassadour, if wee consider the Person that was sent, the Message, and the Myles hee so poasted ouer, for feare the Ambassadour should bee gone.
            T
                  •
               e Message which he brought was much to the purp
                  •
               s
                  •
                of tha
                  •
                Conference held with the Emperour and the Ag
                  •
               nt; the che
                  •
               fest branch of all, bei
                  •
               g a re
                  •
               ouation o
                  •
                
               
                  •
               h
                  ••
                League now betweene 
                  •
               ot
                  •
                the Ki
                  •
               g
                  ••
               mes of Englan
                     •
                  
                and Rushia, which was b
                  •
               twee
                  ••
                the late Q Elizabeth (his deare and ki
                  •
               d Sister) and his Father: and with a protestation to be in greater amitie & correspondence with th
                  •
                King of England, then euer any of his predecessors had b
                  •
               en with other Kinges thereof; for better manifestation of which, all the sayd K. Iames his Subi
                  •
               cts shall haue surer libertie then euer they had before. Adding further, that his personall Coronation being performed, Ambassadours should be sent to salute and congratulate his louing Brother of England. &c.
            The Ambassadour herevpon, not onely sent thos
                  •
                Letters which he had receiued from the late Emperour Borris, but also (by twentie Liueries) a Present worth 100. Markes: And within one weeke aft
                  •
               r this Courtiers departure, we hastned our owne, because the season of the yeere so require
                  •
               .
            
               The day before our departure, by reason of some wrong done to an English Saylor by a Russe, a great tumult arose: in which the Common people (with stones and billets) behaued themselues so furiously, that the English-house gates were broken open, their chambers in perill to be rifled, their windowes throwne downe, and their ware-houses violently entred vpon, yea some aged Merchantes very euilly intreated: Insomuch that the Ambassadour himselfe stood not free from the daunger: to reuenge which, both English and Dutch manned out their boates, to haue gone on shore with some shot, but by intreatie they were staide, and all vvas pacified, not without some hurt on both sides, but most of the Russes.
            
            The next day (being the sixth of Iuly) the Ambassadour beeing accompanied with mayster Iohn Mericke, diuers Merchantes and others, passed (in his Cherdeck) the Riuer of Dvyna, the shipps then lying at the Barr-foote for a Winde, which not hauing, we vvent on boord vpon the twenty eight of Iulye, beeing compelled notwithstanding to staye heere seauen daies, both for winde and Water to carry vs away, which the Countrey (hauing hadde our companye of many monthes togither) seemed to deny vs, as vnwilling to license our departure. Yet on the 8. day following, we went ouer the Bar, not without some daunger of the Sands, which by the prouidence of God, and the care and cuning of maister William Wye, (our pilot and maister) we

happilie escaped, and very ioyfully arriued vppon the sweet shores of our owne natiue Countrey England, &c.
            
               The state of Rushia when Borris Pheodorvvich came to be Emperour.
               
                  OVr Voyage is ended, yet must I now intreate your immaginations to be carried backe againe into Rushia, where you shall receiue so much and such perfect Newes, as will make vp the precedent matter into a pleasing History.
               Vnderstand therefore, that the old Emperor Euan Vassiliwich, dying, left two Sonnes behind him, (Viz) Pheodor Euannowich the eldest, (vvho succeeded the father in his Empire) and Demetrie the yongest (an infant.) Pheador being giuen to deuotion, and neglecting the State and dignity due to a Prince, was held but simple, insomuch that by the secret workings of Bodan Belskey, (who was chiefe Minion to the olde Emperour Euan Vassiliwich) in hope of honours and preferment, procured Boris (who was brother to the then Empresse) to be created Protector ouer Pheador, who vpon his present
                     •
                   comming to the Crowne, sent his mother in Law, with her father and mother (defending of the house of the Nagayes) and his yong brother Demetre, to a place called Ouglets, where he was to bee Nursed. Pheadors raigne beeing expired, and his brother vnfit to rule (being but an infant) Boris set vp such ladders, that from a protector he was aduanct to be Emper. Bodan Belskey afore named, Andrea Shulcan, and Andrea Clyskenine, being his there instruments that wrought for him. But Boris growing weary

of their presence, by whom he was mounted so hie, and thinking that he must euer holde himselfe bound vnto them, laid plots in his braines howe to be rid of such creditors, which he did, by throwing discontents vpon one of them and a slightly-regarding of the other.
               Whereupon Bodan Belskey left the Courte. But the other two prying into Borris his actions, signified from time to time, all matters to Bodan, who (knowing the ambitious thirst of Borris to extirpate the race of Euan Vassiliwich himselfe now but an Vsurper) took deliberation with the old Empresse (mother to Demetre) for the preseruation of the child. And seeing a farre off, arrowes aimed at his life, which could very hardly be kept off, it was deuised to exchange Demetre for the child of a churchman (in yeares and proportion somewhat resembling him) whilst the other (by this meanes) might liue safe, though obsure.
               This counterfet Churchmans sonne being then taken for the lawful Prince, was attended on and associated according to his State: with whome one day, another child, (that was appointed to bee his play-fellow) disporting themselues, finding faulte that the collor which the supposed Demetre wore about his necke (as the fashion of the Countrey is) stoode awry, preparing to mende it, with a sharpe knif (prouided as seems of purpose) cut his throat.
               The report of this arriued presently at court: the Vsurper makes shew of much lamentation, yet to satisfiy the people & seat himself faster in his throne,

the dead body was openly showne three daies, to the eyes of all men. Many arguments were drawne to make the world beleeue, that Boris sonne sought the death, of this his brother in lawes childe, and to weane the peoples loues and hopes they had from him, as first to haue it spred abrod, that Demetre was like to proue like his father, thats to say, a Tyrant because, euen in his childhood, he tooke delighte to see Hennes and Chickens kilde, and to bath his hands in the blood: adde vnto this, the poisoning of his Nurse: besides, it was forbidden to haue him praied for, as the rest of the Emperors children wer because hee should be vtterly forgotten. To conclude an old ouer-worne law buried long in forgetfulnes was now againe freshly reuiued, and that was, That the child of a sixt wife was not to inherit. (yet the murder beeing acted) Boris the vsurper, to blind the eies of the world, and to weare a cunning maske ouer his owne, Sent a noble man with diuers others to take strict examination of each particular circumstance, and to imprison all those that had the guardiaunce of him, yea to put some of them to tortures and to death, which was done accordingly. But heauen protected the lawfull, to be an instrument for the Vsurpers confusion. Obscurely liude this wronged Prince, the changing of him being made priuate to none but his owne mother (Sister as is said before to Boris) who is now liuing, and to Bodan Belskey: but vpon what wheele his various fortunes haue bin turned, (which of necessitye

must needs be strange) came not within the rech of our knowledge being there.
               Onely thus much was receiued as currant, that the king of Poland sent word to the Vsurper, that such a Prince of Rushia was abiding in his court, describing him by name and other perticular notes to be sonne to their olde Emperour: vppon receipte of which Newes (which went but coldly to the heart of Borris) an Ambassadour was presently dispatcht into Poland, one that had been Godfather vnto Demetre, because he should bring certaine knowledge of the truth: whoe at his comming was presented with a Counterfait (Princely attyred) but afterward with true Demetrius, whom (by the ayde of the Polack) the Rushians within short time after receiued for their Emperour, and now raigneth ouer them.
               FINJS.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Errors escaped in the Printing, thus to be corrected.
            IN the first page, for Chain Concatenation, read chain and Concatenation: for Neves, read Nerues: for allude read Allurde: for squred, read Squared.
            
               In the eight page, for Dronia, read Dwyna.
               
               In the xv. page, for Coli
                        •
                     gro, read Colmagro.
               
               In the 31. page: for Meands, read Meades, and so in any other place where that word is found.
               In the 56. p. for Comp. house, read companies house.
               In the 66. p. read Boycrins.
               
               In the 67. pag. read Knees Pheodor, and Knees, &c.
            
            Reader, thou shalt vnderstand that the Godonoues is the name of the Royall family. A Prestave is a chiefe Officer about the Emperour, whoe hath continuall accesse, and doth command prouision and lodging for any Ambassador, &c. A Verst, signifies a Myle. A Derevena, is a little village. These wordes because thou mayst doubt of them, I thought good to explaine.
            
         
      
   