
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  〈◊〉
               
               
                  •
               nstruc
                  •••••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                and orders Militarie requisit for all
Chieftaines, Captaines 
                     〈◊〉
                   higher and lower
men of char
                  ••
                
               
                  〈…〉
                to vnderstand, 
                  〈…〉
                Composed by sir 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               mythe: knight, 1591.
And now first imprinted. 1594.
            Imprinted at London, by Richard
Iohnes: dwelling at the signe of 
                     〈◊〉
                   and
Crowne, neer to Sai
                  ••
                
               
                  ••
               drewes
church in Holborne, 1594.
         
         
            
            
            To the Knights, Esquiers, 
                  •
               nd Gentlemen
of the English Nation, that are honourably
delighted in the Art and Science Militarie.
            
               THE chiefe cause and principall end of the
first association of men dispersed, from a
solitary sauage life, into Citties, Common
wealths, or other ciuill societies, was, that
by meanes thereof they might enioy a certain
cōmon good, tranquility, & happines,
whervnto al humane kind (how barbarous
soeuer) is naturallie inclined; and the speciall waies or meanes
to preserue and continue those ciuil societies thus assembled &
vnited,Li. 4. de legib. in their desired quiet prosperous estate, and to defend
them from the vnnatural rapines,Li. 1. de Repub▪
                violence and oppressions, of
their domesticall wicked neighbors, and from the incursions
and inuasions of forren Enemies, is Religion, pollicie, and discipline
militarie.
            Religion saith Plato, is the foundation of al Cōmon wealths,
and of humane societie; execution of good lawes, and administration
of Iustice, (which is rightly to be called pollicie) is the
fountaine of felicitie: And the exercise of Armes and of
the Art and discipline militarie, is the maintainer of peace,
and ground of securitie; without these and euery one of these,
no kingdome can continue, and the Common wealth where
they are with good order established, doth prosper and flourish:
For ouerpassing the commoditie and necessitie of Religion and
pollicie, to be dilated of by Diuines and states-men, as more agreeable
to their profession, and impertinent to my present
purpose: Concerning the Art and science Militarie, this may
I boldly & trulie write and affirme: that by the exercise therof
all Empires, kingdomes, and Common wealthes haue come
to their height and soueraintie, and haue maintained their
happy state and prosperitie; And by neglecting the same,
they haue declined, decaied, and finally been made praies to
their Enemies.
            The Art Militarie it was, that established the Empires

of the Egyptians, Assirians, Medes, Persians, & Grecians;
and that inlarged the dominions of the Romains to so wonderful
greatnesse: This Art it was, by the which great Alexander
with a handful of souldiors (as they may be tearmed) did
vanquish infinit Armies, and did conquer a great part of the
world▪ and beyond the hope & expectation of almen, did march
vnto the v
                  •
               most parts of the Earth then known, And the neglecting
thereof againe, hath beene the decay and ruine both of
those and many other most noble Empires and Kingdomes, and
hath caused the losse of all Greece, and a great part of the Romaine
Empire; and without the great grace & especiall goodnesse
of Almighty God, wil be the ruine of the rest.Li. 7. polit. Cap. 
                     •
                  
                By men of
Warre (saith Aristotle) Common wealths are conserued, and
that the Art Militarie should be alwaies practised in any well
ordered kingdome, it is both profitable and necessarie: which
Gelon king of Scicilie wel knowing and considering, & that
people vnpractised in Armes through idlenesse and want of
experience incur danger to be subdued: He caused often in his
kingdome rumors of warres, and inuasions of Enemies to bee
raised, and therevpon made present preparation of resistance,
leuied souldiors, trained and exercised them in al points of militarie
discipline, and led them foorth in warlike order some
certen daies march, towards the sea coast, as though hee intended
presentlie to giue battle to his enemies inuauding;
but his souldiors expecting the enemies, and when they should
fight, he emploied them in certaine labors and trauailes, such
as he thought conuenient, saying, that in performing the same,
they should both ouercome sloth and Idlenesse, two mortal Enemies
of the common wealth; and that their enemies besides,
vnderstanding how they were void of Idlenesse, and exercised
in Armes, would neuer haue the boldnesse to inuade them.
            The like prouident care haue diuers other noble kings, Emperors
and gouernors of Common wealthes had, for the continual
exercise of their people in matters militarie, both for the
continuance of their owne estates, and to the terror of their
enemies vpon iust occasions of iniuries offred. But seeing at
this present day the contrarie, and that the a
                  •
               ncient and true

knowledge of discipline militarie is in most parts of Christendome
by ciuil Warres corrupted and greatly decaied, I, for the
benefit of my Countrie and Nation, wherevnto I wish a
                  •
               prosperitie
and happinesse, and for the commoditie of you Gentlemen,
vnto whom matiers and affaires of Armes, and also of
Iustice, do most properlie appertaine, haue with some labour
and pains, collected and set downe in this treatise, Certen orders,
instructions, and obseruations Militarie, the most of
which in seruices of diuers warres vnder notable Captaines,
of diuers Nations I haue seen practised, & the rest by reading
of diuers histories, I haue other wise obserued: giuing you
therewithal to vnderstand, that my intent & purpose is not to
treat in this booke generally of all matters militarie by lande
which are in
                  •
               inite; for I handle not therein the approching &
and besieging of Citties, and places for
                  •
               ified, nor the forming
and fortifieng of Campes, nor the lodging and disl
                  •
               dging of armies,
nor the making of Bridges ouer riuers to passe ouer
Armies, nor in
                  •
               inite other ma
                  •
               ters and stratagems militarie:
Al which (some at one time, and some at another) haue
beene very wel written off by many principall Captaines and
gentlemen of diuers Nations, and some of them also handled
by me in some other Books of mine that I haue composed, which
I haue not as yet put in print.
            But in this booke I haue begun and chieflie handled (as the
Reader may see) the reducing of footmen and horsemen into
their simple and single order of rankes from point to point, and
after how to reduce them into many forms of troups, squadrōs,
& battles in the field, & that (chieflie) to the intent to enter
into skirmish & to giue battle with the most aduantage, which
of al other matters military are of greatest importance, to work
the highest effects in the field, by reason that thereby great
victories are atchieued, and sometimes Empires, Kingdomes
and dominions conquered: And for most of al those matters
that I haue written of, I haue alledg
                  •
               d manie reasons to fortifie
and prooue the same: All which not withstanding, I doubt
not, but that in reading a
                  •
               d perusing of this my treatise, in this
malicious time, there 
                  •
               ill bee some found cast in the mould of
that good fellow, who going to another mans house, vsed to carie

both his eies in his head, and returning home to his owne,
put them vp in his pocket; Many I meane that will find fault,
for one that will commend: and some (as saint Ierome writeth
vpon the like occasion) that wil curiouslie search and sift
euery sentence, clause, word and sillable, yea and the very letters
of my writing, and then censure both my worke and my
selfe according to their Mydaslie iudgement; But as Pindarus
answered a king of Sparta, it is one of the easiest things in the
world to find fault. Sed ecquid habent melius? let them beware
least in passing aboue the slipper, and in correcting the
shadowes of Apelles picture, the boies that grinde collours
laugh them not to scorne, who so long as they hold their peace
thinke them by their gaie and golden garmentes to be goodlie
fellowes.
            But leauing enuie to worke vpon hir owne intrailes, & setting
light of the malice of detractors, to you the honourable
gentlemen of my Countrey, for whose good I composed and imprinted
these discourses, and to whom with a sincere affection
& deuotion I cōmend and present it; I say and protest that if it
may find at your handes that fauorable acceptance and friendlie
allowance that I expect it shall, and worke withal that desired
effect that I hope it will; I shal eesteeme my labours and trauels
well imploied, and my selfe for the same euerie waies abundantlie
satisfied. 
            
               From my house at Badewe in Essex this first of
May. 1594.
               
               Your louing friend Io. Smithe.
            
         
         
            
            The Table of the chiefe matters that
are conteined in this Booke.
            
               
                  HOw Captaines and their officers aswell of horsemen as of fo
                     ••
                  eme
                     •
                  
should reduce their bands into their simple & single order of ranks,
with diuers aduertisements concerning the same. pag. 3.
               How the Captaines and officers are to teach their piquers to shoulder
their piques. pag. 5
               How piquers should be taught by their captains and officers to aduaunce their
piques and make a stand. page 9
               How all the piquers of a single band or squadron should carie all their piques
vpon their right shoulder and not vpon their left. page 10.
               How to forme a single band of 5. different sorts of weapons to march in the
fieldes. page 11
               How Captains marching in their single order of rankes should double or triple
all their rankes by right line, or increase them by fla
                     •
                  kes, with diuers other
particularities. pag 13.
               Where the ensignebearer, drōmers, and phifers of a single band marching in
their single order of rankes, are to be placed. pa. 18
               How Ensignebearers ought to carrie their ensignes marching through a great
Cittie or Towne. pa. 19.
               How Ensignebearers should be armed. pa. 19.
               Certaine particularities concerning a deputie Ensignebearer. pa. 20
               How Sergeants of bands should be armed and weaponed. pa. 20
               Vpon what licence a priuate band or squadron of horsmen and footmen being
reduced into any forme, are to disorder and break
                     •
                   their rankes to go into
their quarters to lodge. pa. 22
               How soldiors are to be taught by their Captains and officers to vpright their
piques. pa. 22
               How piquers are to bee instructed by their Captains and officers to charge or
receaue a charge of an other squadron of piquers. pa. 23
               How piquers should resist a charge of launces. pa. 28
               How piquers should receaue a charge of launces incase the Sergeant Maior or
Captaines should thinke good to place any weapones of vol
                     •
                  e before
them. pa. 29
               In what sort harquebuziers or mosqu
                     •
                  tiers are to discharge their peeces from
vnder a squadron of piques. pag. 29
               A contrarie opinion to Mounseur de le Noüe. pag. 32
               How Captaines should cause their souldiors to make of flanke, or of backe
frunt, pag. 35
               The different waies and orders that are to bee vsed by Coronel
                     •
                   or Seargeant
Maiors to forme squadrons al of piquers double as broad, or a third part broder
in frunt than by flankes. pag▪ 36
               How a Sergeant Maior hauing reduced his squadron into forme should vppon
any occasion, make it broader in frunt, and shorter by flanks, pag. 42
               Diuers waies and meanes for a Sergeant maior to place any ouerplus of broken
rankes in. pag. 42
               How a Lord Marshal or Sergeant Maior their squadron beeing in fight should

draw vp a sleeue of piquers to assa
                     •
                  le their enemies in flanke. pag. 43
               The squadron being formed, how a Sergeant Maior shoulde make of either of
the flankes frunt, obseruing the same proportion in frunt & number of ranks
by flankes, that they were before he made of flanke frunt. pag. 44
               The order that is to be taken by a Coronel, if his squadron accompanied with
sleeues, winges, and troupes of weapons of volee, should happen in their
march to come to a straight, how they should march, and passe through the
same. pag. 47
               Where the Drommers and phifers are to bee placed, the squadron marching
forwards in the enemies Countrie, the enemie beeing not in sight, as also
vpon the doubt of battle. pag. 50
               Wherevpon the squadron formed and marching forward, the field peeces are
to be placed and drawne. pag. 54
               Where the field peeces with their munitions are to be placed in marching thorough
a straight. pag. 55
               Concerning the most conuenient and sure placing of the ca
                     •
                  iages and baggages
in passing through a straight. pag. 56
               How to form a squadron of piquers iust square in number of men both by frunt
and flankes, with diuers particularities concerning the same. pag. 57
               How a sergeant maior hauing formed a iust square may vpon any occasion shor
                  
                     •
                  en
the same by flanke, and inlarge them in frunt. pag. 59
               How a squadron of halbardes enuironed about with 5. rankes of piquers should
be reduced into fo
                     •
                  me. pag. 63
               How to reduce an English armie of 28000. or 30000. horsmen and 
                     •
                  ootmen into
forme of battle, readie in all points to fight with the enemie. pag. 65
               The placing of the seuerall battles of the Ar
                     •
                  ie. pag. 67
               Vpon what parts of the squadrons, the men at Armes, Dimilaunces, Stra
                     •
                  iots,
Archers and Crosbowers on horsbacke are to be placed. pag. 71
               How and where to arme the battels with field peeces. pag. 74
               How all the Cariages and baggages of the Armie should be placed in forme of
a semicircle, to guard the backe and Rereward of the whole Armie. pa. 79
               Where to reduce, appoint, and place the pioners of the whole Arm
                     •
                  e. pag. 81
               Certen reasons alledged to prooue that a pu
                     •
                  ssiant Armie that dooth consist of
many thousands of armed footmen, is of greater force being reduced into 5.
6. 7. or 8. battles, then only into 3. great battles of vaunguard, battle and
Reregard, according to the common vse. pag. 86
               The great aduauntages of a squadron of battleaxes, enuironed about with 5.
ranks of piquers, against a squadron consisting altogither of piquers. pa. 91
               How to reduce and forme a battle of necessitie or extremitie, betwixt 4. or 8▪ piques
placed in square. pag. 99
               Diue
                     •
                  s causes and reasons to prooue that great bands of 500. vnder an ensigne,
are more conuenient for all seruices in the fielde, then smal bandes of 150.
pag. 100
               An Example to prooue that great bandes of footmen, are more requisite then
small. pag. 104
               Concerning Ensignes and Ensignebearers of priuate bandes and squadrons, of
footmen, as also concerning the Standard, and Standardbearer of an Emperor,
or of a king. pag. 128
               Certen orders, directions, and briefe speeches to be vsed vnto harquebuziers,

p
                     •
                  quers, and battleaxes, when they are in skirmish with their enemies in the
field. pag. 133
               Briefe speeches to be vsed by Captaines or leaders of harquebuziers when they
would reduce them into abroad square with distaunces oblique. pag. 145
               Speeches to be vsed to a broad squa
                     •
                  e, or to any ordered troupe of harquebuziers
being in a straight or ground of aduauntage where horsemen cannot
charge them. pag. 146
               Briefe speeches to be vsed to mosquetiers being in a broad square. pag. 147
               Certen orders, directions and briefe speeches to be obserued by a Sergeant maior,
and Captaines, and leaders of archers in the field. pag. 150
               A comparison betwixt Archers and mosquetiers, and archers and harquebuziers.
pag. 154
               A comparison betwixt harquebuziers and mosquetiers. pag. 155
               Instructions to be giuen by captaines and officers to their bandes for the passing
of any briefe speeches or word, pag. 157
               The dutie of trompettors and drom
                     •
                  ers. pag. 158
               Certen instructions and obseruations concerning the ordering and exe
                     •
                  c
                     •
                  sing
of men at Armes, of dimilaunces, and also of light horsmen Stradiots, incorporated
with archers and Crosbowers on horsebacke, for diuers purpo
                     •
                  es
and seruices. pag. 159
               Why launces are rather to be reduced into squadron then into troupe. pag. 165
               How and in what distaunces men at Armes or dimilaunces, are to charge or
receiue a charge of their enemies. pag. 167
               Diuers exercises for horsmen to be instructed and taught. pag. 168
               Into what formes light horsmen borderers or Stradiots, are to reduce themselues,
with the waies how they should be reduced into the forme of a semicicle.
pag. 171
               How stradiots, archers on horseback, and Crosbowers on horseback incorporated
in bands, are to behaue themselues in the field. pag. 174
               Certen proceedings and obseruations that I would wish to bee obserued in the
first election, enrolling, arming and weaponing of souldiors for the defence
of the Realme. pag 179
               Three principal thinges to be obserued in al right and true elections of souldiors.
pag. 180
               Concerning the election, apparelling, arming, and weaponing of 
                     〈◊〉
                   of
footmen. pag. 1
                     •
                  7
               How all fortes of horsmen should be apparelled, armed, horsed, and weaponed.
pag. 1
                     •
                  8
               Of what calling the mustermaisters of eu
                     •
                  ry shiere should be. pag 205
               The curious order that al mustermaisters are to vse in mustering of their ban is
of horsmen. pag. 206
               The order that is to be vsed for the supplying of souldiors ma
                     •
                  med or 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
or otherwaies decaied, or departing from their 
                     ••
                  bitation into 
                     〈◊〉
                   other
Towne or hundred or out of their maisters se
                     •
                  uice. pag 210
               The different placing of the souldiors armors and w
                     •••
                  ons in all the shires of
England, with the Authors opinion where he would haue them 
                     •
                  laced, and
certen other necessarie aduertisements. pag. 211
               Where and how souldiors that are inrolled to any kind of weapon ought to 
                     •
                  xercise
themselues. pag. 217
               The cause wherefore the Author hath compose
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Booke. pag. 220
            
         
         
            
            Faults happened in the printing of this Booke, by reason,
that for Iohn Smythe was absent from London at the
time of the imprinting thereof, And they are tobe corrected
and read, as followeth.
            
               
                  
                     Page.
                     line.
                      
                  
                  
                     5
                     23
                     Put out And march.
                  
                  
                     7
                     18
                     for Armour, read, Armours.
                  
                  
                     9
                     32
                     for, the left feet, read, their left feet.
                  
                  
                     21
                     16
                     for, Captain Lieutenant, read, Captaine or Lieutenant.
                  
                  
                     31
                     26
                     for opinions, read, opinion.
                  
                  
                     36
                     31
                     for, in a
                           •
                        ank, read, in rankes,
                  
                  
                     39
                     18
                     for, therein make, read, there make.
                  
                  
                     43
                     3
                     for, which like number, read, which little number.
                  
                  
                     48
                     9
                     for, forpart corner, read, forpart and corner.
                  
                  
                     48
                     16
                     for, sort and weapon, read, sort of weapon.
                  
                  
                     56
                     26
                     for, substance of the powder, read, substance & body of y• powder
                  
                  
                     62
                     11
                     for, 145. Read, 143.
                  
                  
                     63
                     18
                     for 5. in frunt, read, 50. in frunt.
                  
                  
                     63
                     33
                     for, the flanke, read, the left flanke.
                  
                  
                     74
                     1
                     for, but one kind, read, but of one kind.
                  
                  
                     87
                     33
                     for, that their in encountring, read, that in their encountring.
                  
                  
                     88
                      
                     In the margent, for 3000. read, 5000.
                  
                  
                     93
                     30
                     for piquers, read, piques.
                  
                  
                     94
                     4
                     for ranke, read, rankes.
                  
                  
                     106
                     27
                     for flankes, read, flanke.
                  
                  
                     111
                     14
                     for 18000. read, 1800.
                  
                  
                     126
                     35
                     for like, read, little.
                  
                  
                     134
                     3
                     for double, read, doubt.
                  
                  
                     143
                     2
                     for sortes, read, sort.
                  
                  
                     148
                     33
                     for, and without, read, and not without.
                  
                  
                     150
                     35
                     for, narrow or short, read, narrow and short.
                  
                  
                     156
                     17
                     for motions, read, motion.
                  
                  
                     189
                     25
                     for stocks, read, cocks.
                  
                  
                     194
                     10
                     for, the piques of such sagging, read, the points of such sagging
                  
                  
                     197
                     29
                     for septrionall, Read, septentrionall.
                  
                  
                     203
                     16
                     for, into their bands, read, into bands:
                  
                  
                     218
                     3
                     for, at a great But discharge, read, at a great white in the midst
of a great But.
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Certen Instructions, obseruations and
orders military, requisit for al Chieftains, Captains,
and higher and lower men of charge, & officers
to vnderstand, know and obserue. Composed
by sir Iohn Smythe, knight, 1591.
            
               THE first thing belonging to the Art
and Science Militarie, practised by all
Warlike Nations in all ages hath bin,
that al Captains after they haue receiued
the charge of bands or companies
of horsmen or footmen armed & weaponed,
according to the discipline and
vse of the Nation that they are of; haue first instructed
and taught their souldiors to reduce themselues into their
simple and single order of ranks, and to weare, carry, and
vse all their weapons in soldior-like manner, according
to the nature and effect of euery different sort of them,
without which readilie and orderlie performed and dulie
obserued, with all obedience, neyther Captains, officers,
nor their soldiors, can in right vnderstanding be accounted
worthy to beare the name of men of warre; and therfore
I will first begin with the orderlie reducing of a band
into forme to march in their rankes as followeth.
            All Captaines, Lieutenants, and Sergeants of bands,
are first to consider before they do reduce their bands of
souldiors into their simple and single order of ranks,Certen matters to be considered of and obserued by all Captaines before y• reducement of their bands into their simple & single order of rankes. how
many different sorts of weapons they haue in their bands
with the number of euery different sort of weapon; which
done, then are they to consider what sort & kind of weapon
shall march in the first compertiment or deuision,

and what other sort of weapon in the second compertiment,
and so subsequentlie in all the rest; so as alwaies the
compertiment of armed men piquers doo march in the
midst of all the rest of the compertiments.
            All which being by them and their officers considered,A compertiment of a band of Soldiors, is to bee vnderstood the number of soldiors of any one sort of weapon, as of Harquebuziers, of archers, of musquetiers, of piquers or of halbardiers, reduced into their simple or single order of rankes, as of 3. 4. 5. 6. or 7. & so vppe to 10. or 11. in a rank at the most, readie to be reduced into squadron, or to be any other waies imploied
then they are to resolue how many souldiers
of euery sort of weapon they will command to march in
a rancke; as of 5. of 6. or of 7. or more or fewer: so as
they be not fewer then 3. nor more then 10. or 11: at the
most in their simple and single order of rankes, although
their bandes be verie great. And these numbers of 10. or
11. in a ranke at the most, and 3. soldiors in a ranke at the
fewest for single bands to march in, hath beene obserued
by all men of warre of iudgement amongst all Warlike
Nations in all ages; and that in respect that the rankes of
souldiors that doe not exceed the number of 10. or 11.
may in an instant bee numbred by the Captaines or officers,
sudden casting their eies vpon such ranks, as also by
the souldiors that are to reduce themselues into their
rankes: wheras if they were of greater numbers, the captaine,
lieutenant, or sergeants, may quicklie mistake the
number of soldiors in ranke, and so to their reproach faile
in their intended reducements. Besides that squadrons
how great, and of what forme soeuer they are formed, the
compertiments of diuers or many bands, are more conueniently
and certeinlie brought into their proportions
and formes,Single bandes are not to march aboue 10. or 11. in a ranke at the most for diuers causes and reaso
                     •
                  s. with the compertiments of bands that doe
not exceed the number of 10. or 11. in a ranke at the vttermost,
or rather fewer, then if they were of greater
numbers; with other causes and reasons also which for
breuities sake in this place I omit. And now all this beeing
as aforesaid by a Captaine considered, and he hauing
with himselfe concluded that all the compertiments of
different weapons throughout his band shall march 5. in
a rank, or any other number (as aforesaid:) he is presently
to giue order to his officers to reduce them into that

number in euerie ranke; which to performe, some one of
them is first to saie vnto the harquebuziers who are to be
the first compertiment,Certen orders and briefe speaches to be obserued & vsed by Captains & their officers, when they would reduce their bandes into their simple and single order of rākes. 
               Ranke your selues harquebuziers
fiue in a ranke, appointing them the ground where the
soldiors of the first ranke shall reduce themselues; and so
likewise the like briefe wordes and orders are to bee pronounced
to the Archers, to the Musquetiers, and to the
armed men: which being by them heard, euery different
sort of those weapons ought with all celeritie to reduce
themselues throughout their compertiments into the
foresaid number of 5. in a ranke,In all reducementes either of horsemen or footmen al the backer rankes must obserue the proportionate distances in frunt and by flanks, of the two formost rankes. all the backer rankes of
euery compertiment, obseruing the proportionate distances
of the two first rankes of their owne compertiment
in frunt and by flanks.
            But because when soldiors doo begin to reduce themselues
into ranks after the number pronounced by their
Captains or Sergeants, that in the first, second, or third
ranke, or else in some of the rest of the rankes, there happen
sometimes more soldiors to fa
                  •
               l into some of those
rankes, then there should be by the number pronounced,
(as aforesaid) and that those soldiors that came last into
that ranke or those ranks,Two speciall & generall rules to be obserued by all soldiors when they are to reduce them selues into rankes. are vpon pride or wilfulnesse
lothe to put themselues out of that ranke or rankes, and
to retire themselues to find out some ranke or ranks that
doe lacke the number pronounced: the Captains therefore
and the officers of bands ought to instruct their soldiors,
at such times as they are to reduce themselues into
their simple or single order of rankes, according vnto the
number by their Captains or officers pronounced, that
if in the first, second, or third ranke; or in any of the rest
of the former ranks, that disorder doe happen; that then
the ouerplus of the number of the soldiors by the Captaine
or officers pronounced that doe find themselues on
the left flanke, or side of that ranke, or rankes, shall presently
put themselues out of the same ranke, or ranks, and
retire vntill they find a ranke or rankes, that doe lacke the

number of soldiors by their Captain or officers pronounced.
And to the intent that this order may be the better
performed, the Captaines, Lieutenants, and sergeants,
ought to instruct their soldiors that in the reducing of
themselues into ranks, the first soldior that is to begin in
the first ranke, being placed by the Sergeant in the place
where the first ranke should begin, the rest of the soldiors
of the same armor and weapon that are next vnto that
first soldior by the seargeant placed, shall presently fall into
ranke by the left side or flanke the one of th' other, vntill
that ranke be compleat according to the number by
the Captain, Lieutenant, or Sergeant pronounced. And
so likewise the second,This kind of reducement of a single band of horsemen or footmen into rankes, euery soldior by the left flanke of the other hath not bene according to true discipline vsed by our English nation of a long time. third, fourth, and consequentlie al
the rest of the ranks are to reduce themselues into theyr
ranks by the left flankes, or sides the one of the other, and
not to enter into ranke disorderlie th' one betwixt the other.
So that by the performance of this prescribed order,
any ouerplus of soldiors that shall happen to fall into
any of those rankes shall find themselues to be on the left
flanke or side of those ranks, and therfore shall know that
it is their duties presently to retire out of those ranks, vntill
they find some other ranke or rankes that doo lack the
number by their Captains or Sergeants pronounced. Al
which different weapons being reduced into their compertiments
by the orders aforesaide, then the Captaine
may command his lieutenant and Sergeants of the band
to draw the one halfe of euery different sort of weapon of
volee, behind the compertiment of armed men, & there
to place them in the same & like order as the other halfe
of those weapons of volee are before the armed men; so
as the armed piquers shall hold the middle place of the
band according to all discipline.
            And the like briefe speeches and prescribed orders of
reducements by the left flanke the one of th'other may
serue for horsmen, be they men at Armes, Launces, borderers
or Stradiots, or of any other kinde of armor and

weapon on horsebacke. As for example, If a Captaine
or Lieutenant of men at Armes, or Dimilances would
reduce his companie into their simple or single order of
rankes,Briefe speaches to be vsed by Captains of horsemen when they are to reduce their companies into their simple and single order of rankes. he is to say vnto those that are to begin the first
ranke: Ranke your selues Launces three in a ranke, or 4 or 5
in a ranke, or as it shal please him: Vpon which speaches
pronounced, all his whole band or companie is to performe
his commandement and words pronounced with
the like obseruations as are before prescribed vnto the
bands of footmen, hauing alwaies speciall regard to their
proportionate distances in frunt and by flanks. And these
prescribed orders before set downe, al soldiors bee they
horsmen or footmen ought to know & performe with all
celerity, quietnes, & silence, vpō very seuere punishment.
            Now the Captain or Captains hauing reduced their
soldiors into their simple, or single order of ranks or into
any forme of square, & that the soldiors piquers do stand
at their piques, the butends on the ground, and the points
vpright, and that the Captain, Lieutenant, or Sergeants
would haue them to march, they are then to say to the
first ranke: Shoulder your piques and march; which is as
much to say:Brief speaches to be vsed by the Captain & his officers to piquers standing at their piques. Lay your piques vpon your right shoulders
and march, which shouldering of piques must be doone
with a comely and soldiorlike grace, all the piquers of the
first ranke falling backe with their right feet almost a foot
behind their left, that their piques may the more leisurely
and comelie fall to their shoulders, and then raising vp
their left feet about a handfull from the ground,How piquers should shoulder their piques and march. & letting
them fall againe, they must all in an instant aduance forward,
& so fal into their march, first with their right feet.
And so in like maner the second, third, and fourth ranks,
& so subsequentlie al the rest of the ranks must in al points
perform the like, & shoulder their pikes one after another
& carry the butends of their piques 3. foot or more from
the ground, straight in discent towardes the right hams
of the souldiors piquers marching before them, euerie

ranke beeing so euen in frunt, that the butend of no piquers
pique may preceed the one the other in the same
ranke; and so euen and straight by flanks that the butend
of euerie piquers pique may be iust point and blanke towards
the right hamme of the piquer preceding in the
ranke before him: And so they must al with great silence
and with a graue and soldiorlike grace, march.
            But whereas in this place I doe instruct that all the soldiors
of the first ranke, and so subsequentlie of all the rest
of the rankes one after another should first fall back with
their right feet, almost a foot behind their left, to the intent
that their piques should fall the more leisurely to
their shoulders, and that then all the soldiors of the first
ranke at one instant should raise and lift vp their left feet
about a handfull from the ground, and letting them fall
againe to the ground should march forward, first with
their right feet; that instruction I doe giue partlie in respect
that the same being orderlie performed as aforsaid,
it dooth giue a very comelie grace vnto the soldiors in
their first beginning to march, but chiefelie because that
the leisurely falling backe of all the soldiors of the first
ranke with their right feet, to shoulder their piques, and
so subsequentlie of all the rest of the rankes one after another,
with the lifting vp also of their left feet about a hand
full from the ground, is a warning to euery hinder ranke
presently to prepare themselues to march, whereas by
not performing the same or the like leisurely and soldiorlike
warning vpon the stroke of the drum or briefe speeches
pronounced as aforesaid, it often commeth to passe
that the soldiors of the second ranke, are suddenlie, and
disorderly cast too great a distance behind the first ranke,
and so consequentlie all the rest of the rankes, by the sudden
shouldering of their piques, and stepping forward of
the first ranke.
            And I doe further aduertise that the soldiors piquers of
any priuate band marching in their single order of rankes

doe in any wise obserue the distances of 16. or else 18.
feet betwixt euerie rank & ranke by flankes, and 6. or else
7.Distances to be obserued by piquers marching in their single order of rankes. feet betwixt euery soldior, and soldior in frunt; that is
betwixt soldior and soldior in euery ranke: And this in
case the ground will permit them or otherwise that they
do march in conuenient distances in frunt and by flanks,
according to the ground and occasion.
            And in this place because I haue mentioned and touched
the distances that ought to be obserued by a single
band of piquers, and other weapons marching in their
simple and single order of ranks, I thought it were a conuenient
place also to handle and write at large of the many
and different distances that ought to be obserued as
well in frunt; that is in euery ranke from frunt to backe,
as by flanks, that is betwixt euery ranke and ranke, not
only by single bands, but also by squadrons and battels
for many purposes, and that not onelie by footmen, but
also by horsmen of diuers different sortes of armour and
weapons. Howbeit considering that the same hath been
briefelie touched although to no great purpose by some
other writers of forreigne Nations; And that if I should
enter to write and discourse of those matters effectuallie,
it would require manie sheetes of paper, and therefore
would be very long and tedious to the Reader, I thought
good to ouerpasse those particularities as thinges very
well knowne to all skilfull men of warre of all warlike nations,
and to proceed to other matters that doe require
more particular instruction.That it is a thing of verie great difficulty to set downe by writing all the iust and proportionate distances that Horsemen and footemen are to obserue in frunt and by flanks vpon diuers occasions. And that the rather, because
the many and different distances that are vppon diuers
different causes and occasions to be obserued by horsemen
as also by footmen, are such and so many as they
cannot bee expressed by writing but with verie great
difficultie; for that the same cannot bee particularlye
set downe but by the measures of paces and halfe paces,
and by the measures of more and fewer feet, of halfe feet
and quarters of feet, and other such measures; which I

thinke no man of any experience can possibly by writing
rightlie expresse without failing or erring more or lesse:
And that by reason that sometimes single bandes are to
march in open places where they haue roome inough to
inlarge their ranks both in frunt and by flankes, thereby
to beautifie and giue grace vnto such companies; And
at other times they are to march thorow Citties and
Townes, where the narrownesse of the streats doe not
giue them roome to inlarge themselues in their distances,
thereby to make the greater show: at other times also
bands are to march in the field readie to be reduced &
incorporated with other bands, at which time they are
to march more close, & in neerer distances both in frunt
and by flanks. And so likewise being incorporated into
squadrons, they are for diuers different purposes, as somtimes
for their greater ease to march, & to giue the greater
show, and to bewtifie the squadron, they are to march
in the rankes inlarged; and at other times vpon the expecting
of the enimie being not yet in sight, or beeing in
sight, they are to straighten their rankes more or lesse; or
that vpon the neare approch of the Enemies squadrons
of both horsmen and footmen, they expect and doubt a
charge of horsmen in frunt, or flankes, or both; or that
they themselues are with their piques to charge a contrarie
squadron of footmen. For al which, and diuers other
occasions and purposes, they are to reforme themselues
into diuers different distances.
            And as piquers and short weapons either in single
bands, or reduced into squadrons, are for diuers purposes
to reforme themselues into such varietie of distances:
Euen so weapons of volee reduced into sleeues, wings,
and other formes, are to vse some of the like, and other
sorts of distances. And as footmen are for such different
causes and occasions to obserue such varietie of distances
as aforesaid: Euen so horsmen of diuers armors and
weapons, as men at Armes, Dimilaunces, Stradiots, Reistres,

and other sorts of light horsemen, are to reduce
themselues into diuers different distances according to
the effects and nature of their armors and weapons; and
are again to reforme themselues into other distances according
to new occasions and directions, sometimes for
one purpose and sometimes for others. All which variety
& different sorts of distances and many others are of very
great difficulty, to bee by writing rightly expressed in
their iust and proportionate measures; and yet y• notwithstanding
it is a thing of so great facilitie for all good and
diligent Captaines and officers aswell of horsemen as of
footmen, only by sight of eye and ordinarie practise to instruct
and reduce their souldiors vpon any different occasions
into all sorts of distances either in Towne, Campe,
or field, according to the Art and scyence Militarie; as
that there is not any Captaine, Lieutenant, nor Sergeants
of band, that are any waies worthie to haue the
charge or mannaging of a band of footemen; nor any
Captaine, Lieutenant, Conductor, nor Decurion of
horsmen, that are any waies worthy to haue the ordering
& managing of any sorts of horsemen vnder their charges,
if they doo not very well know all different sortes of
distances according to discipline, that they are to reduce
their soldiors into.
            And if the Captaine or officers aforesaid, would haue
their souldiors to stay their march and make a stand; then
the Captain, Lieutenant, or Sergeant is to say to the first
ranke of piquers Auance your piques: which words being
pronounced, al the soldiors piquers,Brief speaches to be vsed to piquers when they shoulde make a stand or pause. of the first rank must
in an instant lay their left hands vpon the forpart of their
piques, about a foot or more before their right handes,
auancing themselues forward two steps, the first with their
left feet,How piquers should aduāce their piques and make a stand. and the laste steppe with their right feet, and
therewithall raising their piques vpright with both their
hands, they must set the butends of them vpon the groūd
with the pointes towards the Element, which being by
the first rank performed with a comly & soldiorlik grace;

then the second ranke, the third, fourth & so subsequently
all the rest of the ranks one after another, must after the
same sort auance their piques.
            And whereas it hath beene of long time vsed, and stil
is by many Italian, Walloun, and French Captains, and
so likewise by some other Captaines of other Nations,
that they doo instruct their soldiors marching in their
simple or single order of rankes of 5. or 6. or 7. or other
such numbers, as also when they are reduced into squadron,
that all the piquers that doo march of the left flank
or side of the band or squadron, should carrie all their
piques vpon their left shoulders, as 
                  •
               y piquers marching
vpon the right flanke doo carry theirs vpon their right
shoulders; and this to the intent (as they say) that the piquers
of the left flanke or side of the band or squadron
carrying their piques vpon their left shoulders, doo in the
same carrying of their piques, greatly beautifie the band
or squadron in the eies of the beholders: whereas, if otherwise
all the piquers of the left flank should carrie their
piques vpon their right shoulders, as those of the right
flanke doo, that it would not make so good a shew, as by
carrying their piques vpon their left shoulders: Thervnto
I say, that I haue knowne diuers Italians, and namelie
Marco Antonio Colōna, Ascanio de la Corna, & Chapin
Vitelli: all which three were very notable gentlemen
and great Captains, that did greatlie mislike that the piquers
of the left flanke of a band or squadron,No piquers of a single band or squadron ought to carie their piques vpon their left shoulders. should carry
their piques vpon their left shoulders, vtterly condemning
the cause before alledged: saying, that the left flank
or side of piquers marching in their simple, or single order
of ranks, or in squadron, could not be more bewtified,
then by the wearing of their swords vpon their left sides,
and their piques vpon their right shoulders in soldiorlike
manner: besides that for right handed soldiors to carrie
their piques vpon their left shoulders when they are to
aduance, or vpright, or shoulder their piques, it dooth
giue a greater disequalitie and disgrace in the performance

of those and diuers other effects; and therewithal
is a great deale more vnready for right handed souldiors,
for diuers other purposes to performe and vse; then if
they carried al their piques after one sor
                  •
                vpon their right
shoulders. And as the opinions of diuers Captaines
are as aforesaid, that the carrying of their piques vpon
their left shoulders doth bewtifie the left flanke, because
it dooth resemble the right: So contrariwise, I say that
such as doo behold either the frunt or the backe of such
a band or squadron, shall see a disproportion and disequalitie
in the partition where the piquers of the left flank do
carry their piques in a different sort from al the rest of the
piquers of the right flanke. For all which causes before
alledged, with others, which for breuities sake I omit; I
would wish that all piquers should aswell in squadrons as
in their single order of rankes, carry all their piques vpon
their right shoulders, & not vpon their left; except some
times when they are in march in the field to ease themselues,
they may change their piques to their left shoulders.
            Also if there were any piquers that were left handed
from their youth, I wold wish them to carrie their piques
vpon their right shoulders, and to practise and vse their
piques with their right hands, in couching and making
head with them against either horsmen or footmen, and
in all other militarie exercises and actions. And because
such left handed soldiors doo weare their swordes vpon
their right sides, I would wish that they should not be placed
neither in single bandes, nor in squadrons, vpon the
vttermost flankes or sides of them, but in some other of
the inner ranks.
            And here it is to be noted that in reducing of a single
band or companie of soldiors into their simple,How a single band cōsisting of 5 different sortes of weapons should be formed to march in the plaine and open fields. or single
order, the Captain, Lieutenant, or Sergeants of the band,
must haue great consideration in forming of their bands;
and chiefely consisting as our English bands doe of 5. different
weapons; that is, of piques, batleaxes, musquetiers,

harquebuziers, and archers; and that they ought to performe
in this sort following: First that they should place
the one halfe of the harquebuziers in frunt; and immediatlie
after them, should march the one halfe of the archers,
and after the archers, the one halfe of the musquetiers,
and after the musquetiers, al the ranks of the piquers
with the Ensigne in the midst or centre of them, guarded
with halbarders, or battleaxers; and after the piquers the
other halfe of the musquetiers, and after the musquetiers
the other half of the archers, and after them last of al the
other halfe of the harquebuziers; which band marching
in this sort, the one half of the different sorts of weapons
of volee marching before the piques,A great aduauntage and readines for bands marching in this sort, to be reduced into other for
                  
                     •
                  es. and the other halfe
behind, both in like numbers of ranks & in one order, they
are by that means alwaies ready vpon all occasions to be
reduced into any forme, or different forms to arme aswell
the back of the piquers by some called Rereward, as also
the frunt, flanks, & al four corners of the said piques: as for
example, If the Captain of the band be disposed to arme,
and draw two sleeues of any one sort of those weapons of
volee by the flanks of the armed men, he may then with
great celerity perform the same, either by cōmanding by
the stroke of the drum, or by som briefe speach, that al the
piquers and short wepons shal aduance their piques and
make a stand, and hauing reduced those armed men into
som kind of square, then one of the Sergeants of the band
is to draw down al the ranks of that weapon of volee, that
he would make his sleeue of, vpon the right flanke of the
piques in as many ranks as he listeth, and as many soldiors
in euery rank as pleaseth him, or as he is cōmanded;
& so likwise at the same time & instant another sergeant,
or the Lieutenant of the band (which Lieutenant ought
euer to march behind the hindermost ranke of the band
incase the Captain do march before) may draw vp by the
left flank of the piques the like number of ranks, & of soldiors
in euery rank of the same weapon of volee; and so
likewise with the like celerity vpon the different strokes of
the drum, or different briefe speaches of the Captain, all

the rest of the different sorts of weapons of volee by drawing
down as many ranks of them that doo march before
as he thinketh requisit, and drawing vp as many ranks of
those that do march behind or in rereward as he thinketh
meet; and employing the rest for skirmishes, or ambushes,
or other seruices as he thinketh most conuenient;
they may with great dexteritie reduce them into diuers
different and variety of forms, aswell for the guard of the
frunt and back of the piques, as for the flanks & corners,
and all other occasions and purposes.
            Also it is furder to be noted that if a Captain, marching
with hi
                  •
                band in his simple or single order of 3.How Captains marching with their bandes in their simple and single order of rankes should double all their rankes by right line. of 4. or 5.
or more in a rank; & that vpon any occasion he thinketh
requisit to double all the ranks of the compertiments of
his band by right line: that is by euery second ranke entring
into the ranke that is before them; then he is to say
to the sergeant or sergeants of his band, Double your ranks
by right line: vpon which briefe words and directions, the
sergeant presently ought to command the drummer or
drūmers to strike the doubling of the ranks; or else himself
is to command the second rank of piquers to enter into 
                  •
               y
first rank of piquers, & at the same instant the fourth rank
to enter into 
                  •
               y third rank, and the sixt into the fift rank, &
so subsequently in the like order, all the rest of the
ranks to enter one into another; so as if they were before
but 5. in a rank in their single order, they are nowe by this
doubling of ranks by right line becom 10. in a rank.How Captains should double the ir rankes by flankes. And
as a captain may double the ranks of 
                  •
               y compertiments of
his band, by right line as aforsaid, so may he likwise double
them by any of both 
                  •
               y flanks by cōmanding euery second
rank to march vp to the left flank of the rank before
them, that is, that the second rank of 5. soldiors do march
vp to the left flank of the first rank of 5. and that the fourth
ranke doo at the same time march vppe to the left flanke
of the third ranke, and the sixt ranke to the left flanke
of the first ranke, and so subsequentlie all the rest of the
second rankes throughout the bande to marche vppe
to the left flankes of the rankes before them, vntill they

be of equall frunt & in equall distances with the said ranks
before them. And further, if the captain of the same band
his cōpany marching in their simple & single order of 5.
in a rank as they did at 
                  •
               y first be disposed to haue two rāks
to enter into one, that is whereas they marched before 5.
in a ranke to make them 15. then hee is to say to the Sergeants
of his band: Triple your rankes by right line,
               How Captains should triple their rankes by right line. which
briefe words by the Captain being pronounced, then the
Sergeants presentlie are to command the drommers to
strike the tripling of the rankes, or else themselues with
the like briefe speeches as aforesaid, to cause the second
and third ranks of any weapon to enter into the first ranke
of the same weapon, and the fift and the sixt, to enter into
the fourth, and the eigth and the ninth to enter into the
seuenth, and so subsequentlie all the rest of the rankes orderly
to performe the like, which being by them performed,
they must presentlie in euery ranke inlarge themselues
in their distances. And to the same effect, If a Captain
be disposed to triple the rankes of the armed men of
his band by flanks;How Captains should triple their rankes by flanks. that is, whereas they marched before
but 5. in euery ranke in their single order, that he would
reduce them into 15. in euery ranke, then he or his Lieutenant,
or the Sergeants of his band may commaund the
tripling of the ranks by saying to the first rankes.It is to be noted that in all reducements of squadrons into forme with the compertiments of bands, that the middle most part of the frunte is the highest place in estimation, and that the right hand of the same frunt is the second in degree, and that the left hand same frunt 
                     〈◊〉
                   the lowest place in degree. And that the first, second and thirde rankes, but chiefely the first, are the places of greatest estimation for the gentlemen of the bands if there be any to bee placed in the presence of their Captains to shewe their valours. 
               Triple
your ranks soldiors by both the flanks throughout. Vppon
which briefe speaches pronounced either by the Captain,
Lieutenant, or Sergeants, the second & third ranks
are presentlie to march vp to the flanks of the first ranke,
that is to be vnderstood, that the second rank shall march
to the right flanke of the fift ranke, and the third ranke to
the left flanke of the said first ranke, vntil they be al of one
equall frunt, and in like and equall distances; at which
time likewise the fift and sixt ranks shall in the very same
order and sort march vp to both the flankes of the fourth
ranke, and the eighth and the ninth ranks shall march vp
to both the flanks of the seuenth rank, and so subsequentlie
all the rest of the ranks that are of any one sort of weapon

shall march vp to both the flanks of the ranks of the
like sort of weapon before them: so as of 5. that euerie
rank did at the first consist in their simple and single order
they are now by this trypling of rankes by both the
flanks as aforesaid reduced, to be. 15. in euerie ranke
throughout. But because by this kinde of trypling of
rankes, as also in trypling of them by right lyne, the
fourth ranke is now become to be the second ranke, and
the seuenth the third rank, and so subsequently in the rest,
and that therfore euery one of those rankes are too great
a distance by flanke the one from the other, they must
euerie ranke presently vpon their first trypling performed,
march vp vntill they finde themselues in such conuenient
distances and nearenes by flankes one ranke to
another, as the Captaine, Lieutenant or Seargeants shal
thinke requisite.
            But here it is to be noted that in case the last ranke or
the two last rankes shall by this kinde of trypling and reducing
by flankes as afore said,How & where any ouerplus of broken rankes of piquers should place themselues. lacke a third ranke before
them to reduce themselues vnto, by flanks, then the
formost of the two last rankes shall marche vp by the
rightflanke of the piquers, vntill they come to the middle
place whereas the Ensignebearer with his Ensigne
doth stand, and there shall ranke and place themselues
on the right hand of the Ensignebearer. At which present
time likewise, the last ranke of the other. 5. piquers
shall march vp by the lefte flanke of the armed men vntill
they come to the foresaid midle place where the Ensignebearer
with his Ensigne doth stand, and there shall
ranke and place themselues on the left flanke of the Ensignebearer.It is contrary to discipline that any ranke of disequall number to the rest of the rankes should march either in frunt o
                     •
                   backe.
And this is to be performed, by reason that
it is not sufferable according to discipline that any broken
ranke of a squadron of piquers, or of any other weapon
of disequall nomber to the rest of the rankes should
so march either in frunt or backe. How beit the Captaine
before he commandeth the trypling of the rankes as aforesaid,
ought well to consider of the nomber of the

ranks that he hath or meaneth to triple, to the intent to
bring them into a conuenient and proportionate forme,
aswell by flankes as frunte, which proportionate forme is
not only intended in respect of the distances by frunt and
flankes as aforesaid, but that there be not more rankes by
flankes then there be soldiors in euerie ranke, which
would cause being piquers, the square or squadron to be
a great deale longer by flanke, considering their different
distances, then broade in frunt, which in all discipline in
forming of squares, or squadrons is a great disproportion;
vnlesse that the Captaine vpon some occasion or accident
were disposed to make of flanke, frunt, that is to
make all the soldiors to turne their faces and weapons
that waies.How Captains hauing
                     •
                  by tripling their rankes brought their bandes into disproportion, may and ought to remedie the same. Howbeit if the Captaine by the tripling of
his rankes as aforesaid, should find that he had not
brought them into that proportion and forme that he
ought according to discipline to do; that is to make the
frunt full as broad as the flankes are long, or broader to
any conuenient proportion then the flankes are longe;
then he may easely remedie the same by increasing all
the rankes by flankes sauing the hindermost ranke,
(which by such encraesment of ranks commeth to lacke
nomber), to as conuenient bredth and length by frunt
and flankes, as he thinketh meete; which order of increasing
of rankes by flankes, I haue alreadie before sette
downe. And as the Captaine may double or triple the
rankes as aforesaid; so he may likewise vpon good consideration
and cause quadruple them; that is to make euerie.
3. rankes to enter into the fourth ranke, obseruing and
proceeding in performance thereof in the like sort and
order as is before declared.Another speciall point to be lookt vnto by Captaines in doubling o
                     •
                   tripling their rankes by right line or encreasing them by flankes
            
            But in the performance of this before set downe, the
Captaine and his officers, are furder to consider that in
that doubling of rankes by right line, or encresing them
by flankes, they must take heed that they do not confuse
or confound their rankes, by making two sorts of weapons
to enter into any one rancke; as to make any piquer

to enter into any rank of halbarders, or any harquebuzier
into any rank of archers, or any archers to enter into any
ranke of musquetiers, nor yet any harquebuziers at any
time to enter into any rank of musquetiers, although they
be both weapons of fire, because that to mingle two sorts
of weapo
                  •
               s of different force and qualitie in one rank, it is
a great scorne and contrarie to al true discipline. But now
if any man will aske the causes wherfore in reducing this
band of 5. sorts of weapons into their simple & single order
of 4. 5. or 6. in a rank, I placed the harquebuziers formost,
and the archers betwixt them and the mosquetiers,
and the musquetiers next vnto the piquers. Therevnto I
answer,The causes and reasons why in reducing this band into their simple & single order of ranks, euery sort of weapon is placed in the order aforesaid. and say that the causes and reasons that haue moued
me so to doe, are, that harquebuziers in respect of the
lightnesse of their weapon and furniture, are of al other
weapons of volee most readie and apt to bee imploied in
skirmish, or vpon any aduantage of ground to bee placed
vpon the sudden in ambush, where they may lie close &
ready vppon diuers opportunities to giue a sudden volee,
or diuers volees deuided either at horsemen or footmen.
But I would alwaies vpon the employing of them in such
actions,Harquebuziers empl
                     •
                  ied in skirmish or for ambushes or som other like causes ought to be backt with hal
                     •
                  ards. that they should be bac
                  •
               t with some number of
halbarders lightlie armed, as also vppon some occasions
with some piques for diuers causes & reasons that heerafshal
appeare. And as for the archers I haue placed them
betwixt the harquebuziers and musquetiers, partlie to
make a separation & distinction of those weapons of fire,
the one of greater length & heueth,Archers and musquetiers are not to depart from the bodie of the squadron. and in effect of greater
violence in further distance; and the other, I meane
harquebuzes, shorter and lighter, and to be emploid most
commonlie in the first seruices; but chie
                  ••
               e, in consideration
that neither the archers nor the musquetiers are to
depart from the bodie of the piques, but are to bee reduced
into hearses, or into greater or smaller formed troups;
as also for such other effectes, and purposes as in certen
places of this booke heereafter shall appeare: and so likewise
the reasons wherefore I haue placed the harquebuziers,
archers, and musquetiers in the same number and

order aswell behind the body of the piques, as before in
frunt, are aswell in respect of the ready drawing of them
vppe into sleeues, and other formes, by the flankes of the
piques as aforesaid; as also that vpon some accidents or
comming of the enemie, it somtime hapneth that the bodie
of the piques reduced into square may happen to bee
forced to make of backe frunt: vppon which and diuers
other occasions and accidentes the body of the piquers
haue alwaies in a readinesse as many of all sortes of weapons
of volee behinde them to bee any waies emploied
with al celeritie as in frunt before.
            And heere it is furder to be noted,Where the Drommers & Phifers of a sin gle bande marching in their single order of 
                     •
                  ankes ought to be placed. that a single band
marching in their simple and single order, ought to place
their drummers and phifers: one drumme and phifer betwixt
the second and third ranke in frunt, and the other
drummer and phifer (incase they haue two phifers which
few bands haue) in the midst of the band directly before
the Ensigne bearer; and in case that the band bee so great
that there are three drummers, (which is but seldome
seene) then the third drummer is to bee placed betwixt
the second and third of the hindermost rankes. But because
most great bands haue but two drummers and one
phifer, those two drummers are to be placed, the one betwixt
the second and third ranke in frunt as aforesaid, and
the other drummer with the phifer in the midst of the
band before the Ensignebearer: But in case there bee but
one drummer and one phifer, then they are to be placed
in the midst of the band before the Ensignebearer, as aforesaid,
and not betwixt the fore rankes of the band; although
I haue seene when there hath been but one drum
and one phifer, that they haue not marched before the
Ensignebearer,Where the En signebearer is alwaies placed. but in the frunt as aforesaid. And this
I haue seene vsed by some Italians after the one sort, and
by other Italians of other parts and dominions of Italie,
after the other sort.The pique the most honourable weapon for soldiors on foote. But because the Ensignebearer doth
alwaies march in the midst of the piques accompanied
with halbarders; and that the piques being the most honorable
weapon in respect that they are for the bodie of

the square, do march in the midst betwixt the weapons
of volee; I would in consideration thereof, as also to the
intent that the different directions of the strokes of the
drumme may be the more easilie heard throughout the
whole band, place the drummer and phifer (if there were
no more but one in the band) in the midst before the Ensigne
bearer, and not amongst the shot in frunt.
            Also it is furder to be noted that the Ensignebearer
marching in the midst of his band or companie through
any Cittie or great Towne,How Ensignebearers ought to cari
                     •
                   their Ensignes marching through a great Citie or Towne. ought to carry his Ensigne
open and vpright, and not wound vp about his Ensigne
staffe, nor yet the lowest part of the Taffata of his ensigne
gathered into his hand, and leaned vppon his shoulder,
but vpright as aforesaid. Howbeit hauing marcht thorough
the Citty or Towne into the fields, and being out
of the fight of the multitude of the people, he may then
either winde vp his Ensigne, or gather the lower part of
the taffe
                  •
               a into his hand, and leane the same to his shoulder
if it pleaseth him.
            Also I would wish that all Ensignebearers should bee
armed in this sort following (viz)How Ensignebearers should be armed. a light vpright & sharp
crowned Spanish burgonet, a Coller, a Cuyrasse with
short tasses, or without tasses, and a backe with a paire of
sleeues and gloues of fine maile, or without gloues of
maile, to the intent that they may carry their Ensignes
with the more ease; and his said armour I would wish to
bee of a good and a hard temper to resist the point of a
pique, or halbard, and no waies at the proofe of harquebuze
nor pistoll shot, because that such armors at the
proofe are too heauie for Ensignebearers to march withall,
and to carry and mannage their Ensignes: Besides that
Ensignebearers being most commonly in the mid partes
or Centers of squadrons are verie seldom hurt by the bullets
of any peeces of fire maniable but rather with piques
swords, or halbards, vpon a battle well 
                  •
               ought.
            Also I would wish that the Ensignebearer should haue
a Deputy Ensignebearer,Euerie Ensignbearer is to haue a deputie Ensignebearer. who should be of his owne societie

or Camerada,What manner of men I would wish the Ensignebearers and their deputies to be. and this deputy Ensignebearer, as
also the Ensignebearer himselfe I would wish should bee
men of good force and strength, and therewithall that
they should be men verie valiant, and verie sober and of
good discretion, and able to speake well and deliuer their
mindes to the encouraging of all souldiors about them;The deputie Ensignebearer how he should be armed and what weapon he should ca
                     •
                  y.
and this deputy Ensignebearer being in all points armed
like vnto the Ensignebearer, should carrie a faire, and a
good halbard, which halbard should be in common betwixt
him and the Ensignebearer, to the intent that
when the Ensignebearer is disposed to deliuer his Ensigne
to his Deputie, to ease himselfe, that then deliuering
his Ensigne, hee should take his halbard of his Deputie.
            Also I would that the same Deputie Ensignebearer
should take the like oath for the guard and defence of the
Ensigne that the Ensignebearer himselfe hath taken,The deputie Ensignebearer is to take the like oathe for the guard of the Ensigne that the Ensignebearer hath taken. I
meane hee as a deputie, and the other as Ensignebearer
himselfe: And therefore I would wish that the Deputie
Ensignebearer either vpon the aduancement to higher
place or death of the Ensignebearer should succeed him
in his place of Ensignebearer,Preh
                     •
                  minences of right, due to the deputie Ensignebearer. and that during the time
of his being deputie, he should haue an aduantage of pay
according to his place.
            Also I would wish the Seargeants of the band, and of
all bands to be armed in all points like to the Ensignebearer
as is before set downe,How Sergeants of bāds should be armed. as also weaponed like him with
his halbard, sworde and dagger: Howbeit I would not
that the sergeants should weare any long or short tasses
because that their office in marching with their band is
to performe the Captains directions with celeritie,The office of Sergeants in marching with their bands. as also
to march and sometimes to trot by the flanks of the
band to see that the souldiors doe march straight in their
ranks both by frunt & flanks, and that they do with great
silence obserue their proportionate and equall distances
aswell betwixt euery soldior and soldior in ranke; as also
betwixt euerie ranke and ranke, with all other orders and
obseruat
                  •
               ions militarie.
            
               Also a Captaine leading his band through any Cittie
or great Towne ought to march in his Corslet compleat,How a Captain leading his band through any Citie or great Towne ought to marche.
and to march before his band with his pique vppon his
shoulder: Howbeit his page may weare his burgonet,
and carry his target either before him or by him. And so
likewise the Lieutenant of the band being armed & weaponed
in the same sort ought to march at the backe or
Rereward (as they call it) of the band; howbeit this is
alwaies intended by such Captains, as haue disposition of
bodie to performe the same. But incase that the Captaine
be very olde, or haue any other corporall impediment,
whereby he is not well able to performe the same,
then he is to march before his band more lightlie armed
as he thinketh most conuenient, with his sword and dagger
and his leading staffe in his hand.
            Also it is a great shame for any Captaine, 
                  •
               or Lieutenant
of a band of footmen to ride in the fielde before or
with his band vpon any liuely or swift running horse or
Gelding,A great shame for any Captaine or Lieutennant to lead his band in the field vpon a swift running horse. but vpon a simple hackney beeing sure of foote
that will gallop a Caunterburie pace by the frunt, flankes,
and backe of his band, to see order obserued and to ease
himselfe vpon; by reason that when Captaines doe in
the field vpon swift running horses or geldings lead their
bands, it dooth giue the soldiors occasion to doubt whether
the Captains will tarrie with them or not,No priuate band neither of horsemen nor footmen being reduced into their single order of rankes or into any square ought to disorder and breake their rankes vntill the Captaine hath geuen cōmaund ment or licence to the Ensignebearer to lodge. &c. vpon any
accident or occasion of extremitie.
            And here it is further to be noted, that after all these aforesaid
reducements of a single band into diuers orders
and formes as aforesaid, that neyther in Camp, field, nor
town, they must break their ranks to go into their quarter
to lodge, vntil their Captain, Lieutenant, or sergeant doo
come and giue licence to the Ensignebearer to depart out
of his place and lodge; which Ensignebearer departing
with his Ensigne in his hand, out of his place wheras he
before marched, and himselfe pronouncing to 
                  •
               y soldiors
next about him that they may lodge, they all then may,
some conuenient number acompanying & guarding the

Ensignebearer with his Ensigne orderlie, and with silence
breake their rankes and lodge, and goe into their
quarter, or may in the Campe or Towne make prouision
of victuall, and other things as they think most requisite:
And the like is to be performed aswel by squadrons composed
of diuers Ensignes as by one priuate band; that is,
that a squadron being reduced into forme within 
                  •
               y market
place of a Towne,No squadron consisting of diuers bands ought to disorder and breake their rankes vntill the Coronell or Coronells or Sergeants Maiors do come to the ranke of Ensignes, and licence them to departe and lodge. or in the place of assembly within
their Campe, they must neuer breake their rankes to go
to lodge, vntill by the commandment of the Coronell or
Sergeant Maior to the Ensignbearers giuen, they vnderstand
or see that the Ensignebearers with their Ensignes
in their hands pronouncing licence to lodge, are departed,
or departing out of the Centre of the squadron; And
therewithall it is further to be noted that all the Ensignebearers
of euery regiment, must fixe their Ensignes vpright
in the ground all in one rank, a conuenient distance
from and before their quarters, euery Ensigne directlie
before the band that it doth belong vnto,The Ensignebearers of euery Regiment must at the time of their lodging fixe their Ensignes vpright in the ground in the place of assembly in the frunt of their quarters. I meane in the
frunt of euery one of their quarters and bands towardes
the place of armes and assembly. And thus farre concerning
the aforesaid different particularities; And now againe
I reuert to other briefe speaches, and wordes, and
other orders, proceedinges, and particularities militarie
to be performed by Captaines and officers in the
field.
            And if a Captain or diuers Captains, or their officers
would haue their piquers stāding at their piques auanced
as is before written to take their piques into the boultes
of their armes,Brief speaches to be vsed by Captains to their soldiors, when they would haue them to vpright their piques as soldiors do vse when they approach
verie neare the place of their watch, or as piquers ought
to do when they are to charge another square of piques,
or to make head and resist a charge of horsemen, then are
they to saie to the first ranke Vpright your piques, which is
asmuch to say, take the butends of your piques into the
palmes of your right hands, & carry them in the boultes
of your armes with the pointes vpright towards the heauens:

which being performed by the first ranke, then
the second, third, fourth and fift rankes, and so consequentlie
all the rest of the rankes one after another ought
to vpright their piques as aforesaid. And if all the piquers
of a band, or diuers bandes being reduced into any forme
of squadron in the field, & hauing vprighted their piques
in the boultes of their armes as aforesaid, and that the
Sergeant Maior or Captaines. would haue their piquers
to charge or to receaue a charge of another square of piquers
their Enemies,Brief speaches to be vsed by Sergeant Maiors or Captai
                     •
                  es to their soldiors when they would haue them to charge or receaue a charge of another squadron of piquers. then are they to say to the first
rankes of piquers. Straighten and close your rankes, couch
your piques and charge: which being pronounced, all the
piquers of the first ranke must ioine, and close themselues
close in frunt, letting fall the points of their piques
and carying them close breasthigh with both their hands
steadilie and firmely, the points full in the faces of their Enemies:
And the second ranke likewise straightning and
closing themselues by flanke and frunt, and ioyning
themselues to the backe of the first ranke, and following
them steppe with steppe carrying their piques abouehand
ouer the shoulders of the first ranke,How piquers should charge or receaue a charge of an other squadron of piquers. the points of
their piques likewise towards the faces of their Enemies,
And the third ranke closing and straightning themselues
in flanke and frunt, and ioyning themselues to the
backe of the second ranke; And the fourth ranke likewise
straightning & closing themselues to the backes and
shoulders of the third ran
                  •
               e, and carrying their piques
firmelie with both their hands ouer 
                  •
               y shoulders of all the
ranks before them, the points of their piques likewise towards
the faces of their enemies approching. And all the
rest of the ranks of piquers following step with step each
one at the heeles of the other, must carry their piques still
vpright in the palmes of their handes, and in the boults of
their armes as abouesaid, but yet bending the poin
                  •
               es of
them somewhat towards their enemies, that they may be
seen ready in an instant to let fal the points of their piques
towards their enemies, and to succor the ranke before

them vpon any necessitie,Piquers when they approch their enemies, ar not to shake & clatter their piques, but are to carry them firme & steady. or heard incounter of their Enemies.
Aduising therwithall that no Captaines nor officers
of bandes do in any wise teach nor suffer their piquers,
when they shall approch their Enemies to charge
them, to shake and clatter their piques, as some newe
phantastical Captaines and officers of this time do teach
their soldiors to do; as though they would make their enemies
afraid before they come at them: which is more
like vnto such as do plaie the Soldans and Sarazins vpon
a Stage, then like soldiors piquers in the field, who should
at an approach and charge, carie their piques as steadie
and firme as they can possiblie, the points full in the faces
of their enemies as is aforesaid.
            But in this place I thinke good further to notefie vnto
the Readers of these mine instructions that in the yeare.
1588.The opinion of such as do vain ly hold that piquers in squadron should lie at the push of 
                     •
                  y pique, thereby with thrusts and foines to annoy their enemies, answered. I did heare some two or three of our Nation of
principall offices and charge Militarie hold an opinion,
that when two squadrons of Enemies all piquers should
come to incounter and confrunt the one with the other,
that then the 
                  •
               ormost ranks of them should lie at the push
of the pique and so should annoie the one the other, with
thrusts and foines (as they terme it) at all the length of
their Armes and piques, according to the vse of single
Combattes either in sport or earnest betwixt piquer and
piquer. By which kinde of fighting of squadrons at the
push of the pique, I say, that none of the rankes can fight
but only the first ranke, because that if they obserue their
proportionate distances according to order and discipline,
the piques of the second rank are too short to reach
with their points the first rank of their enemies squadron
likewise standing still foining at all the length of their
Armes and piques; as they vainelie imagine: Yea although
to the trouble and disorder of the first ranke before
them they do thrust and foine ouer their shoulders;
During which time of the pushing and foyning of the
two first rankes of the two squadrons of enemies, all the
rest of the rankes of both the squadrons must by such an

vnskilfull kind of fighting stand still and looke
                  •
                on and cr
                  •
               
aime, vntill the first ranke of each squadron hath fought
their bellies full, or vntill they can fight no longer: which
is a very scorne and mockerie mylitarie to be either spoken
or thought of by any men of warre that doo pretend
to haue 
                  •
               eene any action effectuallie performed betwixt
any great numbers of piquers reduced into form of squadrons
in the field. For in troth according to all reason
and true experience, such a squadron as should thinke it
their greatest aduantage to fight in that sort, must (contrarie
to discipline) inlarge themselues in their ranks and
distaunces both in frunt and by flankes, to the intent that
they may haue elbow roome enough without any impediment
by the nearnesse of the ranks behind them, to pul
backe their armes, and to thrust at their enemies approching
them at all the length they can of their armes and
piques, and againe with dexteritie to pull backe, & retire
them to giue new thrusts: which opening & enlargment
of ranks being perceiued by the contrarie squadron (who
if they be skilful men of warre) doe come closed in their
rankes both in frunt and by flankes, as close as they can
possiblie march pace with pace and step with step, as if
they were one entire body, carrying their piques with
both their hands breasthigh, all the points of the piques
of the first rank of one euennesse & equality not any one
preceeding the other: And so likewise the points of al the
piques of the second, third and fourth ranks, carrying the
like equalitie and euennesse, but yet the points of euerie
ranke of piques, shorter and further distant almost by a
yard from their enemies faces, then the pointes of the
ranke that doo preceed them; And all those fower ranks
marching or moouing forward together pace with pace
and step with step, carrying their piques firmly with both
their hands brest high as aforsaid their points full in their
enemies faces, they doe altogether giue a puissant thrush,
the points of the first ranke of piques, first lighting vpon
the faces of the first ranke or rankes of their enemies; and

the points of the second, third, and fourth rankes, subsequently
in a manner all in an instant, doe all one after another
in such terrible sort light vpon the faces, breasts and
bodies of the formost rankes of the enimies that do stand
still pushing and foining with their piques in their rankes
opened and inlarged, that they neuer giue them any leysure
any waies to pull backe and recouer the vse of their
piques to giue any new thrustes, nor yet to close their
ranks inlarged, but doo ouerthrow, disorder and breake
them with as great facilitie, as if they were but a flocke of
geese; as all men of right consideration and iudgement
may easilie consider and see.
            But after all this it may be, that some very curious and
not skilfull in actions of Armes, may demand what the
formost rankes of this well ordered and practised squadron
before mentioned shall doo after they haue giuen
their aforesaid puissant blows & thrusts with their piques
incase that they doo not at the first incountry ouerthrow
and breake the contrary squadron of their enemies: thervnto
I say, that the foremost rankes of the squadron hauing
with the points of their piques lighted vppon the
bare faces of the formost ranks of their enemies, or vpon
their Collers, pouldrons, quirasses, tasses, or disarmed
parts of their thighes; by which blowes giuen they haue
either slaine, ouerthrown, or wounded those that they
haue lighted vpon, or that the points of their piques lighting
vppon their armours haue glanced off, and beyond
them; in such sort as by the nearnes of the formost ranks
of their enemies before them, they haue not spaceenough
againe to thrust; nor that by the nearnes of their
fellowes ranks next behind them, they haue any conuenient
elbowe roome to pull backe their piques to giue a
new thrust; by meanes whereof they haue vtterly loste
the vse of their piques, they therfore must either presentlie
let them fall to the ground as vnprofitable; or else may
with both their hands dart, and throw them as farre forward
into & amongst the ranks of their enemies as they

can, to the intent by the length of them to trouble their
ranks, and presently in the twinkling of an eie or instant,
must draw their short arming swordes and daggers, and
giue a blow and thrust (tearmed a halfe reuerse, & thrust)
all at, and in one time at their faces: And therewithall
must presentlie in an instant, with their daggers in their
left hands, thrust at the bottome of their enemies bellies
vnder the lammes of their Cuyrasses, or at any other disarmed
parts: In such sort as then al the ranks of the whol
squadron one at the heeles of the other pressing in order
forward, doo with short weapons, and with the force of
their ranks closed, seeke to wound, open, or beare ouer
the rankes of their enemies to their vtter ruine: At which
time and action all the inner rankes of piques sauing the
first, 4. or 5. ranks, can with their piques worke no effect,
by reason that the said 4. or 5. rankes before them being
next to their enemies, are so neare and close together,
that they cannot with any thrust vse the pointes of their
piques against their said enemies, without endangering
or disordering their fellowes before them; For which
causes by al reason and experience militarie, short staued,
long edged, and short and strong pointed battleaxes or
halbards, of the length of 5. foot or 5. foot and a halfe in
all their lengths, at the vttermost, in the hands of lustie
and well armed soldiors that doo follow the first 5. rankes
of piquers at the heeles, doo both with blow at the head,
and thrust at the face, worke wonderfull effects, and doo
carrie all to the ground. By all which particularities before
alleaged and declared, I thinke it may be apparant to
all such as are not obstinatelie ignorant, that Battles and
squadrons of piquers in the field when they doo incounter
and charge one another, are not by any reason or experience
mylitarie to stand al day thrusting, pushing, and
foining one at another, as some doo most vainelie imagine,
but ought according to all experience with one puissant
charge and thrush to enter and disorder, wound, open,
and break the one the other, as is before at large declared.
            
               And if all the piquers of a band or of diuers bands beeing
reduced into any forme of squadron, should be charged
with a square or troupe of horsemen, hauing their
piques vprighted in the pal
                  ••
               s of their hands, and boults
of their arms (as abouesaid) and the sergeant Maiors and
Captains seeing the Launces ready to charge them,Briefe speaches to be vsed by a Sergeant Maior, or a Captaine to their soldiours piquers, when they are readie to be charged by a squadron of Launces. they
shuld then say vnto their piquers, Straighten and close your
ranks close, couch your piques and make head: which beeing
by them pronounced, al the soldiors in the first rank shuld
close themselues in an instant in frunt, and setting the butends
of their piques vnder their right feet firmely to stay
the endes of them from sliding, they should hold their
piques with their left hands, about a yard and a quarter
from the butends, leaning their right knees strongly vpon
their piques to keepe them the more firme, & should
direct the points verie lowe towards the breasts of their
enemies horses,How piquers should resist a charge of Launces. hauing all their short arming swords redie
drawne in their right hands, the points forward, readie
to kill or hogh any barbed horse or horses that by
chance may breake the piques and enter: And then the
second ranke of piquers straightning and closing themselues
in frunt, should let fall the pointes of their piques
towards their enemies, and should ioine themselues close
to the backe of the first ranke, bearing their piques firmely
with both their hands, almost close to the vpper part
of their breasts ouer the shoulders of the first ranke, at all
the conuenient length they may, with the pointes towardes
the faces of the enemies horses: And the thirde,
fourth, and fift rankes of piquers in the same sort should
close and ioyne themselues close, each one to the backe
and shoulders of the rankes before them: And each one
of those rankes should carrie their piques firmelie with
both their handes ouer the shoulders of the ranks before
them, with the pointes of their piques full in the eies and
faces of the horses, and bodies of the horsemen: And
the sixth, seuenth, and all the rest of the backer rankes
straightning and closing themselues as aforesaid should

carry their piques vpright in the boultes of their armes,
but yet the pointes somewhat bending forward towards
the enemie readie alwaies to fauour and succour the
rankes before them: And thus all the ranks of the whole
squadron being vnited, closed and in corporated as it were
into one entire bodie, should with mightie hand resist &
repulse any furious charge of horsemen.How piquers should receiue a charge of Launces in case the Sergeant Maior or Captains should thinke good to place any weapons of volee before them.
            
            But it is to be noted that in case the Sergeant Maior
be disposed to reduce three rankes of Harqueb
                  •
               
               ziers,
or else two rankes of mosquetiers, and those not too thicke
before the frunt of the squadron of piques, to the intent
to giue a volee of shorte at the Launces approching;
then the piquers of the first ranke must not sette their
piques vnder their right feet with their swords drawne
(as aforesaid) but the saide two rankes of mosquetiers,The formost ranks of a squadrō of piquers cannot con
                     •
                  eniently and aptly encouer & guard aboue 3 rankes of Harquebuziers nor aboue 2 rankes of musque
                     •••
                  rs, against the charge of Launces.
or the three rankes of harquebuziers, seeing the Launces
ready to charge them, must very orderlie retire
themselues almost close to the forefeete of the firste
ranke of piquers; and there falling vpon their right knees,
they must set their left elbowes vpon their left knees, the
more firmelie and steadilie to beare and discharge their
mosquets or harguebuzes, as from very steadie restes at
the horses or horsemen comming in their Carrire within
10. or. 12. or 15.Euerie Geometricall pace doth consist of 5 foot, & euerie foot doth consist of 12 Geometrical inches, or inches (as we terme them) by the Rule, & so it is to be vnderstoode by the Reader in all my writinges, where I speake of paces. paces.
            And then the first ranke of piquers, as also the second,
third, and fourth,How and in what distances harqu
                     •
                  buziers or mosquetiers are to discharg their peeces from vnder a squadron of piques. must beare all their piques firmly
abouehand close to the vpper parts of their breasts, the
pointes of their piques full in the breasts and faces of the
horses; and so must encouer and guard the shot vnder
their piques, and brauely repulse & disorder the Launces.
The order that mosquetiers should obserue in charging their peeces in the foresaid action. Aduising all Conductors and leaders of mosquet shot
that in this or the like action of arms before declared they
do instruct & giue order to al their mosquetiers to charge
their mosquets with 5. or 6. round hailshot of war of the
heigth of Reistres pistoll bullets which are called by the

Spaniards Perdigones de guerra: and that they do thrust
betweene the powder and the hailshot some conuenient
quantitie of browne or soft paper, or something else to
restraine and keepe the powder close together, and then
to put in the round haileshot of warre, & againe to thrust
after the same a conuenient quantity of browne paper or
something else to keepe the haileshot close together, and
to restraine both powder and shot; in such sort as therby
the powder may carry the haileshot the further, and giue
the greater blow, which within 10. 15. or 20. paces is of
great effect.
            But in this case the mosquetiers must take great heed,
that they do not ouercharge their peeces with powder,
nor with aboue the nomber of .5. or .6. haileshott of warre
at the most, as aforesaid; least that their peeces should
break or recoile, and so ouerthrow them to the trouble of
the piquers, from vnder whose piques they are to discharge
their peeces: And this manner of discharging of
haileshot of warre by mosquetiers is for diuers times and
places of seruice, of great effect, so as they giue no volee
at the enemie aboue .20. paces at the furthest. And I do
furder aduertise that no musquetiers, nor harquebuziers,
reduced vnder the guarde of a sqadron of piquers, should
giue any volee, or volees of shot neither with full bullets
nor with any haileshot of warre at anysquadron or troupe
of Launces charging, or approaching to charge neither
.300 .200. nor yet .100. paces, with intent to recharge againe,
and to giue a new volee: Because that both by reason
and experience the first volee either of mosquets, or
harquebuezes, being charged as they ought to be either
with haileshott of warre, or full bullets, and being giuen
within .10. 15. or. 20. paces at the Launces comming
in their Carrire to charge, doth terrefie, wound and kill
more horses and men, then. 10. volees of musquets or
harquebuzes giuen. 300. 200. or. 100 paces distant can
do. And this encouering of shot with piques (abouesayd)
at my trayning of Maister Barringtons, Maister

Westons, and Maister Maxeies bandes at Chelmesford
this last sommer. 1588. I did shewe vnto them and to
their officers both by actuall demonstrations and reasons
with diuers other perticularities appertaining both to
horsemen and footmen.
            But now whereas there be diuers that haue conceiued
an opinion from the discourse of Mounser de la Noüe,
               The oppinion of Mounsieur de la Noue.
that incase there be any great ouerplus of harquebuze or
mosquet shott more then a squadron of piquers that is
without horsmen can encouer and guarde vnder their
piques from the charge of a squadron or diuers squadrōs
of Launces, that vpon that occasion they should be reduced
into square, and enuironed or empa
                  •
               ed in frunt, flanks
and back, with 6. or 7. rankes of piquers; and that y• Launces
cōming in their squadrons to charge them in frunt, in
flanks, or back; y• piquers closing themselues close in frunt,
flanks, and backe, and bending themselues forward with
their piques to encouer and guarde certen musquetiers
and harquebuziers placed before them, as also to resist &
repulse a charge of horsemen; that then the rankes of the
aforsaid harquebuziers placed within the ranks of piques,
may giue a volee of shot ouer the piquers heads before
them, at so much of the bodies of the horsmen as do appeare
aboue the heads of the piquers, greatly to the danger
and mischiefe of the Launces charging. Certenlie I
doo thinke that the opinion
                  •
                of so sufficient a man of war
and old soldior is no waies to be contemned, but greatly
to be regarded▪ Howbeit when I come to consider that
the same was neuer yet put in practise in any seruice of
the field: and therefore dooth rest but only in imagination,
I will (with the helpe of almightie God) to the intent
that the true effect and effects of the same may be y• more
apparant, al
                  •
               edge diuers reasons wherefore (in mine opinion)
the same can be no waies profitable, but very dangerous
to the whole squadron, and of verie small or no
annoiance to the Launces; and my reasons are these:
First, when a squadron of piques are to make head and resist

a squadron of Launces comming in their Carrire to
charge them,The opinion of the author fortified with reasons cōtrary to the opinion of Mounsieur de la Noue. they are to straighten and close themselues
by frunt and flankes as close as they can, making themselues
as it were, one entire body, to y• intent that they may
the more fi
                  •
               mely and strongly stand together with their
piques bent to the encouering and guarding of the mosquetiers
before them, and to the resisting and repulsing of
the horsmen, which when the formost. 7. rankes haue
performed; then if the harquebuziers that are within the
piques in the centre of the battle, as also the piquers of
the flankes and backe, to the intent that the squadron
may keepe proportion and forme, do likewise straighten
and close themselues in their rankes by frunt and flankes,
as the piquers before them haue done; it commeth to
passe that they are so close together, that hauing no elbowe
rome to discharge their peeces at some kinde of
point and blanke: the discharging of their shott vpon diuers
accidents doth become more daungerous to their
fellowes piquers in the rankes before them, then any
waies to the Launces; because that being so neare together,
euerie each one do so trouble the armes, peeces, and
handes of their companions; that when they thinke to
shoote ouer their fellowes piquers heads at the Launces,
they are more likely to shoote too lowe, and to kill
some of their fellow piquers in the rankes before them, to
the daunger of the disordering of the whole squadron:
Besides that it is wonderfull daungerous if any flaske, or
tuchboxe by any accident should fall on fire by so many
matches light, being so neare together, which if it should
happen by one flaske or touchboxe taking fire; there is no
doubt but that the same would set on fire a great sort of other
flaskes and touchboxes, burning and scorching many
soldiors; in such sorte, as that one accident alone,
would cause so great disorder and feare, that it were enough
to discorder and ouerthrow a whole squadron if it
were of ten thous
                  •••
                men; although they were the most
practised soldiors 
                  〈◊〉
                are in Christendome.
            
               But peraduenture som body not experienced in yt straight
ning & closing of a squadron of armed footmen by frunt
and flanks, will say; y• althogh al the ranks of piquers both
by frunt, flanks, & back, do straighten & close themselues
to make head against ye launces (as aforsaid) yet that ye harquebuziers
that are within the squadrō may remain so inlarged
in their ranks, as yt they shal haue so much elbowe
room without any waies troubling or touching one another,
that they may with great facility discharg their peeces
ouer ye heads of the piquers before them without any
waies troubling them, or endangering the firing of their
flasks & touchboxes to the great mischiefe of the Launces.
Whervnto it is to be answered,An obiection answered. that if euery rank of
the whol squadron be of one number of soldiors, as al wel
formed squadrons are; & that by flanks ye number of ranks
be of the like number to the frunt & back; wherby it commeth
to passe that the squadron is a iust square in frunt, in
flanks, & back; or that the squadron be double as broad;
that is, as broad again in frunt and back, as it is by flanks,
or else that the squadron be triple as many, that is three
times as many in frunt as by flanks, or more or fewer according
to the nature and aduantage of the ground, or of
other occasions and aduantages, that may seeme best to
the Sergeant Maior, or to the Sergeant Maior generall
that hath the ordering of ye said squadron: then in which
of those formes soeuer, or any other that the squadron of
footmen should be reduced into; the formost 7. ranks of
piquers in frunt, straightning, and closing themselues in
their ranks to make head against y• horsmen charging (as
aforesaid) & likewise the 7. ranks of piquers at the back of
y• squadron straightning, & closing themselues, & turning
their faces and piques backeward, to the intent to make
frunt and head against a charge of Launces that would
charge them in back: & the harquebuziers yt do remaine
within the squadron empaled on euery side with 7. ranks
of piquers (as aforesaid) still remaining enlarged in their
rankes to haue the more commoditie to discharge their
peeces ouer the piquers heads; of diuers disproportions

and disorders that must by the forming of this foresaide
squadron of necessitie succeed by the harquebuziers remaining
still enlarged in their rankes, and the piquers
straightned and closed in their rankes: This one chiefe
and most notorious deformed disorder, that doth include
all the rest, must needs ensue to the present ruine and ouerthrowe
of the whole squadron; that is, by 2. or 3.
charges of the Launces giuen at one time vpon the open
and vnguarded places of the squadron; and that by reason
that ye harquebuziers remaining stil enlarged in their
rankes in frunt and by flankes, the more orderlie to discharge
their peeces, doo occupie so great a quantitie of
ground, that all the rankes of the piquers that doo empale
the harquebuziers of the right and left flanks straightning
and closing themselues by frunt and flanks as the ranks of
the piquers of the frunt and backe haue doone, cannot
possiblie performe the same in any such sort, but that the
said piquers of both the flankes must remain a great deale
too short to close themselues, and ioine with the 7, ranks
of piquers in frunt, and the 7. rankes of piquers in back:
wherby of necessititie it would come to passe, that there
would be 4. open places betwixt the 4. or rather 8. corners
of the squadron vnguarded with piques; where the
Launces without receiuing any resistance, nor so much
as one blow of the point of a pique, might charge and
giue in amongst the harquebuziers within the bodie of
the squadron, to the disordering and vtter ouerthrow of
the whole squadron with great facilitie,Weapons of fire are no waies to be placed nor yer to be suffred to enter within the bodie of a squadron of piques. as any man well
practised and of good experience and iudgement in matters
militarie, may easily consider & conceaue. For which
causes, dangerous accidents, and reasons before alleaged
mine opinion is, that I would neuer place nor yet suffer
any weapons of fire, to enter within the body of my squadron
of piques.
            But now furthermore, if any number of souldiors of
what weapon soeuer they bee, beeing reduced into any
forme of square, and that the Sergeant Maior or Captaines

would make of flanke frunt; then are they to go to
that flanke and side, that they would make frunt, and beeing
right against the midst, somewhat distant from the
flanke,Brief speaches to be vsed by Captains to their soldiors when they should make of flanke 
                     〈◊〉
                  . they should say to their soldiors aloud. Frunt to
me souldiors: which being by them pronounced; the first
rank next vnto them is to turn their faces towards them,
& so subsequentlie al the rest of the rankes one after another:
But because that by making the flanke frunt, the
squadron commeth to be in disproportion, by reason that
the distances of the ranks of a squadron, being reduced
into any forme of square to march or to fight, are greater
by flankes; that is betwixt ranke and ranke, then they are
by frunt;How a Sarg
                     •
                  
                  ant Maior or Captain in making of flank
                     •
                   frunt is to reduce their piquers into their due proportion are distances. that is betwixt soldior and soldior in frunt: The
Sergeant Maior and Captains in making the flank frunt,
must straighten all the rankes in frunt and inlarge them
by flanks; and so reduce them into their due and proportionate
distances.
            And incase the sergeant Maior or Captains will make
of the backe frunt, then they are to goe to the backe
and pronounce with a loude voice the like words, & then
all the rankes are to turne their faces and to make their
frunt that waies:How to make of backe frunt. And as these briefe words pronounced
for the purpose aforesaid are to bee vsed vnto souldiors
footmen; so the like wordes for the same effect and purpose
to make flanke frunt, may serue for men at armes, dimilaunces,
or light horsmen; as for example, If a Coronell
or Captaine of men at arms, or dimilaunces hauing
reduced their Launces into any forme or squadron, bee
disposed to make of flanke frunt; then they placing them
selues vpon the side or flanke as aforesaid, and saying to
their horsmen with a high voice,How Captains or Coronells of horsemen a
                     •
                   to make of flanke frunt. 
               Frunt to me Launces, or
if they be light horsmen, Frunt to me speares, all the horsmen
of what armour and weapon soeuer they bee, must
turne the faces of their horses, and make frunt that waie,
hauing regard to reforme and reduce themselues into
their proportionate distances by frunt & flank as aforsaid.
            And now hauing written concerning the ordering

and forming of priuate bands and companies of soldiors,
                  
                     •
                   doth behoue the Generall and the 
                     •
                  ord Marshal of an Armie as also the 
                     •
                  ergeante Maior generall alwaies to 
                     •
                  aue about them a 
                     •
                  erfite roll of all the Coronells and Cap
                  
                     •
                  ains names with the 
                     •
                  umber of euery 
                     •
                  ne of their Regi
                  
                     •
                  ents, and what 
                     •
                  umber of soldiors also doe appertaine 
                     •
                  o euerie 
                     •
                  nsigne & 
                     •
                  and aswell of horse men as of footmen 
                     •
                  hroughout the whole armie, that 
                     •
                  hereby vpon all occasions they may giue present orders and directions.
with diuers and sundry particularities concerning as well
squadrons composed of diuers bands, as of single bands:
I will with the helpe of Almightie God, proceed to shew
how a squadron should bee redu
                  •
               ed into forme in the open
fields, to march or fight, that by the curious forming
of that first one squadron with diuers particularties concerning
the same; all such as doo professe armes, and are
of consideration may with great facilitie see and obserue
all such particularaties as they shall thinke therein worth
the nothing and obseruing: And therefore I say for examples
sake: If a Coronell or his Sergeant Maior of a Regiment
of 4000. footmen of diuers weapons bee disposed
to reduce 2100. piquers of the same Regiment into squadron,
and that hee would forme his squadron double as
broad, or a thirde part broader, or more, or lesse in frunt
then by flanke; then he first is to consider of how manie
piquers he will make his frunt, that is, how many soldiors
euery ranke from frunt to backe shall conteine,The waie and order 
                     •
                  ow a squadron 
                     •
                  hould bere duced 
                     •
                  nto forme in the o
                  
                     •
                  en fields, either to marche or fight. as also of
how many rankes the same squadron by flank, or flankes
shall consist; and therewithall of how many diuisions or
compertiments of bands he will forme the said squadron;
and according to the same, the Sergeant Maior must
command all the Captaines or their Lieutenants,All Coronells and Sergeants Maiors of Regiments aswell of 
                     •
                  or
                     •
                  emen as of foot
                  
                     •
                  en ought to haue 
                     •
                  ontinually about them a Roll of all 
                     •
                  he Captains and 
                     •
                  heir Lieutenants names that are in 
                     •
                  heir Regimentes 
                     •
                  ith the nomber of soldiors and diffe
                  
                     •
                  ent armors and 
                     •
                  eapons that do be
                  
                     •
                  ong to euery band 
                     •
                  r companie therby 
                     •
                  o giue present di
                  
                     •
                  ections. the piquers
of whose bands are to enter into squadron, to feparate
them from all other sorts of weapons, and to reduce
them into so many or so many in euery ranke, and so many
rankes by flank as he before hath propounded and resolued
with himselfe. As for example, hauing 2100. piquers
to reduce into one battle, and that he thinketh 55.
souldiors in 
                  •
                ranke, and 38. ranks by flankes to be a conuenient
forme of squadron according to the nature of the
ground to march and fight; he then may make his compertiments
of the piquers of euerie priuate band, of odde
numbers; or of different odde numbers, as of 5. and 7. or
else of euen and odde numbers, as of 4. of 5. of 6. and of
7. according to the greatnesse or smalnesse of the number

of piquers of euery priuate band, incase there be none
of the numbers too small; which if any of them be, then
they are to be vnited and incorporated with the compertiments
of the piquers of other bands; alwaies obseruing
that the different numbers of al those compertiments being
vnited in frunt doo make iust 55. souldiors, and by
flankes 38. rankes.Three different formings of squadrons. And therefore I will begin with three
different formings of squadrons, which of all others are
most ready and best;The firste. of the which the first is, That a Coronell
or his Sergeant Maior hauing considered and cast
how many compertimentes or diuisions of piquers hee
will make the frunt of his squadron of; and that the same
compertiments be they euen or od, or of compertiments
both of euen and odde numbers, so as they all vnited into
one bodie of squadron doo make in frunt but the iust
number of 55. soldiors: then the Coronel or his sergeant
Maior determining to forme his squadron, and seeing all
those compertiments of piquers by their Captians, deuided
and separated from all the weapons of volee & other
weapons, and therefore ready to bee reduced into squadron;
he then is to say to the captain that dooth lead that
compertiment, or companie that is next him, if he thinketh
good to begin his squadrō with that compertiment:
March vp to yonder ground, pointing to the same with
his warder; & there you & your cōpanie auance your piques
and make a pause: which being by that company or compertiment
performed; then he is to say to the Captaines
of two other compertiments or companies: March vppe
with your company vpon the right flanke, and you with your
company by the left flank of yonder compertiment, and incorporate
your compertiments in frunt, flankes, and backe, with
that companie or compertiment; Then the Coronelles
drummer Maior, or rather his trompetter according to
the vse of the Suissers in respect that the soundes and
commandementes of the same may bee the better and
further heard and vnderstoode for the forming of battailes
and squadrons, then the strokes of Drummes

can bee; is presentlie to sounde the forming of the
squadron by doubling by both the sides or flankes at one
time, according vnto the order of the doubling of the 3.
first compertimentes; which being by all the rest of the
compertiments performed; I meane by marching vppe
and doubling themselues vpon both the flankes or sides
of the 3. first compertiments formed; all marching and
succeeding one another both vppon the right and lefte
flankes in a manner at one time; and so the squadron being
reduced into forme; the first compertiment by this
kind of forming and doubling vppon both flankes of the
same, is now come to be the middlemost compertiment
of the whole squadron: and this manner of forming of a
squadron by doubling the compertiments vppon both
flankes at one time, is one of the readiest, and best of
all others, if the ground doo permit the performance
thereof.
            Then there is another order in forming of squadron;The second waie to forme squadrones.
and that may bee tearmed to forme and double a squadron
with companies, or compertiments by backe, and
that is to be performed in this sort; First, that a Sergeant
Maior hauing considered which waies he will make the
frunt of his squadron, he is then to command that euerie
companie or compertiment that are to enter into squadron
shall be reduced into so many souldiors by flank, as
he dooth meane to make his frunt of, hauing regard also
to the number of the rankes that he will make his whole
squadron of by flankes: which being by his direction, as
also by the sound of the Coronels trompetter thrughout
all the companies or compertiments performed; then he
may say to the Captain of the first compertiment that he
will make his frunt of, pointing or directing with his warder:
March to yonder ground, & there auaunce your piques
and make a pause, and make of your right flanke frunt, and
reforme your distances according to discipline both by frunt
and flankes, or if he hath determined to make his frunt of
the left flanke, he may then say, Make of your left flanke

frunte, and reforme your distances both by frunte and flankes
according as he hath before determined either the one
waies or the other to make his frunt: which making of
frunt either of the right, or of the left flanke is to be vnderstood
that they should turne their faces and weapons
one of those waies: which being by them performed,
then if they were. 55. rankes, and. 5. in euerie ranke in
their marching, they are now by making of their flanke
frunt become. 55. in frunt, that is so many in euery ranke,
and by flanke only. 5. rankes: which aduancing of their
piques, and pause, and making of flanke frunt by the first
company, or compertiment performed; then he is to say
to another compertiment of the like number of rankes
by flanke, be they of euen or od numbers it is importeth not
so as he faile not in his great and generall account of the
number of the rankes of the whole squadron by flanke, or
flankes. March and double your selues by the backe of yonder
conpertiment, or companie, and there 
                     〈◊〉
                   make of flanke
frunt, as that companie hath done. Which being by them
preformed, then persentlie, but rather at the first, the Coronelles
Trompetter is to sound the doubling of their
Companies into squadrō by back, which being by all the
companies or compertiments performed and reduced
into their conuenient distances both by frunt and flankes
according to discipline either to march or to fight, then
the Sergeant Maior may giue order and reduce vpon the
flanks and corners of the squadron all the different sortes
of weapons of volee into as many formes as he listeth, of
sleeues, winges, hearses, troups &c, and may backe as
many of them with light armed piquers, and halbarders,
or battleaxes, as the number or remnante of those
weapons will giue them leaue.
            And yet there is another order of forming of a Squadron
by doubling and redoubling of the compertiments
vpon the backe of the first compertiment, which with
diuers others, because I do not allowe them for so good
as these before sett downe, I omitt; and therefore proceeding

to the third order of forming of a squadron by doubling
the compertiments only by one flanke, that is only
either vpon the right,The third order of forming of squadron: or vpon the lefte flanke, with diuers
and sundrie particularities concerning the same; I say
that incase I had a regiment of. 4000. footmen of diuers
sorts of weapons, as abouesayd, and that I were disposed
to reduce. 2100. piquers into squadron of. 55. in frunt, &
38. by flanks, and that I thought good to make my compertiments
altogether of like od nūbers, as of. 5. soldiors
in euerie ranke from frunt to backe, and the same of. 38.
rankes by flankes, I would then deuide them into. 11.
compertiments of. 5. in euery ranke throughout euery
compertiment, which vnited are. 55. piquers in euery
ranke: and in number of rankes by flanks. 38. euery which
compertiment of. 5. from frunt to backe cōteining. 190.
soldiors, the whole squadron consisting of. 11. compertiments
as aforesaid, doth come to consist of. 2090. soldiors;
the ouerplus which lacketh nomber to make a ranke
and therefore to be tearmed a broken ranke. 10. soldiors;
who are either to march and place themselues with the
ranke of Ensignes, or otherwise readie to be emploied as
the Sergeant Maior shall thinke most conuenient. Now
hauing all these. 11. compertiments in the field seperated
from all the rest of the weapons; and being disposed to reduce
them presently into forme, the Coronell, or Sergeant
Maior either leading them himselfe, or pointing with
his warder in his hand to the ground to y• which they shal
march vnto, is to vse these briefe speaches, or the like to
the Captain that dooth lead the first band, or compertimēt
March vp to that ground & there aduāce your piques &
make a pause; then presently after he is to say to the second
band or compertiment, March vp and double your selues by
the left flanke of the first compertiment, and so subsequently
he is to commaūd his trumpettor to sound, as also otherwise
to giue direction to the rest of the compertiments
that they shall double themselues euery one vpon the
left flanke of the other: but after that he hath vsed the briefe
speaches aforesaid to the two first compertiments, then

besides the sounds of the trompettor for the forming of
the squadrō, if he be not disposed to gallop with his horse
by ye flank of the rest of ye compertiments yt are furder off
behind, and to vse the like speaches of doubling by flanks
as aforesaid, he may by certen signes that hee may vse to
accustome his Captaines and officers vnto, either with
his hand, or with his warder, direct them to the doubling
of their rankes by flankes as aforesaid, which squadron,
with all the Ensignes guarded with their halbardes, or
battleaxes placed in the Centre, or betwixt the 2. middle
rankes of the same beeing by the Coronell, or Sergeant
Maior with so great facilitie perfourmed, and by him and
his officers straightlie lookt into, that all their rankes as
well in frunt as by flanke, doo obserue their most conuenient
and proportionate distaunces either to march
or to fight, he then may forme his sleeues, wings, squares,
hearsses and troups of harquebuziers, Archers, and
mosquetiers, and backe as many of them with the rest of
the piques and battleaxes, as the ground and the sayde
remnant of those weapons wil giue them leaue, or as the
approching and cōming of the enemies shall giue them
occasion.Squadrons may be formed of compe
                     •
                  timents of like odd numbers, or of diffe
                     •
                  ent odd numbers, or o
                     •
                   di
                     ••
                  e
                     •
                  ent euen and odd numbers, as also of like euen numbers. Now as this squadron is formed altogether of
compertiments of like od numbers, so may the Sergeant
Maior forme the very same squadron with compertiments
of different odde numbers, as with compertiments
of 
                  •
               . and 7. or with compertiments of different euen and
odde numbers, as of 4. 5. and 6. so as they all vnited in
frunt doo come to make 55. souldiors, and by flan
                  •
               e 38.
ranks, as is before declared: which different particularities
with many others concerning aswell the ordering of
horsmen as footmen, I haue set down by demonstration
in a booke which I mean shortly to put in print, entituled.
Certen military discourses, and Arithmetical tables, with
diuers formes and demonstrations for a Lord Martiall or for
a sergeant Maior to form squadrons and to reduce both horsmen
and footmen into diuers and many forms of battles, by me
Composed 1585. or rather 1580.
            
               But now this foresaid squadron being reduced into the
forme of 55. by frunt and 38. by flankes, ouerplus a broken
ranke of 10. souldiors as aforesaid, if the Sergeant
Maior vpon the comming of the enemie, or vpon any other
occasion shall thinke requisite to make the said squadron
broader in frunt, that is of more souldiors in euerie
ranke, and shorter by flanke, that is to bee vnderstood of
fewer rankes; then he may drawe vp by flanke, from the
backe, or rereward (as some termeth it) as many ranks as
he thinketh conuenient. As for example, If he be disposed
to draw vp 4. rankes of piquers by flanke to frunt, he
is then to say vnto his deputie Sergeant Maior, or to any
other such Captaine or officer that dooth accompany
him;How a Sergeāt Maior hauing reduced his squadron into forme should vpon any occasion make it broder in frunt and shorter by flanke. 
               Draw vp 4. rankes from the backe of the squadron by
flanke: which briefe speach or the like being by him pronounced,
his said Lieutenant, Sergeant Maior, or other
Captaine or officer by him appointed, is presently to goe
to the left flanke of the last 4. rankes in backe, and to saie
vnto them: Frunt vnto me yee 4. last rankes, and let this
word, frunt, from the left flanke passe throughout to the
right flanke; and that incase hee doo pronounce those
wordes vpon the left flanke. Vppon which wordes pronounced,
and the wordes passed from the one flanke to
the other, and their faces and weapons turned towardes
him; then he is to lead them vppe by the left flanke vntill
they come to make euen frunt with the formost ranke of
the squadron; which being performed, then of 55. that
the squadron was before in euery rank from frunt to back,
it is now come to be 59. throughout all the rankes from
frunt to backe.
            But heere it is to be noted,Diuers wayes and means for a Sergeant Maior to place anie ouerplus of broken rankes. that this addition of 4. piquers
in euery ranke being drawne vp by the flanke of the
squadron as aforesaid, there doo remaine ouerplus 21.
rankes, of 4. in euery ranke, which doo in all make 84. piquers;
of the which number the sergeant maior may if he
dooth so thinke it requisite, draw vppe 34. rankes more
of 2 in euery ranke, by the flanke of the squadron; which

performed, then the squadron doth consist in frunt of 61.
souldiors, and by flank of 34. rankes; but then there doth
remaine an ouerplus of 16. souldiors, which li
                  ••
               e number
he may reserue to employ in any place of seruice where
he shall thinke most requisite; but if the Sergeant Maior
shall not thinke it conuenient to inlarge his whole squadron
from frunt to backe with 2. souldiors in euery ranke
as aforesaid: then he may with 59. souldiors taken out of
the number of 84. that did before remaine, (in which
number of 84. souldiors, the 16. souldiors ouerplus before
remaining are conteined) increase his squadron in
number of one ranke by backe, as by drawing those 59.
piquers in one ranke by the backe of the squadron, then
the squadron from 34. that it was before, is now come to
be of 35. rankes, ouerplus 25. souldiors, with which 25.
souldiors and with the 10. souldiors that did first remaine
of the 2100. that were reduced into the squadron, who
were to be placed in the ranke of Ensignes as aforesaid;
those 10. souldiors being drawn againe from thence, and
annexed vnto the 25. doo in all make 35. which 35. souldiors
being drawne vp in length by the flanke of the squadron,
doo increase euery one of the 35. ranks 1. souldior
in euerie ranke; so as of 59. souldiors that euery rank did
consist before; they are now by this increase come to be
iust 60. souldiors in euery ranke, and in rankes by flankes
35. rankes, besides the rank of Ensignes with their guard
of Halbarders, that are p
                  •
               aced in the midst or Centre of
the squadron: by which kinde of reducement the whole
squadron commeth to contein iust 2100. soldiors, ouerplus,
0. that is to be vnderstood, not so much as one souldiour.How a Lo
                     •
                   Marshall or a Sergeant Maior their squadron being in fight, should draw vp a sleeue of Piquers to assaile their enemies in flanke.
            
            And it is further to be noted that if another squadron
of like number in frunt should come to confrunt and ioin
in battle with this squadron, and being entred into fight;
and that the Coronell or Sergeant Maior, or the Lord
Marshall of the field should thinke it their aduantage to
charge and assaile the contrary squadron with a sleeue of

piquers in flanke, then the Sergeant Maior may drawe
5. or 6. rankes or more as hee thinketh good from the
backe of the squadron vppe by any of both the flankes
of the same squadron, but distant the length of 2. piques
or more, to the intent that by that little distance of the
length of 2. piques as aforesaid, when they haue marcht
vp, and doo finde themselues right against the flanke of
their enemies squadron, they may haue space to turne
themselues and make frunt towards their enemies flank,
and to close their rankes by frunt and flankes, and with
y• points of their piques to charge their enemies in flanke:
And thus farre concerning the ordering and forming of
squadrons in diuers sorts, as is before set downe.
            But now further,The squadron being formed how a Sergeant Maior should make of either of the flankes frunt, obseruing the same proportion in frunt and nomber of ranks by flanks, that they were before he made of flanke frunt. this squadron being thus formed into
60. souldiors in frunt, and of 35. souldiors by flanke,
which is by flanke 35. rankes, then if vpon any occasion
of the comming of the enemie, or vpon any other cause,
the Coronell and Sergeant Maior shall thinke requisite
to make of one of the flanks frunt: As for example of the
left flanke frunt, and that he would reduce them into the
verie same forme of squadron both in number of rankes
by flanke, as also of number of souldiors in euery ranke
that they were before; then the sergeant Maior ought
himselfe on horsebacke if he thinke it requisite, or else to
command his Lieutenant Sergeant on foot presently to
goe athwart 25. ranks:It is not lawfull for any other officers of the fielde to passe on horsebacke athwart the ranks of a squadron reduced into any forme but onely the Lieutenant General, the Lord Marshall or the sergeant Maior maior of an Armie, but yet it is lawfull 
                     •
                  or a Cor
                     •
                  
                  nel, or Sergeant Maior to passe on horsebacke a thwart y• rankes of any band, or squadr
                     •
                  n that is of their owne Regiment & not any other Captain nor officer. not from flanke to flank, but from
frunt to backe, that is to goe downe by right line betwixt
the fiue and thirtith soldior of his right hand, & the fiue &
twentith souldior of his left hand, from frunt straight to
backe; and passing through them he is to say to the souldiors
that are vpon his left hand: Keepe your selues in frunt
as you are, notwithstanding that the souldiors of my right
hand, doo make flank frunt: the effect of which his words
being throughout signified to the souldiors that are next
vnto him of his left hand, presentlie the Captaines and
their drummers that did marche in frunt before the 7.
compertiments of 5. in euery compertiment as aboue is

set downe; are to march and goe to the left flanke, which
now shall be made frunt: but the other Captaines and
drummers that are in frunt before the other 5. compertiments
are still to keepe their places vntill they receiue
further direction.
            And now the Captains and their drummers of the
compertimentes aforesaid beeing come before the left
flanke; the Coronels drummer is first to begin to strike,
and the rest immediatlie to doo the like, that all the souldiors
of that left flanke are to make frunt towardes the
Captaines and drummers; that is, to turne their faces
and weapons towards them: Or else the Sergeant Maior
may command the Captaines, or in galloping or passing
on horsebacke by the flanke, may himselfe say with a loud
voice, Frunt to me souldiors: vpon which words pronounced,
or vpon the sound of the drums for that purpose, all
the souldiors of flanke, are presently, to make frunt; and
are therewithall presently to reforme their distances as
well in frunt, as by flankes; which by this making of flank
frunt is growne into great disproportion: which reforming
of their distances as well by frunt as flanke, is to bee
performed by straightning their ranks in frunt and enlarging
them by flanks into their conuenient and proportionate
distances, either to march or fight.
            Which being performed; then the Sergeant Maior
to the intent to giue the more ground and roome to the
other part of the squadron of 5. compertiments to reduce
themselues by flanke, is to command the Coronelles
Drummer and so the rest to strike a march; which
doone, then the Captaines and all that part of the squadron
that haue made flanke frunt, are orderlie one ranke
after another to shoulder their piques and march after
their Captaines but 50. or 60. paces where the Drummers
againe striking and sounding a pause; all that
foresaid part of the squadron, are presentlie one ranke
after another to aduance their piques and make a stand;
which being performed, then the sergeant Maiors Lieutenant

is presently to command the drummers that doo
remaine vppon the frunt of the 5. compertiments that
haue not altered their frunt nor flankes, to strike a march;
which being performed, he and all their captaines must
with that part of ye squadron march certen paces straight
forward, thereby to take the more compasse of ground:
and then turning vpon the left hand, must draw them vp
almost close by the left flanke, to the frunt of that part of
the squadron that haue alreadie made of flanke frunt: Al
which being performed according to the orders before
set downe, the whole squadron is now come againe to be
in the same proportion both in number of souldiors in
euery rank, as also of number of ranks by flanks that they
were at the first; that is of 60. in euery rank, & 35. ranks.
            But heere it is to be noted,How the Ensigne bearers of the first part of the squadrō that made of flank frunt are to bring themselues againe into order. that the ranke of Ensignebearers
of the first part of the squadron that made flanke
frunt with their guardes of halbarders by this making of
flanke frunt, being brought into disorder, by reason that
now they are not in ranke as they were before, must presentlie
vpon the stroke of the drummer commanded by
the Coronels Ensignebearer march vp, not betwixt the
rankes but through the rankes of the souldiors, till they al
come betwixt the seuenteenth ranke before them, and
the eighteenth ranke behinde them; and there betwixt
those two rankes they must reduce themselues into
order and ranke; which being by them done, then both
they and the rest of the other Ensignebearers of that part
of the squadron that marched vppe and reduced themselues
by flanke as aforesaid, being in one ranke, haue before
them iust 17. rankes, and behind them 18. which in
all are 35. ranks.
            All which performed, then the sleeues, winges, and
troupes of the different weapons of volee that did before
arme the right and left flankes, and all 4. corners of the
squadron, are againe by their officers to be lead and reduced
into the same forms vpon the right and left flanks,
that they were before that the squadron did make of

flanke frunt; or else may be reduced into any other varietie
of formes that the Coronell or Sergeant Maior shall
thinke most conuenient; And so march forward if the
plainnesse of the Countrie, and other requisite causes, do
cause and permit them so to do.
            But now it is furder to be noted that if the same squadron
accompanied with sleeues, winges, and troupes of
diuers sorts of weapons of volee as aforesaid, not hauing
the enemie in sight nor neare, should happen in their
march to come to a straight passage; where betwixt rocks
mountaines and hilles or any such like there could not
passe aboue .5. soldiors in a ranke; and that there were no
other open way neare by many miles for the Regiment to
passe, but only the same; then the Coronell if he be alone
with his Regiment of .4000. men,The order that is to be taken by a Coronell if his squadron accompanied with sleeues, winges, and troupes of diuers sortes of weapons of volee should happen in their march to come to a straight how they should march and passe through the same. as aforesaid, is presently
to take order that the highest partes and sides of the
mountaines, rockes, & hilles be possessed of both sides of
the passage, with certen numbers of harquebuziers,
and some mosquetiers, as also of some light armed halbarders
to backe them; that thereby the rest of the shott
and squadron of armed men may the more safelie passe
through the straight; which being perfomed, then he is
to send the one halfe of the shott of all the diuers sorts of
volee yt did arme the right and left flanks of the squadron
to march before through the straight, I meane all such
weapons of volee as did arme the foreparts of both the
flankes and frunt of the squadron, and not the other halfe
of shott that did arme the hinder parts of the flankes, and
backe of the squadron, who are for the guard of the backe
or Rereward of the squadron, and for diuers other causes,
and accidental employments to remaine hindermost and
to march .5. in a ranke, and to follow the last compertiment
of piquers into the straight, and that I would wish
to be performed in this order and sort following: First I
would send the compertiments of mosquetiers of the
right flank marching according to the narrownes of the
straight .5: in a ranke, and the harquebuziers of the same

flanke after them, backt with some light armed piquers
and halbarders; then I would send the compertiments of
archers likewise of the right flank marching .5. in a ranke,
then I would that the compertiments of mosquetiers and
harquebuziers that were for the guard of the left flanke
marching. 5. in a ranke, backt likewise with some number
of light armed piquers and halbardars, should follow
the archers of the right flanke, and that after them should
follow the archers of the forepart corner of the left flank,
which different compertiments of weapons of volee of
the forepart of the right flanke being marcht through ye
straight into the plaine, should march so far on the right
hand, as there should be space and roome enough for the
compertiments of the piquers of the right flanke to reduce
themselues into forme vpon their lefte flanke, and
that then euerie sort and weapon of volee should reduce
themselues into the same formes, of sleeues, winges, and
troupes and other such like, as they were vpon the right
corner and flanke of the squadron before that they marched
into the straight:Wher the compertiments of the weapons of weapons of volee of the forepart of the right and left flankes of the Squadron beeing marched through the straight, should reduce themselues into forme. Then would I that the different
Compertiments of the like weapons of volee of the foreparte
of the left flanke of the squadron that haue followed
the first compertiments and are now likewise come
through the straight, should march so much on the left
hand of the plaine as they may leaue ground and space enough
for the squadron of piquers to reduce themselues
into their forme betwixt them and the weapons of volee
of the right flank, & that they there should again reduce
themselues into the like formes of sleeues, winges, and
troupes that they were vpon the forepart of the left flanke
before they marched through the straight. But it is to be
noted, that presently vpon the entring of the last compertiments
of the forepart of the weapons of volee of the
left flanke into the straight, that the Sergeant Maior is to
come to the frunt of the right flanke of the squadron if
the same flanke be next vnto the passage, and he is in
briefe words to say. Single. 5. in a ranke throughout from

frunt to backe and march after the last compertiment of shot
through the straight,Brief speaches to be vsed by the Sergeant Maior to the piquers, before they enter into the passage. and being marched thorough into the
plaine, Auaunce your piques and make a pause. Vppon
which his direction the Captaine with his whole compertiment
of 5. in a ranke from frunt to backe is to single
the same from the rest of the squadron and to followe
the shot and march into the straight; vppon the separation
and marching of which compertiment, then the
Sergeant Maior is to say to the Captain of the next compertiment.
Single your compertiments of 5. throughout,
and follow, and march straight after the first compertiment
through the straight, and being marched thorough into the
plaine, double your compertiment by the left flanke of the
formost compertiment of piquers, which compertiment being
something separated and marching into the straight;
then vppon the same direction receaued by all the Captaines
that are before the frunt of the rest of the compertiments,
as well by such briefe speaches as aforesaid, as
by the sound of the trompettor and drummes, they are
all subsequentlie and orderlie with their compertimentes
to separate them and to followe one another by right
line; and as euerie one of those Captaines with their
compertimentes haue marched one after another thorough
the straight into the plaine; so they are with all celeritie
to reduce themselues by the left flanke the one of
the other into the same form of squadron that they were
before they entred into the straight;How ye piquers being marched through the straight are to reduce themselues againe into their former squadron. and that is, that the
Captaine of the thirde compertiment of 5. in a ranke
throughout, as aforesaid, seeing the seconde compertiment
reduced and doubled by the lefte flanke of the
firste Compertiment; hee likewise is to reduce his
compertiment by the lefte flanke of the seconde; and
so consequentlie the fourth, fifth, and all the reste of the
compertiments, are by their Captaines to bee lead and
reduced by the left flanks the one of the other; which being
by them performed, and the squadron reduced into
the same forme of number of ranks, & of soldiors in euery

ranke that it was before they entered into the straight;
then all the shot of the different weapons of volee that
did march through the straight before the first compertiment
of piquers; I meane, the one halfe of those that before
they came to the straight did arme the forepartes of
the right and left flankes of the squadron, and now againe
already before the squadron is altogether againe formed
by their Captaines and officers, reduced into the same
formes vpon the foreparts of the right and left flankes of
the squadron that they were before that they first separated
themselues from the squadron, and entred into the
straight: And euen as those different compertiments of
shot did one after another orderly march through the
straight and are now againe reduced and come into their
first order as aforesaid; So the different compertimentes
of sleeues, winges, troups, and other such like of different
sorts of weapons of volee that did arme the right and left
hinder flanks, and corners of the squadron, in the like order
immediatly following the last compertiments of piquers
through the straight, are presentlie againe by their
officers to be reduced into the like compertimentes and
formes for the guard of both the hinder flanks and backe
of the squadron, that they were before the squadron did
enter into the passage.
            All which being performed, and al the harquebuziers,
mosquetiers, and halbarders that were sent to possesse the
tops of both the sides of the passage being come downe
into the plaine,Where the drommers and phifers are to be placed, the squadron marching forward in the Enimies Countrie, the Enemie being not in sight as also vpō doubt of battle. and reduced into such formes, or otherwise
employed as the Coronell and Sergeant Maior shall
thinke most meet, they may then begin againe to march
forward. Howbeit in this place it is further to be noted
that the squadron marching forwarde in the enemies
countrie the one halfe of the drummers are to bee placed
vpon the frunt, and the other halfe vpon the backe of the
squadron; and that, during the time they march the enemie
being not in sight; but vpon the sight and approch
of the enemy and doubt of battle; then vpon that occasion

all the drummers & phifers y• did march in the frunt
& back of the squadrō must presently reduce themselues,
the one halfe vpon the forpart & hinder part of the right
flank of y• squadron, & the other halfe vpon the forpart &
hinder part of y• left flank of the squadron; I meane more
towards al the 4. corners of the squadrō vpon both flanks,
then towards the midst of those flankes; because that all
their different strokes of direction, may bee the better
heard and vnderstood aswell in frunt and backe as flanks:The cause wherfore no Drummers should bee placed in the frunt of the squadrō vpon the occasion of a battle.
And the cause wherefore I woulde haue no drummers
placed in the frunt of a squadron vppon the occasion of
battle is; that they should bee no impediment to the piquers
through the greatnesse of those instruments, to vse
their piques, nor vnto mosquetiers, nor harguebuziers, in
case that any, vpon any occasion should be reduced vnder
the guard of the frunt of the piques to vse their mosquets
or harquebuzes.Not aboue one Drōme and a Phifer are to march in the midst of a squadron with the rank of ensigne Besides that I would neuer permit vpon
any occasion, that any drummes, or at the most aboue
one drummer, and a phifer, should march in the midst of
the squadron with the rank of Ensignes, because that the
greatnesse of them would be an impediment to the ranks
to close themselues by frunt and flankes, as vppon some
occasions they ought to doo.
            But heere it is furder to be noted that the squadron being
againe reduced into forme, and marching forward in
the enemies Countrie, and finding the ground in diuers
partes as they march of that nature, yt they cannot march
in squadron formed, and hauing great intelligence by
discouerers, and espialles, that the enemie is not so neere
hand as that by reason and discipline military they ought
to keepe themselues in squadron; then they ought according
to the bredth or frunt of their squadron, to deuide
the whole squadron into as few and as great compertiments
of number of soldiors in euery ranke from frunt to
backe as the grounds or passages will giue them leaue;
that by the greatnesse of their compertiments they may
a great deale the sooner reduce and forme their squadron

againe vpon any sudden or great Alarum: As for example,
If the squadron were double as broad in frunt as by
flankes, as of 60. in frunt and 30. by flankes, then the Coronell
or Sergeant Maior may presentlie command the
whole squadron to be deuided into 6. compertiments of
10. souldiors in euery ranke from frunt to back throughout
euery compertiment; or if the ground be of that nature,
that in some places there cannot passe aboue 7. or
8. souldiors in frunt, then he may deuide his whole squadron
into 
                  •
               . compertiments, that is of 4. compertiments
of 7. in euery ranke, and the other 4. compertiments of
8. souldiors in euery ranke throughout euery compertiment,
and by flanks, that is in length from frunt to backe
euery compertiment of 30. ranks, the Ensigns alwaies placed
betwixt two of the middlemost ranks of euerie compertiment,
or of so many of the compertiments as shalbe
requisit. All which compertiments vpon intelligence or
discouery of the enemies approching may in any conuenient
ground be presently incorporated and reduced by
flank or flanks into the same form of squadron that it was
at the first forming of the same; or into any other forme
that the Coronell or Sergeant Maior shall thinke most
requisit by any one of the same orders of reducementes
that I haue before very particularly set downe.
            And it is furder to be obserued that the said squadron
marching in the open fields with sleeues, wings, & troups
of weapons of volee belonging to the same, should euer
at certen times make certen pauses, aswel to the intent to
ease themselues and take breath, because that armed men
or mosquetiers with their heauy furniture, or the soldiors
of any other weapon cannot possibly continue any long
march without such pauses and staies, as also that if anie
dismarch or disorder hath hapned in their ranks, forms, or
orders, the same may be presently againe reformed and
redressed: And the like pauses and staies are to bee made
by bands of horsmen, for the same cōsideration & causes.
            But now peraduenture some that may read this place

of my booke may say that I forgot in this place to write of
horsmen, aswell where they should be placed in the field
either vpon the flankes or corners of the compertiments
of diuers sortes of weapons of volee reduced into their
orders, as also in marching through the straight, whether
they should march halfe before and halfe behind, or otherwise.
Wherevnto I answer that it were impertinent
to this place,An obiection aunswered. considering that here I doo but only shew,
how a Regiment of 4000. footmen vnder their coronels,
Captaines, and officers, without any bandes of horsmen
should be reduced into diuers formes aswell to march as
to fight; as also to passe through a passage or straight, and
being passed through the same; howe againe to reduce
themselues into forme; that by the ordering, forming,
and marching of this squadron and regiment as aforsaid,
all such as doo professe armes, and that doo not knowe
how squadrons of footmen should bee formed, may by
that which I haue before set downe, see, consider, and
obserue,Bands and squadrons of horsemen are to be reduced into forme after the verie same order and sorte that footmen are. how any squadron of a great deale greater or
smaller numbers may diuers waies be reduced into form,
although in troth, bands and squadrons of horsemen are
to bee reduced into forme or diuers formes euen after
the verie same order and sort that bandes and squadrons
of footmen are. But yet something to satisfie such as
shall reade this my booke, I will by the helpe of Almightie
God, in some places more conuenient, of these discourses
make mention, and set downe diuers verie important
particularities concerning the ordering, fourming,
and employing of bandes, squadrons, and diuers
other formes of horsemen of sundrie sortes of armous
and weapons.
            But now peraduenture some will with more reason
furder demand where the baggages and carriages of the
Regiment that I haue not hithervnto mentioned,
shoulde bee placed in marching through the straight:
and how the same should be guarded; as also where the
field peeces of the same regiment, if there be any shuld be

placed vpon the squadron formed; and in what conuenient
place or places they should be with their hor
                  •
               es,Wherevpon ye squadron formed and marching forward y• field peeces are to be placed & drawen. or
oxen drawne, and go through the said straights. Whervnto
I say that incase there were 8. field peeces belonging
to the Regiment, that is, 4. fawcons of the Caliuer of 5.
pound the bullet, and 4. fawconets of the Caliuer of 3.
pound the bullet; I would then vpon the squadron, formed
and marching forward, that 2. peeces (viz) one fawcon,
and one fawconet should with their horses be drawn
vppon the flanke, or side of the squadron, betwixt the
sleeues of the weapons of volee and the squadron, I mean
vpon the forepart of the right flanke; and so likewise another
fawcon, and fawconet to be drawne by the hinder
part of the same flanke likewise betwixt the weapons of
volee and the squadron, and euen in the same manner, in
the like places, order and sort I would haue the other 4.
fawcons, and fawconets to be drawn vpon the left flanks
of the squadron ready vppon all occasions to be drawne
forward and placed, the 4. formost that were vppon the
formost right and left flanke of the squadron somewhat
distant or wide from the 2. forecorners of the squadron,
or vpon some occasions vpon the very frunt of the same
squadron readie to be discharged at the enemie approching,
and so likewise the 4. peeces that are drawne by
the hinder flankes of the squadron are readie likewise to
be placed vpon the frunt or both the corners of the back
or rereward of the same square, incase that the squadron
vpon any accident or comming of the Enemie should
make of back frunt: And heere it is to bee noted that all
these 8. field peeces must bee accompanied with their
gonners,Officers and other necessarie prouision belonging to the field peeces. officers, and all other their assistants, with some
numbers of pioners, and with all kind of thinges and Instruments
belonging to them, as bullets ladles, rammers,
and other such like, as also with a large and sufficient
quantitie of good powder well guarded by some number
of halbarders, and archers from the danger of fire.
            Howbeit vpon the occasion of marching through a

straight as aforesaid; then I would that. 4. of these field
peeces with their powder,Where the, field peeces with their munitions and other things belonging vnto them are to be placed in marching through the straight. bullets, and all other thinges
requisite should vpō their carriages be drawen with their
horses, conducted by their Carters, gonners, and pioners
and guarded and accompanied as aforesaid, iust betwixte
the last troupes, and compertiments of weapons of volee,
and the first compertiment of piques; and so likewise that
the other. 4. field peeces that did before march vpon
both the hinder flankes of the squadron, should vnder the
conduction of their gonners and assistants as aforesaid
with their powder, bullets and al other things necessarie,
march through the straight in Rereward iust betwixt the
hindermost compertiment of piquers, and before the formost
troupe or compertiment of the weapons of volee,
that did and are againe to arme the hinder partes of both
the flankes of the said squadron; and those. 8. peeces marching
in the order and sort as aforesaid are most readie againe
vpon the whole Regiment being past through the
straightes, and the reducing againe of the same into the
forme of squadron first aboue set downe, to be placed and
drawne as they were at the first before the regiment entered
into the straights: But incase that the Coronell being
entered into the straights should doubte to be assailed
by the enemie either in vauntguard or in Rereward; then
hee ought to place a couple of fawcons,How the Coronell is to place the field peeces incase he doubt to be assailed either in vaunt guard or R
                     ••
                  eward▪
                or of fawconets
either in frunt or in backe as he doubteth to be assailed,
with some conuenient quantitie of powder, and bullets,
and other thinges necessarie strongly guarded and accompanied
with some numbers of archers, light armed
piquers, and halbarders, as also some mosequtiers, so that
those soldiors of weapons of fire do not come too neare
the powder belonging to those field peeces; and in y• sort,
those. 2. field peeces are to be drawne by their horses and
accompanied with their gonners pioners and guardes of
diuers sorts of weapons as aforesaid, in frunt and backe
according to the occasion.
            And now concerning the most conuenient and sure

placing of the cariages and baggages of the Regiment,Concerning the most conuenient and sure placing of the carriages and baggages in passing through the straight. I
meane for the passing through the straight; for the placing
and marching whereof, it is first to be considered,
whether they expect, or doubt the enemie more in frunt
and vauntgard when they shall be passing, or passed
through the straight, or in backe and Rereward when
they are entring & entered into the straight; or that they
doubt to be assailed both in vauntgard and Rereward:
Now if in case they doubt to be assailed by the enemie in
Rereward,Diuers things to be considered of, for the sure placing of the cariages & baggages. then the Coronell is to commande all the
carriages and baggages to be placed in the midst of the
weapons of volee y• are in vauntgard with some conuenient
numbers of light armed piquers and halbarders for ye
better guard of the same; but in case that they doubt to be
assailed in vauntgard and not in Rereward,Where the Coronell is to place the carriages and baggages incase he doubt to be assailed by the enemy in Rereward or in Vauntgard or in both. then they are
to place the cariages in the midst of the short of the Rereward
accompanied with some light armed piquers and
halbarders as aforesaid; But if they doubt to be assailed
both in vauntguard and Rereward, then the Coronell
is to commaund all the cariages and baggages to be
placed in the midst betwixte al the compertiments of piquers,
I meane the one halfe of the piquers before, and y•
other halfe behind the carriages; euerie Carre, or waggon
hauing two harquebuziers or archers for y• guard of them.
Howbeit here it is to be noted that the carriages of the
chiefe substance of the powder that doth belong to the
Regiment be they waggons or Carres that do carrie the
same,Where the carriages of the chief substance of pouder are to marche. do with their officers, Carters, and pyoners march
either formost of all the rest of the Carriages, or else hindermost
of them all; or else vpon some occasions halfe
before and halfe behind as the Coronell vpon any occasion
shall thinke most conuenient, but in any wise a conuenient
waie distant from all the rest of the carriages, and
that the same carriages of powder be well accompanied
with some good numbers of archers and halbarders, but
with no harquebuziers nor mosquetiers, thereby to auoid
all accidents of fire. Also euerie Wagō or Carre ought to

haue a couer of the hides or skinnes of buffes made of
such largenesse that the same may couer all the barrels of
powder from wet,Euerie waggon or Carre ought to be couered with Buff hides as also that such couers of buffe wil resist
the force and furie of all kind of bals and other inuentions
of artificiall fires and wilde fire,A peculiar propertie of the skins of Buffes. which peculiar property
the skins of those beasts haue aboue all others.
            And now as I haue very particularly shewed howe a
squadron of 2100. should be reduced into form in diuers
different sortes, and that the same squadron consisting of
2100. armed men piquers is now last of all reduced into
60. souldiors in frunt,Squadrons by more then a third part broader in frunt then longe by flankes, are of a far greater aduauntage to fight, then iust Squadrons. which is intended in euery rank frō
frunt to back, and 35. soldiors by flank, which is to be vnderstood
35. ranks; which proportion of squadron is broder
in number of piquers in frunt, then long by flanks, by
more then a third part, which by most Sergeants Maiors
is esteemed to bee of a great deale greater aduauntage to
fight, for diuers causes and reasons (which heere I omit)
then any iust squadrons of armed men are; by reason that
squadrons that are iust square in number of men;Why squadrōs that are iust square in number of men are thought to be out of proportion. that is,
as many piquers by flank as in frunt, are accounted to bee
out of proportion; and that in respect that such squadrons
are a great deale longer by flankes then broade in frunt,
because that the distaunces betwixt ranke and ranke bee
it either to march or fight, are a great deale more then
they are betwixt euery soldior and soldior in frunt, which
is to bee vnderstood in euerie ranke;How to forme a squadron of piquers iust square in number of men both by frunt and flankes So to satisfie such
as would vnderstand of the forming of a iust squadron of
piquers: I meane a iust square of like numbers of men in
frunt, flankes and backe as aforesaid; and not a iust square
in ground, I would take 6600. piquers, which number I
would command y• sergeant Maior, Maior, to draw out
of 4. of 5. regiments, & to reduce them into 12. compertiments,
euery cōpertiment of 5. in frunt & 60. by flanks,
which maketh iust 300. piquers in euery compertiment;
al which 12. cōpertiments of 300. piquers in euery compertiment,
beeing reduced into squadron either by doubling
those compertiments by back, or by flank or flanks,

or any other waies, as I haue before very particularlie set
downe; doo come to be a iust squadron of 60. piquers by
frunt, flankes, and backe, ouerplus not any one souldior.
            And this kind of iust square of armed men by frunt,
flankes, and backe, hath beene holden by some men of
warre,The reasons that diuers mē of warre do alleage to proue a iust squadron to be of greatest aduauntage to fight. and yet is, to be the most strong and puissant kind
of squadron of all others, in respect that the number of
rankes by flanks are equall with the number of souldiors
in frunt and backe; whereof ensueth (say they) vppon
the ioyning of two squadrons, and a battle well fought,
that commonlie many of the souldiors of the first rankes
are either ouerthrowne & wounded, or slain in the place:
vpon which accidents, the souldiors that are in the next
rankes directlie behind them, are presently to bestride
them; I meane to stand ouer and defend them if they be
but wounded, and if they be slaine, then to take their places;
and so subsequentlie euery hinder ranke to fill vp the
ranke before them; so as only the hinder ranks shal come
to diminish and lacke number, by the supplying and filling
vp of the former ranks: By meanes of which entring
of souldiors out of the hinder rankes still to fill vppe the
formost rankes for the causes aforesaid, the opinion of
some men of warre hath been and is, that a iust squadron
of armed men, is of more resistance and annoyance against
the enemie, then a broad squadron in frunt and
shorter by flankes is, I meane both the one squadron and
the other being neere about one number of souldiors; Besides
all which it may bee alleaged, that such iust squadrons
in frunt, flankes, and backe, are more ready vppon
any sudden vnlooked for occasion, and comming of the
Enemie to make of any of both the flankes frunt, with a
conuenient breadth; then a squadron that is broad in
frunt, and narrow by flankes is able to performe, by reason
that the iust squadron hath no more to doo, but to
make of one of the flanks frunt by turning their faces and
weapons that waies, and to reforme their distaunces by
frunt and flankes: whereas the broad squadron to make

of flanke frunt, must not onely doo the like, but also must
draw out a great sort of rankes from the contrary flanke,
and draw them vp to the head of that flanke, that is nowe
made frunt, and also reforme themselues in their distances
by frunt and flanke, with diuers other particularities
by me at large before set downe.
            But incase that the sergeant Maior when he hath fourmed
this iust square of men,How a Sergeant Maior hauing formed a iust square may vpō any occasion shorten the same by flankes and inlarge them in frunt. and not of ground as aforesaid,
shall vpon any occasion thinke it requisite to inlarge
the same squadron in frunt, that is to increase euery rank
from frunt to back with some conuenient number of soldiors,
and to shorten the same squadron by flanke, that is
to make fewer rankes; then hee may with great celeritie
and dexteritie draw out as many rankes from the back or
rereward, as hee shall see requisite to inlarge the frunt
withall, and draw them vp by one of the flankes: But because
the squadron commeth to be shortned by flanks, by
so many rankes as the Sergeant Maior hath drawne out
from the backe or Rereward, and therfore that there shal
remaine an ouerplus of broken rankes more then at one
time can be drawne vp by flankes as aforesaid: the sergeant
Maior then must consider whether the numbers of
the piquers of those broken ranks, be sufficient to increase
one ranke more by backe: And incase there doo lacke
number to performe the same; then hee is to consider
whether the numbers of the piquers of those broken
rankes, will serue to increase euery ranke one souldior or
more by flanke; which is to be vnderstood from frunt to
backe; and as he may with those broken rankes best performe
either the one or the other, he is to doo the same.
But incase that the Sergeant Maior shall see that the armed
men of those broken ranks doo lacke number to performe
as well that by flanke, as the other by backe (as aforesaid,)
hee then is to place them in the ranke of Ensignes,
or otherwise to employ them in other seruices as
he shall thinke most requisite: The particularities of all
which with many more I haue before set downe at large,

and therefore it were superfluous to particular the same
againe. And now as I haue formed this foresaid battle
and iust square of 60. piquers in frunt, flanks, and backe,
which in all do amount to 6600. men, with diuers other
requisite matters: Euen so by the like orders of reducement,
If a Lord Marshall or a Sergeant Maior Maior,
haue 4000. or 5000. yea or 10000. or more or fewer piquers
to reduce into one bodie of squadron, hee may reduce
them into a battle of a thirde part broader in frunt
then by flanks; or double as broad or more in frunt then
by flankes; or otherwise as he thinketh most conuenient:
As for example; If he haue 5355. piquers, and that hee
woulde reduce them all into one squadron, double as
broad or more by frunt then by flankes, as of 105. piquers
in frunt, and but of 51. rankes by flankes; and that hee
would reduce his squadron into form, by compertiments
throughout of 5. in a ranke; he shall then finde that 21.
compertimentes reduced into squadron by flanke or
flankes as aforesaid, will forme that squadron, of 105. piquers
in euerie rank from frunt to backe, and of 51. ranks
by flankes.
            Or if the Sergeant Maior, be disposed to forme the
same squadron of the like number of 5355. piquers with
greater compertiments as of 7. in euery compertiment
throughout from frunt to back, that thereby he may form
his squadron with the fewer compertimentes; hee may
then command all the Captains or leaders of the piquers
to reduce euery one of their compertimentes into 7. in a
rank throughout from frunt to back; and then he shal find
that 15. such compertiments or diuisions of 7. in a ranke
throughout euery compertiment reduced into squadron
either by the flanks the one of the other, or by both flanks
subsequently al at one time, (as I haue in the beginning of
this proiect of squadrons very particularlie declared) doo
make iust 105. piquers in frunt, and 51. rankes by flanke,
which is more then double as broad in frunt, then long
by flankes.
            
               But because peraduenture there are some professing
armes not knowing how squadrons should be fourmed
that will imagine,The orders and waies of reducing of 3000. or 4000. or of. 10000. or of any greater number of piquers into one bodie of squadron, are all one sauing that the compertiments are to be made longer by flanks. that it is a matter of farre greater difficultie
to forme a squadron of 10000. or 12000. piquers,
or of greater numbers, then of 3000. or 4000. Therevnto
I say, that the orders and waies of reducing of
3000. or 4000. or of 10000. or any greater numbers into
one bodie of squadron is all one, sauing that the compertimentes
or diuisions of piquers, or of piquers and
short weapons to forme great squadrons must be longer
by flankes, then the compertimentes of small squadrons
are: and therefore whereas the number of piquers of one
bande, or companie are sufficient to make a compleat
compertiment of number of piquers by frunt, as of 5. 6.
7. or any such euen or odde numbers, not exceding 10.
or 11. as also of numbers of rankes conuenient by flanks
to beginne the squadron withall; and that so likewise the
piquers of other such single bandes are able to performe
the like, beeing reduced by the flankes the one of the other
as aforesaid, whereof it shoulde come to passe that
such small squadrons should bee composed of the compertiments
of single bands by themselues; yet great squadrons
or battles double as broad in frunt, as long by
flankes, or iust squares, or any other formes, must bee
composed of compertimentes although of like numbers
in frunt as aforesaide: yet much longer by flankes, which
to performe, because no one band haue piquers enough
to ma
                  •
               e a compertiment of so great a number as is requisite
with celeritie to forme so great a squadron; the Sergeant
Maior in that case is to commaund the piquers of
2. bandes presentlie to bee reduced into one compertiment,
and so likewise of other bandes, to the intent that
by such great compertiments he may with the more celeritie
forme his squadron; in such sort, as if a Lorde
Marshall or a Sergeant Maior Maior, were disposed to
forme and reduce his squadron of 10000. or 12000.
piquers, or any greater, or smaller numbers into one

squadron or battle; and that hee would forme the same
double as broad by frunt as long by flankes; hee may by
the like order of reducing of compertimentes of greater
numbers by flanks, performe the same with as great facilitie,
as hee did in the reducing of the other squadrons of
smaller numbers with the compertiments of single bands
into forme.
            And therfore if a Sergeant Maior Maior would forme
one battle of aboue 10000. piquers, and that hee would
make them double as broad or more in frunt then long
by flankes: As for example, of 143. in frunt, and of 71.
rankes by flankes; he is first to consider how many compertiments
of euen and od numbers wil make that frunt,
and he shall find that 17. compertiments of 8. souldiors
in euery ranke from frunt to backe, and of 71. rankes by
flankes in euery compertiment reduced into squadron by
flanke or flankes (as I haue verie particularlie in my first
forming of squadrons before declared) doo make y• squadron
in frunt 136. souldiors, and then drawing vppe another
compertiment of odde number, as of 7. souldiors in
euerie ranke throughout the whole compertimente from
frunt to back, in all are 17. compertiments of euen numbers
of 8. and one of 7. which are odde, which in all are
18. compertiments. All which diuisions reduced into
squadron by flankes as aforesaid, the whole squadron so
formed, dooth come to be of 143. souldiors in frunt, and
71. rankes by flankes, which in all doo make 10153.
souldiors.
            But now whereas all these squadrons before reduced
and described do consist only of piquers with a few halbardiers
for the guard of the Ensignes,The chiefe causes why the Italians and Spaniards, haue of late vsed squadrons altogither of piques. which hath bene
altogeather vsed of late yeares by the Italians & Spanyards
in respect (as I haue heard them say) that such squadrons
all of one weapon are mor readilie reduced into
squadron, then of two different weapons, and therewithall
more beawtifull and terrible in the sight of the Enemie
in shewe, through the equalitie of the length of

the piques, then if there were many rankes of short
weapons within the piques, which through the shortnes
of the weapons would make the squadron to shewe vnto
the Enemie as though there were a voide place without
any soldiors in the midst of the piques: Yet because many
yeares past I haue in Fraunce seene the Sergeants Maiors
of the Suissers reduce certen rankes of halbardiers
within their piques, thereby according to discipline to
strengthen their battles aswell against the charges of horsmen
as against squadrons of footmen piquers: I will here
(with the helpe of Almightie God) sett downe and shew
how a squadron of halbardiers or battleaxes, inuironed
or impaled about with 5. rankes of piquiers in frunt, flanks
and backe, should be reduced into a squadron broader by
a third parte in frunt and backe,How a squadrō of halbardiers enuironed about, with 5. rankes of piquers, should be reduced into forme. then long by flankes:
which is to be performed in this sort following, that is,
Incase that I haue .1500. armed battleaxes, or halbardiers,
and that I were disposed to reduce them into .50 in
frunt, and .30. by flankes, and that I would deuide that
whole number into .10. compertiments of .5. battleaxes
in euery ranke throughout euery compertiment: so as euery
compertiment from frunt to backe should containe
150. battleaxes; Or that I were disposed to commaund
the .1500. battleaxes to be reduced into .5. compertiments
of 10. souldiors in euery ranke throughout euerie
compertiment from frunt to backe, that is of 300. souldiors
in euery compertiment, the same being by the captaines
and officers performed, I then appointing the
ground where I would make the frunt of the squadron,
would command the Captaines or leaders of euery compertiment
either of .5. if the compertiments be all of .5.
or of .10. if they be of .10. soldiors throughout euerie
compertiment to march vp, the one by the flanke of the
other, vntill they come all to make one equall frunt in
their iust & proportionate distances from frunt to backe:
which being performed then I would commaund two
compertiments all of piquers, each one of them of .150.

marching .5. in a ranke to be drawne vp, the one compertiment
of .150. close by the right flanke of the battleaxes:
and the other compertiment of the like number in
like sort close by the left flanke of the battleaxes vntill the
formost rankes of both those compertiments of piquers
vpō both flanks be of equal frunt with the frunt of the battleaxes,
and their last ranke equall with the last ranke of
the battleaxes, which being performed, then of 50. battleaxes
that they were in frunt before, now by the conioining
and reducing of those 2. compertiments of piquers
vpon the two flankes as aforesaid, the squadron is
come to be of 60. soldiors in euery ranke from frunt to
backe; which performed, then would I commaund 300.
piquers reduced into 60. rankes of 5. in euery ranke to be
drawne close by the frunt of the squadron of battleaxes &
piquers before reduced, euen from the one flanke and
corner to the other: And at the very same instant, I would
command 60▪ ranks of piquers more of 5. in euery ranke
to be drawne close by the backe, and Rereward of the
same squadron: which being performed, then aswell the
60. ranks of piquers 5. in a ranke in frunt, as the 60. ranks
of piquers 5. in a ranke in backe, are either vpon the sound
of the trumpet, or the stroake of drummes to tourne their
faces and weapons, and to make of flanke frunt: I meane
that waies that the squadron of battleaxes, and the piquers
on the flankes do make frunt, and therewithall presently
to reforme themselues in their distances: so as of
60. rankes of 5. in euerie ranke that the same compertiment
of piquers that was reduced in frunt was before, it
is now by making of flanke frunt as aforsaid, become to
be of 5. rankes of 60. soldiors in euery ranke: And so likewise
the aforesaid compertiments of the like number of
300. piquers of 5. in euery ranke reduced vpon the backe
of the squadron, by making of flanke frunt, towards the
squadron of battleaxes and piquers, are now likewise become
to be 5. rankes by flanke, and 60. in euerie ranke.
All which being performed the squadron of battleaxes

dooth come to be enuironed or empaled with 5. rankes
of piquers in frunt, flankes, and back, the whole squadron
conteining in frunt 60. soldiors, & by flanks 40. rankes.
            And now this squadron being thus formed; then would
I reduce all the different sortes of weapons of volee into
their most conuenient forms of forlorn hopes, of sleeues,
of winges, of hearses, of troupes, and other formes, according
to the nature and effect of euery different sort of
weapon, and as the comming of the enemie should require,
or as the ground or groundes woulde permit, hauing
therewithall regard as wel to arme the backe or rereward
of the squadron with weapons of volee, as to arme
the frunt and flanks. And as I haue very particularly shewed
how a squadron of Halbardiers or battleaxes, enuironed
about with 5. rankes of piquers should be reduced
into the forme aboue described, and therewithall said
that the same should be armed in frunt, flankes and back,
with weapons of volee of diuers sorts, so would I if I had
conuenient numbers of horsemen of diuers armors and
weapons, arme the same squadron, and sleeues, & wings
of weapons of volee, with horsemen in their due & most
conuenient places and formes.
            But because I doo thinke that it shall be a farre greater
instruction for such Gentlemen of our Nation, as doo
not know and yet are willing and desirous to learne how
diuers squadrons or battles of footemen with their weapons
of volee and field peeces ought to bee armed with
many hearses, squares, and troupes of horsemen of diuers
sorts of armors and weapons, and those conueniently
placed in the large and open fieldes to giue battle and
fight with the Enemie,How to reduce an English Armie of 28000. or .3000. horsemen and footmen into form of batle, readie in all points to fight with the Enemie. with their moste aduauntage,
then to place onelye one squadron of footemen with
their Weapons of volee, and to arme the same with
horsemen of diuers sortes, I doo for example say, that if
there were in the enemies Countrey 28000. or 30000.
horsmen & footmen of our English Nation, well sorted,
armed, weaponed, and exercised, according to the

nature and effect of euery different sort of weapon: And
that the same Armie of 28000. did consist of the different
weapons and numbers vnder written, that is of 4500
piquers, 8500. battleaxes, or halbardiers, of 10000. weapons
of volee, of the which I would haue 7000. good archers,
1500. mosquetiers, and 1500. harquebuziers; Of
horsemen also I woulde haue 5000. of the which there
should be 240. men at Armes, 480. Dimilaunces, 1680.
Stradiots, 1300. archers on horsebacke, and 1300. crosbowers
on horsebacke; and all those aswell horsemen as
footmen sorted and deuided into their different proportions
and numbers vnder their standards, En
                  •
               ignes, pennons
and Guydons, as also vnder their Coronels, Captaines,
Conductors, and other higher and lower men of
charge and officers; and that I were by the commandement
and appointment of the Lord Lieutenant Generall
to giue order and reduce the said Armie into a forme of
battle, as if it were presentlie to fight with the enemie, I
would then take of those 8500. battleaxes or halbardiers,
6000. and out of the 4500. piquers I would take 3600.
and would deuide and reduce all those numbers of piquers
and battleaxes into 3. battles,Howe many battles ye whole Armie, should be deuided and reduced into. that is, into a vauntguard,
a battle, & a Reregard, or rather into foure battles,
that is into a vauntgard, a battle, and a Reregard, and into
a fourth which I would tearme and call by the name of
an a Rereregardrereward: euery one of which foure battles
should consist of 1500. armed halbardiers or battleaxes,
and of 900. armed piquers, which are iust 2400.
piquers and battleaxes in each battle: And as for the ouerplus
of the whole number of the halbardiers or battleaxes,
which in all doo amount to 2500. as also the ouerplus
of the piquers which are 900. (none of both which
numbers are to enter into the squadrons afore mentioned)
I would reserue to be employed in such other seruices
as heereafter shall be mentioned: And I would that
each one of the said 4. battles should conteine 60. souldiors
in euery ranke from frunt to backe and 40. rankes by

flanks: And that all the battleaxes should bee enuironed
and empaled in frunt, flankes and backe, with 5. rankes
of piquers, euen in the very same forme and sort that I
haue before particulerlie reduced and formed the laste
squadron before described.
            But because diuers squadrons being reduced into form
in the open fields where battles most conueniently are to
be fought, are to be placed in diuers sorts, as sometimes
all in a manner of one equall frunt with their sleeues and
winges and other formes of weapons of volee, and sometimes
also the vauntgard, aduaunced a good distance before
and nearer to the enemie then the battle and Reregard,
who are in winges more retired, ready vppon all
needfull occasions to succour and aide the foremost battle:
And at other times the vauntgard, and Reregard aduaunced
beyond and nearer to the enemie then the principall
battle, which remaineth either in wing retired, or
otherwise placed according to the nature of the ground
and comming of the enemy, or according to some other
order and commandement of the Generall, readie vpon
all occasions to succour the other two battles, that are
ready to enter into fight: So would I place those foresaid
4. battles in this sort following.
            First,The placing of the seuerall battles of the Armie. I would place the vauntgard and Reregard both
of one equall frunt, but yet so farre distant the one from
the other, as that there might be ground & place enough
betwixt them to reduce so many troupes, sleeues, wings,
and other formes of all the different sorts of weapons of
volee footmen, belonging to those two battles, as ought
to bee (according to the disposition of the ground and
comming of the Enemie) reduced and placed vppon the
outer flanks and corners of those 2. battles: And I would
that of the 2500. halbardiers before reserued and not placed,
one thousand deuided into 2. partes of 500. halbardiers
in each part should be placed in many little societies
and troupes of ten halbardiers in euery societie, some in
guard of the field peeces belonging to those two battles,

and all the rest behind in Rereward at the backes of the
troupes and winges of the weapons of volee, ready vpon
any occasion to succour them and to annoy the enemie:
I meane that the said 1000. halbarders deuided into
2. parts of 500. in each part, that the one 500. deuided
and placed in their little troupes as aforesaid, should bee
for the succour and guard of the weapons of volee of the
vaungard, and the other 500. should be for the succor &
guard of the weapons of volee of the Rereguard, which
performed, then would I place the other two squadrons
of battle and a Rereregardrereward in two wings, but not
so farre forward as the hindermost rankes of the two formost
battles by 150. paces or more, with all theyr different
sortes of weapons of volee, reduced into their most
conuenient formes, with one thousand Halbardiers also
taken out of the 1500. yet remaining vnplaced, equallie
deuided 500. to each battle for the guard of the field peeces
and succor of the weapons of volee as is before more
at large set downe: And those twoe hindermost battles
I would also place of one equall frunt, that is, the one as
farre forward as the other, but so farre seperated and distant
the one from the other, and so farre without and in
winge, the one on the right hande, and the other on the
lefte hand of the two foremost battles, as that all the different
sortes of weapons of volee belonging to the two
inner flankes of those two hindermost squadrons, might
not onelie haue roome inough to bee reduced into their
most conuenient formes, according to the nature & different
dispositions and effects of euery sort of them, but
also in such sort, as that both those two hindermost battles
with all their weapons of volee might (without any
impediment of the two formost battles and their wepons
of volee, or of any their hearses, troupes, or squares of
horsmen) haue the comming of the enemies battles, and
squares, and troupes of horsmen, so apparant and cleare
in their sightes, as that they might succour and aide the
said two formost battles vpon all needfull and requisit occasions
and causes.
            
               All which reducements of those foresaid 4. battles,
being by the Coronels, Sergeant Maiors, Captaines and
other officers with great order and celeritie perfourmed:
then I hauing such conuenient numbers of men at arms,
of dimilaunces, of Stradiots, of Archers and Crosbowers
on horsebacke (as are before particularlie set downe)
to arme the flankes of the aforesaid foure battles: I would
first giue order that the 240. men at Armes shoulde bee
deuided into 4. winges, that is into 60. men at Armes in
each wing, euery which number of 60. men at Armes,
I would reduce either into 3. rankes of 20. in euery ranke,How & where the men at Armes should be ordered and placed.
or else into 4. rankes of 15. in euerie ranke, and woulde
place two of those hearses or broade squares of men at
Armes, the one euen by flanke and right ouer againste
the middest of the right flanke of the vauntguarde, and
the other broad square or hearse of men at Armes in
like sort, euen by flanke and right ouer against the middest
of the lefte flanke of the Reregard; And so likewise
in the very same order I would place the other two broad
squares of men at Armes, the one by flanke right ouer
against the midst of the right flanke of the principall battle,
and the other broad square by flanke, right ouer against
the middest of the left flanke of the a Rereregardrereward.
            But yet it is to be vnderstood by this before written
that I would place all those 4. hearses or broad squares
of men at Armes, so farre distaunt in winge from all the
flankes of those foresaid 4. Battles, and so farre wide and
cleare from all the Sleeues, Winges, and Troupes of
the Weapons of Volee footemen, as that those hearses
of men at Armes might vppon all good occasions
offered, giue a charge vppon the Enemie, bee they
horsemen or footmen without any waies troubling the
Weapons of volee, or receiuing any trouble or let by the
Weapons of Volee to giue their charges with great
order: And therewithal that vpon their charges giuen,
they may retire to giue new charges without disordering

their owne weapons of volee, or any waies troubling the
rankes of their owne squadrons of armed footmen.
            The dimilaunces also belonging to those men at Arms
(which according to discipline ought to bee in number
double as manie as the men at Armes)The ordering and placing of the Dimilaunces. which is that the
men at Armes being 240. the dimilaunces ought to bee
480. which number 480. Launces, I would deuide into
4. broad squares or hearses, of 120. in euerie hearse,
euerie which number of 120. dimilaunces, I woulde reduce
either 
                  •
               nto 4. rankes of 30. in euery ranke, or else into
5. rankes of 24. Launces in euery ranke, and woulde
place two of those winges, the one by flanke in a manner
euen with the right flank of the hearse or wing of the men
at Armes reduced vpon the right flank of the vauntgard,
and the other wing of dimilaunces in a manner euen by
flanke, with the left flanke of the wing of the men at armes
that are reduced vpon the left flanke of the reregard: But
yet both those two winges of dimilaunces I would place
a little aduaunced more forward then the winges of the
men at Armes, and so farre distant by flanke from both
the foresaide winges of the men at Armes, as that there
might be ground and roome enough betwixt them, for
sixe little troupes or societies, I meane two troupes or societies
of archers on horsebacke, and 4. troupes of Crosbowers
on horsebacke of 10. in euerie societie, to place
themselues in their troups in conuenient distances separated
and oblique each one troupe from the other, readie
vpon any charge by the Launces or men at Armes giuen
or vnto them by the Enemie offered, to galloppe by the
flankes of the Launces or of the men at Armes, but somthing
more backe and in Rereward of them, and to giue
their volees of quarrels and arrowes at the enemie, before
the Launces or men at Armes should come to ioine and
shocke with the enemies horsmen, or charge their footmen,
or otherwise to giue their volees at any squadrons
or troupes of horsmen or footmen, according to any other
order and commandement vnto them by their superiors
giuen.
            
               And in like sort as I haue placed those 2. winges of dimilaunces
with their troupes of Crosbowers and archers
on horsbacke betwixt them and the flankes of the 2. formoste
winges of men at Armes as aforesaid; Euen so
would I in the verie same sort place the other two winges
of dimilaunces of 120. in each winge reduced, either into
4 rankes of 30. in euerie ranke, or else into 5. rankes of
24▪ in euery ranke, almost euen and right ouer against, sauing
a little more aduanced forward, then the flankes of
the two hindermost winges of the men at Armes, that
are reduced the one vpon the right flanke of the principall
battle, and the other vpon the left flanke of the a Rereregard-Rereward,
with the like numbers of troupes or
societies of Crosbowers & archers on horsbacke betwixt
them, (euerie little troupe of those weapons of volee seperated
and oblique in distances the one from the other,)
as are reduced and placed betwixt the flankes of the. 4.

                  •
               ormost winges of men at armes and dimilaunces. All
which with great order being performed, then of al y• rest
of the numbers of Stradiots,The ordering and placing of the Stradiots, and Archers, & Crosbowers on horsebacke. of archers on horsbake,
and Crosbowers on horsbacke, which in all do amount to
4040. I would take out 60. stradiots 40. Crosbowers, &
40. archers on horsebacke, which are in all 140. horsemen,
which numbers I would reserue for such other employments
as hereafter shalbe mentioned, and would deuide
the rest which in all are 3900. stradiots, Crosbowers
and archers on horsebacke into 3. diuisions or parts that
is into. 1300. in each diuision, in euerie which. 1300. I
would there should be like numbers of euery one of those
3. foresaid different sorts of weapons, or as neare thereabouts
as they could be deuided: which done, then would
I appoint one of those. 3. partes of different sorts of light
horsemen, which are in number 1300. to arme the right
flanke of the winge of dimilaunces that are vpō the right
flanke of the men at Armes which do arme the righte
flanke of the vauntgard. And I would giue order to all the
Captaines & Conductors of al the aforesaid light horsemen

men of the first 1300. that they should deuide and reduce
all the numbers of their stradiots, of Crosbowers and archers
on horsebacke into little troupes and societies of
tennes & fifteens in euerie troupe, and that euerie societie
and troupe should be of distincte and like weapons by
themselues, and that euerie one of those societies should
be lead by the heads and chiefe of their societies, & that
all the troupes of stradiots Crosbowers and archers on
horsebacke, should be placed and aduanced in winge
more furder forward towards the Enemy, then the hearse
or winge of dimilaunces: And I would also that all the societies
of the weapons of volee, I meane the archers and
Crosbowers on horsebacke, should be placed & aduanced
before and nearer to the Enemie by some 10. 15. or
20. paces, then the troupes and societies of stradiots, and
that the troupes of archers should not march altogether
by themselues, without any troupes of Crosbowers amōgst
or betwixt them, in respect that they are different
kindes of weapons, but I would that the troupes of archers
and Crosbowers should march in their troupes seperated,
but yet in their troupes intermingled about 15.
or. 20. paces distant one troupes from another, which is
to be vnderstood a troupe of archers and a troupe of
Crosbowers, and a troupe of archers & a troupe of Crosbowers
and so the rest, some troupes fifteene, some twentie
paces one from another and those not all of one equal
frunt, but oblique the one to the other, I meane some aduaunced
furder forward towards the Enemie, and others
more backward in winge and Reregard Retired; And that
I would to the intent that when the formost societies and
troupes of weapons of volee, had giuen their volees of
quarrels and arrowes either at horsemen, or footmen
their Enemies, and that they were casting about againe
and retiring to giue place to other troupes of weapons
of volee to second and succeed them: that then some
other troupes of weapons of volee that are in winge
Reregard of them, should in their troupes put spurres to

their horses and aduaunce themselues forward and seconde
and supplie their fellowes places retired, with new
volees. And I woulde also that euerie three societies of
Crosbowers and Archers on horsebacke, should haue
one troupe of 10. of 15. of 20. or 25. stradiots with their
double headed Launces continuallie vppon all charges
and other seruices to attend vppon them in Reregard,
some 15. or 20. paces distaunt, ready vpon any occasion
to aduaunce themselues forwarde and succour them, as
also vpon the disordering or ouerthrowe of the Enemie
to followe the Chace, and doo execution vppon their
Enemies disordered or broken, bee they horsemen or
footmen.
            And I would that no societie nor troupe of Archers
nor Crosbowers on horseback should be vnder the number
of 10. nor aboue the number of 15. nor that any
troupe of Stradiots shoulde exceed the number of 25.
nor be vnder the number of 10. And to the intent that
euerie troupe of Stradiots should knowe vppon which
3. troupes of Crosbowers and Archers they should attend,
as al
                  •
               o that euery 3. troupes of Archers, and Crosbowers
should giue their charges and volees and make
their Retraites, and worke all other effectes in the fielde
together, it were conuenient that euery 4. troups of stradiots,
archers, and Crosbowers on horseback, and their
Conductors, should alwaies lodge in their quarters in
Campe together, but I meane not that the soeieties of
archers, of Crosbowers, and stradiots should lodge all
in one hale or tent together, but that the hales and tents
of euerie different sort of weapon of euery such 4. troups
should be placed one next vnto another, and that al their
Cariages vpon any remoue of campe should march together,
and that all the Conductors and the chiefs of the
societies of tennes, as also all their soldiors of euery different
sort of weapon, shuld know, frequent & keep company
one with another in Campe, & should vow to liue

and die together, as if they were but one 
                  •
               ind 
                  〈…〉
               ,
societie and Camerada.
            And as I haue placed this first 1300. light 
                  •••
               smen of
different weapons in the order before described, so would
I in the very same sort and form reduce the second number
of 1300. stradiots, archers, and Crosbowers on horsbacke
vppon the left side and flanke of the dimilaunces,
that are vpon the left flanke of the men at armes, which
are in wing of the left side of the Reregard, which performed,
I would then giue order that the third diuision and
number of 1300. stradiots, archers, and Crosbowers on
horsebacke, should be deuided into 2. diuisions or parts,
that is into 650. in each diuision, and that the first 650.
stradiots, archers and Crosbowers on horseback should
in the like order as abouesaid bee reduced in their societies
and troupes vpon the right flanke of the dimilaunces,
that are reduced on the right flanke of the men at armes,
that are in wing on the right side of the principall battle:
And that the other diuision and number of 650. stradiots,
archers, and Crosbowers on horseback should bee
likewise reduced in their societies and troupes vpon the
left flanke and side of the broad square of dimilaunces,
that are on the left flanke of the men at armes, that doo
arme the left side of the a Rereregardrereward.
            And I would that all those 4. winges of light horsmen,
stradiots, archers and Crosbowers on horseback should
vppon any occasion of battle, great incountrie, or skirmish,
behaue themselues in fight according to the instructions
that are heereafter described and set downe,
where amongst other matters I make speciall mention of
those 3. different sorts of light horsmen.
            And now as I haue reduced and placed these 4. battles
of footmen,How & wher
                     •
                   to arme the foresaid 4 squadrons, with field peeces. and armed them and their weapons of volee
with many squares and troupes of horsmen of diuers different
sorts of armors and weapons, so would I in this sort
following, arme those 4. squadrons with certen field peeces,
according to the ordinarie vse of this time for the

greater annoiance of the Enemie, and for the more sure
guard of the battles. First, incase there were any little hil
or high ground of aduantage of any conuenient neerenesse
vnto the two formost battles, that might command
the open fieldes and plaines where the Enemies battles
should march and approch, then I would there place so
many field peeces as should bee requisite for that ground
of aduauntage, with some trench or trenches by good
numbers of laborers and pioners vppon the sudden cast,
and those peeces well and stronglie guarded with conuenient
numbers of piquers, halbardiers, and archers, and
would place the rest of the field peeces, vpon the flanks of
the battles in their most conuenient places, with their
powder, bullets, and all other thinges that do appertaine
to the vse of them for the annoiance of the Enemie. But
incase there were no such grounds nor ground of aduantage
as aforesaid where to plant such peeces of artillerie,
then would I place 3. fawcons ranforced of 6: poundes
the bullet, and one fawconet ranforced of 3. pounds the
bullet, some 8. or 10. paces wide from the right corner of
the vaungard, and aduaunced furder forward then y• frunt
and Corner of that battle by the like number of paces
with their gunners and all their aides and thinges appertaining
vnto those peeces well guarded with conuenient
numbers of halbardiers; And so likewise would place the
like numbers of 3. fawcons and one fawconet in the like
distances wide and aduanced furder forwarde, then the
left corner of the same battle, by th
                  •
                like number of paces,
with their gonners and all their aides and other thinges
appertaining vnto those peeces, well guarded also with
conuenient numbers of halbardiers.
            And as I haue now armed the frunt of the said vaungard
with the number of field peeces before planted, so
would I arme the fruntes of the other 3. battles of Reregard,
of maine battle, and of a Rereregardrereward before
placed and described, each battle with the like numbers
of field peeces planted in like distaunces from the

frunt and corners of them, well guarded also with Halbardiers
as aforesaid. And although the backs and Reregards
of all those 4 battles should not need to bee armed
with any fielde peeces, as it shall bee within fewe lines
heereafter apparant by the rest which I will set downe
concerning those matters: yet to arme those 4. battles
in the greatest perfection that I can, I would place vpon
euery corner of the backs and Reregards of all the aforesaid
4. battles, two fawcons and one fawconet in like distaunces
of paces that I haue before placed the field peeces
from the corners of the frunt of the aforesaid 4. battles.
            But heere it is to bee noted that although diuers great
Captaines that haue bin commanders and leaders of armies,
haue alwaies accoūted Sakers of 10. or 12. pounds
their bullets and other peeces from 10. poundes downewards
to Robinets of one pound to bee in the number of
fielde peeces,Of what height the field pieces ought to bee. yet I to arme any battle with field peeces in
the open fieldes, would vse no peeces aboue the heigth
of fawcons of 6. pounds the bullets, and no smaller peeces
then fawconets of 3. pounds the bullets, vnlesse it were
some Robinets of one pound the bullet, and those mounted
vpon carriages after the manner of Germanie light
and easie to be drawne, and readie vpon the suddaine by
the Gonners to bee turned euery waies. And the causes
wherefore I would vse no peeces of any greater heigth
for the field, are, that to vse Sakers of 10. or 12. pounds
the bullets in the fielde, such peeces I say doo require
more Horses, or Oxen to drawe them, and men to manage
them, then Fawconets of 3. poundes, or Fawcons
of 6. poundes doo, which ouerplus and greater numbers
of Horses or Oxen of draught, doo vpon the remoouing
of those horses or oxen, and drawing them backe
when the peeces are planted, giue a great deale more
impediment and trouble not onely to the Gonners and
their aydes, but also to 
                  •
               he sleeues, winges, and troupes
of the weapons of Volee, that are reduced on the flankes

and Corners of squadrons, then the small number of
horses belonging to fawconets of three pounds or Fawcons
of 6. pounds doo.
            Also Armies sometimes in marching in the open
and plaine fieldes, doo light vpon sandie and such other
softish and yeelding groundes, where either vppon the
drawing or discharging of Sakers of 10. or 12. poundes
the bullets, their Wheeles doo sinke so deepe into the
ground, that oftentimes they giue great impediment
and let to the Gonners and their aides to manage and
vse them, vpon diuers needefull occasions; besides that,
vppon their discharginges the
                  •
                worke no greater effect
against the Enemie, then such Fawcons and fawconets
as aforesaid doo.
            Also it is further to be noted that I would neuer place
aboue the number of 8. field peeces by the flanks or corners
of any battle, nor vnder the number of 4. I meane
that I woulde neuer place aboue 3. Fawcons and one
Fawconet, and those in conuenient distances wide from
the right Corner of the Battle, and 3. Fawcons and one
Fawconet, wide and in like distaunces from the left frunt
and corner of the same Battle, or at the fewest 2. Fawcons
and one Fawconet, some 8. or 10. paces wide from
the one Corner, and 2. Fawcons and one Fawconet
wide in the like distaunce from the other Corner of the
fame Battle, and that in respect that too manie fielde
peeces beeing drawen and marching vppon the flankes
of squadrons to the intent to bee planted as abouesaid
vppon the day of battle, are for diuers causes and vppon
diuers accidentes of farre greater impedimentes and
trouble, then any waies profitable to their owne Squadrons.
            Also it is further to bee noted that I woulde neuer
place any Fielde peeces directlie before the frunt of anie
Squadrons or Battailes, vnlesse I thought our forces in
the field to bee much inferiour in strength to the Enemy,

because that peeces so planted would be a great impediment
vnto the battles marching forwarde to incounter
with the enemie, by reason that such squadrons should
be compelled by such peeces so planted to open & break
their rankes, and to disorder themselues, which is a matter
of great danger the Enemie being in sight or neere at
hand. And now hauing armed all the aforesaid 4. battles
with field peeces in their most fitte and conuenient
places, there resteth to shew what should become of the
Cariages and baggages of the Campe, as also where the
ouerplus of the horsemen and footmen that are not yet
placed, ought to be emploied.
            The Carriages of all Armies and Camps do consist of
two sorts, the one sorte that are publique, as of treasure
and pay for the Armie, of great quantitie of powder both
for great and small shot, of armor and weapon, of Artillerie,
as of Cannons, Culuerings, demy Cannons, demy
Culuerings, & Sakers and other smaller pieces, with
all things belonging vnto them, of diuers sorts of victuall
of prouision, of pieces maniable also, as of Curriers of
warre, of mosquets, harquebuzes and other such pieces,
with all things belonging vnto them, of bowes & sheafes
of arrowes, and Crosbowes, gaffles, and quarrells, with
piques, halbardes, targets, Launces, Launcezagaies and
all other sorts of armors and weapons both offensiue and
defensiue, with boates also to make bridges ouer riuers &
all thinges appertaining vnto them: And to be briefe, of
many other munitions & prouisions, al which being publique
for the vse of the whole Armie or Campe, are vnder
the charge of the Maister of the Ordinaunce. And as for
the other Carriages and baggages that are priuate they
are such as do belong vnto Cheistaines, Coronells, Captaines,
and other higher and lower men of charge and officers,
and to be short to all the soldiors of the Army that
haue any thing to be caried: All which priuate Cariages
also, are vnder the Maister of the Ordinance his commaundement
and Order. Now all the aforesaid most important

publique Carriages that do belong to the Army
and Campe,How the Cari
                     •
                  ages and baggages of the Armie, should bee placed and guarded. I would that the Maister of the Ordinaunce
and his officers and substitutes should reduce as neare as
he can possiblie into a square with such cōuenient distances
betwixt euerie rowe of carriages & carriages as they
might not be any impedimēt nor let the one to the other,
neither in marching nor in staing and pawsing. And I
would that the treasure should be caried either vpon mulets
or horses, or rather vpon close couered waggons after
the manner of Germanie, and those carriages placed
towardes the midst of the square on the right hande, and
that the waggons or Carts that do carrie the cheife substance
of the powder, should be placed also towardes the
midst of the square on the left hand, and that both those
sorts of carriages should bee very strongly guarded with
good numbers of halbardiers, and that all the great ordinance
of batterie and artillery with powder and bullets,
and all other things belonging vnto them should be placed
and drawen with their horses or oxen aswell vpon
the frunt and backe, as vpon the outer flankes and sides of
the same square: And I would that all the rest of the carriages
should be reduced into 2. 3. or 4. ranks in the forme
of a Rainebow, a semicircle or halfe round at the back of
the most important publique cariages which are be
                  •
               ore
reduced into square, in such sort as that the midst of the
halfe round should be directly behind and verie neere the
foresaid square of Cariages, and that both the endes of
the semicircle should be so farre extended and drawn into
a great Compasse circular, that the right ende thereof
should haue right ouer against the left flanke & corner of
the same (but a good distance wide) the hinder part of
the right flanke of the principall battle, and that the lefte
end of the same halfe round, should a
                  •
               so haue right ouer
against the right flanke and corner (but a good distance
wide) the hinder part of the left flank of the a Rereregardrereward,
and that in such sort as that semicircle or halfe
round of Cariages might seeme as it were to halfe compasse

and embrace the backes and Rerewards of all the 4▪
battles and their weapons of volee: which Reducement
of Cariages being performed, I would then take the 500.
halbardiers, and the 900. piquers, which at the first forming
of the 4. battles were reserued and not any where
placed, and would also either from the beginning reserue
vnplaced, or at least would drawe. 400. archers. 400.
harquebuziers, and. 400. mosquetiers, out of the 7000.
archers, and the. 3000. harquebuziers and mosquetiers,
which are reduced and placed in many sleeues, winges,
troupes and other formes vpon the flankes Corners and
Reregards of all the aforesaid 4. battles, and would deuide
all the aforesaid 900. piquers 500. halbadiers and 12000.
wepons of volee of different sorts into 4. parts, 3. parts of
the which being reduced into diuers squares and troupes,
I would should be reduced vpon the backe and both the
Corners of the semicircle, with certen fawconetts and
Robynets for the guard of the backe and ends of the semicircle
of Cariages, and therewithall would also place many
of 
                  〈◊〉
                the harquebuziers and mosquetiers aforesaid vpon
diuers of the Carriages themselues, that from thence
vpon any approach of the Enemie, they might discharge
their peeces at them to their terror and mischiefe.
            Now as for the fourth part and diuision of the weapons
aforesaid I would they should be placed in many hearses
and troupes vpon the frunts and flankes of the aforesaid
square of carriages, as also vpon the ynner parts and corners
of the halfe round. And as for the 140. stradiots, archers
on horsebacke and Crosbowers on horsebacke, I
would that. 100. of them should be placed vnder their
Conductors in diuers little troupes & societies vpon the
backe and Rereward of the halfe round, for the more sure
guarde of the same, and the rest which are 40. light hormen,
I would that they being deuided in their litle troups
and societies, should be for the guarde of the inner parte
of the semicircle, or else that the Enemies Army being
in frunt of the aforesaid 4. battles, that 20. of those light

horsmen vnder a sufficient Conductor should serue for
discouerers on the right hand of the whole Armie, and
that the other 20. light horsmen vnder the like Conductor
should discouer on the left hand, whether there were
any vnlooked for troupes of the enemie approching, and
thereof to giue aduertisement to the Generall of the Armie,
or to the Lord Marshall.
            And now all these reducements before set downe being
performed, It is to be noted that for so puissant an Armie
as this of 28000. horsemen and footmen of our English
Nation is, there cannot be fewer then 4000. pioners
and labourers, besides the waggoners, Carters, and
other baggagers of the Campe, aswel for the leuelling &
plaining of groundes where the Armie and artillerie shal
passe, as also for the fortefying of Campes and approching
of places fortefied with trenches, Crosse trenches
and gabions, and for the making of mounts and working
in mines, and infinite other thinges appertaining to the
Armie and Campe: which 4000. labourers and pioners
I would vpon the day of battle appoint and place in this
sort following. First,How to reduce appoint and place the Pioners of the whole Armie. I would that besides their spades,
shouelles, and mattocks, which they should haue alwaies
by them readie to performe any labour or worke to them
appointed by their Captaines and Conductors, that euerie
one of them should haue a good halbard or blacke
bill with a good dagger either hanging before them, or
vppon their Girdles at their backes: And so I would likewise
that all the Waggoners, Carters and other baggagers
of the Campe should bee appointed with the like
weapons alwaies vppon their cariages readie vppon any
occasion for them to take and vse, or else that euery sort
of them should haue such other weapons as they haue
most skill to handle: And of the pioners and labourers
I would appoint some conuenient numbers to bee with
the field peeces that were placed vppon the fruntes and
corners of all the 4. battles to helpe to remoue, turne and
mannage them.
            
               Also I would take 1600. more of those pioners and
labourers, and would deuide them into 4. diuisions or
parts of 400. in euery diuision, vnder their Captaines, &
Leaders, and would appoint euery one of those 4. partes
deuided into their societies of tens to attend vpon the aforesaid
4. battles, and that they should be placed at the
backs and in Rereward of the societies of halbardiers that
are in Rereward of the weapons of volee of the 4. battles,
readie to cut any trenches, or to perform any other commandment
vnto them giuen, as also vpon the ouerthrow
of the Enemie with their blacke Bils or other weapons to
follow the Chase, and doo execution vpon the Enemie
flying as the souldiors halbardiers placed at the backes of
the weapons of volee ought to doo, because that according
to right discipline vpon the ouerthrow of the Enemie,Squadrons and battles, vpon y• ouerthrow of the enemie, are in no wise to breake their rankes and order to follow the chace: and that in respect of the many & great inconueniences that vpon diuers occasions and accidents, doe often happen.
it is not any waies lawfull for battles and squadrons
of footmen to breake their rankes and orders, to the intent
to follow the Chase: And as for all the rest of the
4000. labourers and pioners, I would place them deuided
vnder their Captaines and leaders aswel for the gard
of the aforesaid square and halfe round of cariages, as for
the keeping of the Cariages in order, and repairing and
mending of the wheeles and other thinges of the Ordinance,
or of Carts and waggons broken.
            And now hauing reduced and placed all the aforesaid
4. battles with their forlorn hopes, sleeues, wings, troups
and other formes of weapons of volee in their most conuenient
places, and therewithall armed them with conuenient
numbers of field peeces, and reduced and placed
all the horsmen of diuers different sortes of armors and
weapons in their most conuenient formes for the annoiance
of the Enemie and for the aiding and succouring the
one of the other vppon all needefull occasions and accidents,
and therewithall placed all the Cariages of the
Armie and Campe in the forme of a halfe round and semicircle
with a square of cariages in the midst or bosome
thereof for the guard of the Rerewards and backs of all

the 4. battles; and all those cariages in their forms guarded
with diuers different sorts of weapons both of horsemen
and footmen, accompanied with small field peeces
to make head against and resist al attempts either of horsmen
or footmen: And all this to the intent presently vpon
the approach of the Enemy that is now in sight to giue
battle: Then I would wish according to the auncient vse
of many Warlike Nations, to the intent that it might
please Almightie God to prosper this Armie with victorie,
that vpon the sound of the Lord Lieutenants trompet
for the displaieng of the standard Royall of the Army,
to the intent to giue battle, the Enemie being in sight and
approching, all the souldiors should be instructed and
taught long before to say this short praier following, or
some other to the like effect.
            O Almightie,A short prayer to be saide by soldiors, vpon the approaching and, sight of the Enemies battle. Eternall, and incomprehensible God,
we most humblie beseech thy diuine Maiestie, to
giue vnto vs all courage, force and victorie to the glorie
of thy holy Name.
            And this said praier, I would wish to be said vpon the
sight of the Enemies battles by all the squadrons of armed
footmen, and by all the sleeues and winges of the
souldiors of weapons of volee vpon their knees in their
Rankes as they stand. And that all the horsmen of euery
sort of weapon should on horseback vse the same or the
like short praier.
            And therewithall I thought good furder to aduertise,
that those squadrons being so formed or in any other sort,It is not lawful nor sufferable for any soldior vppon the near approach of the Enemie, to turne his face.
to the intent to giue battle to the Enemie, all the soldiors
piquers, and halbardiers should be instructed and taught
long before, that it is not lawfull nor sufferable for any of
the souldiors of any ranke reduced into forme of battle,
when vpon the very neere approch of the enemies squadron
they haue vprighted their piques, to the intent with
the points of them to charge or receiue a charge of their
Enemies be they either horsemen or footmen, so much
as once to turne their faces to looke behind them: And

to the intent that they may bee the more terrified from
any waies turning their faces to look backe (which doth
argue feare) they are to be instructed according to discipline,
that it shall bee lawfull for the souldiors of euerie
Ranke to wound or kill any souldior or souldiors of the
ranke before them vppon the turning of their faces and
bodies to looke backe: and the same is to bee performed
euen from the verie first to the last rankes: And this instruction
is to be obserued to ye intent to make all the soldiors
of a squadron formed to keepe their weapons, faces,
eies, and braue countinaunces towardes their Enemies,
without shewing any suspicion or so much as one
tittle of feare.
            But now after my describing verie particularlie and
at large this said Armie reduced into the forme & formes
aforesaid, to the intent that thereby all Gentlemen affected
to matters of armes, and souldiors may with great facilitie
vnderstand mine intention and meaning; it may
bee that some gentlemen not experienced in matters of
armes, will in reading this my proiect imagine that the
reducement and forming of an armie into diuers battles
and other formes, dooth appertaine onely to the Lorde
Lieutenant Generall, or to the Lord high Marshall of the
armie; and that the same should be performed onley by
one of them, one peece after another: And that they peraduenture
may imagine the rather; because I in my foresaid
reducing and forming of ye armie by way of discourse
doe write, and say, that first I would reduce and place the
vaungard, then the Reregard, and then the other two
battles, and the Weapons of volee, and after the horsemen
of diuers sorts of armors and Weapons in this sort,
and in that sort, with many other particularities and circumstances:
Vnto which their misimaginations I say,
that it is not one mans worke; although it were Iulius
Caesar himselfe, to reduce a whole armie into diuers forms
of battle with celeritie when they are to march in the enimies
Countrey, or to fight with the Enemie, but that the

same must be of necessitie perfourmed by diuers Chiefetains,
and higher and lower officers of the armie: And yet
that notwithstanding, it is not possible to perfourme the
same with art, celeritie, and Discipline, vnlesse the direction
and order thereof doo proceede either from the
onely mouth of the Chiefetaine of the armie, or from
the Lorde high Marshall, or some other chiefe Officer
by them appointed; And therefore it dooth behooue
(which of them soeuer dooth giue the order) to haue the
forme and formes, of all the battles, squares and troupes,
as well of horsemen as of footemen with the scituation
and nature of the ground and groundes, and many other
particularities in his memorie and head; and that in so
great perfection, as if hee with his eies did at that instant
behold and see the whole armie in the field reduced into
all his intended formes.
            And therefore to perfourme the same, it is the ordinarie
vse of all skilfull Chieftaines of armies and Lorde
Marshals when they haue concluded and resolued with
themselues by the aduise of their Councell,The ordinarie proceedinge of al skilful Chieftainsof Armies in their reducements and forming of batles. into what
forme and formes the whole armie shall bee reduced to
march or to fight, to call and assemble before them the
Chiefetaines of all the horsemen and footmen, the maister
of the Ordinance, the Sergeant Maior generall, the
maister of the Campe, and such other men of office and
charge as hee thinketh requisite, and there giueth order
vnto them from point to point, concerning y• dislodging
and ordering of al those most important affaires: which
being by him performed; they presently do resort euerie
one to their owne charges, and doo giue order to their
Lieutenants, to their Sergeant Maiors, Captaines, and
all other officers vnto whom the execution of those affaires
and actions doo appertain, for the performance of
al those reducements and orders that they haue receiued
of the Chiefetaine of the armie, or from the Lord Marshall:
which doone, then all the Captaines both of

horsmen and footmen, and all their officers, doo with all
celeritie reduce their bandes into order, and march into
the field, where the Lord Lieutenant Generall, with the
Lord Marshall, and Sergeant Maior generall, do ouersee
and direct the Coronels, Sergeant Maiors and Captains,
in the ordering and forming of their battles, troupes and
other formes. And thus by this ordinarie proceeding of
all skilfull Chieftaines of Armies in their reducementes
and formings of battles and Campes, those and all other
matters militarie of any great importance, are with great
facility, and in very short time performed.
            And now hauing shewed all the most co
                  •
               uenient
waies of reducing and forming of all sortes of squadrons
aswell great as small, and where in the field to their most
aduantage they may be placed, and therewithal how and
where horsemen of diuers different sortes of armors and
weapons ought to bee placed in their most conuenient
places: with many other particularities, I think good before
I goe any further to giue an aduertisement that although
it hath beene the vse of all antiquitie amongest
many Nations according to good discipline to reduce
the chiefe force of their armed footmen into three squadrons
or battles,Certen reasons alleaged to proue that it is more conuenient and of greater force, for the generall of a puissant Armie that doth consist of many thousands of armed footmen to reduce them into 5. 6. 7. or 8. batles, than onely into 3. great battles of vaungard, battle, & reregard, according to the common vse. terming the first, vaunguard, the second,
battle, and the third, Reregard; and that oftentimes they
haue vsed to forme very great battles of 8000. or 10000.
or more into one body of squadron; yet I for diuers causes
and reasons would wish a Lieutenant generall, or lord
Marshall of a puissant Armie, rather to forme 6. 7. or 8.
smaller battles; incase the number of the Armie bee so
great that the same by reason militarie may bee perfourmed,
then onely into three great battles as aforesaid.
            As for example, if there were an Army of 30000. horsmen
and footmen; and that there were of those. 15000.
armed men piquers and short weapons to be reduced into
diuers battles; that I would not only of those. 15000.
according to the ordinary vse, forme a vauntgard, battle
and Rereward, but also 3. other smaller battles, vnto the

which I would giue 3. different names, & would call the
first by the name of a vauntregard Rereward; the second
the batle of succor;It is here to be noted that the whole frunt of 15000. men reduced into 3. great battles of 5000. to each battle doth consist of 3. times 125. armed mē, which being nombred as if they were all in one frunt, doe make iust 375. piquers, & by flanke 40. ranks, ourplus of broken ranks, not any one soldior. And so likewise the frunts of the 15000. men reduced into 6. smaller bat
                  
                     •
                  les, 3. of the. which being of 3000. to each battle doe consist euery one of them of 75. piquers in frunt. And the frunt also of eache one of the other 3. smallest squadrons of 2000. to euery batle consisting of 50. piquers in each frunt being all 6. frunts nombred togeather as if they were all 
                     〈◊〉
                   one frunt, doe likewise make the iust nomber of 375. piquers in frunt, as the 3. great squadrons of 
                     •
                  000. to euery batle doe, and by flanke 40. ranks, ouerplus not any one sodior. and the third by the name of a Rereregard
Reregard; and the firste 3. battles of vaungard, battle,
and Reregard I would should consist of 3000. piquers
and short weapons to euery battle; and that each one of
those battles being reduced into squadron should consist
of. 75. piquers in frunt, and. 40. by flankes, ouerplus of
broken rankes not so much as one soldior; and the last 3.
mentioned battles I would should consist of. 2000. to euery
battle, and that euery one of them being reduced in
to squadrons should consist in frunt, that is in euery ranke
from frunt to backe of 50. piquers, and by flankes of. 40.
rankes, ouerplus of broken rankes not any one soldior.
And these 6. foresaid battles reduced into the formes aforesaid,
and flankt and wing'd with weapons of volee of
diuers sorts according to discipline and the comming of
the enemy; in mine opinion should be of great aduantage
to encounter with 15000. armed men their enemies reduced
but only into. 3. batles of 5000. to euery battle;
by reason that whilest the 3. formost battles each of them
consisting of 3000. as aforesaid, do confrunt with the. 3.
great batles of 5000. in each battle, the other 3. battles of
a vauntregard Rereward and of the battle of succor, and
of a Rereregard Rereward, that doo march in winges in
Rereward retired, as aforesaid, may with great celeritie
and dexteritie by marching and auauncing themselues
forward, charge the flankes of their enemies 3. battles,
and put them in great hazard of disordering & breaking:
Howbeit here it may be obiected against mine opinion,
that in case the 3. great battles of the enemy of. 5000. to
euery battle were each one of them reduced into. 125.
armed men in frunt, & of 40. rankes by flankes; that their

                  〈◊〉
                encountting & ioining with the formost 3. small batles
of vaungard, battle, and Reregard, they might euerie one
of them in ioyning frunt to frunt with them, in respect
that euery one of the great battles of. 5000. to euery

batle doth beare a greater bredth by the nūber of. 28. soldiors
in frunt, then any of the formost 3. squadrōs of 3000
in euery squadron do, with great aduantage draw vp a
sleeue of 28. in euery ranke, and of 40. rankes by flankes;
and finding themselues full against the flanke of their Enemies
squadron, they may suddenly make of flanke frunt
by tourning their faces and weapons towards the flanke
of the foresaid littlesquadrons, and then reforming themselues
in their distances, and closing themselues in frunt
and flanks, may bend their piques and charge the flankes
of the little squadrons to their most assured ruine. Or otherwise
vpon the inconsiderate ioining of any one of the
small squadrons of 3000. being in frunt but. 75. with the
verie midst of the frunt of the great battles of. 5000. that
do consist of 125. piquers in frunt; the foresaid great squadrons
vpon such an aduantage offered, may drawe vp
each of them two sleeues from each side or flanke of their
squadron one of. 14. piquers in euery ranke, and finding
themselues euen vpon both the flankes of the little squadron;
they may of their flankes make frunt, and so of. 14.
that they were before in euery ranke, they are now by
making of flanke frunt become to be 40. in euerie ranke,
and in length by flankes 14. soldiors, and so by reforming
their distances and straightning and closing themselues
in frunt and by flanks as aforesaid, may with their piques
charge both the flankes of the little squadron to their vtter
disorder and ouerthrow. To which obiection I say,
that those foresaid aduauntages and others might be very
well taken against the 3. little squadrons of vaungard, battle,
and Reregard, if it were not that the other 3. little battles
of succor of 2000. to euery squadron, euery of them
of. 50. piquers in frunt, marching in Rereward in distincte
battles by them selues were not alwaies ready vpon the
drawing vp of all such sleeues or winges from the bodies
of the great squadrons, suddenly with great dexteritie to
charge them either in frunt flanks or backe, to their most
assured ruine and ouerthrow. But againe it may be

further alledged in fauor of the great battles, that al squadrons
of armed men piquers doo alwaies march, wing'd,
& flankt with conuenient numbers of weapons of volee,
in such sort as those weapons of volee should be a great
impediment to the forsaid little squadrons to charge the
sleeues, and wings as aforesaid.
            Vnto the which I say, that true it is, that all well ordered
battles, are wing'd and flankt with shot of diuers sorts
and that it hath beene and is a maxime amongest al men
of warre of great experience and Iudgement, that hearses,
sleeues, winges and troupes of shot beeing deuided
into many small diuisions, are a great deale more apt and
ready to bee emploied at one time, into more different
and effectuall seruices to worke great effectes then any
great diuisions of shot can bee: Which if it be so, as most
certen it is by all experience Militarie; then the 3. battles
of 5000. to euery battle hauing 10000. weapons of volee
of diuers sortes to be reduced vnder their safeguard,
must diuide those 10000. into so many compertimentes
and diuisions of sleeues, winges and troupes, as are requisite
to guard 3. such battles; As also the diuisions of weapons
of volee themselues to bee protected and defended
vnder the safeguard of those 3. squadrons; and so likewise
the 15000. armed men beeing reduced into 6. little battles
as aforesaid, hauing the like number of weapons of
volee of diuers sorts to aide them, and to be by them protected,
must by all order militarie diuide those 10000.
weapons of volee into double as many or more diuisions
of sleeues, wings and troups then the 3. great battles haue
diuided theirs for their aide. From all which experienced
reasons and examples I come to conclude that as
15000. armed footemen reduced but onely into 3. great
battles cannot by any reason militarie haue so manie
sleeues, winge, troupes, & other diuisions of diuers sorts
of shot vnder their safegard, as 15000. armed men reduced
into 6. smaller battles may haue: Euen so that the 3.
great squadrons of armed men with their few & great diuisiōs
of shot cannot possibly by any reason or experience

worke so great effects, as the 6. smaller battles their Enemies,
with their many and more conuenient diuisions of
diuers sorts of weapons of volee may worke.
            And now whereas I haue before fourmed a squadron
and diuers squadrons all of halbardiers or battleaxes enuironed
or empaled about with 5. rankes of piquers in
frunt, flankes and backe; and that the short weapons are
in greater number then ye piques; & therfore by some in
these daies (that doo more regard the new fashions, and
fancies of the disordered and corrupted Militia, that of
very late yeares in diuers ciuill warres haue crept into
Christendome, then the true discipline, art, and science
militarie, which hath beene practised and vsed from age
to age of all antiquitie, in the warres betwixt Emperors,
Kinges, and puissant Common wealthes) it may peraduenture
be thought, that such a squadron is no waies cō
               parable
for all great effects and purposes to a squadron of
the like number al of piquers without any short weapons,
sauing onely a very fewe for the guard of the Ensignes:
Thervnto I say, that I doo thinke this squadron of short
weapons enuironed with 5. ranks of piques as aforesaid,
to be of a great deale more aduantage, strength and effect
aswell against horsmen as footmen, then any squadron
of the like number all of piquers can be. And because it
shall be apparant that I am not carried with new fashions
and fancies, but with the obseruation of that which I
haue read, hath been in vse and obserued by diuers braue
Nations in many ages, as also by mine owne hearing the
opinions of diuers great Captaines, Coronels, and Sergeants
Maiors of diuers warrelike Nations, some of late
yeares dead, and some yet aliue; And therwithall by that
which I haue seene and obserued my selfe, in the squadrons
of diuers Nations, some of the which haue vsed
squadrons all of piquers as aforesaid, and other Nations
squadrons of piquers with some rankes of halbards with
in their piques: which different vses of Nations haue giuen
me occasion not onely to enter into imagination of

the different or contrarie causes of the forming of such
squadrons, but also the more curiouslie to aske & inquire
of diuers men of great sufficiencie of those Nations, the
different reasons and causes of the forming of such squadrons,
some all of piques and others of piques and short
weapons as aforesaid; I therfore will set down that which
I haue gathered and obserued by the diuersitie of their
opinions concerning the same, as also by mine own sight
and consideration, and will here by the helpe of Almightie
God, giue sufficient causes and reasons to proue that
my foresaid squadron formed with short weapons, enuironed
about with 5. rankes of piquers as aforesaid, is of
farre greater force and effect, then if the squadron were
all of piquers; And the reasons are these.
            First, when a squadron of men at armes or dimilaunces,
or diuers squadrons seconding one another,
shoulde charge the squadron of footemen all of
piquers in frunt:Reasons to prooue a Squadron of Battleaxes, enuironed about with 5. rankes of Piques to be a far greater aduantage, strength, and effect against▪ horsemē 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   footmen thē any squadron of the like nomber, all of Piques. all men of consideration may consider
and know that all the whole squadron consisting only
of piquers, according as I haue before formed diuers
squadrons in this discourse; that not aboue 5. rankes of
the foremost piques at the most beeing closed in frunt,
flankes and backe, or rather but 4. rankes, can make head
with the pointes of their piques to hurt or reach the horses
or men of the formost ranks of the Launces charging;
& that because the longest piques that are in these daies
vsed by any Nation are not aboue 18. foot long, of which
length of 18. foot,Not aboue 5. ranks of Piquers closed in frunt, flanke & backe, are able to make heade with their Piques, to reache or hitt the first ranke of Launces charginge, for diuers reasons. the formost ranke of piquers either
clapping the butendes of their piques vnder their right
feete, or carrying them breast high to resist, and repulse
the Launces (both which waies are in the beginning of
this booke, very particularlie declared) I say that from
their right handes that they hold the butendes of their
piques withall to theirleft and forehands that doo beare
their piques (incase they carry them abouehand breast
high) doo occupie and therefore shorten 3. foot at least
of the length of their piques towards the foremost ranke

of their Enemies; then there doo remaine 15. foot beyond
their left and forehandes more for them to reach
and annoy their enemies withall; then the second ranke
closing themselues to y• first rank and carying their piques
breast high ouer the shoulders of the first rank do leese 3.
foot more of 
                  •
               y length of their piques by that which they
hold betwixt their hinder and forehands, as aforsaid; so as
there remaineth but 12. foot of the length of their piques
beyond the foremost rankes towardes the annoiance of
their Enemies; then the third ranke closing themselues
to the shoulders of the second ranke doo come likewise
to loose three foote more by so much of their piques as
they hold betwixt both their handes as aforesaid, which
with the thicknesse and distance of the two rankes before
them dooth come to make them to leese 9. foote of the
length of their piques, so as there remaineth only 9. foot
of the length of their piques at the most beyond the foremost
ranke towards the annoiance of the Enemie; then
the fourth ranke by the like cause and reason commeth
to leese 3. foot more of the length of their piques, so as
there remaineth only 6. foot of the length of their piques
with the pointes of them before the formost ranke to annoy
the Enemie; then the fifth ranke of the squadron of
piquers commeth by the like causes and reasons as aforesaide
to leese 3. foote more at the least of the length of
their piques, which with the thicknesse of all the 4. ranks
before them doo come to make them to leese 15. foot or
more of the length of their piques so as there remaineth
only 3. foot of y• length of their piques beyond y• formost
and first ranke, the which 3. foot of their piques towards
the Enemie reaching too short to annoy either horses or
men, doo rather through the shortnesse of the same, reaching
so little a waie beyond the first ranke, trouble the
foremost rankes of their fellowes, then worke any other
good effect; and therefore those piques of the fifth ranke
are rather to be kept still vprighted with the points some
thing bent towardes the Enemie, then any waies to bee

couched as the piques of the 4. foremost rankes are, and
so likewise the piquers of the sixth, seuenth, and eighth
rankes, and subsequently of all the rest hauing no possibilitie
at the first charge either of horsemen, or footmen, to
annoy them, they are to keepe their piques still vprighted,
the pointes something bent forward towardes the
enemie to shew themselues in the sight of the enemy ready
to succour the formost rankes, rather then any waies
to beare the pointes of their piques any lower. But if any
man will say that all the backer rankes of piquers may orderlie
and easilie succour and supplie the places of such
piquers of the fore rankes as come to be slaine, wounded,
or ouerthrowne, and so resist or repulse either horsemen
or footmen entring, as I my selfe in the beginning of this
booke haue particularly set downe.
            Therevnto I answere,An Obiection answered. that the piques that are in the
backer rankes vppon the accidentall breaking in of any
men at Armes into the foremost ranks of piquers; or vpon
the entring of any of the formost ranks of the contrarie
squadron of footmen; are through the hauing of so
many other ranks of piquers before them, with the great
length of those weapons in a presse so vnmaniable, and
therefore of so little effect when battles come to ioine;
that most of the piques of the inner rankes; I meane of
the sixt, seuenth, and eighth, and so consequentlie of the
rest of the middle rankes, through the letting fall of the
pointes of their piques forward (how leisurely soeuer) to
couch and bend the points of them to the annoiance of
the enemies, do through their great length so intermingle,
and intricate with the pique
                  ••
                of the former rankes,
that euery sudden touch of the piques that are in the
ranks before one another, do so disorder, beat, and turne
aside the points of the piques from their intended thrusts
at their enemies, as that they rather turne them through
their great length to the trouble of the ranks before them,
then any waies to resist, repulse, or annoie the Enemie.
            But now it may be demanded of me wherfore the sixt,

seuenth,Why the sixth, seuenth, and so consequentlie, the rest of the inner rankes can not as orderly let fall & couch their Piques to the mis chiefe of the Enemies, as the 5 formost rankes. and so consequentlie the rest of the inner rankes
should not as orderlie one after another let fal and couch
their piques to the resistance and mischiefe of their enemies,
as the 5. formost, and first rank
                  •
                of piquers may.
Wherevnto I answer that the 4. or 5. first rankes hauing
apparant and cleare in their eies and sights the comming
of their Enemies in squadron, be they horsemen or footmen,
may with greater order and leisure all one after
another couch their piques and charge a contrary
squadron of footmen, or receiue a charge of horsemen,
then the other inner rankes of piquers can, who vpon the
breaking in and entring of some of the men at armes in
one place or other, or y• entring of some part of the squadron
of their enemies footmen more in one place then in
another, as sometimes it happeneth, cannot so well and
clearely see the comming and entring of their Enemies,
by reason of so many ranks of their fellowes before them,
as that they may so wel in iust and conuenient times, moments
and distances, orderlie and effectually let fall and
couch their piques as the 4. or 5. foremost rankes haue
doone.
            Vpon which accidentes it dooth ordinarilie happen,
that such inner ranks are driuen to let fall and couch their
piques vpon suddens, least y• by their not couching them,
they should by their enemies approching them too neer
leese the vse of the points of their piques. Which sudden
letting fall and couching of their piques, dooth cause the
aforesaid intermingling and intricating, and confused ouerthwarting
of piques with piques, a great deale more
in the inner rankes, then any waies in the formost 4. or 5.
rankes as aforesaid. By all which it is to bee considered
and noted, that neither horsmen, Launces, nor footmen
piquers can enter vnder the points of my squadron of battleaxes
empaled and inuironed in frunt, flanks and back,
with 5. ranks of piques as aforesaid, but that they must of
necessitie abide the first violence of the pointes of them,

                  〈◊〉
                they find them already in great order and leisure

couched to resist and repulse them.
            Whereas farre otherwise it doth behooue the inner ranks
of a squadron consisting all of piquers, to obserue the entring
of their Enemies be they horsemen or footmen in
such moments & iust distances, as that they may be sure
to let fall and couch their piques, when their Enemies are
entred, and do come within 4. or 5. ranks of them; which
if they should faile to performe; then it were too late for
such inner rankes to couch their piques either againste
horsemen or footmen, now entred and comne within and
vnder the length of their piques. But vnto this, some vnskilfull
soldior may obiect and say, that the inner rankes
may still carrie their piques couched, readie to resist, or
repulse their Enemies entering. Or otherwise, that they
letting fal and couching their piques, after that their Enemies
be entered within lesse then 5. or 4. rankes of them
may so farre retire, and pull them backe, as that they may
recouer the vse of the points of them against their Enemies
to their great annoiance.
            Vnto which obiections, I say that it is not in the force
and strength of the most puissant soldiors of any Nation
that liue,An obiection aunswered. still to carrie their piques couched, no nor yet
to beare them abouehand ouer their fellowes heades but
a verie little while, considering the great length and heaueth
of them: And therefore they must neuer let fall and
couch them, vntill such instant & needfull times, as their
Enemies do approach them in so neare distances, as they
must presently (either with one entire thrush, if they bee
the formost, 4▪ or. 5. rankes, or with diuers thrusts in iust
instantes and times if they be the inner rankes), vpon the
entering of the Enemie, be driuen to make head, and succor
the rankes before them; for if the inner rankes should
through lacke of skill thrust at their Euemies before they
come within the reach of their piques, then they should
worke no other effect, but thrust their owne fellowes that
are betwixt them and their Enemies, to their trouble, or
mischiefe in their heads, necks or backs. And for aunswer

to the other obiection that the ynner rankes of piquers
letting fall and couching their piques, may pul and retire
them so farre backe, as that they may againe recouer the
vse of the points of them against their Enemies entered; I
say, that if the enemies be they either horsemen or footmen
be entered but only .7. 6. 5. 4. or 3. feete within and
vnder the length of any of the piques of the inner ranks
that it is not possible for such piquers, in respect of the
ranke and rankes that are so neare and close behind them,
to pull their piques with their armes so farre backe, as any
waies to recouer y• vse of the pyonts of them against such
Enemies as are comne within and vnder their piques as
aforsaid: whereof insueth that those inner rankes haue
vtterly lost the vse of their piques, and therefore must let
them fall to the great trouble of the leggs and feete of the
rankes of their fellowes aduauncing forward, and betake
themselues to their swords and daggars,The great effects that a squadron of Battleaxes, enuironed about with 5. rankes of Piquers do work. which are not
weapons any waies able to repulse or resist armed men
with battleaxes, or halbards. By all which before alleaged,
I thinke it is most apparant that the 5. rankes of piquers
that do empale & enuiron my squadron of battleaxes
by frunt, flanks, and backe, are ranks enough to restist
any Charge or Charges of Launces, aswell, and a great
deale better, then if the same squadron were all of piques,
because that the 4. or 5. first rankes only are those that do
worke al the effects to the resisting & repulsing of Launces
charging, or that are with their thrush to resist and repulse
any charge of a squadron of footmen piquers their
Enemies; and if any Launces by chaunce should breake
through those 5. rankes, then the battleaxes, and short
staued, and long edged, and short and strong pointed halbards
in the handes of well armed men, are readie at the
heeles of the 5. rankes of their piquers, and do wonderfully
both with blow and thrust at the heads, and faces of
horses or men, kill wound, ouerthrow, or repulse either
horsemen Launces, or footmen piquers, whose first charges
and furies haue bene before greatly staied and weakened

by y• resistance of the first 5. ranks of piquers (as aforsaid;)
For it is to all men of vnderstanding in matters Militarie
most euident, that short staued battleaxes, or halbards,
of not aboue 6. foot long in their whole length, do
no waies in their blowes nor thrusts, either against horsmen
or footmen trouble, entermingle, nor intricate one
with another, by reason of their shortnesse, as the rankes
of piques do, through their great lengthes: which piques
doo no waies kill nor hurt but only with their pointes, as
is before at large declared. By all which I come to conclude,
that 4. or 5. of the first rankes, be it in frunt, flanks,
or backe; I meane which of them soeuer vpon the comming
of the enemie be made frunt; doo worke far greater
effectes then all the rest of the inner rankes of piquers
can possibly do: for in troth, all y• inner ranks of piquers
besides the 5. first ranks, doo neither against horsemen,
and chieflie against footemen halbarders, or battleaxes
well armed; no nor yet against armed men with swordes
and targets, vsing their targets only to defend their faces
from the points of the piques, worke any important effect,
as it is most manifest by the reasons, causes and accidents
by me before alledged.
            And thus hauing at large shewed by diuers reasons
the imperfections of squadrons that doo consist onelie
of piques, with the great perfections and effects of squadrons
of battleaxes enuironed onely with 5. rankes of
piquers; as also howe all sortes of squadrons that are
commonlie in vse in the open fieldes in these daies, and
also in al former ages ought to be reduced into form, with
many other different particularities; I will omit diuers
other sorts & forms of little battles that are conteined in
som printed books of diuers languages; as of Crossebattles,
of battles in triangle, & battles in form of stars, with
many other such battles of diuers shapes & fashiōs extraordinary,
y• are rather set forth to fill vp books & to please
y• curious; then for any great vse of them; by reason y• such
phantastical battles are no waies able in the open fields to

march & encoūter with such squadrons as I haue before
described and set down: And yet somtimes armies may
march vpon such strange & extraordinary grounds (as in
marching ouer mountains or high hils y• haue varietie of
forms of rising & descending grounds) y• it is not possible
to form such great squadrons in such forms, as I haue before
declared and described, but that vpon the comming
of the enemie they must bee forced to deuide their three
battles of vauntguard, battle and Rereward, that they
marched withall in the plaine and open fieldes, into as
many varieties of little battles and formes, as the aduantages
and formes of the varietie of groundes where they
presently find themselues doo present vnto them; and
therewithall to flank their armed men on euery side with
weapons of volee: All which a Lord Marshall or sergeant
Maior may with a great deale more facilitie perform,
then to forme such great squadrons as I haue before described,
reduced, and formed.
            But heere I thinke it good to aduertise the Reader,
that I haue heard verie crediblie reported, that there is
another kind of forming of a battle, amongst some of the
Sergeants Maiors of our Nation in these daies greatly in
vse, and that is; That they place foure piquers with their
piques aduaunced in square, according to the greatnesse
of the squadron that they meane by guesse to form with
the number of piquers that they haue for that purpose:
And somtimes they place in the middest of the frunt betwixt
the two formost piquers, a third piquer, and so likewise
they place two other piquers, vpon the midst of ech
flanke one, betwixt the said piquers that are in flanke,
with a fourth piquer also in the midst betwixt the two hindermost
piquers, which 8. piquers when they haue placed
in as iust square in their distaunces as they can: then
they command al the piquers that they meane by guesse
to reduce into squadron, beeing all behind and in Rereward
of the 8. piquers in square, presentlie to run into the
void place within the square of the 8. piquers, and there

to fall into their rankes with hubbledeshuf as well as they
can, vntill they haue filled vp all the distances and empty
place within y• square of the said 8: piquers, which being
performed; they hold this way not only for a verie ready
forming of a squadron, but also for a most excellent waie
of reducement,Some Sergeants Ma
                     •
                  ors of this time doe through lacke of vnderstanding and skill, thinke a battell of extremitie and necessiti
                     •
                   to be better then a battell according to art and discipline formed. because that there is not any Sergeant
Maior so vnskilfull, although hee be vtterly ignorant in
Arithmetique, nor that he do know so much as one letter
vpon the book, but that he may by guesse forme such
a squadron; which kind of forming, or rather deforming
of squadrons, in troth is called of all antiquitie to make a
squadron or battle of extremitie and necessity; when vpon
the sudden and vnlooked for approch and neare comming
of the enemie, through the fault and negligence
of the scouts & discouerers, they are forced in the place
of assemblie in their Campe, to make of necessitie vertue:
that is, for lacke of time to reduce their squadrons
into forme of like numbers of souldiors in euery ranke,
and into their iust and proportionate distances both by
frunt & flanks according to discipline, to form a confused
squadron of different numbers of soldiors into crooked
ranks, and vncerten and confused distances, into the void
ground or place that is within 4. 8. or 12. or more piquers,
placed in square as abouesaid, in the place of assembly
of their Campe: which kind of disordered battles
of extremitie are no waies able by any reason Military, to
encounter and abide the charge of a squadron of the like
number of piquers reduced into forme according to discipline;
that is of like numbers of soldiors in euerie ranke
from frunt to backe, and in their euen and proportionate
distances in frunt, and by flankes; and therefore being alwaies
ready with great order and facilitie to incorporate
and close themselues by frunt and flankes, may without
any waies troubling the one the other, nor intricating
their piques nor rankes, mannage and vse their piques
with great dexteritie▪ and charge, and ouerthrow, such
a confused multitude, or battle of extremitie that are in

vncerten numbers in their ranks, and in as vncerten and
confused distances: which causeth disequality and crookednesse
of rankes; and therefore cannot possibly close
themselues in frunt and by flankes, in any order, forme,
and strength, nor mannage and vse their piques without
confounding and intricating their piques with their fellowes
piques, to the great aduantage of their enemies
well formed squadron, and their own most certen ruine;
Besides all which it is not possible for such a disordered
squadron to march in the fields, with any order, nor according
to discipline to performe diuers other effectes
belonging to well ordered squadrons in the fielde, as all
skilful and expert Sergeants Maiors, and men of warre of
experience and iudgement doo verie well know. Wherfore
I come to conclude that such disordered battles of
necessitie and extremitie are neuer to bee vsed, but vppon
a suddaine and vnlooked for comming of the enemie,
through the negligence of the scoutes, discouerers,
or Centinelles as aforesaid. And therefore now I proceed
to diuers other very important and requisit matters
Militarie.
            
               That great bands of 500. vnder an Ensigne are mor
                     •
                  
connenient for al seruices in the field,
then smal bands of 150.
               
                  IN this place before I proceede any further, I
thought good to notifie vnto all such as shall read
these my instructions, that my opinion is, y• great bands
of footmen of 500. souldiours to euery Ensigne according
to the ancient and moderne vse of Germany (when
they doo inuade,Great bandes of footmen of 500 to euerie Ensigne are a great deale better then bands of 150. or 200. for diuers causes, and reasons. or resist, and make head against y• Turk)
are more conuenient, and a great deale better as well for
the princes sauing of many paies of Captaines, and officers,
as also for the more speedie forming of great battles
or squadrons with dexteritie & celeritie, then smal bands
of 150. are; who in respect of the many Captaines and
officers, are a farre greater charge vnto the prince as aforesaid;

as also through the smalnesse and great number
of their compertiments or diuisions of diuers different
sorts of weapons, a great deale more slow and vnfit to be
reduced into great battles or squadrons, then great bāds
are: which mine opinion, because I haue fortified and
proued the same with certen examples & many reasons
in my booke of discourses, which I set foorth and caused
to be printed 1590. and yet that the same hath beene by
certen apassionate Gentlemen with many malicious and
vaine words void of all reason militarie, denied in certen
malicious libelling pamphlets by them in written hande
in many places dispersed contrary to all ciuilitie and profession
militarie; I wil againe in this place rehearse & set
downe a part of that which is conteined in my foresaid
booke of discourses, and wil fortefie the same with such
reasons and examples, as any man that is of any discretion
may manifestlie see the great ignorance and lacke of
skill of those that doo thinke, that many small compertiments
of piquers and of weapons of volee may be assoon
brought into any forme of battle, with sleeues, winges,
forlorne hopes, &c, as great bandes of 500. that do consist
of great compertiments of different sorts of weapons
may; And therefore the words of my booke of discourses
to proue my foresaid proiect, are in a manner verbatim,
these following.
               When the great Princes of Germanie vppon any occasion
or iniury offred, are disposed to make Warre one
against another, or vpon an imperiall army assembled to
inuade or resist the Turk, beeing bounde as they are by
their Tenures Militarie to the Empire, some to finde
Horsemen,The causes and reasons wherefore y• Princes of Germanie doe vse great bandes of 500, in their seruice of the Empire. and others to finde footemen at their owne
charges, they then vppon such occasions haue alwaies
vsed, and doo still vse to forme their Regiments of footmen
into great bands of 500. to an Ensigne, & that they
vse especiallie for two causes; the one thereby in their regimentes
and so consequentlie in their whole Armies to
saue the pay of a great sort of Captaines, Lieutenantes

of bands, Ensignbearers and other officers, which would
be greatly increased & so amount to a far greater charge,
and pay, incase they should compose smaller bandes of
200. or 150. or vnder that number.
               The other cause that doth moue them to forme their
bands so great, is, that their Militia consisting of harquebuziers,
mosquetiers, piquers, and some halbarders, with
a few slathe swords for the guard of their Ensignes, that
those sorts of weapons by reason of the greatnesse of the
bands being in great compertiments and diuisions may
be the more readilie and easilie drawne out, and seperated,
and with a great deale more celeritie incorporated
with the other great compertimentes of like weapons of
other great bands to forme their squadrons with sleeues,
winges, troupes, and forlorne hopes, according to the
order and direction of their Coronels, and Sergeantes
Maiors, then if their bands were smaller either of 200.
or 150. or vnder that number, whereby the Compertiments
of weapons should be also the smaller, and therby
in number the greater, and so consequently, would require
a much longer time not only to drawe out, but also
to incorporate compertimentes with compertimentes
for the forming of battles with sleeues, winges, and forlorne
hopes as aforesaid: Besides that, such great bands
both by reason and experience are as readie, and a great
deale more ready to bee emploied either in whole companies
vnder their Captains and Lieutenants, or deuided
into partes and corporalates vnder their Corporals and
Sergeants, for watches, bodies of watches, Centinels,
and all other ordinarie and extraordinary emploiments
and actions militarie, in Campe, Towne, or field, then any
smal bands are: For it is most euident that smal bands
of 150. to an Ensigne, consisting of 5. different sortes of
weapons, (viz:) piques, battleaxes, mosquets, harquebuzes,
and longbowes, and that therefore euery one sort
of those weapons is to be reduced into diuers little diuisions
by themselues, which besides the vncomely sight to

see so many small compertimentes in euery such little
band, it would require a much longer time vpon the dailie
and ordinarie dislodging of an Armie reduced into a
vaungard, battle and rereward, to draw so great numbers
of compertiments out of such a number of little bandes;
then out of a few bands of 500. to draw a few great compertiments,
and to incorporate and reduce them into
any forme or formes.
               And this before written, I thinke, might suffice to perswade
any that do professe Armes, that are of any discretion,
although but of meane iudgement in matters Militarie,
that such great bands as aforesaid, are a great deale
more fitt and conuenient to forme battles and squadrons
withall, then such small bands as aforesaid are. Howbeit
because there be some 3. or 4. of our Nation yt haue written
in certen lewde and false pamphlets and libells against
me (as is before mentioned) that haue not bene ashamed
to name themselues the inuentors and deuisers of a new
discipline Militarie, (who how farre wide they are from
the vnderstanding of all true discipline, all men of right
consideration may euidently see by their writinges,
speakings, vaine opinions and actions); that they I say, in
their malitious and friuolous libels do write (as aforesaid)
that small bands of 150. are as readie to be reduced into
any squadron, as great bands of .500. are. I therefore to
make that, which I haue before written more apparant,
and vtterlie to conuince their obstinate ignorances, will
by comparing the best orders and waies of fourming of
squadrons, both with great, and with small bandes, shewe
with what great readines and facilitie, squadrons may be
formed with a few great Compertiments out of great
bandes of. 500. to an Ensigne; and with what difficultie
great squadrons are reduced into forme, with many little
Compertiments out of small bandes of .150. to an Ensigne:
that therby all men of consideration may euidentlie
see the erronious and vnskilfull opinions Militarie that
those our such men of warre do hold: And therefore I do

for example alledge: That admit that a generall of an Army
of .18000.An example to proue that great bands of Souldiers are more requisite then small bands. footmen reduced into .6. Regiments of
.3000. to euerie Regiment and .8000. 10000. or .12000.
horsemen of diuers armors and weapons, with all other
prouision and furniture belonging to such an Armie, to
inuade some forren dominions; & that the whole 18000
footmen being deuided into 5. partes he had concluded
(according to the commendable opinion of some notable
men of warre that I haue knowne in my time) that. 3.
parts of the 5. should be all piquers and short weapons, or
all piquers without any short weapons, to forme a vaungard,
battle and Rereward, according to the manner and
vse of the Italians and Spaniards of this time; and that the
other two parts should be all weapons of volee; weare I
say, determined to make a proofe, whether little bandes
of 150. or great bands of 500. were most apte and ready
to forme squadrons withal; and therefore hauing reduced
3. of the 6. Regiments into little bands of 150. that is 20.
bandes of 150. to euerie Regiment of 3000. and the other.
3. Regiments into great bandes of .500. that is .6.
bandes of 500. to euerie Regiment of 3000. he then geuing
these or the like directiōs hereafter set down, should
most manifestly see the great aptnes, dexteritie and readinesse
of great bandes of .500. to reduce squadrons into,
with the wonderfull vnreadinesse, great disorders and imperfections
in reducing of squadrons into forme by little
bandes of 150. consisting of .5. different weapons as aforesaid▪
               
               The Lieutennant general therfore first to make proofe
whether the piquers of one of the regiments of the small
bands, or the piquers of one of the Regiments of the great
bands were more readie to be reduced into squadron, is
to commaund that at a certen houre vpon a sound and
warning giuen by his trompettor, two Coronells with
their two Regiments the one consisting all of small bands
of .150. and the other all of great bands of .500. should
with all celeritie reduce themselues into their simple and

single order of rankes: (which reducement of bandes into
their simple, and single order, is euer to be performed
before squadrons can with order and reason Militarie be
formed),Soldiors are to be ruduced into their simple and single order of ranks, be fore they are to be broug▪ to any forme of squadron. and that either in the place of Armes, if the Generall
shal appoint that place, or otherwise if it shal please
him to commaund both the Coronells at one time to
march out of the Camp to two seuerall places & grounds
appointed both of like distance from the fortifications of
the Campe; there to reduce .3. parts of their Regiments
which do consist of piquers, (the other two parts consisting
weapons of volee as aforesaid) into two seuerall squadrons,
each of them 60. piquers in frunt, & 30. by flanks
which are in each Regiment .1800. piquers:The great readinesse and dexteritie in forming of squad
                        •
                     ons with great compertiments out of bands of 500. Then I say
that the 3. partes of piquers of euerie great band of .500.
being .300. and the other two parts of weapons of volee
in number 200. marching out of their quarters into the
place of Armes, which is betwixte their quarter and the
fortifications of the Campe, and there reducing themselues
into their simple and single order of 100. rankes 5.
in euerie ranke; or rather into 50. rankes of 10. in euerie
ranke: I mean the one halfe of the weapons of volee, that
doconsist of 100. marching before the ranks of y• piquers,
and the other halfe of y• like number of weapons of volee
behinde the hindermost ranke of all the piquers, with
the Ensigne according to all discipline in the middest of
the piquers: And so all those 6. bandes of 500. vnder euerie
Ensigne marching 10. in a ranke one after another
out of the Campe towardes the ground where they are
to forme their squadron; whither being comne, the weapons
of volee that are in frunt of the first band, marching
a conuenient distance to the right hand from before the
piquers, to the intent to giue the piquers place, and to be
readie to arme the forepart of the right flanke of the
squadron: And the compertiment of piquers of this
formost and first band being comne to the ground wheras
they are to aduaunce their piques, and make a stande,
and hauing perfourmed the same; the other halfe of

the weapons of volee of the same band that marcht behind,
who are to arme the forepart of the left flank of the
squadron being drawne vp by their Conductors so large
a distance on the left hand from their compertiment of
piquers, as they may leaue ground enough betwixt them
and their piquers to forme all the rest of the squadron:
which whilst the first band of 500. is a performing; then
the one halfe of the weapons of volee of the second band
that dooth follow the first band, being by their Conductors
drawn from before their compertiment of piques,
and marching vppe by the right flanke of the compertiment
of the first bande of piquers, (that haue alreadie
made their stand) vntill they come to the formost compertiment
of the weapons of volee; & y• second compertiment
of 30. ranks of piquers 10. in a rank of y• said secōd
band, marching vp by y• left flank of the first cōpertiment
of that weapon vntill they find their first and last ranks equall
in frunt and backe, with the first and last ranks of the
first compertiment; and then the other halfe of the weapons
of volee, that marched behind the second compertiment
of piquers being by their Conductors drawne so
farre to the left hand, vntill they come to find the hindermost
rankes of the other compertiment of weapons of
volee that was marched thither before; And so subsequently
the formost compertiments of the weapons of
volee of the third band of 500. marching vp by the right
flanke of the piquers that they find alreadie reduced; as
the other two foremost compertimentes of the former
bands haue doone; And the third compertiment of piquers
marching vppe by the left flanke of the other two
Compertiments before reduced, vntill they finde themselues
of equal frunt with them: And then the other that
is, the last compertiment of weapons of volee of the
same band, being drawne from behind their piquers to
the other two compertiments that are already of the left
hand: And so subsequentlie the three formost compertiments

of weapons of volee of the three last bands, marching
vp by the right flanke of the piquers before them,
to the intent to arme aswell the hinder part of the right
flanke, as the backe, or Rereward of the squadron: And
the three compertimentes of piquers, of the said three
last bands, marching vp by the left flanke of the other 3.
compertiments already reduced, as also by the left flanks
orderlie the one of the other, vntill they find themselues
all of one equal frunt; the whole squadron by this means,
is now reduced in a very short time into forme of battle,
hauing in frunt 60. piquers, and by flankes 30. rankes:
which whole squadron being reduced thus into forme of
60. piquers in frunt, and 30. rankes by flankes, doth conteine
1800. piquers as aforesaid; the hindermost & last
three compertiments of weapons of volee marching to
the left flanke of the squadron, readie to arme the same
according to the direction of the Coronell or Sergeant
Maior.
               Or otherwise, if the same said Regiment of 3000. beeing
ready to dislodge and march out of their quarter, will
vse a more short waie of reducement into squadron, and
to arme the same with weapons of volee: Then the Sergeant
Maior may giue order that euerie one of the 6.
bands of 500. to euery Ensign be reduced into their simple
and single order of rankes in this sort following; that
is that the Captains and officers of the 3. first bands that
he will reduce into forme, and begin his squadron withal,
doo reduce all their weapons of volee that are to 
                     〈◊〉
                  
the frunt and right flanke of the squadron into compertiments
of 10. in a ranke, or fewer as he shall think most
meet: And that the said seuerall compertiments of euerie
one of those three bands being led by their Conductors
shall march and follow one another: And that al the
piquers of the 6. whole bandes be reduced into 6. compertiments
of 10. in euery ranke from frunt to back, readie
vpon the sound of the drums to follow the compertiments
of weapons of volee; As also beeing distinctlie

led by their Captaines to march and follow one another:
And then that the three compertiments of weapons of
volee, that do belong to the three last compertiments of
piquers, y• are to arme the left flank and back of the squadron
shall reduce themselues into 10. in a rank throughout,
or any smaller number, in like sort as he hath before
giuen direction to the three first compertiments of weapons
of volee.
               Al which reducementes into their simple or single
order beeing performed; then vppon the strokes and
sounds of the drummes, or of the Coronels trompettor,
they are presentlie to march out at that Sallie, turnpique,
or barriers of the camp, that it hath before pleased y• General,
or L. Marshal to giue direction: And the three formost
compertiments of weapons of volee being comne
neere to the place where the squadron is to bee formed,
they are presently to march to the right flanke and side of
the same place, & there to reduce themselues into as many
different forms, as the sergeant Maior hath before giuen
direction: At which instant, the first compertiment
of 30. ranks of piquers 10. in a rank, doo march vp to the
place of reducement, whither being comn, vpon y• sound
of the drums for that purpose, they are presently to aduance
their piques and make a pause. At which time &
instant the second compertiment, and the third compertiment
both of like numbers of 10. piquers in euery one
ranke from frunt to back, do march vp the second by the
right flanke of the first compertiment that hath alreadie
made a pause or stand, and the thirde by the left flanke of
the said first compertiment: At which time and instant
also the fourth compertiment dooth march vppe by the
right flanke of the second compertiment, and the fifth
by the left flanke of the third compertiment.
               And the sixt or last compertiment by the right flanke
of the fourth compertiment, vntill all those 5. compertiments
doo finde their first rankes equall in frunt, and their
last rankes equall in backe or rereward, with the first and

last rankes of the said first compertiment. During which
time and instant of the reducement of the said 6. compertiments
of piquers into squadron, the three last compertimentes
of weapons of volee doo march vp by the
left flanke of the squadron of piquers now alreadie fourmed,
and there are to reduce themselues into the like
formes that the foremost 3. compertiments of weapons
of volee haue doone, vpon the right flanke of the squadron:
Or otherwise as it shall please the Coronell or Sergeant
Maior to giue direction, for the arming of the said
left flanke and back of the aforesaid piquers.
               And now this squadron being by this kind of reducement,
reduced into forme, with sleeues, winges, troups,
and other formes of weapons of volee, with great readiness
and celeritie; al men of consideration may euidentlie
see, with what great facilitie and dexteritie a few great
compertiments of piquers and halbardiers for the guard
of the Ensignes, out of great bands of 500. are reduced
into squadron of 60. souldiors in frunt and 30. rankes
by flanke, or into any other farre greater squadron, with
weapons of volee reduced into diuers formes to arme,
the frunt, flankes and backe, according to the commandement
of the Generall, or Coronell, or Sergeant
Maior.
               But now let vs see how the other aforsaid regiment of
3000. deuided into small bandes of hundreds and fifties,
(according to the contrarie opinion) three parts of them
piquers, and the other two partes weapons of volee (as
aforesaid) may with most celeritie be reduced into y• like
squadron of 1800. piquers before set downe; that is, 60.
in frunt, and 30 by flanks: I say that to form that squadrō,
each one of the 20. Captaines must according to all order
and discipline, first reduce their bandes vnder their
Ensignes into their simple and single order of rankes, as
also into their different compertiments, as the great bāds
before haue doone.
               And because that they may the more readily forme the

squadron, it will behooue them to haue speciall regard
to the number of 60. souldiors that their squadron
must conteine in euery ranke from frunt to backe, as also
that there must be 30. ranks by flankes: which beeing by
them considered, they then must reduce all the piquers
of euerie one of their bandes into such numbers of ranks,
as that they may be by flank, in equall numbers of ranks
with the squadron that they intend to forme of 30. ranks:
which to accomplish, they must reduce their compertimentes
of piquers of each one of their bandes into 30.
rankes of 3. in a ranke: which number being 3. partes of
the 5. parts of each one of their bands as aforesaid; doth
amount iust to 90. piquers; the other two partes consisting
of weapons of volee beeing 60. So as they must
forme their squadron with the compertiments of 90. piquers,
3. in euery ranke, as the great bandes did forme
their squadrons with compertiments of 300. piquers 10
in euery ranke, which to perform, (considering that they
are 20. compertiments of 90. piquers to euery compertiment,
out of 20 little bands, as the compertiments of
the great bandes were but only 6. compertiments of 300
piquers to euery compertiment, out of the 6. great bands
of 500. to euerie band) will require 3. or 4. times longer
time, then to reduce them into squadron by the 6. compertiments
of the great bandes as aforesaid.
               Or incase that the Coronell would giue order that
those little bands being reduced into their simple and single
order of.3.Diuers disorders and confusions that doe ensue in forming of squadrons with litle compertiments out of bands of 150. in euerie ranke throughout euerie Compertiment
as aforesaid, should come to ioine 3. or 4. Cō
                  pertiments
of piquers out of 3. or 4: little bandes, thinking
thereby to forme the squadron with greater celeritie:
They I say shall first before they bring that to passe, finde
themselues greatly confused to forme the same, by their
seeing so great a number of little bandes dispersed ouer
the place of Armes, which do occupy a great deale more
ground in the said place, then 6. great bands do: Besides
that it will require a double, or rather a treble time more,

first to reduce 20 little bandes into their simple and single
order of ranks, and little Compertiments of so many different
sorts of weapons in so many places dispersed: and
then to drawe out and to incorporate such a number of
small Compertiments one with another, and after to reduce
them into one bodie of squadron as aforesaid, then
only with 6. greate Compertiments of piquers to forme
the like squadron, & to arme the same with many formes
of different sorts of weapons of volee in frunt, flankes and
backe. By all which alleadged both Pro et contra, as also
performed in the sight and presence of such a generall as
aforesaid, I thinke it would be euident vnto him, and to
all other men of consideration and Iudgement in his Amie,
that this little squadron formed but of. 1800▪ piquers,
is a great deale sooner and with more facilitie performed
with the Compertiments of a few great bandes,
then with a great number of little Compertiments, out
of many little bandes as aforesaid: which if it be so in so
small a squadron where the little Compertiments of 90.
piquers marching 3. in a ranke doo beare length in number
of rankes by flankes to forme such a little battle without
patching and peecing so many little compertiments
to forme the squadron withall: what then if the Generall
should command the Coronels and Sergeants Maiors
of 2. of the 3. Regiments of those little bands to reduce al
the piquers that according to the former diuision doo amount
vnto 3600. piquers, into a squadron on of 90. piquers
in frunt, and 40. rankes by flanke? when that to perform
the same, they must not onlie first of all reduce euery one
of their little bands into their simple, and single order of
ranks of 3. or 4. or more in euerie ranke; but because that
their compertimēts of 30. ranks 3. in euerie ranke are too
short by 10. rankes to make 40. rankes, they must not only
incorporate themselues by flankes with the like nomber
of rankes; but also must with pieces of other bandes,
patch and piece their incorporated Compertiments, and
after the patching and pie
                     •
                  ing of them, then reduce and

forme their squadron: which to performe doth require
a verie long time, and doth greatlie confuse & confound
the Coronels and Sergeants Maiors, and al the rest of the
officers of those Regiments to their great disgrace and
reproach: wheras contrariwise the 3600. piquers of the. 2
Regiments of 6000. that do consist but of 12. great bands
being in the place of Armes reduced into 10. Compertiments
of 9. piquers in euerie ranke, in each Compertiment
from frunt to backe, are with great facilitie, & with
out any cōfusion to be reduced, by doubling themselues
by flanke, or flankes as aforesaid into the aforesaid squadron
of 90. piquers in frunt, and 40. rankes by flankes:
which being so, as by all reason and practise Military it is,
then if the Generall should giue furder order to the three
Coronels or Sergeants Maiors of al the three Regiments
of 9000. that do consist of little bands (as aforesaid) to reduce
al their piquers, which according to the proportion
and diuisions aforesaid, do amount iust vnto. 5400. piquers;
besides the other two partes that are weapons of
volee, into one bodie of squadron of 108. piquers in frunt
and of 50. rankes by flanke: how wonderfully then would
the Sergeants Maiors & officers of those Regiments find
themselues confused to forme so great a squadron of the
peeces and patches (as they may be well termed) of. 60.
little bandes; when euery one of those single Compertiments
do not only lacke number in frunt to make conuenient
compertiments to forme the frunt of the bat
                     •
                  e with
celeritie; but also are a great deale too short by flankes to
forme the aforesaid squadrō in number of ranks by flanks
and therefore must of necessitie, not only incorporate a
great number of little Compertiments, and peeces of
compertimēts with other little compertiments by flanks
therby to make them to come to the iust number in frunt
of 108. piquers; but also must peece and patch euery one
of those Compertiments with the peeces of other little
Compertiments in backe or Rereward, thereby after to
reduce, forme, and being their squadron by flankes to

haue the iust length of 50. rankes: which to performe,
dooth cause so great a disorder and confusion in the officers
executing of the directions of the Coronelles and
Sergeants Maiors, as it is neuer to make an end: whereof
insueth great noises and rumors, by calling, by swearing,
by commaunding and countermaunding, and by this
and by that.
               Wheras contrariwise, the compertiments of piquers
of the other three Regiments of great bandes of 500. as
aforsaid, consisting of 300. piquers to euerie compertiment,
may with great dexteritie, quietnesse and facilitie,
without the aforesaid peecing and patching of compertiments
with compertiments form the aforesaid squadron
of 108. in frunt, and 50. by flanks, with their single compertiments,
without any one band, or compertiment borowing
the one of the other: As for example, to form the
aforesaide squadron of 108. piquers in frunt; and 50.
rankes by flankes, (the three Regimentes of 3000. to euerie
Regiment consisting of 18 bandes 500. to euerie
ensigne: which of piquers and weapons of volee are in
all 9000. Of the which there are 3. partes piquers, and
two partes weapons of volee, as aforesaide, that is 5400.
piquers, and 3600. souldiours of weapons of volee) the
compertimentes of piquers of all those 18. bandes consisting
euery one of 300. piquers, and euery one of those
compertimentes of 300. beeing reduced into their simple
and single order of 6. in euerie ranke, from frunt to
backe, are iust in number 50. ran
                     •
                  es of 6. souldiours in
euery ranke.
               All which 18. compertimentes of 300. piquers to
euerie compertiment marching euery one of them 6. in
a ranke, (as aforesaid) beeing led and drawne vp by their
Captains by the flanke, or flankes the one of the other,
(according vnto any of the orders that I haue before very
particularly set down for ye forming of squadrons and
battles) are without any kinde of trouble, disorder or rumor,
with great facility reduced into ye aforsaid battle and

squadron of 108. piquers in euery ranke from frunt to
backe, and of 50. rankes by flankes, which squadron in al
consisteth of 5400. piquers as aforesaid.
               And this dexteritie and facilitie of forming of great
squadrōs without any disorder or confusiō doth proceed
of the great compertiments that are drawne out of great
bands: whereas farre otherwise, to forme the same saide
squadron with 60. compertiments of 90 piquers, 3. in a
ranke in euery compertiment, drawne out of 60. little
bandes of 150.Diuers confusions that doe ensue of many little compertiments of piquers. to euery Ensigne, to the intent to forme
the said squadron: the Captaines and officers after that
they haue reduced euery one of their bandes into their
simple and single order of ranks, (which is the first thing
for all seruices in the field that according to al discipline
ought to be performed) must then because their litle compertiments
of 90. piquers doo consist but of 30. ranks, 3.
in a ranke, go and find another compertiment of the like
number of another band to ioine with them by flanke,
thereby to make their compertiment of 6. in euery rank.
But because their two compertiments incorporated by
flankes as aforesaid, doo lacke 20. rankes of 6. in euerie
ranke to make the iust length of the squadron by flanke
that consisteth of 50. rankes: Another Captaine must
bring his whole compertiment of 90. piquers, which do
consist of 15. rankes 6. in a ranke, and ioine them at the
backe of the other two compertiments; and yet those 3.
Captaines must borrowe out of another compertiment
of a fourth band 5. rankes more of 6. in a ranke, which
are 30. piquers to make out the full number of 50. ranks,
6. in euery ranke; so as the fourth Captain that hath lent
30. piquers, dooth remaine but with a peece of his compertiment
of 60. piquers, with the which he must after
incorporate, and peece and patch other compertiments
either to make length by flanke, or bredth in frunt. And
in this sort or in the like with small difference all the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
compertiments of 90. piquers in each compertiment as
aforesaid must in corporate, peece and patch by flankes

and backe all the rest of their compertiments, and peeces
of compertimentes vntill they haue formed their squadron:
which kind of reducing, peecing and patching, to
forme a squadron, dooth breed such a wonderfull confusion
in such a number of little compertiments dispersed
in the fieldes, as the Sergeants Maiors and other chiefe
commanders wil finde themselues wonderfullie confused
and confounded in their directions for the forming
of their squadron,H
                        •
                     ere it is to be noted tha
                        •
                      although the Author doth praise & allowe great bands of 500 in the which diuers different sorts of weapons are incorporated, to be more conuenient for the forming of squadrons then small bands of 150. or 200. of the like different 
                        •
                     or
                        •
                     es of weapons: yet he doth not disallow that in a puisant army there shuld be some small bands of 1
                        •
                     0. or 150. amōgst the great: but those onely of weapons of volee, as of Archers or harquebuziers, incorporated with some conuenient nombers of halberdiers or battle axes, for diuers purposes, and the Captaines and other inferior
officers in the performing and executing of the same.
               And as these before alledged confusions and disorders
doo insue in forming of a squadron of piquers with
such little compertiments: euen so dooth there ensue as
great or greater confusions in reducing a farre greater
number of little compertimentes of weapons of volee,
that do consist of three different sorts of weapons, as of
Archers, mosquetiers and harquebuziers, into diuers
formes and emploiments; All which reducementes of
squadrons into forme with sleeues, winges, troups, and
forlorne hopes of weapons of volee, and other such like
doo require fower or fiue times longer time to performe,
then with a few great compertiments of piquers & weapons
of volee out of bandes of 500. to reduce such great
squadrons into forme as aforesaid with sleeues, winges,
forlorne hopes, &c. of weapons of volee, as all men that
are not obstinatelie ignorant may by that which I haue
before declared most manifestlie see.
               The testimonie and proofe whereof was euidentlie
seene at such time as there were certen great squadrons
formed, or rather with great disorder, trouble, and confusion
wonderfullie deformed heere in Essex the yeare
1588. Which proceeded of nothing so much as of the
lacke of vnderstanding of such as should haue reduced
the whole Armie into great bandes of 500. to euery Ensigne,
with conuenient and well sorted compertimentes,
or of 400. or of 300. to euerie Ensigne at the fewest.
Whereas farre otherwise, the bands of the whole Armie

did consist of diuers different numbers, as of 150. of 200
of 300. of 400. of 500. and of 600. to an ensigne, and in
all those bands, the compertimentes of the different sorts
of weapons were so ill sorted, and in so great disproportion,
as the same with the lacke of skill of such as should
haue reformed those imperfections, were the very causes
that when they went about to reduce and forme any
squadron with sleeues, wing
                     •
                  s, &c: they fell into manie
errors and confusions, as all those that were there of any
vnderstanding in matters militarie might euidentlie see.
Vppon all which reasons and examples of reducing of
great and small bands into squadrons with so many imperfections,
confusions, and failings as are incident and
doo ordinarilie ensue in reducing of little compertiments
of small bandes into diuers formes of squadrons
with sleeues, winges, forlorne hopes, &c, with the great
perfections and easinesse of reducing the great compertimentes
of great bandes into all sortes of formes with
great facilitie as is before declared, considered; I come to
conclude that the aforesaid Lieutenant Generall, or any
other Chiefetaine of right vnderstanding, obseruation
and iudgement, would forme the footmen of his Armie
into great bandes, and not into such small bandes as are
before mentioned. And thus farre concerning the proouing
that great bandes of 500. are more conuenient for
all purposes and emploiments, then small bands of 150.
or 200. are.
            
            
               Concerning Ensignes and Ensignebearers of priuate bandes
of footmen, as also concerning the Standard, and
Standard bearer of an Emperour,
or of a King.
               
                  HEere it is to be noted, because Ensignebearers of
footmen are to march in the midst of the armed
men, aswell in squadrons as in priuate bands; and
therewithall to be euer ready to take their places vppon
the assembling, reducing, or marching of such bandes:

that they with their Ensignes ought to be lodged in their
Captaines tents or lodginges,Where Ensig
                        •
                     
                     bearers footm
                        •
                      are 
                        •
                     o be lo
                        •
                     
                     ged. or verie neere vnto their
Captains; alwaies accompanied with one of the drummers,
and the phi
                     •
                  er of the band; & the other to accompanie
the Captaine. And incase there be but onely one
drummer and a phiser, then they are alwaies to accompanie
and lodge where the Lieutenant and ensignebearer
with his Ensigne in their soldiors quarter doo lodge;
and that, in respect, that they may with al celeritie by the
stroke and sound of the drum assemble their band vppon
al sudden Alarmes, or mutinies or other accidents.
               Also it is to bee noted that an Ensignebearer in the
field,How an Ensigneb
                        •
                     arer in seruice in the fielde ought to carrie his Ensigne. carrieng his Ensigne displayed ought 
                     〈◊〉
                   carrie the
same vpright, and neuer, neither in towne nor field, nor
in sport, nor earnest to fetche florishes about his head
with his Ensign staffe, & taffata of his En
                     •
                  igne, as the En
                  
                     •
                  ignebearers
of London do vpon midsommer night; because
that such florishes in all true discipline are houlden
for mockeries: Howbeit sometimes to aduaunce, lift vp;
and raise his Ensigne higher vpon certen occasions it it
verie allowable.
               Also an Ensignebearer carying his Ensigne woond vp
about the Ensigne staffe,Ensignes of 
                        •
                      conuenient bredthe and lengthe more better then Ensignes that are verie large. or else he carrying the same open,
& leaning it to his shoulder, ought marching doune
a hill to gather together the lower parte of the taffata of
his Ensigne in such sort as it may not touch the ground:
And therfore Ensignes of a conuenient size and not too
large and great,With what respecte the hal
                     
                        •
                     ards that are for the guard of the Ensignes are to march. are far better and more conuenient then
Ensignes that are very large.
               Also the halbarders that do march in the ranke of the
Ensignes, and are for the gard of them ought to carrie
their halbards with such respect as they ought not to
teare nor touch any part of the Ensignes as neare as they
can possible.How Ensignebearers vpon the sight and nere approach of the enemie are to mannage their 
                        ••
                     
                     signes.
               
               Also all Ensignebearers marching in the field either amongst
their single companies, or being reduced into
squadron vpon the discouerie of the Enemy are presently

to vnwind, open & display their Ensigns: but yet if the
wind be great, they may gather together the lower parte
or taffata of their Ensignes, and leane the Ensignestaffe
and Ensigne to their shoulders vntill they approch neerer
to the enemie; at which time all Ensignebearers
ought to display and aduance their ensignes carrying
them in their left hands, to the intent that they may bee
the more ready vpon the neer approch and encountring
with the enemie, with their right handes to drawe their
swordes and defend their Ensignes, by reason that they
ought not to fight nor thrust with the points of their ensigne
staues, but only in assaults of Towns, or vpon some
other great extremitie, but to carry them vpright, and
sometimes aduanced to the intent that they may be still
in the sight of their souldiors.
               Also if any Ensignebearer or ensignebearers in their
band or bandes,How an Ensignebearer marching by an Emperor or king, or their Lieutenant generall is to behaue himselfe. happen to march by an Emperour or
King, or by the Lieutenant Generall, they ought to carrie
them displaied and aduaunced, and when they come
almost ouer against such a Prince or his Lieutenant Generall,
they ought to pull downe their ensignes lower, &
bow downe forward the point and taffeta of their ensign
or ensignes, not directlie towards the prince, or Lieutenant
Generall, but directly towardes the waie that they
are marching: and at the same instant, they ought also
to bow something forward their heads and bodies, in token
of respect and reuerence, without any waies moouing
or touching their burgonets, which ought to be alwaies
fast tied with a taffeta vnder their chinnes.
               Also when a single band or companie of soldiors or a
squadron of diuers bandes marching in the fieldes shall
come to aduaunce their piques and make a stay,How Ensignebearers are to vse their ensignes when the squadron maketh a paus
                        •
                     . or pause,
then the Ensignebearer of that single band if it be alone,
or all the Ensignebearers of a whole squadrō must display
and aduance their Ensignes.
               Also a squadron of diuers bands marching in the fields,
it is lawfull for all the Ensignebearers in their ranke or

rankes of Ensignes to carrie their Ensignes woond vp about
their Ensignestaues,How all the ensignebearers of a squadron marching in the field are 
                        〈◊〉
                      carrie their Ensignes. rested or leaned to their shoulders
so as in the ranke of Ensignes or in each ranke of Ensignes,
if the squadron be so great that there be more then
one ranke of Ensignes, that one Ensignebearer in eache
ranke must carrie his Ensigne open and displayed: and he
during the time that he so carrieth his Ensigne ought to
be in the midst of the ranke of the Ensignes, vntill such
time as he to ease himselfe doth wind vp his Ensigne, and
retire againe to his owne place, be it on the right or left
hand, leauing the middle place to the Ensignebearer that
doth succeede and supplie his place with his banner or
Ensigne displayed. But it is to be noted that in a squadron
whereas there be diuers Ensignes, for some of them to carrie
their ensignes woonde vp and leaned against their
shoulders & others displaied, vprighted, and aduaunced,
and other ensignebearers also their ensignes opened and
leaned to their shoulders, it is verie vnsoldiorlike and vncomely
to see such varietie of carrying of ensignes in one
squadron, & therefore either they ought all to carry their
ensignes woond vp and leaned against their shoulders sauing
only one ensignebearer with his ensigne displayed,
vprighted, or aduaunced as aforesaid; or incase in calme
weather or vpon any other occasion, the ensignebearers
like not so to do, then they may carrie them al opened &
displaied, but in any wise all after one sort, sauing only he
that is the chiefe ensignebearer for the time, who ought
to cary his ensigne vpright, opened & displaied, although
all 
                     •
                  y other ensignebearers do carry their ensignes woond
vp as aforesaid.
               But all this before notwithstanding,All Ensignebearers are to receaue their directions from the Standard bearer of the Emporor or king 
                        〈◊〉
                      he be in the field. here it is to be noted
that in case an Emperor or a Kinges Standard be in any
battle or squadron of footmen in the field, that then al
the ensignebearers of priuate bandes are to receiue their
orders & directions from the Standerbearer of the same
Emperor or King, whether they shall carrie their ensignes
woonde vp, or any waies open, with all other directions.
               
                  And also it is to be noted that the said standardbearer
with his standard, or his deputy standardbearer, when the
standardbearer is disposed to ease himselfe,Where the Standeardbearer of an Empep or king should be pla
                     
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     . is alwaies to
hold the middle and chiefe place of the ranke of ensigns,
and therewithall that hee should neuer display his Standard,
as other ensignebearers of priuate bandes doo, but
onely vpon the assured doubt and expectation of battle,
the enemies Armie being in sight in the field,When the Standardbeaerr of an Emperor or of a king is to display his standdard. or else vpon
some other great and principall occasion; and yet not
then neither without the speciall commandment of the
prince or his Lieutenant Generall: which said displaying
of the Princes standard, ought to be performed with certen
notable respects, praiers, and ceremonies: which because
I do not certenlie know them all, I omitte. And
therwithal it is to be furder noted that the standardbearer
of an Emperour or King being alwaies either a Nobleman
or a Knight, doth seldome himselfe carrie the standard,
but vpon certen great occasions, and therefore he
hath alwaies. 2. or. 3. esquiers of great reputation and
valot to supplie his place in carring the standard, the enemie
being not in sight in the field; but the enemie being
in sight, he is presentlie to leaue his horse and to retire
himselfe into the squadron and ranke of ensignes, readie
to take his standard into his owne handes vpon any important
occasion: And besides when he commeth neare
to the place where he shall lodge,Cerren other par
                        •
                     icularities concerning the Standard and Standdardbearer of an Emperor or of a Kinge. be it in Campe or
Towne which ough to be in the Lieutennante generalls
lodging or at lea
                     •
                  t very neare vnto the same, he then being
on foot, must himselfe with great respect & reuerence
take and carrie the standard be it imperiall, or roiall, and
place it in his lodging vnder a strong and verie conuenient
guarde of soldiors, and so likewise in the morning vpon
the occasion of dislodging he himselfe being stronglie
accompanied ought to take the standard into his own
hands, and to march and take his place according to the
directiō of the Prince or his Lieutennant general, which
being by him performed, he may then deliuer the standard

vnto one of his deputies giuing vnto him a great
charge therewith, and so march out of the battle & then
take his horse and ride a little either before the squadron
to ease himselfe, or else to accompanie the Prince or the
Lieutenant Generall if any of them both bee neare vnto
the same battle or else not. And these particularities concerning
these matters aforesaid are such as I doo at this
present remember, although there be others that I haue
in times past obserued which with length of time I haue
forgotten.
            
            
               Certen orders, directions and briefe speeches to be vsed vnto
Harqueb
                     •
                  ziers, Piquers, and battleaxes, when they are
in skirmish with their enemies in the field.
               
                  SKirmishes both on horsebacke and on foot doo
begin vpon such, and so many diuers, and infinite
occasions when two puissant Armies that
are enemies one to ye other are in the field, as no
man is able to particular the number of them: And therfore
I will as not requisite ouerpasse them; But because
hithervnto I haue handled the ordering, reducing and
forming more particularlie of footmen then of horsmen,
I will by the help of Almighty God in this place proceed
to certen orders, directions and briefe speeches, that are
to be vsed vnto bands of harquebuziers entring into skirmish,
or being in s
                     •
                  irmish; as also how they should bee
reduced into diuers orders and formes for diuers effectes
and purposes: which when I haue performed, I wil then
proceed to the reducing and ordering of other weapons
of volee, as of mosquetiers, and archers into their conuenient
formes. And therefore it is first to be noted yt there
be 4. different and principal waies for bandes of harquebuziers
to enter into skirmish4 different 
                        •
                     nd principall w
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     s for harquebuziers to enter into skirmis
                        •
                     e. and to maintaine themselues
being in skirmish, which although they seeme not
much to differ, yet their differences are so great, as they
are to be obserued by al skilfull leaders and conductors
of harquebuziers, and by the soldiors themselues.
               Of the which 4. the first is vpon some occasions to

skirmish only with loose shot,The first way for harquebuzers to enter into skirmish. backt some good & conuenient
distance behind them with light armed halbardiers:
yea and of piquers also incase they doubte ye charge
of horsmen, but then those loose shot must deuide them
selues into small societies either of 3. or else of 4. harquebuziers
to second and supplie one anothers place: and
that is to be vnderstood in this sort: Incase that they doo
deuide themselues into societies of threes, then haue
they but onely three dischargings, and that is when the
formost soldior hath in trauessing his groūd & with good
aduisement discharged at the enemy, and trauessing his
groūd doth retire behind his fellowes to charge again; y•
then ye second harquebuzier should aduance forward to
espie som aduantage to discharge his harquebuze, not in
hast at the aire, but with leisure at his enemie that hee espieth
standing still or in slow motion; which when hee
hath performed, and trauessing his ground, he dooth retire:
then the third harquebuzier aduauncing forward
and trauessing his ground should with good aduisement
discharge his peece at the enemie that he espieth standing
still or in slow motion, whilest the other two harquebuziers
his companions, before retired doo charge
againe: which by him performed, then he is to trauesse
his ground and to begin againe to charge, retiring beehind,
and somthing wide of the hindermost of the three.
And by this kind of loose skirmishing of many societies
of threes dispersed in the field,The commodities that ensue to harquebuziers by this first way of skirmishing. the formost of euery three
next vnto the enemie with his peece charged, trauessing
his ground, and espying when to discharge his peece effectuallie
(as aforesaid) dooth giue time and leisure, to
the other two of his societie retired behind, to charge
their peeces againe: But because that the chiefe effect of
harquebuziers in skirmish dooth consist principallie in
three thinges;Three principall waies wherein the chiefe effects of harquebuziers in skirmish do consist. that is, in the well charging of their peeces,
which cannot be well performed without conuenient
time and leisure; the second, in leisurely discharging,
although not from steady and firm point at blank; which
can be seldome performed at men, or by men in motion;

and therefore they are to take their sights at the endes of
their peeces, at such their enemies as are in slowest motion,
and so make the best point and blanke that they may
by guesse from the endes of their peeces.
               And the third which is of no lesse importance then the
former two is; that harquebuziers doo not discharge
their peeces at the enemy out of conuenient distances;
for if they doo, then how well soeuer they haue charged
their peeces, and with what leisure and aduisement soeuer
they doo discharge the same at men in motion, they
doo worke verie little or no effect, as well in respect that
no harquebuziers howe good soeuer they bee, can take
their sightes so certenlie from point at blanke in a great
distance, as they may in a much nearer distance; as also
that they can a great deale lesse take their sights from the
ends of their peeces at their enemies in motion a great
distance off, although it be within the points and blankes
of their peeces: besides many other causes and particularities
concerning the same in my booke of discourses
by me set forth 1590. conteined:Harquebuzie
                        ••
                      in skimish are not to discharg their peeces aboue 20. 30. or 40 paces in distance. All which well considered,
it dooth behoue all good and skilfull harquebuziers
not to discharge their peeces aboue 20. 30. or 40.
paces at the vttermost, although their peeces will carrie
point and blanke a much greater distance.
               But here it is to be noted that this kind of skirmishing
of lose shot of societies of threes is not so good by a great
deale as to skirmish in societies of 4.Societies of threes not so good by a great deale for harquebuziers to skir
                        •
                     ish in as societies of foures. in euery societie;
and that by reason that euery formost harquebuzier of 4.
next to the enimie discharging his peece as effectually as
he may and retiring behind the hindermost of his societie
to charge againe, whilest the second aduauncing forward
and trauersing his ground doth supplie the place of
the first harquebuzier that did first discharge and is now
retired as aforsaid, and so consequently the third harquebuzier
vpon the discharging of his fellowe before him,
(that at the first was the second) to aduance and supply
his place, and then againe the fourth that did first of all

discharge, and hath now againe very well charged hi
                     •
                  
peece, doth (vpon the dischargeing and retiring of his fellowe
before him) aduaunce forward, and trauessing his
ground supplie his place: which orderly discharging &
recharging againe, and discharging, & recharging againe
and againe with good aduisement, doth by the societies
of 4. giue more time and leisure to euerie harquebuzier
that hath discharged his peece to retire and charge verie
well againe without heating of his peece, then societies
of threes aforesaid can doo, considering that in those
skirmishes of loose shot, it is conuenient that onelie one
of euerie societie of 4. should bee formost, and should
discharge alone to the intent aswel to giue leisure to their
fellowes one after another to recharge againe, as also to
haue 2. or 3. harquebuziers continuallie ready with their
peeces charged one after another stil to aduance forward
and supply the others place ready to discharge at the enemy.
For if they should discharge 2. or 3. or al at one time,
then vpon their error espied by the enemies, and taking
the aduantage thereof by a sudden approch, they should
find themselues vnsupplied and vnsuccoured, the one of
the other to their great danger and mischiefe.
               But here it may be demanded what I doo call the well
charging of peeces of weapons of fire? Whervnto I answer,
That I doo allow neither harquebuze nor mosquet
for well charged in seruices of the fielde,Now harquebuzes and mosquets ought to bee charged. vnlesse they bee
charged with conuenient charges of powder, and with
softe browne paper, or the refuge endes of matches, or
something else, with their skowring stickes thrust close
to the powder to restraine the same, and likewise vppon
the bullet the like or a more quan
                     •••••
                   to keepe close and
restraine the bullet: or when at the least, I would that
some such thing should be thrust vpon the bullet with the
skowring stick to keep the same close to the powder; &
therewithall to the intent that euerie souldior vppon his
lacke of bullets might vse his fellowes bullets, I woulde

that all the harquebuzes throughout the field should be
of one Caliuer and heigth;All the harq
                        ••
                      buzes through out the field ought to be of one Caliuer 
                        •
                      height. and that all the ordinarie bullettes
for the field, I meane not the full bullets that first
with great leisure they charge their peeces withall before
they march out of the Campe, which are or ought to be
of the iust Caliuer and heigth of their harquebuzes,All the ordinarie bullets for the field ought not to bee aboue 2. bores lower then the heigth of their pecees. but
the ordinarie bullets for skirmish: that those bullets I say
should not be aboue two bores lower then the heigth of
their peeces, whereas farre otherwise the most bullettes
for the field heere in England as well of Mosquets as of
harquebuzes are 4. 5. and many 6. bores lower then the
height of the peeces, which with the souldiors not restraining
the powder nor bullettes as aforesaid,The discommodities of bullets that are 4. 5. or 6. bores lower then the heigth of their peeces. is the
cause, that the powder how good soeuer dooth neither
carrie the bullets so farre point and blanke, nor yet doo
giue so violent blowes as beeing otherwise well charged
with more full bullets they would doo, nor yet can possiblie
shoot with any certentie, although it were from a
steadie rest either at horses or men standing still within
point and blanke, by reason that such bullets doo naturallie
mount and flie wide, howe true soeuer the peeces
are, besides that the powder for lacke of restraining as
aforesaid, dooth lie in the Cannon of the peece loose,
and the bullet through the too much smalnesse thereof
in comparison of the peece doth vpon euerie little accident
fall out and droppe to the ground: where as ordinarie
bullets for the field, that are not aboue two bores lower
then the heigth of their peeces, doo carry the bullets
(the peeces being otherwise true and well charged as aforesaide)
further point and blanke, and with a great
deale more certentie: and besides doo giue a more forcible
blow as aforesaid then such ouer small bullets can
doo.
               But now the second way of skirmishing is,The second way for harqu
                        •
                     
                     buziers to skirmish in. that such
little societies of threes and of fowers may skirmish by
discharging their peeces, almost, or neere about one
time: but that must be performed by the discharging and

retiring to charge again of such little troupes, other such
little societies of like numbers that are a conuenient
waie distant vpon both their flankes but something retired,
and therefore haue kept their shot, aduancing forward,
as well to espy some aduantage to giue their volees
at their enemies effectuallie, as to giue time and leisure
to other little troupes that haue discharged, and therfore
retired to recharge and aduance forward againe.
               The third waie of skirmishing is of greater troupes as
of 6. of 9. of 12. of 15. of 18. or of 21.The third way of skirmish. And this kind of
skirmishing in so great troupes doth resemble the first
mentioned skirmishing of loose shot of 3. souldiors in
euerie societie, and that in this sort; that euen as the societies
of 3. did deuide themselues into 3. single discharginges
as aforesaid, so must these greater troupes deuide
their dischargings into 3. volees: as for example, if the
troupe be of 6. then the 2. foremost may discharge at or
neere about one time, and then trauessing their grounds
retire behind the hindermost two, to charge againe, whilest
the two second being now formost doo aduance forward
to espie their aduantage to discharge effectuallie:
which when they haue perfourmed, then they likewise
are to retire againe recharging vntil they be hindermost,
giuing place vnto their next two fellows to giue their vol
                     •
                  e
as aforesaid: which being by the second two performed,
then are the laste two (who did first discharge and
haue now recharged againe) to aduance forward againe
towards the enemie to giue time to their fellowes retired
to recharge againe: but if the troups be of greater numbers
as of 9. then their diuisions of volee are of 3. harquebuziers
at a time, as those of 6. were but of two; and so
likewise their troupes being of 12. then their diuisions of
discharging are likewise of 3. volees, yt is 4. to discharge
at or neere about one time: And incase that the troupes
be of 15. then they are to deuide their discharginges into
3. volees of 5. at a time, that is of 3. times 5. And incase
that the troupes be so great as of 18. then they are likewise

to deuide their volees into 3. times 6.No tr
                        ••
                     ps of shott are to giue their volees in diuisions aboue the numberof 
                        •
                     1. harquebuziers:
And if of 21. then of 3. times 7. harquebuziers, euery
7. to giue their volees one after another in the order and
sort before declared, greater then the which for diuers
causes I would haue no troupes of harquebuziers in the
field for to giue their volees in three diuisions as aforesaid.
               But now the fourth sort of giuing of volees in troupe,The fourth way of skirmishing. is
of 4. diuisions, which resembleth the second discharging
of loose shot of societies of 4. harquebuziers, for as those
societies of 4. soldiors did deuide themselues into 4. single
discharginges for the causes aforesaid, so these greater
troupes are to deuide themselues into 4. dischargings or
volees, and that in this sort: the smallest troup that are to
performe the same are. 8. which nomber is to be deuided
into. 4. volees of two of the formost harquebuziers to discharge
or giue their volee at or neare about one time, and
to retire to charg againe & giue place to their fellowes as
aforesaid, and so subsequently, all the rest by two harquebuziers
continually aduaunced to discharge, and other 2.
continually retiring to recharge to performe the like: and
incase that their troupes be of 12. then they may deuide
their volees into 4. as of. 3. harquebuziers to giue their
volee at one time, and if they be of 16. then their diuisions
of volee may be of 4. harquebuziers all at one time, and
incase that their troupes be of 20. then their. 4. diuisions
of volee may be of 5. harquebuziers at a time, greater then
the which nūber of 20. or 21. as aforesaid I would not in
mine opinon for diuers causes haue any troupes of shott
in skirmish to giue their volees: which 4. diuisions of volee,
by discharging, retiring, aduauncing, and discharging,
retiring and aduancing again and againe with continuall
volees, doth giue more time and leisure to euerie
formost diuision of harquebuziers with good aduisement
to discharge their peeces, and to retire & rechgarge their
peeces orderlie and verie well againe, then the diuisions
of three dischargings or volees aforesaid, for lacke of

conuenient time can do, as all men of any consideration
may euidently see by the particularities by me before
sett downe. But here it is to be noted that the 2. first little
societies of 3. & of 4. soldiors deuided into three single discharginges,
and the other of 4. harquebuziers into 4. single
discharginges are to be accounted skirmishing and
discharging of loose shott, whereas al the rest are to be accounted
skirmishing in troupes.
               And furder that all the aforesaid little societies and
greater and smaller troupes of shot, are in their foresaid
skirmishes to be ordered ouerseene and conducted by
their Corporalles, and all the Corporalls by their higher
officers; and all these different sorts o
                     •
                   skirmishing in societies
of loose shot, as also in troupes I haue particulerly
set down because I haue known some Conductors of harquebuze
shot, Italians, Spaniards, & of other Nations that
haue vsed to skirmish by their soldiors giuing of their volees
in three diuisions, and some other conductors of the
same Nations that haue caused their harquebuziers to
giue their volees in 4. diuisions in such sort as is before
declared.
               But now besides all this,The skirmishing of loose shot in hubbledeshu
                        ••
                     e. there is another kinde of skirmishing
of loose shot, and that is when vnskilfull harquebuziers
Nouices are lead out to skirmishe by as vnskilfull
conductors, that those harquebuziers do neuer deuide
themselues into chosen societies of threes, of foures, or
any s
                     •
                  ch numbers, nor into little troupes, as aforesaid, the
one to take care of the other, and to giue time and leisure
to discharge and recharge with order as aforesaid, but
that they are lead in skirmishe by their officers in great
troupes of. 25. or 30. harquebuziers together or more,
wheeling about & following one another so thick and so
n
                     •
                  re as they resemble a sport that I haue seene little boies
play, hanging one vpon anothers long coate when there
haue bene many of them together, called, Why Puttocke
away, or else that euerie one of his owne head do go thick
& threefold or dispersed to discharge at the enemie with

all furie,Discommo
                        ••
                     
                     
                     
                        •
                     ies ensuing by this manner of skirmishing. by which disorderlie and furious skirmishing, it
commeth to passe that the harquebuziers doo discharge in
hast without aduisement, to small or no hurt to the enemy,
and therwithall by their discharging, charging, and recharging
as fast as they can, they suddenlie heat their peeces and
make thē vnprofitable, & oftentimes do by such disorderlie
skirmishing, kil, or mischiefe one another: And besides,
if any of them happen to be wounded or hurt because they
haue not deuided themselues into chosen societies as aforsaid,
none doo take care to succour and relieue such hurt &
wo
                     •
                  nded souldiors, nor to draw away and saue their dead
karkases according to the vse of all warlike Nations, with
diuers other Inconueniences that I omit, which doo ensue
vpon such disorderly skirmishing: And this kind of skirmishing
may be very well tearmed to skirmish in hubbledeshuffe.
But yet it is furder to be noted that in most skirmishes
that are well performed in the open fieldes, although
they do skirmish in such troupes of 3. or 4. diuisions of volees
as aforsaid, yet such skirmishes are first begun by small
societies of threes and of fowers, besides that it is alwaies
conuenient that such troupes of shot should be backt with
some numbers of light armed halbarders and piquers for
such causes as heereafter shall be mentioned.
               But because that in all matters militarie how well ordered
at the first soeuer, there happeneth vppon diuers accidents
disorder, either through the fault or lacke of skill of
the conductors, or else through y• negligence or lack of skil
of the soldiors conducted: I wil now proceed to shew how
the chiefe cōmanders & directers of such skirmishes should
by briefe speeches redresse & reform al such disorders hapned:
as for example, If the chiefe leaders & directers of the
skirmish, shal see the loose shot in their societies as aforsaid,
or any of the troupes of shot before mentioned to skirmish
too thick and neere togither wherby they may indaunger
one another, or receaue the greater annoiance from the
shot of their Enemies, being more thinne and dispersed in
their distāces: then he is to say vnto such societies or troups,

                  Inlarge souldiors inlarge,
                  
                     
                        •
                     riefe spea
                     
                        •
                     es to be vsed 
                        •
                     hot when 
                        ••
                     y are too 
                        ••
                     cke in skir
                     
                        •
                     ish, by their 
                        •
                     aders. which being by the harquebuziers
heard, they then should presentlie inlarge themselues more
thinner, and into greater, but yet conuenient dis
                     •••
                  ces, as
wel the societies of the loose shot of threes, and foures, as
also such troupes of shot as are before mentioned, thereby
to discharge with great order and dexteritie, seconding &
supplying the one the others place, as also each one to succour
the one the other incase of any wounds or hurts receiued
according to the directions by me before very particulerlie
set downe.
               And if it happen as your souldiors are in skirmish or
marching towardes, or entring into skirmish or retiring,
that you doo perceiue and espie any ground or grounds of
aduantage for your harquebuze or mosquet shot to worke
any good effect against your enimies, either by ambush or
otherwise as of hilles, bankes, trenches, caues, wooddes,
shrubs, vines, or any other thing to encouer your shot, then
you are to say to so many societies or troupes of your souldiors
as you shall think meet for that effect;
                     
                        •
                     riefe speaches 
                        〈◊〉
                      be vsed to 
                        •
                     ot vpon any rounde or rounds of adauntage e
                        •
                     
                     
                     
                        •
                     ied. 
                  To your aduantage
souldiors to your aduantage, and therewithall you must
name the aduantage and strength that they should preuent
the enimies of, be they bankes, hedges, trenches, hilles, or
any other strength, which being by them heard, they must
presently performe the same.
               And incase that you beeing in skirmish doo see any reason
of aduantage to drawe the loose shot of societies or
troupes, or both, more on the one side, then on the other,
that is more to the right hand then to the left; then you are
to say vnto them, Wing, Wing souldiors to the right. And if
to the left hand then you may say, Wing, Wing souldiors to
the left.
                  
                     
                        •
                     erten other 
                        •
                     lefe speaches 
                        •
                      be vsed vnto ot for diuers 
                        •
                     rposes. And if you see that the enemies haue spent their
powder and heated their peeces, and that your aduantage
is to approch them with more furie, then you are to say
Auaunce, Auaunce forward souldiors. And incase your
souldiors being in skirmish, you shall see your aduantage to
reduce some of your loose shot into troupes of 6. of 9. of 12
or of 15. or more, be the numbers euen or odde it importeth

not, so as the particularities by me before set down be
alwaies obserued, in such sort that the one troupe may fauour
and flanke the other; then in passing amongest them
you are to say to your Corporals and souldiors. Troupe,
troupe, and flanke souldiors.
               And if you find your souldiors ouerpressed with number
of shot, or that your souldiors with long skirmish haue
almost spent their powder or heated their peeces, then you
are to say. Retire, retire, and frunt souldiors, which beeing
by them heard they must retire stil with their faces towards
their Enemies, discharging their peeces not too fast, least
that they should find themselues to their own mischiefe altogither
without powder.
               And incase that you haue piquers or halbarders to backe
your shot (which you should neuer be without,) and that
you see that your Enemies as also your owne soldiors by
long skirmish haue spent much of their powder and heated
their peeces, and that your shott with the shot of your enemies
are readie to enter pellemelle, then you are to say to
your piquers and halbarders: Charge charge and execute soldiors:
which being by you pronounced they are to enter
with all furie vpon their enemies, and with puissant hand to
do execution vpon them.The harquebuzes of a yard long the Cannon and 
                        •
                     anfor ced backward, of as great and greater effect
                        •
                      then the heauy Caliuers that are nowadaies in vse. And here it is to be noted that
harquebuzes of a yard long the Cannons at the most, well
ranforced backward, & of a conuenient thinnesse forward,
and the bullets of a conuenient Caliuer or heigth not too
great, are a great deale more maniable, and therefore better
for soldiors to vse in the field, then such heauie harquebuzes
as we in these daies do miscall Caliuers, that are of
great bullets, and the Cannons long and heauie with deformed
stockes: which said harquebuzes ranforced of conuenient
heueth & lightnes will wound or kill as well 50. or
60. paces off (which is distance enough) as any such heauie
mistearmed Caliuers▪ & therewithall they do not so soone
wearie the soldiors in handling and vsing them in seruices
of the fielde as such foresaid heauie peeces do, besides that
they haue this commoditie that when in skirmish soldiors

do grow very neere together, and so sometimes pelle melle
that they haue no more leisure to recharge their peeces but
that they are forced to betake themselues to their swordes:
they may then I say take their peeces being of such conuenient
heueth & lightnesse, in the midst with their left hands
and drawing their swordes may beare a blow either at the
head or legges, or beat by any thrust of sword, halbard, or
pique, either with the vpper or lower part of their harquebuze,
and may therewithall at that instant enter and run in
with the points of their swordes to the mischiefe or endangering
of their enemies, which cannot be performed with
our such heauie mistearmed Caliuers, which most commonlie
vpon such accidents through the too much heueth
of them are throwne awaie by the souldiors that vse them.
Aduertising furder, that whensoeuer your souldiors bee in
skirmish with the enemie in the plaine and open fields, that
your harquebuziers be alwais instructed neuer to discharge
their peeces nor giue any volee of shot at their euemies aboue
20. 30. or 40.But small effect 
                        •
                     rought by harquebuzes in skirmishe aboue 50. paces off paces distant, or 50. at the vttermost:
For it is to bee noted that to discharge or giue any volee, or
volees of shot at the enemie in skirmish any greater distance
then 50. paces, the same dooth worke but very little
effect; by reason that such weapons of fire are in those actions
so vncerten, as all Captaines and souldiors that are of
experience in matters of Armes doo verie well knowe; although
I haue diuers times heard some talke and tell how
they haue seene skirmishes wheras the harquebuziers haue
discharged their peeces at their enemies,A very skorne 
                        •
                     o giue volees of harquebuze shot at the enemy 10. 12. or 14 
                        •
                     kores of. 10. 12. or 14.
skores of, which (considering the verie small effect that
such discharginges and volees doo worke against the enemie)
is to be holden for a verie great skorne and error militarie,
for such harquebuzes as doo vse to skirmish so farre
off, are more meet by al reason and true experience to skare
Crowes in a corne field, then to worke any good effect against
their enemies in the field.
            
            
               
               Briefe speeches to be vsed by Captaines or leaders, of Harquebuziers
when they would reduce them into a broad square
with distances oblique.
               
                  IF a Captaine or leader of harquebuziers would vpon
any occasion or aduantage of ground reduce any
number of harquebuziers into a broad square or
hearse oblique of 7. rankes, with intent that they may haue
the more conuenient distances for the discharging of their
volees, then they are to say vnto them: Oblique your selues
harquebuziers 21. and 20. in rankes, or any other numbers
greater or fewer, so as the first ranke doo exceed the second
ranke by the number of one, and the third, the fourth likewise
by the number of one, and so consequently in the same
sort to the last seuenth ranke which should be of equal number
to the first: Then the harquebuziers presentlie are to
reduce themselues into the forme oblique,What distan
                        ••
                      oblique do
                        •
                      means. all the harquebuziers
of euerie second ranke being fewer in number then
the greater ranke preceeding them by the number of one
should place themselues oblique to the ranke before them,
that is, they shoulde place euerie one of themselues with
their faces directlie towards the voide places or distaunces
of the greater ranke before them sauing that the last ranke
as aforesaide, must be of equall number to the first ranke, to
the intent that the same may bee a fourmed and proportioned
hearse that is broad in frunt and narrowe by
flankes.
               And all those harquebuziers beeing reduced into this
forme oblique with conuenient and proportionate distances,
may through those distances oblique giue gallant volees
to the great mischiefe of their enimies, without hurting
or endamaging the one the other: And because that these
distances oblique may seeme strange to such as neuer sawe
horsemen or footemen reduced into that fourme: So it
is that I haue manie times seene in Hongarie in the
Warres of Emperour MAXI MILIAN against the

Turks, the harquebuziers,
                     
                        〈…〉
                      lique altogither vsed by the harquebuzes and light horsemen Hongarians and other ori
                     
                        •
                     ntall nations. Hongarians called by the name
of Heydukes march and serue in those orders and distances
oblique: And so in like manner the horsemen Hongarians
being all light horsemen and called by the name of Vssarons
although I haue seene them in the field in many and diuers
orders and formes, yet their distances were most commonlie
oblique; which order oblique is also vsed by the Turks,
Tartars, and other such orientall Nations: because that all
their horsemen are light horsemen and not men at Armes,The Persians only of all the orientall nations doe vse men at Armes. sauing that the Persians onely of all the rest of the orientall
Nations doo vse both men at armes with their horses barbed,
as also light horsemen. And this aforsaid order oblique
is of great aduantage for all light horsmen in the field, and
chiefelie for such as doo vse to charge their speares,Distances oblique in the field of great aduauntage for all light horsemen. as the
Hongarians doo, in sockets made fast to their Saddles, or as
our light horsmen borderers that doo charge their speares
vpon their thighs, as also for such light horsmen Stradiots
as will after the maner of the Moores, vse double headed
Launces, or zagayas by some called punching staues for diuers
causes and reasons, that I am able by the helpe of Almightie
God to shewe by effectuall demonstrations in the
field, Of the which some I did shew this Iast Summer 1588
in exercises of the field, vnto diuers Captaines and Gentlemen
of the shire of Essex.
            
            
               Speaches to be vsed to a broad square, or to any ordered troupe
of harquebuziers being in a straight or ground of aduantage,
where horsmen cannot charge them.
               
                  WHen a good number of harquebuziers are reduced
into a square or troupe formed not in rankes
oblique but by right line to flanke a breach or to
make head against the enemie in some straight or
passage, or that the place is such and of that strength for the
guard of the harquebuziers that it is more requisit that they
should make resistance against the enemie in some square
or troupe formed then any waies disseuered or in troupes

confused, then the leaders vppon the approch of the enemie
are to say vnto them Discharge soldiors & to your knees,
and charge againe volee after volee:
                  How harquebuziers are to giue their volees being reduced into a square in some ground of aduauntage. which beeing by them
heard, the first and second ranke being in rankes of conuenient
distances, are at one instant to giue a volee as neere as
they can, taking their sightes at point and blank, which being
doone, they ought in an instant to fall vppon one of
their knees and to charge againe while the third and fourth
rankes doo likewise giue their volees, which being by them
performed, they ought in like manner to kneele downe and
charge their peeces, giuing place to the fist, and sixt ranks
to discharge their peeces ouer all their heads, which being
performed throughout the whole hearse or troupe, sauing
that the two hinder rankes shall not need to kneele bicause
there are none behind them to shoot ouer their heads, then
all the first rankes that haue charged their peeces againe are
to stand vp & to giue volee after volee, and so to their knees
againe, and to giue place to the hindermost rankes to discharge
their peeces ouer their heads according to the former
prescribed order: But to the intent that two ranks may
the better giue a volee both at one instant without daungering
the one the other as aforesaid, it were requisit that euery
second ranke should be reduced oblique as aforesaid to
the ranke preceeding, for otherwise there can but only one
ranke discharge at a time vnlesse their rankes be very thin.
            
            
               Briefe speaches to be vsed to Mosquetiers beeing in a
broad square.
               
                  WHen a conuenient company of mosquetiers well
guarded with armed men are reduced into a broad
square of 15. or 20. in frunt, and 6. by flankes, more
or fewer, and that all their restes be fixed in the ground in
conuenient distances, and that their conductors vpon the
approach of the enemie would haue them to giue volee after
volee from their rests, taking their certen sights from
pointe at blanke, and that euerie ranke should orderlie succeede

the one the other in discharging their peeces; then
they are to say vnto them, Discharge, retire, and aduance,
which being by the mosquetiers heard,How mosquetiers are to discharge their peeces being reduced into a 
                        ••
                     oade square then the first whole
ranke taking their sights at pointe and blanke are all at one
time to discharge their peeces at the squadron or troupe of
horsemen or footmen approching, which being by them
performed they are presently to retire to the last ranke of
rests there to charge againe, leauing their owne ranke of
rests still fixed in the ground. Then the second ranke are to
aduaunce themselues and to clappe their peeces vpon the
first ranke of rests as they do stand directly before them, and
the third ranke are to aduaunce themselues to the second
ranke of rests, & the fourth ranke to the third ranke of rests
and the fifth ranke to the fourth ranke of rests, and the sixte
ranke to the fifth ranke of rests, whilest the first that hath discharged,
and is now retired to the sixte or last ranke of rests
do charge their peeces againe & so geuing continual volees
of bullets by discharging, retiring, and aduauncing as aforesaid,
they may annoie the enemy be they horsemen or footmen
in terrible sorte without falling into any disorder or cō
                  fusion.
And the verie like speaches may be vsed to little
squares or troupes of harquebuziers in the field when they
are to retire hauing discharged, and other troupes to aduaunce
and supply their places geuing them time to charge
again, and so by retiring, aduauncing, and succeeding euery
one the other, they may giue continuall volees of shot at
the enemies. Aduertising and aduising all leaders of
mosquetiers that will worke good effect and winne reputation
with that kinde of weapon in the field,Mosquetiers are not to discharge their peeces at the enemie aboue 10. or 12. skores 
                        〈◊〉
                      the furthest. that they do
not permitt their mosquetiers to discharge their peeces at
their enemies aboue 8. 9. 10. or 12. skores, at the furdest,
and therewithall to take their sightes at point and blanke
from their rests and without their rests. Also I would that
some conuenient numbers of mosquetiers should be commaunded
to charge their peeces with conuenient charges
of powder and with 5. pistoll bullets of a meane Caliuer and
height with some quantitie of soft browne paper or something

else, both betwixt the powder and haile shot of war,Mosquets charged with haileshot of warre within 10. 15. or 20. paces doe worke great effecte.
as also after the haileshot to restraine both powder and bullets,
to the intent that the same may worke the more forcible
and terrible effectes: And that the same mosquetiers
should be commanded not to discharge their peeces when
their companies do discharge theirs with single bullets, but
that they should reserue their shot vntill some squardron of
footmen, or square, or troupe of horsemen should approch
within 10. 15. or 20. paces to charge them. At which time
I would haue them to giue their volee of hailshot of warre
from their rests at their Enemies approching within the aforesaid
distances, and not any furder, because they may be
the more sure to hit either horsmen or footmen, which in
greater distances they cannot so certenlie performe.
               And heere it is to be furder noted,It argueth but small experience in those that would haue mosquetiers in the field to giue their volees of shot 30 24. or 20. scores off. that such as doo talke
of giuing volees of mosquet shot 30. 24. or 20. skores off,
at squares or troupes of horsemen or footmen that are in
march or in any motion of the field do greatlie erre, as men
that neuer had any good experience of that weapon in actions
of the field, vnlesse peraduenture it hath been to their
owne mischiefe, incountring with olde bandes, Italians,
Wallouns, or Spaniards, who were neuer so ill aduised as
in vaine to giue their volees so great distances off, and therfore
doo reserue their shot to discharge at the enemie not
aboue 8. 9. or 10. skores off at the vttermost, although it
bee at a whole square or troupe of horsemen or footmen,
vnlesse it were out of some fortification, from whence they
may discharge their peeces with full bullets, and Demain
puesto, as the Spaniards call it.
               For although the mosquet ranforced and well charged
with good powder woulde carrie a bullet point and
blanke 24. or 30. scores: doth it therefore follow that they
should giue Volees of mosquet shotte 24. or 20. skores
off,Why mosquetiers are not in the field to giue their volees of shotte 20 24. or 30. scores off. when that in failing to take their iuste point and
blanke no more but the length of a Corne, their bullettes
doo worke as much effect at the starres, as against the enemie
that they shoot at; Besides that in so great a distance of

ground, how truly soeuer they take their sights at point and
blanke, the aire dooth worke verie great effect, with their
bullets that are lower by 4. or 5. bores then the heigth of
their peeces, to carrie them by mounting, or otherwise
from the marke or markes that they are shot at.
            
            
               Certen Orders, directions, and briefe speeches to be obserued
by a Sergeant Maior, and Captaines, and leaders of Archers
in the field.
               ALl the most notable and excellent kinges and their
great captaines of our English nation in times past,
(who as it is most manifest by many notable histories
both auncient and moderne) were not any wayes inferior
in knowledge and skill in the Arte and science military
to the greatest kinges and captaines of our age deceased;
but did also farre exceed and excell all the Princes and Captaines
of this obscure time of Ignorance in christendome
nowe liuing, in all proceedings and actions militarie, (as it
is most apparant by the many batt
                     •
                  les & great victories by
them in diuers ages, and against many warlike nations obtained)
did (contrarie to the vaine and friuolous opinions
of our newe English men of warre of this time) so greatly
esteeme of our archers,The account made of archers in times past. through the continuall and great
experience they had of their wōderful & miraculous effects
in all battles and great in countryes; that vpon the composing
& forming of any Armie, the same being deuided into
fiue partes, alwaies three partes of the fiue did consist of archers:
And because archers in all actions militarie were so
continually & greatly emploied, they vsed to reduce them
into the most conuenient orders and formes that they
could deuise for them with their arrows to work their greatest
effects,The auncient 
                        •
                     orme of redu
                     
                        •
                     ing of archers 
                        •
                     ere into hear
                     
                        •
                     es. against both horsemen and footmen their Enemies;
which was into the forme of hearses, which hearses
were broad in frunt, and narrow short by flankes, which
is to be vnderstood, of many soldiors in euery ranke; and
but of fewe rankes by flankes; in such sorte, as what nombers

soeuer of archers they placed in frunte, that is in euery
ranke, the archers by flanke did neuer exceed the nomber
of 7. or 8. rankes at the most; And the causes and reasons
were these: that the archers being reduced into their hearse
or hearses, as also into their conuenient distaunces in frunt
and by flankes, euery one of them without any trouble
through the too much nearenes of their fellowes in the
same ranke, or by the ouermuch nearenes of the ranke &
ranks before them, might, without any impediment shoot
and roue of any mean height at their enemies being either
horsemen or footmen, ouer the heads of the rank or ranks
before them; and therewithall that the hindersmost ranks,
(being so few by flanks as aforesaid) might the more easily
see their Enemies that they shoot at: As also that by the
fewnesse of their rankes, the hindermost ranke and rankes
being the nearer to their Enemies, should the more easilie
reach their Enemies with their volees of arrowes; whereas
otherwise if the rankes were many, then by the ouerpluralitie
of rankes the hinder rankes should be depriued of the
sight of their Enemies that they should shoot at, and also
should be driuen to shoot their arrows at their enemies too
high a compasse, and by such meanes worke the lesse effect
against their enemies.
               All which considered,How to reduce archers into Hearses. I thought good in this place to
shew how any number of archers should be reduced into
the forme of a hearse, or diuers hearses, which is a thing of
great facilitie to be performed, because that the Captaine
or Captaines of archers haue no more to do but to say vnto
their archers. Ranke your selues archers. 7. in a ranke or if
they will make a hearse of 8. rankes, then ranke your selues 8
in a ranke, (as in the first part of this my booke concerning
the reducing of single bandes into rankes, is verie particulerly
contained); which being by the archers performed
thrughout the whole band, or as manie bands of archers as
they will bring into a hearse; then their Captaines and conductors
are to lead them by the flanke and corner of the
squadron where those archers shall be reduced into winge;

and there drawing those archers as far out, and large from
the corner of the squadron as they shal think requisite; and
finding the hindermost ranke of 7. soldiors, or of 8. if they be
disposed to make their flanke of 8. archers, to be of such cō
                  uenient
distance from the corner of the squadron as they
shal think meet: then the chiefe Commander of those Archers
is presentlie to goe to the midst of that flanke where
they are to make of flanke frunt, and then being a conuenient
distance from them, he ought to say vnto them: Frunt
to mee Archers, and let this worde passe throughout from
flanke to flanke: Vppon which his wordes pronounced, all
the souldiors in flanke throughout next vnto him are presentlie
to turne their faces and weapons towardes him and
make of flanke frunt, and so subsequentlie all the rest of the
archers throughout al the rankes must performe the like.
And this making of flank frunt may be performed aswel by
the stroke of the drumme as by the briefe speeches of the
commander: which being by them performed, then they
must presently reforme themselues into their conuenient
distances both by frunt and flanks, that thereby they may
without any impediment giue their volees as aforsaid: And
thus of a great number of ranks that they were before when
they marched in their simple or single order of rankes, as of
7. or else of 8. in a ranke from frunt to backe, they are now
become a great number of Archers in frunt; that is, in euerie
ranke, and but onelie of 7. or else 8 rankes by flankes,
which order and forme is to be vnderstood and tearmed a
hearse of Archers; and as this hearse is now reduced into
a wing either from the right or left corners of the squadron:
so may the like winges be drawen from all 4. corners, as also
vpon the frunt or flankes of the squadron, or any other
place or places where it shal please the General of the field,Archers reduced into hearses, are neuer 
                        •
                     o giue their volees but vpon a signe giuen
or the Lord Marshall to direct or command.
               But heere it is to be furder noted, that such hearses are
not to giue any volees of arrowes at their Enemies, but onlie
vppon a token or signe giuen vnto them by some chiefe
Commaunder of the hearse, who by his officers is to make

all the souldiors of the hearse priuie to the same signe and
token; And therefore the same Commaunder and signe
giuer is to be of good vnderstanding in archerie: as also of
the distances of groundes, that thereby he may not faile to
giue his signe when the hindermost archers are within the
reach of the former rankes of the enemies bee they horsemen
or footmen: for if hee should faile in the same, whereby
the Archers through the too great distance of ground
shoulde shoot short, hee should then commit a very grose
error.
               Also it is to bee noted that if the commander of the archers
doo thinke it requisite, he may deuide the deliuerie of
his archers arrowes into two volees, that is, that hee may
if the hearse doo consist of 8. rankes by flankes take order
that fower of the formost rankes shal giue their first volees,
and as the enemies doo approch neerer to giue order that
the other 4. hindermost rankes shall likewise giue their
volees altogither with the rankes before them. And as the
reducing of Archers into these aforesaide formes of hearses
are verie conuenient and of great effect for battles: euen
so they may bee brought into diuers other formes according
to the scituation of the ground or grounds and diuers
other occasions, and likewise worke verie great effectes.
               But now, whereas there be diuers in this time professing
Armes, that doo greatly disesteeme archers, thinking that
a farre greater number of Archers were not able to encounter
with a smaller number of mosquetiers:An aunswer to such as doe thinke archers inferior to mosquetiers in the plaine field. Thereunto
I say that that their opinion doth proceede of nothing else,
but of their lacke of vnderstanding and knowing the wonderfull
imperfections and failinges that do belong to musquets
and mosquetiers in the field, as also of the strange and
incredible effects of archers arrowes, and therewithall that
they did neuer enter into the consideration that mosquetiers
are not to worke any effect in the open fieldes but from
their restes fixed in the ground, or some other accidentall
or naturall rests and themselues standing still to take some

sight from point at blanke, at their enemies when they discharge,
which at men in motion with any certentie it is not
possible for them to performe, and if they faile in taking
their sightes at point and blanke, then their bullets do flie
straight at the Cloudes without doing any other hurt; besides
that when they haue once discharged their first charges
of full bullets, or haileshot of warre from their rests incase
they be forced vpon the vncerten comming of the Enemie
to remoue and new place their rests and charge againe,
their peeces are so exceeding heauie, and they therewithall
so troubled with their rests hanging vpon their fingers,
that they are driuen to a verie long recharging of their
mosquets againe, which recharging if it be not in such particuler
sort and perfection, as I haue before set downe, the
bullets of their second volee will scarce go within the compasse
of the height of piques vprighted, or rather of younge
trees, as all skilfull soldiors that do know their wonderfull
vncerten effects in seruices of the field will confesse: so as I
com to conclude, if the trial were to be made in the open &
plaine fields betwixt 1500. archers, and 3000.1500. archers able to breake 3000 mosqueters mosquetiers
without any other weapon of succor either for the one side
or for ye other, ye mosquetiers being reduced into anyformes
of greatest aduauntage and conueniencie for mosquetiers yt
can be deuised, those. 1500. archers being reduced into many
& many troupes of fifteenes, of twenties, of fiue & twenties,
of thirties & more or fewer, and they approching & assailing
the mosquetiers both in frunt and by flanks, & giuing
their volees of arrowes in continuall motions at the mosquetiers,
who if they meane to worke any effect of necessitie
must stand still to discharge their peeces as aforesaid during
which time of their standing still they shall to their
great error and mischiefe receaue the continuall volees of
the archers arrowes, vpon all parts of their bodies, in such
sort as the archers there is no doubt, being well instructed
and led in their troupes by their Captaines and other officers,The aduauntage that archers haue of mosquetiers.
would with great facilitie with a verie few volees of
arrowes breake all the mosquetiers, although they were of

a farre greater number: For although mosquets will carrie
their bullets point and blanke a great deale furder distance
then archers are able to work any effect with their arrowes;
yet their wonderfull vncertenties (many of the particularities
whereof I haue in other my bookes very particulerlie
set downe) are such and so manie, as against archers reduced
into great numbers of troups as aforesaid, and assailing
them in motion with infinite volees of arrowes, they would
be found to be of a wonderful, & incredible small resistance
against the blowes of such innumerable arrowes as aforesaid.
               Howbeit peraduenture some professing armes will saie, that harquebuziers
may with a great deale more aduantage
encounter with Archers then mosquetiers,Their oppinion that thinke harquebuziers of greater aduauntage to encounter with archers then mosquetiers refuted. because that
harquebuziers may incounter with Archers deuided into
great numbers of societies and troupes, and therewithall
may giue their volees of bullets in motion at the archers,
aswell as the archers their volees of arrowes in motion at
them. Wherevnto I answer, that if the volees of mosquetiers
bullets from their rests be so vncerten at men in motion
as I haue before mentioned, then of necessitie the volees
of harquebuziers, themselues discharging in motion,
at the archers likewise in motion must needs be a great deale
more vncerten: besides that if harquebuziers do discharge
9. 10. 11. or 12. skores distant at the archers, as the archers
may doo at them, it will bee found that in 10000. of their
shot they will not hit so many as 10. archers:The aduauntages y• archers haue of harque buziers. so wonderful
vncerten by all true experience of all wel practised and skilfull
souldiors are those weapons of fire. So as I come to
conclude also that a farre greater number of harquebuziers
are no waies able to abide the terror of a much smaller number
of archers, I meane if the archers bee of a thousand or
any greater number, whereby they may reduce themselues
into many formes and troupes.
               And now as I haue alledged diuers reasons to shew and
proue that a smaller number of archers reduced into many
greater and smaller troupes, haue great aduauntage to ouerthrow

and breake a great deale greater nomber of mosquetiers
in the plaine & open fields: euen so am I perswaded
by the like causes and reasons that.Reasons to proue that 500. harquebuziers are in skirmish able to ouerthrow as many mosquetiers. 500. harquebuziers in
the plaine and open fields reducing themselues into many
societies of loose shot, as also into greater troupes (as I haue
before in other places, whereas I haue shewed in what sort
harquebuziers should skirmish declared) were able with
great facilitie to ouerthrow and driue out of the fieldes. 500
mosquetiers; I meane, if neither the harquebuziers nor the
mosquetiers had any other weapon to succor them but
themselues, by reason that the harquebuziers being dispersed
into many societies of loose shot, and into greater and
lesser troupes, may trauesse their grounds and inlarge themselues,
and giue their volees in continuall motion, Iauing
only at the instant when they take their sights and discharge
their peeces at the frunt, flankes and backe of the mosquetiers
standing still like buttes without motion at their rests
whereas mosquetiers reducing themselues into diuers
broad squares, or troupes according vnto their most conuenient
orders of aduauntage to discharge their peeces
from their rests, cannot discharge their peeces although
with haileshot of warre at the harquebuziers to any effect,
by reason that they are dispersed, and in continuall motion.
Howbeit if any man will saie that mosquetiers might without
their rests likewise reduce themselues into many little
societies, and greater and smaller troupes, and so with great
aduauntage in respect that their peeces wil carrie point and
blanke a great deale surder, then harquebuzes, skirmish with
the harquebuziers:Mosquetiers are not able in skirmish to vse their peeces without rests to any effect, & with restes they cannot skirmishe. Thereunto it is to be aunswered, that it
is not possible that mosquitiers, although they were al men
of great force and strength, should be able with their forehandes
to support and beare their so heauie peeces to discharge,
and shoote with any steadines or certentie: Considering
that for any man to discharge any peece either harquebuze,
Currier, or mosquet without a rest effectual
                     •
                  lie it
doth behooue him to haue his peece of such lightnesse, as
he may be Maister of his peece, and not his peece through

the great heueth thereof maister of him;For any man to discharge his peece effectual ly, it behoueth him to be maister of his peece and not his peece maister of him. that is, that hee
may with dexterity discharge it steadily and with ease from
his forehand, taking his sight either from point at blanke, or
at least from the end of his peece with some kind of certentie:
which if his peece be any thing too heauie for him with
facilitie & ease to mannage, it is not possible for him to performe,
although it were at a firme and steadie marke, by
reason that he striuing with all his force to beare the end of
his peece, to discharge the same with some steadinesse and
certentie, the same ouermaistring his forces with extreame
heueth, doth make him to shoot iust either at the centre of
the earth, or else at the seuen stars without dooing any hurt
to the enemie: Besides that when he hath once or twise discharged
to recharge againe, it dooth not onlie through the
great length and heueth of his peece require a much longer
time then for a harquebuzier to recharge his harquebuze,
but also doth so weary the mosquetier, that it doth bereaue
him of his forces, in such sort as he is to work in a mā
                  ner
no effect, other then by his seldom discharging to make
a great noise. So as in this matter I come to conclude, that
as mosquetiers (as I haue in certen other places before men
tioned) through the great distance that their peeces wil carie,
and the great blowes that they will giue aswel with hailshot
of war as with single bullets, haue in their conuenient
and due times and places great aduantage against harquebuziers:
Euen so for skirmishes, harquebuziers for the
causes and reasons before alledged, do in their effects farre
exceed and excel mosquetiers. And thus farre concerning
these matters before handled.Instructions to be giuen by Captains and officers to their bands for the passing of any briefe spe
                        •
                      ches or word. All Captaines both of
horsemen and footemenne and their officers shoulde instruct
and teach their bandes that when they are reduced
into their simple or single order, or into any forme of squadron,
or into any other form; that when any briefe speeches
or words are spoken either by y• coronel or sergeant Maior,
or by their Captains, to y• intent that the same should passe
from the hindermost rank to the formost rank, or from the
formost to the hindermost, or from flank to flanke: y• then

they do in no wise faile with all celerity to passe that speech
or worde without stop or stay vppon seuere punishment of
euerie ranke that shall be found not to passe the same, euen
to the verie first or last ranke, and so likewise from flanke to
flanke. And the commandement of the passing of those
briefe speeches or wordes in bandes single doo appertaine
to the Captaine,To whome the commaundement of passing of briefe spea ches doth appertaine. his Lieutenant or Sergeants; and if it be in
diuers bandes reduced into forms either to march or fight,
then those commandements of briefe speeches or wordes
doo apperteine chieflie to the coronell or Sergeant Maior,
or to his deputie Lieutenant, and not to any Captaine or
Captains, or their officers, without the speciall commandement
of one of the three aforesaid officers.
               All drummers should bee very skilfull and perfect in allThe duetie of trompettors & drummers.
the different strokes that are to direct and command al captaines
and their souldiors be they either in Campe, field or
Towne. All trompettors also, aswell such as doo belong to
bands of horsemen, as others that doo belong to Coronels
of footmen should be very skilfull and perfect to blow and
sound all kinde of soundes, directions, & commandments.
And the Lord Lieutenant generals sergeant trompettor, or
trompettor Maior, as also his Sergeant drummer, or drummer
Maior, should haue a speciall care to see that all trompettors,
and drummers vnder them throughout the whole
Campe should strike, and sound all diuersities and kindes of
soundes and strokes with one conformitie, in such sort that
all Captaines and their officers & souldiors may at al times
and vppon all occasions vnderstand distinctlie by all those
their diuersities of soundes and strokes what they shoulde
performe without any waies mistaking them.
               Also all Captaines and officers of bandes aswell of horsmenThe care that all Captains & officers of 
                        •
                     andes are to 
                        •
                     aue to instruct 
                        •
                     heir bandes.
as of footmen should be verie carefull to instruct their
souldiors to learne and know what euery different sound of
trompet or stroke of drumme dooth signifie, and howe to
performe the directions of those trompets or drummes: as
for example, when horsemen or footemen should reduce
themselues into their simple or single order of rankes, and

when one or diuers bandes should reduce themselues into
squadron, and how when they being reduced into squadron
should make of backe, or of flankes, frunt, when also to
march faster or more leisurelie, and when to march a trot
without disordering their rankes, when to staie and make
a stand, when to retire, and when to aduance, when also to
straighten and close their rankes by frunt and flankes, with
all other diuersities of soundes and strokes, that are in the
skill and science of trompettors and drommers to direct
with their trompets and drums. And as they are to learne
and know when by the sound of the trompet, or stroke of
the drum to performe those and other actions militarie, so
ought they to be instructed and taught by their Captaines
and officers by often exercises how to performe all those
and other matters militarie with great order as well euerie
souldior in particular as all souldiors in generall. And thus
all bands both of horsemen and footmen being instructed
and taught by their Captaines and officers to vnderstand
the different significations of all strokes and soundes of
trompets and drummes, as also all such briefe speeches, as
I haue before set downe in this booke, and how effectuallie
to performe them, may in mine opinion be very well
accounted not only soldiors, but old souldiors, in most seruices
of the Campe or field.
            
            
               Certen Instructions and obseruations concerning the ordering
and exercising of men at Armes, of dimilances, & al
so of light horsmen, stradiots incorporated with Archers and
crosbowers on horsebacke, for diuers purposes & seruices.
               
                  FIrst, when any Coronell or Captaine or Captains
will reduce their bandes be they of men at Armes,
or of dimilaunces, or Stradiots, or of any other sort
of light horsemen into their simple or single order of 4. 5.
or 6. or more or fewer in a ranke,To reduce men at a
                        •
                     mes or dimilaunces into their simple or single order of rankes. I would wish that they
should instruct their horsemen that vpon the sound of the
trompet for that purpose, or vpon hearing such words pronounced
by their Captaines or officers, as I haue very particularlie

set downe aswell for horsemen as footmen in the
beginning of this booke, that they should presentlie reduce
themselues into rankes by the left flankes the one of the other,
and that there withall they should haue regard to their
distances, and to all other such considerations as are there
mentioned concerning these and diuers other purposes.
               Now to reduce men at Armes or dimilaunces into squadron,
I think it is more then needeth againe to particuler ye
same; considering that any numbers of such horsmen are to
bee reduced into their squadron or squadrons in one of the
same sorts that piquers footmen are;Squadrons of men at armes how many soeuer they be in frunt ought not to be aboue 10. or 12. by flanks. and that with a greater
facilitie; because that squadrons of men at armes, how many
soeuer they bee in frunt ought not in mine opinion (although
I haue seene otherwise) to bee aboue 10. or 12. at
the most by flankes; because all the rankes that should bee
aboue that number might be holden for superfluous and vnprofitable;
by reason that if another squadron of men at
Armes that were but of the like number by frunt; and were
by flankes 24. or 30. rankes or more, would vpon that opinion
of the pluralitie of the rankes conceiued without taking
any other aduantage, charge such a squadron as aforesaid,
that were of like number vnto them in frunt, and by
flankes onelie 10. rankes, they should finde that squadron
but of 10. rankes aswell able to encounter with them, and
to abide their charge, as they theirs; because they should
not be able with their charge to passe those 10. rankes, no
more, then the squadron of 10. ranks to passe through their
multiplicitie of ranks; which is the cause that I would make
my squadron of men at Armes or Launces broad in frunt
according to the number, and by flanks not aboue 7. or 8. or
9. or 10. or 11. or 12. ranks at the most.
               Howbeit, true it is that such squadrons of Launces as do
consist of 20. 25. or 30. rankes may drawe foorth from the
backe or rereward a sleeue of 5. or of 10. ranks of Launces,
and draw them vppe by one of the flankes of the same squadron,
and make the frunt of their squadron broader by frunt
and shorter by flankes; and may also vpon some other aduantage

espied with those ranks drawne out from behind,
charge the contrarie squadron in flanke; or vpon other occasions
otherwise employ them, which is the greatest aduantage
that such squadrons of men at Armes or dimilaunces
of manie rankes haue.
               Also it is to be noted that it is a greater aduantage for
such as are Coronels,Why 500. 
                        〈◊〉
                      are rather to be reduced into 3. 4. or 5. litl
                        •
                      squadrons, then into on
                        •
                      entier squadron. commaunders, or orderers of horsemen
to reduce 500. Launces into 2. 3. 4. or 5. squadrons to
charge either horsemen or footemen, then to reduce 500.
Launces all into one body of squadron; by reason that they
being in so many squadrons may at one time bee emploied
in diuers seruices. Also if it were to charge a squadron of
500. Launces; 3. of the 5. of those little squadrons may
make themselues all of one frunt: but I meane euerie squadron
by himselfe separated a good distance one from another,
and in that forme may receiue or giue a charge all at
one instant vpon the broad frunt of the 500. Launces whilest
that the other two squadrons that are in wings of those
three, espying their aduantages immediatlie vpon ye charge
giuen and receiued, may likewise almost at the same instant
giue their charge vppon the flankes, backe, or hinder corners
of the great squadron to the disordering of them: euen
so likwise 500. Launces reduced into 5. squadrōs of 100 to
euery squadron may with greater aduātage charge a squadron
of piques, then if the whole 500. were reduced but
into one bodie of squadron, by reason that 3. of the 5. squadrons
of 100. to euerie squadron reduced into 5. rankes 20
in euery ranke, charging the frunt & corners of ye squadron
of piquers at one time, and the other 2. squadrons of 100. a
peece being each one of them reduced into 4. ranks of 25.
in euerie rank to the intent to beare the greater breadth, or
into 5. rankes of 20. in euerie ranke as the other 3. were,
may immediatlie vppon the Retraite of those 3. Squadrons,
giue a newe Charge vppon the frunt and corner
of the Squadron of piquers, to the indaungering of
the disordering and breaking of the saide Squadron:

whereas, if the whole number of 500. Launces were reduced
into. 100. rankes. 5. in a ranke, or into. 8 rankes that is
62. in a ranke, ouerplus▪ 4: or into. 10. rankes that is. 50.
in euerie ranke, or more or fewer, I say (that in mine opinion)
one charge of the squadron of 500. launces should not
be able to worke so great an effect to the endaungering of
the squadron of piquers as those 5. little squadrons or hundreds
should be able to doo, seconding one another and
charging at different times, and thereby the two last squadrons
finding the squadron of piques in some disorder
through the charge of the. 3. first squadrons should with
great facilitie giue in amongst them & ouerthrow them, or
at least, put them in great hazard of breking & ouerthrowing.
And so likewise 500. launces or stradiots or any greater
number haue a great deale greater aduauntage to charge,
disorder & break in the open fields any number or numbers
of harquebuziers or mosquetiers, incase they be without
any succor of piques or aduauntage of ground in troupes of
hundreds and fifties, or many other smaller troupes, then if
they were reduced into any. 2. or. 3. great bodies of squadron
or troupes.
               But yet because I haue said before that a squadrō of Launces
of 10. or 12. rankes are to be reduced into forme with a
great deale greater facility then a squadron of footmen that
doth consist of many rankes and peraduenture of diuersitie
of weapons, and that all Captaines that do leade Launces
do not well knowe how to forme such a squadron, although
but of a few ranks as aforesaid; I will therefore here
briefely set downe how they shall presently reduce such
a squadron of few,Two waies whereby to re
                        •
                     duce a squadron of launces of fewe or many ranks into forme. or of many rankes into forme with
great facilitie; and that is by any one of two waies, the first
to reduce them by flanke or flankes, & the other by right
line.
               As for example, the Captaine or Captaines of such a
band or bands of men at Armes or dimilaunces, commanding
their officers to reduce their band or bandes into their
simple or single order of 6. Launces in a rank throughout,

and then considering the one halfe of the full number of
the rankes, they are vpon the sounde of the Trompette,
or else by briefe speaches pronounced, to commaund
the formost one halfe of the launces to marche some 20.
or 30. paces, and the other halfe of the launces to stay and
kepe their ground, which marching forward of 20. or
30. paces by the first halfe to giue conuenient ground and
place to the other halfe to reduce themselues into squadron
by flanke being performed, and they there in their
rankes making a stay and pause, then some captain or captains
or other leaders for that purpose appointed, placing
themselues vpon the frunt of the hinder halfe of the launces
that haue not yet moued, they vpon the sounde of the
trompet are to march vp either by the right or left flanke of
the formost halfe of the launces now making their pause
and standing still, vntill that the formost ranke of the hinder
halfe of launces doe make equall frunte with the formost
ranke of the formost halfe of launces, and so likewise that
the hindermost ranke of the same one halfe of launces, bee
equall with the hindermost ranke of the formost one halfe
of the launces, and so consequently all the rest of the ranks
be euen and straight by flankes one with another: which
being performed then of 6. in a rank that the same band or
bandes of launces were before throughout, they are nowe
comne to be 12. in a ranke throughout; which being done,
then to make them a broade square of many in frunte, that
is in euery ranke, and but only of 12. rankes, the captain, or
captains that doe lead them, are to lead and draw the flanke
of their band or bandes to the ground whereas they will
make of flanke frunt: where being comne, they are to make
a stay and pause, and then either by the sound of the troumpet
vpon that flanke that shall be made frunt, or else vpon
some of the captains galloping to the midst of the same
flanke, and being something distant from the flanke; and
pronouncing with a loud voyce. Frunt vnto me men at Armes;
or frunt vnto me Launces: then presently all the horsemen
that are nexte vnto them are to tourne their horses

faces and make frunt that waies, and so subsequetnly al the
rest of the ranks of the launces one after another, which being
performed, then of how many rankes soeuer they were
before by flankes, now they are becomne to be only of 12.
rankes by flankes, and in frunt, of the like number that they
were by flanke, or flanks: And as the first forming of this
squadron was performed by doubling of the hinder halfe of
the Launces by the flanke of the formost halfe of the Launces
(as aforesaid:) Euen so may the Captaines either by the
sound of the trompette, or by brief speaches commaund
their Launces to double themselues by right line; that is,
that the second ranke of 6. should enter into ye formost rank
likewise of. 6. and that the fourth ranke should enter into
the third ranke; and so consequentlie euerie second ranke
throughout to the verie backe or Rereward, to enter into
the ranke before him, in such sort that of 6. that euery ranke
was before, they are now by this doubling by right line becomne.
12. in euerie ranke from frunt to backe: which being
performed and all the ranks reformed in their distances
as well by frunt as flankes, then the Captaine or Captaines
may presentlie make of flanke frunt according as I haue
before verie particulerlie declared; and then the standard
or Ensigne,Wher the standard of men at armes or the guydon of di
                     
                        ••
                     il aunces is to be placed. or Ensignes if they be men at Armes, or the
Guidons if they be dimilaunces being placed in the midst of
the same squadron, the whole broade square is readie to
straighten and close their rankes by frunt and flankes, and
either to charge their enemies or to receaue a charge. And
as this broad square of many Launces in frunt, and but of
12. Launces by flankes hath bene reduced into forme by
two different waies as aforsaid; so may any other squadrō or
squadrons of launces be reduced by any of those two waies,
of how many rankes by flankes soeuer they are. But yet as
the reducing of horsemen by right line is verie good and
ready: so the reducing of them into squadron by flankes as
aforesaid, is better; because they do no waies alter nor disorder
themselues in their distances neither in frunt nor by
flankes; whereas otherwise by entring and doubling their

rankes one into another by right line, they come to disorder
their proportionate distaunces, which they must again
with all speed reforme. Aduertising furder, that as this squadron
hath beene formed by the aforesaid two waies, so may
the same or any other euen at the first be as well reduced by
any of those 2. waies into form, in vaungard and frunt, without
making of flank frunt, so as the Coronell, Sergeant Maior,
or Captain, that hath the forming of the said squadron,
haue good regard aswel to the ground and number that he
wil make his frunt of, as to the number of ye ranks by flanks,
and therwithal to place and accomodat the broken rank, or
ranks if there be any with the standard, ensigne, or Guidon.
               Now because in these daies new opinions and fancies in
matters of armes grounded vpon very weake or rather no
reasons at all, do beare a very great swaie; and that amongst
other errors militarie there be some that doo hold & allow
that launces should be rather reduced into troup to charge
or receiue a charge,Launces are alwaies rather to be reduced into squadron, then into troupes. then into squadron formed: I for diuers
reasons, of the which some I will after alledge, would that
when any Coronell or Captaines of men at armes or dimilaunces
shal haue occasion to reduce their bands into form,
either to march or fight; that then they doo in any wise reduce
them into forme of squadron, according to the ancient-vse,
and not into troupe according to the newe fancies,
incase that time and leisure wil serue: And therwithall that
they do form them with a triple frunt,Launces are alwaies to bee 3. times and somtimes 4. or 5. times or more in frunt thē by flankes. that is three times as
many in frunt as by flanks, and somtimes more: As for example,
if the frunt be of 24. or 25. Launces, then the flanke
should be of 8. launces: And somtimes also with a quatriple
frunt, that is 4. times more in frunt, then by flankes; as also
at other times and vpon other occasions into farre broader
frunts then quadruple, although by flankes not aboue 10.
or 12. rankes at the most as aforesaide: and that the Standardes
or Ensignes, if they bee men at Armes; or the Guidons
if they bee dimilaunces bee placed in the midst of the
squadron.
               And ye those horsmen be instructed how to inlarge themselues

in their rankes when they march in squadron: and
how presentlie vpon the sight of the enemie approching to
straighten themselues by frunt and flankes, with their iust
& proportionate distances, in such sort as they may charge
or receiue a charge of the enemie without disordering their
horses or Launces, or confounding their ranks. But incase
that vpon a sudden Alarm giuen vppon the approch of the
Enemie the Launces being in Campe, Towne, or Village
be not reduced into their single order vnder their Ensignes
or Guidons, but that they are then assembling themselues
and the enemie neere at hand; then they must make of necessitie
vertue, that is to reduce themselues into troupe, making
as neere as they can a triple, or quatriple frunt, or more
that they may somewhat resemble a squadron, hauing regard
to their distances, that they may vse their Launces
without disordering the one the other as neere as they
may.
               And whereas there be some professing armes in this time
that doo holde an opinion that Launces haue a greater aduantage
to charge or receiue a charge in troupe, then in
squadron as aforesaid; they therein doo shew that for lacke
of vnderstanding and consideration they doo greatlie erre
in the ordering of horsemen Launces. For the Almaines,
Italians, English, and diuers other Nations haue of great
antiquitie vsed, both squadron of men at Armes and dimilaunces,
and also troupes: But it was neuer heard of before
these disordered ciuill wars of France,wherupon the 
                        •
                     educing of aunces into roupe doth amongst men of warre proceed. and the Lowcountries,
that Launces in troupes confused, should be preferred
and iudged to be of greater aduantage then launces in squadron
formed, considering that the reducing of Launces into
troupe dooth amongest men of war proceed of nothing
else but of lacke of time to reduce them into squadron vpon
some sudden Alarme and approch of the Enemie: So as
such as doo hold that opinion might aswell say that two,
                     
                        •
                      batle of neces
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     tie is a nom
                     
                        •
                     er of piquers 
                        〈◊〉
                      horsemen 
                        •
                     unces out of 
                        ••
                     nks in 
                        •
                     roup. or
three thousand piquers, and short weapons haue more aduantage
to fight in a battle of necessitie, then in a Squadron
formed: which battle of necessitie or extreamitie, terme it

as you list, is neuer vsed but vpon some great and sudden accident
as when a puissant enemie dooth make a sudden approch
vpon your Campe most commonlie by night, or at
the breake of day with a Canuesada, killing both scoutes,
Centinels and watches, through their negligent watching,
or discouering, and therevpon an alarme giuen, for lacke of
time to reduce your piquers into squadron formed, you are
faine in the place of assemblie to make them to runne togither
into rankes confused, closing themselues as close as
they can to defende the Ring, or entrie of the Campe. By
the which comparisons, reasons, and examples of footmen
piquers before alledged, such new fancies and lacke of vnderstanding
in the ordering, or rather disordering of launces
may be easilie discerned by men of reason and iudgement.
               And now to the intent that your men at Armes or dimilances
may be the better able to charge or receiue a charge
of their enemies, it is verie meete, and conuenient that their
Captaines and officers should reduce them some time into
squadron with a triple, or quatriple frunt.
               And being so reduced, that they should be taught,How and in what distances men at Armes or dimilaunces are to charge or receiue a charge of their enemies. how
to straighten and close themselues in frunt and flankes; and
how presently vpon the sound of a charge they should almost
all at one instant put spurres to their horses galloping
vpon the hand about 8. or 10. paces, and then charge their
Launces from their tasses or long Cuisses and thighes presentlie
into their restes, and not to carrie their Launces at
the Armes ende, as they do commonlie vse at Tilt, to make
the fairer shew; and then imagining the squadron of the
enemies Launces to be within 15. or 20 paces directly before
them, they should altogither put their horses into their
Carrires to the intent to giue the greater blowe and shocke
to the ouerthrowing or breaking of their enemies. Then I
would wish them to be taught how they should receiue a
charge if another squadron of launces should charge them:
and that they should doo in this sort.
               First when they shall see the squadron of their enemies

comming to charge them either galloping vpon the hand,
or in their full Carrire; then they being straightned & closed
in their rankes by frunt and flankes should stand firme, all
the Launces of the three formost rankes ready charged in
their restes, but yet the pointes of their launces something
high, vntil they do see the enemies squadron within 15. or
20. paces of them: at which time they should with a terrible
shout altogither in an instant, as if they were one entire
bodie, put spurres to their horses, and fall into their Carrire,
and so charge and shock with their enemies, to the disordering
or breaking of them.
               All which being by them performed, they should then
stop their horses and discharge their launces, setting them
againe vppon their thighes: And then they should be instructed
how with al celeritie to make of flank frunt, by turning
al their horses faces that waie, and by inlarging themselues
and doubling, and redoubling their rankes to reduce
their squadron againe into a triple, or quatriple frunt. Then
I would wish that all the squadron of Launces should disorder
themselues pelle melle out of their rankes: and that they
should be instructed either vppon the sound of the Trompet
or vpon the pronouncing of these wordes,Diuers exercises for horsmen to be instructed and taught in. 
                  Troup, troup
Launces, presentlie to fall into troupe, making their frunt,
triple, or quatriple, or more in respect of the flankes, as
neere as their Captaines or officers can guesse; And being
thus fallen into troup, they should be taught how to charge
or receiue a charge of their Enemies, without disordering
themselues or their launces.
               Then I would haue them againe reduced out of troupe
into squadron, and taught how they should charge ye flank
or corner of a squadron of piques, and how incase they doe
not disorder▪ nor breake the piquers, that they should retire
againe; and then falling into troupe they should with a
terrible shout offer a false charge by making a point & casting
about when they come within 10. or 15. paces of the
squadron of piques, incase that the piquers making head
with their piques doo not disorder themselues: But if they

should perceiue the squadron of piquers to wa
                     •
                  er or swaie
(as commonly they do a little before they break) that then
they should giue in vpon the piquers with a full charge, to
the vtter ouerthrowing of them. And thus with these and
such like exercises they should be made skilfull & able with
all aduantages to charge any squadron of horsmen or footmen
with great art and de
                     •
                  teritie.
               Now peraduenture some not skilful in matters of armes
may say that I haue made in a maner no difference betwixt
the charging of a fquadron of men at Armes, or Dimilaunces,
and the receiuing of a charge of another squadron
of the like Weapons, because I doo allow to the squadron
that should charge but 30. paces, that is 20. galloping vpon
the hand, and 10. for their full Carrire to giue the greater
blow and shocke:An obiectio
                        •
                      aunswered. Wherevnto I answer that such as are
leaders of any squadron of Launces that will fall into their
gallop 12. skores, or 15. skores distant or more, to the intent
to charge another squadron of Launces, shall finde
themselues in so great a distance greatly disordered & confounded
in their rankes, and their horses out of breath, and
thereby the force of their blow and shocke greatlie weakened
when they shall come to encounter with the squadron
of their enemies freshe, and not disordered, 
                     •
                  ho haue
put forward their Horses into their Carrire not aboue 10.
paces.
               Now if it should bee said vnto me that it were more
meet that a squadron of launces that is disposed to receaue
a charge,The opinion of such as hold it best for launce
                        •
                      to receiue a charge stāding still, answered▪
                   should keepe their ground and stand firme with
their launces in their rests rather then to fall into their carrire
of. 10. paces as aforesaid: I say that their receauing of
a charge in standing still, should be greatly to their disaduauntage,
because that force and violence in this action
must be repulsed with the like or greater force & violence.
For any man of iudgement by reason may consider that a
squadron of launces straightned and closed in frunt and
flanks with their iust and proportionate distances cōming
to charge their enemies squadron but 30. paces, that is. 20.

galloping vpon the hand, and. 10. with a terrible shoute in
their full carrire will worke a wonderfull effect to the breaking
of the squadron of launces standing still,The disaduantage of a Squ
                        •
                     
                     dron that receueth a charge standing still. without mouing
forward with any force. Besides that the disaduauntage
of such a squadron as receaueth a charge standing still
without mouing forward with force, is greatly augmented
by the terror and thundering of their enemies horses feete
vpon the ground comming in their full cartire, as also by
the noise of the armors of the horsemen, and with the furious
comming of the horses in squadron with the pointes
of so many launces in the eyes and sights of both horses &
men standing still in colde blood: whereas contrariwise the
squadron comming but. 30. or. 40. paces in hoat blood to
charge them, first galloping vpon the hand, & after in their
full carrire as is aforesaid, doe gather heate, furie, and force,
in such sorte as their blowe and shocke becommeth so violent,
that it doth amaze, disorder and breake the contrary
squadron with great facilitie; But a squadron of Launces
standing firme vpon their ground vntill they see their enemies
within. 20. paces of them, & then putting themselues
into their full carrire and meeting with their Enemies. 10.
paces of, it is distance enough to receaue and encounter
them with as great force as if they had begun their carrire
when the squadron of their Enemies was a greater distance
of.
               But now in this place it is to be noted and obserued that
the Ensignebearer if he be of men at Armes, or the Guidon
bearer,Where the En
                     
                        •
                     ignebearer of men at Armes or the Guydon beare
                        •
                      of light horsmen are to 
                        •
                     e lodged. if he be of light horsemen, be euer lodged both in
Campe and Towne in the Captaines Tent, or lodging, or
very neer vnto the same, euer accompanied with the trumpetor
of the same band, to the intent that they may receaue
all orders and sudden directions; and hauing receaued the
same, may signifie them by the soundes of the trumpet.
               Light horsemen borderers I will not take vpon me to set
downe any thing for their instructions how they should vse
their speares in the field, because that they themselues by
their continuall exercise are so skilful with al such weapons

as they do vse in the seruice of the borders.Into what formes, light hors
                        •
                      men borderers are to reduce themselues. But yet I would
wish them to learne to reduce themselues into semicircles
or halfe moones into two rankes either by right line or else
oblique, after the manner of the Turkes and Hongarians;
Because I thinke that the same would be of great aduauntage
for them, for diuerse purposes, as I haue shewed by diuers
demonstrations and formes in a Booke by me Composed
1585. and not yet printed, entituled; Certen Military
discourses, Arithmeticall Tables, formes and demonstrations to
reduce both horsemen and footmen into many formes of squadrons.
&c.
               
               But because that in my forementioned Booke I haue but
only sett downe the formes and demonstrations of those
semicircles by figures of little horsemen, and not how nor in
what sort they should be reduced into those formes; I will
here briefely set downe concerning those reducements, as
also of the aduauntages that such light horsemen haue in
such semicircles against a squadron of Launces. And therefore
to reduce them into the aforesaid formes, I say that if
therebe (for examples sake) 200. light horsemen; they are
to march 2. in a ranke either by right line or oblique: And
incase they march 2. in a ranke by right line, then euerie 2.
horsemen are of equal frunt throughout from frunt to back
as all other sortes of horsemen in their rankes are: But if
they march in ranks oblique,How to reduc
                        •
                      light horsemen or Stradiots in to the forme of a Semicircle. then euerie second light horsman
doth march retyred and a good distance wide from
the first, in such sort as he may march and haue in flanke
the midst of the voide ground that is betwixt his fellow
formost horseman of his owne ranke, and the formost horseman
of the second ranke, that followeth the first, and so
likewise the second souldior of the second ran
                     •
                  e is to follow
him in the like sort, but marching and hauing on his flanke
likewise the midst of the distance or voide ground that is
betwixt his formost fellow of his owne ranke, and the formost
light horsman of the third ranke; And so subsequentlie
all the rest of the light horsemen must march in rankes
oblique the one to the other.
               Now all this band of 200. light horsemen reduced into

100. rankes marching by right line straight forward, are to
be reduced into a semicircle in this sort following, that is,
that one Conductor ought to march before all the rankes;
And another last of all behinde all the rankes; Then after
two other Conductors are to be placed in the verie midst,
the one to take care and to see order obserued by the one
halfe of the semicircle, that is of his right hand; and the other
to see order obserued by the other halfe of the semicircle
that is of his left hand: which conductors being so placed,
and the Cornet either in the midst of the rankes of the
light horsemen, or else in one of the formost rankes; then to
reduce these 100. rankes into a semicircle, either the Captaine,
or formost Conductor must march with his band &
fetch a great and a large compasse and circuite of ground,
either vpon the right, or left hand, according as he intendeth
to make the frunt of his semicircle: And thus he must
leade his band in compasse and halfe circle, vntill he seeth
the hindermost ranke right ouer, and against in semicircle
to the formost ranke of all the bande, which he himselfe
leadeth: which he perceiuing, then he must commaund his
trompettor to sound a stay or pause, which done, the trumpettor
must gallop towards the midst of the semicircle; I
meane of the inner or compasse side, and there must againe
sound to make of flanke frunt: which being performed, then
of 100. ranks of 2. in a ranke that they were before, they are
now becomne to be only 2. rankes of. 100. in each ranke,
which being performed, then may they march in this
forme of semicircle in their rankes, either by right line or
oblique if the fields be large and open (as they are most
commonly in Fraunce, and many other Countries) with
great facilitie: And incase there were a squadron of. 150.The aduantage of a semicircle of light horsemen or Stradio
                        •
                     s, against a squadron of launces.
Launces that would thinke to breake that semicircle by a
charge giuen in the midst of the same semicircle, then the
aduauntage of the semicircle is, vpon the instant and verie
beginning of the charge of the launces to open themselues
in the midst; the formost Conductor of the Corner of the
right hand galloping large and something in compasse,

and leading the one halfe of the semicircle of light horsemen,
vpon the one flanke of the squadron of Launces; and
the other Conductor of the other ende, or corner of the semicircle
to galloppe likewise somewhat large in compasse,
and lead the other halfe of the semicircle to charge vppon
the other flanke of the squadron of Launces, and with terrible
noises and shoutes to charge both the flankes, as also
the backe of the squadron with their speares al at one time.
Or if the Semicircle bee all of stradiots, with their zagaias,
which are double headed Launces, then that they beeing
lead by their Conductors and opening in the midste, as aforesaid,
doo charge both the flanks and backe of the squadron
with their zagaias striking both forwarde and backeward,
killing, and wounding, both horses and men.
               By which new, extraordinarie, and vnexpected kinde
of charge, the squadron of Launces that thought by right
line to haue charged and broken the semicircle in the midst
finding nothing there before them to charge but onely the
ayre, are forced to make a stay or stand, and to defend them
selues with great disaduantage of Weapon; and are compelled
to make frunt of both their flankes and backe, all at
one time; which they can no waies performe without disordering
themselues out of all forme: whereof, and by the
neernesse of the light horsmen bee they speares or zagaias,
that haue charged them, as aforesaid, it commeth to passe,
that they haue not any ground nor roome to put their horses
into any Carrire, nor to charge their launces into their
restes, thereby to giue the greater blow and shocke, or anie
other waies to annoy the light horsmen, that haue charged
& do with their zagaias, or speares vsed as punching staues,
wounde and kill them and their horses both in flanks and
backe, as aforesaid, by meanes whereof they haue not onelie
vtterlie lost the vse of their Launces, but are driuen with
many wounds alreadie receiued to disorder all their ranks &
squadron & in tumultuarie and disordred sort, to fight with
their swords, and other such short weapons against the said

light horsemen with their punching staues, to the g
                     〈◊〉
                  
disaduantage and vtter ruine of the Launces.
               And whereas I haue shewed this order of marching of a
semicircle of two rankes oblique according to the Hongarian
and Turkie manner: I say that it hath beene and is in
respect, that if any other such light horsemen in rankes by
right line should charge them, that the hindermost light
horsemen of the second ranke, that are oblique in ranke to
their fellowes before them, may at the same instant, haue
more open and conueniencie of ground to succour their
fellowes in the formost ranke, and to charge their enemies,
then they otherwise could haue, if they were by right line
directly behind the first ranke.
            
            
               The great effects that Stradiots, Archers on horsbacke,
and Crosbowers on horsback, are to performe in the field,
both against horsmen and footmen, with also, the great ad
                  
                     •
                  antage
that they haue against Carabins, and against
Reistres, and all other weapons of fire on horsebacke, in
seruices of the field.
               
                  STradiots before mentioned are a kinde of light
horsemen that haue beene vsed of many yeares
both in Italie, Fraunce, Spaine and Germanie,
although in their weapons & manner of arming,
euery Nation hath differd one from another more or lesse.Stradiots much vsed in times past.
Amongst the Pagans, the Arabians and Persians, the Turks
and the Tartars, in such ages as they conquered the greatest
part of Europe, Affricke and Asia, vsed almost no other
souldiors and weapons on horsebacke but light horsemen
Launciers with long launces, Stradiots with Launcezagaias
headed with two steeled heades, Archers with their
bowes; and Crosbowers, and al those with their Cemeteries
and straight or crooked daggers, and other weapons in
vse with them.Stradiots of great execution and effect in the field.
               
               Now these light horsemen stradiots that haue been vsed
by so many Nations are of great execution and seruice in

the fielde, both against horsemen and footmen disordered,
and very excellent to enter into and maintaine skirmishe,
chieflie if they be incorporated with Archers on horsback,
and Crosbowers on horsebacke: The difference of which
armors, weapons, horses, and other furniture belonging to
those three sorts of weapons I omit, because I haue verie
particularlie set down mine opinion of those matters in my
forementioned book, entituled; Certen Military discourses,
Arithmeticall Tables, formes and demonstrations, &c. by me
Composed 1585. not yet printed. Now therefore I will
make mention of nothing else but how they shoulde behaue
themselues in the field against their enemies, and that
I would haue them to performe in this sort.
               Stradiots,How stradiots Archers on horsebacke, & Crosbowers on horsebacke, incorporated in bands, are to behaue themselues in the field. archers on horsebacke, and Crosbowers on
horseback, being incorporated into bandes, euery band of
100. of the which I would haue 40. stradiots, 30. archers,
and 30. Crosbowers all on horseback, and all those reduced
into Cameradas or societies of tennes, or fifteenes I
would wish that they should not fight in squadrons nor in
great troupes as men at armes and dimilaunces should do;
but that they should fight in many little troupes of tennes,
or fifteens, or twenties, and not aboue; and that they should
charge a squadron or troupe, or diuers squadrons or troups
of Launces in frunt, flanks and backe, in many little troups
some aduanced, and some retired, in such sort, as all the
troupes next vnto the squadron of their enemies horse,
might haue other troupes in wing more retired to second
and succour them; and that the troupes of archers & Crosbowers
should giue their volees of arrowes and quarrels at
the squadrons or troupes of their Enemies both in frunt,
flankes and backe, all at one time, and that the little troups
of Stradiots should remaine in winges somewhat retired,
readie vppon all occasions of any disorder of their enemies
to giue in, by flankes, and backe, and to kill, or wound the
horses of their enemies; and that incase the Launces being
in great squadrons, or troupes, should charge them; that
then they should presentlie cast about and flie in their little

troupes, and that they should disperse their troupes all ouer
the large fieldes, in such sort, that the squadrons of launces
should not well know which troupes to followe; and that
vpon the Launces pursuing of those troupes; that other little
troupes and societies should charge them againe both
in backe and flankes, and that with terrible shoutes and volees
of quarrels and arrowes, the Stradiots at the same time
galloping in their troups by the hinder corners of the squadron,
should wound their horses with their Launcezagayas,
and giue them occasion to stay their pursuit, & to make
head against them; which if the Launces doo without disordering
themselues; then I would wish those troupes that
charged the backe and flankes presently likewise to disperse
and flie: and that the other little troupes that they had followed
before, should vppon some extraordinarie shoute or
hubabub, (whereto they should bee inured) returne againe
vppon them with new charges and volees both in
backe and flankes with terrible shoutes and cries as aforesaid:
In such sort that although all the little troupes of Stradiots,
and shot, doo not exceed the number of the launces
in their great squadrons; yet that their false charges should
be such, so many, and so continuall in giuing their volees
in frunt, flankes, and backe, as that by continuall molesting
of them, they should put them in hazard to disorder themselues
and disperse: which if it shoulde happen; then that
the Stradiots should enter pelle melle amongest the Launces,
and striking both forwarde and backwarde with their
Launces that haue double heades, should kill or wounde
their horses; and so by the aduauntage of their weapons,
should doo execution vppon their Enemies to their vtter
ouerthrow.
               Now peraduenture some wil saie that there are no squadrons
of Launces that wilbee without some companies of
Carabins, and Argolettiers, or else of Reistres to succour
them, which should greatlie trouble the archers and Crosbowers
to worke the effect before declared. To the which
I answer, that I am perswaded that if the Stradiots, archers

and Crosbowers, bee as many in number, as the Launces,Argolettiers Carabins, or Reistres are of small succor to a squadron of launces against stradiots, archers and crosbowers.
and Argolettiers, or Reistres; that the Argolettiers or Reistres
will bee of small succour to the Launces against those
kindes of weapons, but that they would vpon three or fower
volees of quarrels and arrowes turne their backes, and
leaue the launces to defend themselues: For Argolettiers,
or Reistres in true experience, are not to discharge their
peeces and work any effect aboue 6. 8. or 10. paces distant,The distances wherein Argolettiers or Reistres are to discharge their peeces.
and yet that too farre, considering the vncertentie of those
weapons caused through the motion of their horses: wheras
Crosbowers and chiefelie archers, may worke very certen
and great effect to the mischiefe both of men and horses
a great deale greater distance off; which with diuers other
reasons that for breuities sake I omit, do perswade me
to thinke that 2000. Carabins or Reistres, are not able in
the fielde to abide the charge and volee of 1000. stradiots,
Archers and Crosbowers.
               Now the effectes that bandes of stradiots, archers and
Crosbowers on horsebacke may worke against footmen,Theeffects of bands of stradiots archers & crosbowers on horsbacke against foot men in the field.
vpon diuers opportunities are, that they may giue their volees
of quarrels, and arrowes at randon into the squadron
of piquers or into the winges, or sleeues of shot, to the disturbing
and molesting of their orders; and vpon the ouerthrow
of horsmen or footmen be they armed men or shot,
the stradiots in following the chase may doo great execution
and slaughter by striking both forward and backewarde
with their double headed launces. And these actions before
declared are in mine opinion the chiefe effectes of
those three sortes of weapons in corporated in bandes, as aforesaid.
               And thus hauing now finished all such instructions,
and aduertisements militarie as haue at this time fallen into
my remembrance, that doo concern the ordering, forming
and exercising of single bandes and companies aswell of
horsemen as of footmen, as also of reducing and sorming of
squadrons into al the chiefe formes of battles 
                     •
                  y are requisit
for armies to march or fight withal in the open fields, with

manie other important particularities: I wil now (with the
helpe of Almightie God) proceed to the setting downe of
mine opinion how new bands and companies that should
be elected and enrolled for defence of the Realme, or for
forren inuasion, are to be elected, inrolled, armed and weaponed,
with diuers other particularities. For as for the
mustering of olde bandes that haue either serued long in
Armies, or in Garrisons, they are matters so cōmon in vse,
as it might be holden but for superfluous to set downe the
orders and proceedings concerning the same; considering
that the most of all Warrelike Nations doo obserue
almost all one sort of proceedings and obseruations
in viewing and mustering of armies
and Garrisons that haue of
long time serued.
            
         
         
            
            Certen proceedinges and obseruations
that I would wish to be obserued in the first election,
enrolling, arming, and weaponing of Souldiors, for
any employment; but chieflie for the ordinarie bandes
and companies of horsemen and footmen that are to be
chosen in the Shieres of England, for the defence of
the Realme, or for forren Inuasion; as also for taking
of reuewes of musters againe from time to time, with
diuers other particularities.
            
               THe first thing of all others that doth belong
to any perfect Militia,
               The first and cheife thing 
                     〈◊〉
                   all others tha
                     •
                   doth belong 
                     〈◊〉
                   anie perfect Militia is goo
                     •
                   election and choice. either of
horsemen or of footmen, or of both, is
good and orderly and sufficient Election
and choice of soldiors, which we commonly
call taking of Musters, without
which well and sufficiently performed,
all the rest of any Militia and discipline Militarie can haue
no good forme, nor worke any great effect: and therefore,
according to orderly writing, I should first haue begon to
haue written of the same: Howbeit, because I meane to
write but of some partes thereof; I thought good in that respect
to set it downe in the end of these my former instructions:
And therefore I say that there are only two principal
causes of elections,Two principal causes of elections inrollements and leuies of men of warre. enrollements, & leuies of men of warre,
of the which the first is for employments, and seruices by
Sea; into the which there do enter none but only footmen
and that of two sorts: the one Maisters of Shippes, officers,
mariners, and saylers that are to mannage the Shippes,The first. and
all other sorts of artificers that are to repaire the Shippes,
and all things belonging to the same: And the other of soldiors
and their officers that are chosen, elected and leuied
to vse their weapons for the annoying of the Enemie, and
defence of the ships; in which nomber of soldiors are contained,
all sortes of gonners and officers belonging to great
ordinaunce, as also all others that do receaue paie for and

concerning those seruices; which because it is a distinct and
different thing from that part of the Militia, that I intend
to handle,The second. I will omit. Now the second cause of musters
and leuies, is, for emploiment and seruices by land, either
for a warre offensiue, or defensiue or for both; into the
which doth enter the first elections, choice, and enrollements
aswell of horsemen, as of footmen, and aswell the
horsemen, as the footmen of different sorts of armors and
weapons.
            Now because I haue in diuers partes of Christendome
seene soldiors both horsemen, and footmen elected, inrolled,
and leuied, in some Countries with greater order, and
in others with lesse; and that also I haue partly obserued the
ancient maner of election, inrolling, arming & furnishing of
soldiors here in England when I was yong, as also the proceedings
in those affaires of this time; I thought good in
this place to set downe my opinion how and in what sorte,
I would haue al horsemen and footmen of such armors and
weapons as we at this present in England do vse, to be elected
inrolled and euerie waies furnished; and there withall in
their first election and inrollement instructed: And therefore
I will first beginne with footmen.
            And because that in all right and true elections and first
enrollements of men of war,Three principall things to be obserued in all right and 
                     •
                  rue elections of soldiors, by coronells captains, and muster maisters. there be three principal things
to be regarded and obserued; of the which the first is, conueniencie
of age and yeares: The second Corporall disposition
and abilitie of bodie: and the third, honestie, which
proceedeth from honest education, which in respect of obedience
Militarie that insueth thereof, is no lesse requisite
then the other two: therfore I meane to include those as
three principall matters belonging to my whole election.
Of the which three concerning conueniencie of yeares,Concerning the conueni
                  
                     •
                  ncy of yeares 
                     •
                  f such as are to 
                     •
                  e elected and 
                     •
                  nrolled for 
                     •
                  oldiors. I
thinke none meete to be elected and inrolled vnder the age
of. 18. yeares; which is the lowest age that hath beene allowable
amongst all warlike nations of auntient and moderne
times; nor none aboue the age of. 35. or. 40. at the
most: And of the age of. 18. I would haue none elected

vnlesse they were of so great growth, & corporall disposition,
as that they were able to perform the duties & effects of
souldiors, which verie fewe at that age can. And such as
should be elected after the age of 18. I would haue to continue
soldiors vntill they come to the age of 45. incase their
health and corporall disposition of bodie, doo continue in
them vntil that age.
            And so likwise, I would that such as were elected through
their good disposition of bodies to bee souldiors at 35. or
40. yeares old, should with good account and credit in the
shiers where they dwell, be dismissed from being souldiors
at the age of 45. and no waies further to bee emploied in
matters militarie, vnlesse their wisedome and sufficiencie
were such, as they were to serue as officers of bandes. And
the causes wherefore I would not haue any to bee elected
to bee souldiors aboue the age of 40. or to continue souldiors
aboue the age of 5. yeares more, which is 45. are; that
to elect and leauie olde men that neuer serued before to bee
young souldiors, is contrarie to all discipline; and to serue
as priuate souldiors aboue the age of 45. (vnlesse they bee
excellent archers in perfection of strong and cleane shooting)
it is more then is conuenient, considering that for the
defence of a kingdome where there is choice of young men
enough, it were contrarie to all reason and discipline that
they should continue their seruices as priuate souldiors any
longer, then vntil that age of 45. but in the countries where
they dwell, at that age with great credit to be dismissed, that
they may the better intend and follow their owne priuate
affaires and other yoonger men of sufficiencie and abilitie
of bodie and mind to bee chosen in their places: And thus
far concerning conueniencie of yeares.Concerning the good and conuenient corporall disposition of bodie of such as are to bee elected and inrolled for soldiors.
            
            And now to the second sufficiencie that is to bee required
in such as are to be elected and inrolled to be souldiors
either horsmen or footmen; which is good and conuenient
corporal disposition of body and minde, able and apt
to handle, or to learne to handle & vse diuers sorts of weapons,

without which none are worthy nor meet to be elected
and enrolled for priuate soldiors. First therfore I would
concerning the same, that the choice and election should
be such, as euery souldior that should be chosen should bee
a man well formed and dispost of body and mind, and therfore
meet and fit either by former exercise from his youth;
or at least by aptnesse of mind and force, to learne the vse of
such weapons as he should be chosen and inrolled vnto: as
for example: I would have no man chosen to be an Archer
that had not so practised the vse of his bow from his youth,
that he should bee able to shoot strong, or at the least of a
conuenient strength and long arrowes, and therewithall vsed
by continuall exercise to draw his arrow with three fingers,
and not with two (according to the new fashion) to
the head: of which shooters with two fingers, I would haue
none to be alowed for archers,Archers shoo
                  
                     •
                  ing with two fingers are not to be allowed for soldiors ar
                  
                     •
                  hers. how faire soeuer they shoot,
vnlesse they could verie well reforme themselues from that
fond new fashion: because that in their so shooting they
loose a great deale of the strength of their draught. And
thus farre in this place concerning corporall disposition of
bodie.
            And now to the third sufficiencie of such as are to be elected,
chosen & inrolled,Concerning the honestie of such as are to be elected, 
                     •
                  hosen and in
                  
                     •
                  olled. which is honestie, I would that
all such as should be elected and inrolled should be of honest
parentage, and that their education and course of life
had bene such, as there were no notable vice to be noted in
them, and chiefly of dronkennesse, theft, blaspheming, common
swearing or brawling. Al which vices are such, as they
cause al such as are possessed of them to be disordered, mutinous,
and disobedient; which are things most contrary to
all true discipline. Also I would if it might be, that all such
as should be elected and chosen to be soldiors, should be of
themselues of some abilitie and substance either in landes,
or goods, or both; or else that from their parentes they
should be in possibilitie after their deceases to enioye some
lands, or goods, or both: And I would that they should be
of those two conditions before mentioned; I meane of

good parentage & present hauiour, or in possibilitie by the
death of their parents as aforsaid, because ye same should be
a kind of obligation to their captains, as also to ye common
wealth, for their good and obedient behauior, in their vocation
and degrees of soldiorie. Besides all which I would
haue all soldiors and officers of bands at their first electionAll soldiors & officers of bands are at their first electi
                     •
                  on and enrolment, to take their othes of fidelitie to the crowne and Realme of England and obedience to their captains and superior officers.
and, enrolment to take their oathes of fidelitie and loyaltie
to the crowne and Realme of England; as also of obedience
to their captains and officers, in such matters as doo concerne
the arte, science, and discipline militarie, for the defence
of the Crowne and Realme of England.
            Now the election and inrollment of the archers, as also
of all the rest of the soldiors of other weapons being taken
with such regard and respect as aforsaid; I would then haue
them to be armed verie fitly and conueniently according
to euerie different sorte of weapon: And because that no
man can be conueniently and fitly armed, vnlesse he be first
fitly apparelled for his armor, and also for the vse of his weapon,No man can be conueniently, armed vnlesse he be first fitly apparelled. and that in the campe and armie at Tilburie 1588.
wheras there were the regiments of diuers shieres, with diuers
bands both of dimilaunces and light hormen, I did see
and obserue, so great disorder and deformitie in their apparrell,
to arme withall, as I saw but a very few of that Army
that had any conueniencie of apparel, and chieflie of doublets
to arme vpon; whereof it came to passe that the most
of them did weare their armors verie vncomelie, and vneasilie;
which foresaid doublets if they bee not conuenientlie
made, and of purpose to arme vpon according to the vse of
all antiquitie, it is not possible that armed men horsemen,
nor footemen should finde themselues in their armors at
ease: nor that they should vse their weapons with such dexteritie
as they may doo if their garments be purposelie and
fitlie made to arme vppon; nor yet that there can bee any
comlinesse in wearing their armors vppon such deformed
doublets; I would first therefore, that there should be speciall
regard had to the fit and conuenient apparelling of all
sortes of souldiors; and therefore to begin with souldiors

doublets,Concerning the conuenient apparelling of all sorts of
soldiors. I would that their doublets should bee made of
Fustian according to the vse of all antiquitie, or of chamoise
skinnes, aswel in respect of lasting, as that a man may
arme better vppon any of both those thinges, then vppon
Canuas, or any thinge that is more smooth, and lesse
woollie.
            Then concerning the form and fashion of their doublets,
I would that they should be of a conuenient heigth in
the Collers, aswell to defend their necks from cold in winter,
as from heate in Summer. Then▪ I woulde that they
should be narrow in the shoulders, & so smal in the sleeues,
and with so little bumbast, that the vambrases of armed
men might easilie close togither; and that archers vsing no
vambrases but certen stripes of serecloth or maile within
their sleeues to defend the cut of a sworde, might through
the smalnesse of their sleeues easilie draw and shoot, without
the string hitting vpon any part of the sleeue, but onelie
vpon their bracers.
            Then I would that their doublets should be made easie
and wide vpon the stomacks and breastes, that the souldiors
being not pent by the straightnesse of their doublets
vpon their breastes, might the easlier fetch their breath either
in fighting, or in any hastie march: and therewithall,
that their doublets be cutte flat vpon the bellie, and wasted
of like length to the Cuirasses of their armors, to the intent
that armed mens armors might sit the more iust and flat to
their bodies: But because the collars of armors doo beare
the chiefe waight of all the rest of the armour, I would wish
that the souldiors armed men horsmen, or footmen, should
either haue vnder Collars of Fustian conuenientlie bombasted
to defende the heueth and poise of their armours
from the paining, or hurting of their shoulders and necks;
or else that their doublets should be verie well bombasted
in all that part vnder their Collars both before and behind
according to the depth of the same, which will bee a great
ease to all armed men horsmen or footmen, for their often
and long continuing armed.
            
               Also I would that no armed men should weare any cut
doublets, as well in respect that the wearing of armour doth
quicklie fret them out, and also by reason that the corners
and edges of the lammes and iointes of the armours doo
take such holde vppon such cuttes, as they doo hinder the
quicke and sudden arming of men; as also that they are of
more impediment to harquebuziers, mosquetiers, and archers,
for diuers respects to all skilfull soldiors wel knowne,
then doublets vncut are. Then I would wishe that there
should bee regard had to their hosen, that they might bee
easie for them to march and fight in; which the new fashion
straight hosen are not: and therefore I would that they
should rather weare Greygescoes too vnder the knee, that
shoulde bee large, wide, and easie, lined with a Cotton lining
without any bombast; and next to the thigh with a
strong Canuas lining or false sloppe, wherevnto the nether
stockinges should be set and sowed, and gartered vnder the
knee, then either these new fashioned little round hose, or
newe fashion'd bombasted Greygescoes that are very
straight to the thighs and vpper parts; which in summer besides
the vneasinesse of them, doo with so much bombast
keep armed men exceeding hot, whereas the other beeing
large and wide as aforesaid, something after the fashion that
the Spanish souldiors doo vse, are a great deale more easie,
and chieflie for all sorts of footmen.How archer
                     •
                   should be armed and weaponed.
            
            Now as for their armors I would wish, that archers should
either weare Ilet holed doublets, that wil resist the thrust of
a sword, or dagger, and couered with some trim and gallant
kinde of coloured cloth to the liking of the Captains, with
their sleeues striped within, with certen narrow stripes of
serecloth or maile, to resist the cut of a sword, or else Iackes
of maile quilted vpon fustian to resist a blow or a thrust, of a
conuenient length, and the skirts not too long, in respect of
the lightnes & easines of them: with their doublet sleeues as
aforesaid; and for the defence of their heads, because these
steele. Cappes commonly vsed, are of verie small comlines
for soldiors, and most of them too shallow, and therefore of

small defence, I would wish some new and gallant fashion
morrions verie light and easie to be made for archers to
weare without any couering vpon them, but that they
should be milde or burnished white; which besides their
greater defence, being well and aptly made; would with
their brightnesse greatly bewtifie the archers that do weare
them. And as for the archers bowes, I would that they
should not be short after the new vse which causeth them
often to breake, but that they should be long and well backt
and nockt, according to the auncient vse; and their strings
whipt with fine thred, or silke; and that they should head
and make their first sheafes of arrowes, according to the
length that they do commonly vse to drawe. The blades of
their swordes I would haue to be verie good, and of the
length of a yard and not aboue; with their hilts only made
with. 2. portes, a greater and a smaller on the out side of
the hiltes, after the fashion of the Italian and Spanishe
arming swordes; and those swordes I would haue them to
weare with strong girdles of leather, their hangers of such
conuenient length, and so well formed as their swordes
might hang vpon the vpper parts of their thighes; not only
readie and verie easie to be drawen; but also by their well
hanging of them straight forward and backward, (I meane
not athwarte their bommes, as drommers, to giue place
& roume to their drommes do vse; nor yet so farre forward
as they may lie athwarte their Codpeeces, as great boies
do vse at their first wearing of swordes when they come
new from schoole) that the said soldiors swords vpon their
hastie march, or any other occasion by their straight and
well standing of them, should hang firme without dauncing,
or bobbing forward and backward, as swords vnsoldiorly
worne, do commonly vse. The blades of their daggers
also, I would wish them to be not aboue 10 inches long, and
that the hilts of the same should be only made of one single
and short crosse without any portes, or hilts at all, and
not with great hilts after the fencers or alehouse fashion;
and that they should weare their daggers not vpon their

girdles at their backs, but hanging downe vpon their right
thighes before them, after the old English fashion; and because
that their daggers should stand the more firme and
steadie without bobbing or dauncing vp and downe vpon
the hastie march of the soldiors; I would that they should
weare them in leathers, after the fashion that I sawe some
of the soldiors of Sir Iohn Peters band deuise and vse, at
such time as I mustered his band neare vnto Brentwood the
yeare 1588. Which leathers being of the length of 7. inches,
and 3. inches broad beneath, but aboue not so broad,
and haue in the vpper parts two cuts straight downeward,
for the waste of the girdle to goe through, and in the lower
end, two cuts straight athwart, for the dagger sheath to be
thrust through and downe euen to the verie locket; & then
the locket of the dagger being fastned a little aboue, to two
holes through the leather right against the same with a
string or a lace; such daggers so worne, doo stand wonderfull
firme, and verie readie for souldiors, archers, or armed
men to draw, and with thrustes to vse the pointes of them.
The archers also I would haue them to vse shooting gloues
with the inner partes of the fingers of Bucks leather, and in
no wise any leathers called finger stalles after the new fashion.
Al their bracers also I would haue after the old fashion
of our English archers to many well known, and not according
to the new deuises. And thus farre concerning the election,
apparelling, arming, and weaponing of archers.
And now to the election, apparelling, arming and weaponing
of harquebuziers.
            Harquebuziers I would wish them to be elected and
chosen of the yoongest sort of men,Concerning the election apparelling, arming, and we aponing of harquebuziers. and of the meanest stature
and size of all other sortes that should be allowed of, to
be elected and inrolled, and chieflie of such as haue small
skill and dexteritie in the long bowe, and archerie: For I
would that such as were skilfull in the long bow; I meane
good archers of what size of men soeuer; that they should
not be inrolled to any other weapon, considering that the
number of good archers of our Nation in these daies are so

few, and that, that kind of weapon is of so wonderfull and
miraculous effect in seruices of the field as by all auncient
and moderne experience amongst all Nations it hath bene
and is most manifest. Harquebuziers therefore I would
haue them to be of the yongest sort of men, as aforesaid, because
they should be the more nimble to trauesse their
grounds, and to stoope to their peeces, and to take all aduauntages
of groundes, and of the smallest sorte and size of
men, because they should be the lesser markes in the sights
of their enemies in skirmish neare at hand, as is in my former
instructions at large conteined.
            Their apparell I would haue to be dublets of fustian
without any cuttes, and Greigescoes all of the like sort and
fashion, as I haue before particulerlie set downe concerning
archers; and that they should haue euerie one of them
a saltenberg, commonly called a Mandilion of very good
broad cloath that will not shrinke, to encouer and keepe
drie their flasks and touchboxes and the pans and touchholes
of their harquebuzes in the time of wet & moist weather;
and the same handsomely made to their bodies, and
of such Colours as euerie one of their Captaines should
make choice of.
            And therewithal that euerie one of them should haue an
vpright or sharpe morrion fast tied with a red skarfe vnder
their Chins after the spanish fashion, all white and grauen,
or at least, white vngrauen, and in no wise any black mortions;
because that the white doth beutefie the soldiors more,
and is of greater terror in the eie and sight of the Enemie.
The Cannons of their harquebuzes I would haue them to
be all of the length of a yard and not any longer nor shorter
all ranforced backward, and conuenientlie thinne forward;
and that the sights of their harquebuzes should be all open
sights; I meane without any pipes or couers vpon them,
because they might the more readilie take their sightes either
from point at blanke if time will serue, or else from the
endes of their peeces. I would also that all those sights as also
the pins of their peeces should be very euen and straight

set and filed to a iust and conuenient height; and their peeces
chosen without any cracks or flawes within, verie well
boared and drawbored, and therewithal their vices at the
hinder ends of their peeces of such conuenient length, &
so well made and filed, that their harquebuzes should not
recoile: besides all which I would that all their bullettes
should be of one Caliuer and heigth, and that of a meane
size for diuers causes, & reasons that I haue before in mine
instructions alledged.
            All the stocks of their harquebuzes I would haue them
to be crooked (as we call them) and of good forme, and
not straight stocks, because that being crooked and compassed
stocks they doo more readily counterpoise the fore
end of their peeces, and more readilie fall into leuell when
they are in skirmish, and haue no leisure to take any sight
from point at blanke, but from the fore ends of their peeces,
then straight stockes doe: Besides that considering
the lightnesse of their peeces they may aswell and as readilie
without rests at any time take their sights from point
at blanke with crooked stockes of good forme as if they
were straight. The Cockes, or serpentines I would haue
to be of conuenient compasse and able to receiue any conuenient
match, and that the feathers and springs that doo
belong vnto them should be of so hard and good temper,
that they shoulde cause the 
                  •
               ockes or serpentines to fall
and rise so strong and quicke, as by their strong falling
with the matches into the pannes, they may make the fire
to sparcle, thereby in an instant to make the powder to
take fire.
            Then I would that euery harquebuzier should haue a
good and a faire flaske and touchbox, with strings to them
of conuenient length, and that they should bee taught
by their Corporalles very souldiorlie to weare them, and
to keep their powder in their flaskes and touchboxes very
drie. And I would that the pipes or mouths of their flaskes
should be a iust charge for their harquebuzes according to
the vse of the Spaniardes and Wallouns, and that the

feathers and springs that doo make the plate or couer of
the lower part of the mouthes of their flaskes to open and
couer againe, should be of so good temper as they might
open and couer quicke and close, that the souldiors thereby
might bee assured not to ouercharge their peeces to
their daunger.
            Then I would that euerie harquebuzier should haue in
a little purse, or in a little bagge in his pocket, a little steele
with a flint, and a little peece of a certen kind of tinder like
a spunge, such as the harquebuziers Spaniards doo vse, to
strike fire to light their matches, with scourers, skrues, prining
irons, and mouldes, and all other things requisite for
the well charging and keeping of their harquebuzes clean
and neat. Swordes also the blads of the length of a yard,
with hiltes of the fashion before mentioned, with strong
leather girdles, able to beare their swordes, flaskes, and
touchboxes, I would wish euerie harquebuzier to haue; &
that they should weare their swordes of such conuenient
heigth, as I haue before declared, that archers and armed
men ought to doo. But as for daggers, I would wish no
harquebuzier to weare any, because they haue so seldome
occasion to vse them: and therefore doo rather increase
heueth and burthen then serue for any other purpose; the
experience whereof hath taught the harquebuziers of all
Nations to weare no daggers; Besides all which, I would
haue the harquebuziers to be taught, as also the mosquetiers,
to know the differences of powder and of match, that
they may bee the better able to know what charges they
shall giue to their peeces, according to the goodnesse or
badnesse of the powder, and therewithall alwaies in skirmish
or otherwise to charge their peeces with some softe
paper, or something else betwixt their powder and their
bullets, and after their bullets to restraine the same: and to
haue their flaskes full of good and drie powder well corned;
and their touchboxes full of fine and drie touchpowder,
with al other thinges requisit to the well vsing of their
peeces, and thus farre concerning harquebuziers.
            
               Mosquetiers I would wish to be elected of such men as
are of good force & strength of bodie,How mosquetiers should be elected apparelled, armed, and weaponed. although they were
but of meane statures, for the tallest and best formed men I
would haue reserued for armed men piquers, and battleaxes
or halbarders to be reduced into squadrons or battles;
and yet I would not as aforesaid, that any good or strong archers
should be enrolled to any other kind of weapon, but
onely to the longbowe, for the causes before mentioned.
But it is conuenient that mosquetiers should bee of good
force, and strength, in respect of the heauines of their weapons
and furniture, that by their strength and agilitie, they
may the better cary, handle, and mannage their mosquets:
And I would wish that they should be euerie waies apparelled,
and that they should weare their swordes in strong
girdles without any daggers as the harquebuziers aforsaid,
and that they should be armed with the like morrions to
the harquebuziers before mentioned. Then I would wish
that all their mosquets should be of one length well ranforced
backward,The Author would that all mosquets curriers of warre, and other such pe
                     •
                  ces as are to be vsed in the field with restes, or in places fortifi
                     •
                  d or against places fortified should haue straight stocks and tha
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  ll other lighter peeces that are for the skirmish and therefore to be vsed without rests, should haue crooked stocks. and of conuenient thinnesse forward, and
of one heigth, or caliuer of bullet with open sights, and in
all other thinges and particularities of the like perfection to
the harquebuzes that I haue before mentioned.
            But all the mosquets I would haue them to bee with
straight stocks because that considering their rests with the
great heueth of their peeces they may the better sett the
straight stocks to their shoulders and take their sights more
readily & certainly from point at blank, then if their stocks
were crooked. Their iron forkes, or rests I would haue
them to be well and euen formed, that when the staues are
fixed in the ground, their mosquets might ly iust and euen
in their rests, which they cannot do if they be made higher
on the one side then of the other, as many are. The staues
of their rests, I would wishe to be of iust and conuenient
length and strength with piques of a good length that they
may enter a good waie in and stand the more firme in the
ground. Their flaskes, touchboxes, and stringes I would
haue to be of as great perfection as the flaske and touchboxes

of ye harquebuziers before mentioned. And I would
wish that they should charge their mosquets with powder
out of the pipes or charges of the flaskes as the harquebuziers
aforsaid, and not out of charges that hang vpon band
rolles as many doo vse: Because that oftetimes the couers
of such charges doo flie off, and shed the powder, in such
sort as the mosquetiers if they be not olde souldiors or wel
practised, doo sometimes thinke that they charge their
peeces out of such bandrol charges, when the powder was
spilt before, so as sometimes they put in their bullets into
their peeces without any powder.
            And I would that euerie societie or fellowship of 10.
mosquetiers should haue one great mould to cast 2. sortes
of bullets, the one full bullets, and the other 2. or 3. bores
smaller to charge vpon some occasion with the more celeritie.
Also that the same mould should bee so long and
bigge, as it should be able to cast at one time 8. haileshot
of warre besides the bullettes, which haileshot of Warre
should be of the heigth and Caliuer of small pistoll bullets.
And this great moulde with a melting pan and lead, and
all other thinges belonging to the same, should be for the
common vse of the whole societie of 10. mosquetiers: as
the like pan and mould and other thinges which I for breuities
sake did omit should be for the common vse of euerie
societie of 10. harquebuziers. And yet it doth behooue
the societies aswell of mosquetiers as of harquebuziers to
haue some priuate mouldes for bullets, besides their common
and publike mould. And thus far concerning mosquetiers.
And now to armed men piquers.
            The arming doublets and greygesc
                  •
               es for armed men
piquers,How piquers should be apparelled armed & weaponed. I haue before described, and therefore I proceed
to the arming and weaponing of them, as followeth. I
would haue all the piquers armed with burgonets of good
depth wel lined and stuffed for the easinesse of their heads,
and tied with a red skarfe vnder their chinnes, and that
they should not wear them flapping open vntied, as I haue
seene many of our Mosquetiers and armed men heere at

home doo. Also I would haue them armed with collers of
a good size, with backes and with cuyrats not too flat but
somthing high vpon the stomachs, that they may easily in
any hastie march fetch their breaths: & the belly or lower
part of the Cuirasses, I would haue to bee lowe, and rather
somthing flat then any thing ri
                  •
               ing or high, because they
may hauing their vambraces on, the more easily put their
hands to their swords without any impediment of ye ouermuch
heigth of the lower parts, or bellies of their Cuirasses.
Also I would haue them to haue tasses to ye mid thigh
not too broad, but of conuenient length and breadth,
comely and fit for their greygescoes.
            Also I would haue them to haue pouldrons of a good
compasse and size, and vambraces both ioined together,
and not asunder, because that the poise of the pouldrons
and vambraces, hanging vpon the pinnes and springes of
their collars, they doo not weigh so much, nor are not so
wearisom as when they are separated; and that they weare
their vambrases tied with pointes to their doublets vnder
their pouldrons; Also I would that al armed men should
weare gauntlets, as the armed men piquers Italians, and
Spaniards doo, and not to be bare and disarmed handed
as our English and some other Nations of late years haue
vsed, because that any smal wound receiued vpon ye hands
doth presently make such souldiors impotent, and vnable
to vse their weapons that haue receiued such woundes although
they be but small. Their swords, their daggers, and
their girdles I haue before particularlie set down, how and
in what sort I would haue them to weare them. Their
piques also I would wish them all to bee of the length of
18. foote, and neither longer nor shorter for the causes
in my former instructions and discourses mentioned, as
also conteined in my Booke of certen Discourses printed
1590. and that they shoulde haue verie good and foure
square heads of good temper, and lowe armed with long
cheeks, and in ye midst couered or armed with black lether
or black vellure, or with some other such thing, and ye they

should not be too great nor heauie in wood, that thereby
the souldiors may carrie them and mannage them with
ease.
            Also I would that the staues of the piques should bee of
a tite and stiffe ashe, and not of ashe that dooth sagge, and
bend when the piquers doo carrie their piques breast high
before hand couched, because that such sagging and bending
ashe, although it be verie tough yet it is more heauie
then the other ashe: besides that the piquers cannot carry
the 
                  〈◊〉
                of such sagging, and bending piques so euen
and straight in their Enemies faces, as they may carrie the
other piques that doo not bend nor sagge, but are tite and
straight. And thus farre concerning armed men piquers,
And now to bat
                  •
               leaxes or halbarders.
            The election, choice and inrolment, of souldiors with
battleaxes or halbarders,Concerning the election apparelling arming and weaponing of soldiors with battle
                  
                     •
                  kes. I would wish to bee of the taller
and stronger sort of men, and that al the halbarders or battleaxes
that should be to enter into squadron, should bee
apparelled and armed in Corslets in all points and peeces
of armour like vnto the piquers before mentioned: and yet
if those halbarders or battleaxes in stead of pouldrons and
vambraces did weare sleeues of good reueted maile that
might couer all their shoulders and armes euen from vnder
their Collers, breasts and backes, to the verie Gauntlets,
considering that by the good defence and easinesse of
such sleeues of maile, they might mannage their halbards
the better, I would for my part allowe them for verie well
armed, although I woulde that the piquers because they
are the formost rankes should bee in any wise armed with
pouldrons, vambraces and gauntlets, as aforesaid, and not
with any sleeues of maile. Also I would that the halbarders
should weare their swords and daggers of the same length,
and in the verie same sort that I haue appointed the armed
men piquers. But their halbardes or battleaxes I▪ would
haue to be strong and of good waight with long straight
edges, with good piques backward, and strong pointes of
conuenient length, but in no wise too long forward, and

that they should for the strengthning of them, be armed
with two cheekes downe the staffe of a soote and more
long, and that such battleaxes, or halbardes for the squadron
should not be aboue 6. foot long from the top of the
points to the lowest end of the little iron hoopes commonly
called the Feralles of their staues.
            Also I would haue certen other halbardes that
should be incorporated in euerie band of archers and
likewise of harquebuziers, who should ser
                  •
               e vpon diuers
occasions, to doo execution vpon the enemie: And those
Halbarders I would haue them called extraordinarie because
they are not for the squadron; And those I would
haue to be armed only with burgonets with collers, verie
light Cuirasses and backes, and without any tasses, and in
stead of pouldrons; vambrases, and gauntlets, the sleeues
of their doublets I meane within the fustian striped with
certen narrow stripes of serecloth, or of maile, to defend
the Cutt of a sword, and if that some of those extraordinarie
battleaxes, or halbarders, were armed but only with
burgonets and with short skirted Ierkins of buffe, with a
double buffe vpon their brests, and the sleeues of their dou
blets with stripes of maile or serecloth as aforesaid, and
their swordes and daggers worne after th
                  •
               same sort, as the
piquers before mentioned, I thinke it allowable: But the
staues of the halbards of such halbarders extraordinarie, I
would wish to be longer by a foote, or a foote and a halfe
or more, then the armed and ordinarie halbardes that are
to enter into squadron, that is of 7. foote and a halfe long,
or more, because that they being to succor troupes and societies
of loose shot, or to do execution vppon diuers accidents
as aforesaid, and often times to fight with the enemy
hand to hand, and sometimes to encounter with two, or
three against one, it is requisite that their halbards for their
aduauntage in fig
                  •
               t should be longer then the ordinarie
halbardes that are to enter into squadron; And incase that
those halbards were lighter also thē the others that are for
the squadron, being of good strength, it weare not amisse.
            
               But whereas I haue before armed all the piquers, and
battleaxes ordinarie, I meane, that are to enter into squadron
in Corslets complete, and that contrariwise I do vnderstand
that diuers of our Captaines of this time when
they receaue any English bandes readie armed and furnished
to serue withall either in Fraunce,It is contrary to altrue discipline militarie for soldiors to leaue of their pouldrons vambrases and tasses. or the Lowe Countries,
and that the piquers of those bandes are deliuered
vnto them armed in corslets complet all sauing gauntlets;
they presentlie giue, or throw awaie all their pouldrons,
vambraces and tasses in such sorte as the soldiors doo remaine
armed only with burgonets, Collers, Cuirasses and
backes, contrarie to all true discipline: Certenly, it seemeth
vnto me verie strange, that the lacke of Iudgement, or rather
the ignorance of this time in matters Militarie should
be so great,The greate
                  
                     •
                  illes ensuing to soldiors by leauing of their pouldrons vambraces and tasses. that they should contemne the arming of their
shoulders, armes, handes, and thighes, and only seeke to
guarde their brests, bellies and backes, in respect as I doo
thinke that they would preserue only those their vital parts:
when it is verie well knowne by all experience Militarie,
that such as come to be wounded in their shoulders, armes
hands or thighes, do oftentimes by such woundes, come
to be in their Enemies handes, and mercie, who many
times vpon such aduauntages do put them to the sworde▪
Besides that it is more then strange that such Captains do
not censider that soldiors with their legges and thighes do
march forward to incounter with their Enemies, and with
their shoulders, armes, and hands, they do vse their weapons
and fight with their Enemies; whereas cotrariwise
with their bellies and backs, (which they altogether seeke
to guarde) they do neither march forward against the enemies,
nor fight: which is a great skorne and mockerie that
some of the men of warre of this time should so imitate
the French, and Flemish fashions, who of late yeares, haue
scarce remained one whole yeare in one order and manner
of arming, but haue still chaunged from fashion to fashion.
Howbeit such of our Captaines as do contemne
the wearing of pouldrons, vambraces, gauntlets, and tasses

doo vainelie alledge for the reason and excuse of their so
dooing;A verie val
                     •
                  e opinion and friuolous excuse. that battles now a daies doo neuer come to ioine,
but that they doo onely fight in skirmish; which is a verie
vaine conceit and a friuolous excuse, and contrarie to all
reason and true experience of diuers battles, that themselues
may remember haue beene fought in France, and
in diuers other Countries, within these few yeares: considering
that whensoeuer there are two Armies of Enemies
in the field, or two puissant powers of horsemen and footmen,
and that the one armie or power of them vpon any
aduantage or conueniencie of ground espied, shal resolue
to giue battle or fight, that the contrarie power or armie
shall not be able to refuse the battle, vnlesse they will turne
their backs and betake themselues to their heeles; and that
by reason that armies when they are in march, cannot assure
themselues alwaies to find grounds of such aduantage
and strength, wherevpon the enemies resolution to fight
they may suddenly intrench, or incampe & fortifie themselues.
Besides al which, it is to be noted as Vigetius and diuers
other ancient,The Romaines obseruing their auncient orders and discipline militarie preuailed: but neglecting the same, came to vtter ruine and destruction. and more moderne notable historiographers
do write, that so long as the Romanes did obserue
their ancient orders and discipline militarie, they did preuaile
against all other Nations; but that assoone as they began
through effeminacie to neglect the same, and to leaue
the couering and guarding of diuers partes of their bodies
with armour in respect of the poise and heueth therof, and
other su
                  •
               h important matters, that presently their Empire
began to decline:The neglecting of the well arming of themselues with the contempte of archerie were the vtter ruine of the two notable Christian Empires of constantinople & Tr
                     •
                  pisonda. in such sort as ye 
               Gothes, Vandals, Hunnes,
& other septrional Nations, as also of later years the Arabians,
and the Sarasins did chieflie with weapons of volee,
ouerthrow them in many, and manie battles, wherof and
of the contempt of their archery insued the losse of a great
part of the Romain Empire, and finallie vpon ye neglecting
& forgetting of the like discipline did likwise ensue ye vtter
ruine of ye two notable christian Empires of Constantinople
& Trepisonda with diuers other christian Kingdoms. And
thus far concerning the apparelling, arming & weaponing

of halbarders, or battleaxes: So as I haue now finished the
apparelling arming, and weaponing of all sortes of footemen
by our Nation in these daies vsed, and therfore I will
God willing proceed to the apparelling, arming, weaponing,
and horsing of all such different sorts of horsmen, as
we now a daies doo vse, with some other such sortes of
horsemen also, as I would wish should be in vse and exercise
for the defence of the Crowne and Realme, as also for
any forren inuasion.
            And therfore to begin with light horsmen, such as in diuers
shires of england we doo now vse,How light horsmen should be apparelled, armed, horsed & weaponed. armed with red or
pied cappes and steele sculles within them, and with Iackes
and speares by some called Gads; in stead of this rude kinde
of arming as I account it, `I would wish that they should bee
armed with burgonets, or else with vpright morrions after
the Spanish manner, with collers, cuirasses, and backs, and
short tasses, and with sleeues of maile and gauntlets, or else
gloues of maile in stead of gauntlets; And to the intent they
should bee the more easely & fitly armed, I would wish that
they should be apparelled I mean in doublets & Greigescoes,
in the very same sort as is before for armed men declared;
And as for their speares I would wish them to be of 18. foot
long, and those I would wish to bee so long, because they
might not only vse them to charge vpon their thighes, but
also that they might by taking and houlding them in the
midst, vse them in stead of punching staues: And as for their
geldings, I would haue them to be of good life and size, and
swift of ca
                  •
               rire, and that they should ride them with light
short cheeked bittes, according to their horses mouthes, &
that their sadles should not bee so little and ill fashioned, as
those which we commonly call scottish sadles, but rather
that they should bee of that fashion, which wee call nowe a
daies Morocco sadles, with pommells of suche conuenient
heigth as one single pistoll in a case might bee buckled and
set fast to the same, as also that the same should be made fast
and buckled athwarte the lower end vpon a little boulster to
make it to sit the more firme, and fitly vpon all occasions to

be vsed according to the manner of the Reistres: Also I
would that no saddle should be without 3. girthes, and ther
withal should haue Patrells, and croupers with the raines
and headstalles light and of very good fashion. Besides al
this, I would haue those kind of light horsmen to bee verie
wel practised in the wel riding and vsing of their horses, and
handling of their weapons in euery kind and sort. And thus
far concerning that kind of light horsmen. And now to the
apparelling, arming, & weaponing of stradiots by me mencioned
in my former instructions, and discourses.
            Stradiots are a kind of light horsmen that haue been vsed
by manie Nations,Concerning the appareling, arming, horsing and weaponing of stradiots. aswell Pagans, as Christians, and
haue beene armed and weaponed in diuers different sorts
according to the liking of such different Nations: Howbe
it according to my opinion and best liking, I would wish
those kind of souldiors to be verie well elected and chosen
of such men as haue dispositions of bodies and mindes to
learne very well to ride, as also to diet, vse, and keepe their
horses, & therwithall to learne to handle al their weapons
with great dexteritie: And as for their apparel, I meane
their arming doublets & hosen, I would haue them to be
after the verie same sort as I haue appointed vnto other armed
men. And I would wish them all to bee armed with
good burgonets and buffes, with Collers, with Cuirasses,
with backs, and with long Cuisses, from vnder the lowest
lam, or skirt of their Cuiras
                  •
               es to vnder the knee, and in
stead of pouldrons and vambrases, 
                  •
               leeues of maile compleat,
with gloues of maile also, or gauntlets, with all the
vpper parts of their thums and forefingers of their right
handed gaunt
                  •
               ets couered with maile, thereby the better
to vse their pistols and other weapons; with such good
swordes, daggers, and girdles, as I haue before appointed
to other armed men, and in stead of Launces or speares, I
woulde wish them to haue Launces commonlie called
Laun
                     •
                  ezagayas of good, tite, and stiffe ash, coloured black,
with double heads of good and hard temper according to
the vse of the Moores, of 18. or 20. footlong; to the intent
that taking them in the midst, they may strike both forward

and backewarde, I meane aswell their enemies that
they haue in frunt or in flanks, as also their enimies & their
horses that may vppon any retrait pursue them: I woulde
wish them also to haue horses or geldings, strong, of good
size and Carrire, with saddles of the fashion of the Reistres
of Saxony, with Croupers, pat
                  •
               els, good headstalles and
raines with small chaines, to the intent that if their raines
should happen to be cut, they should not be straight at the
mercie of their horses, or of their enemies. And I would
wish them to haue at their saddle po
                  •
               mels very good single
pistolles, in good cases well and firmelie sette at their
saddles as I haue before mentioned, with touch boxes full
of fine powder in some conuenient places about them caried,
and with a Cartage boxe of Iron of 7. or 8. cartages
fast set vpon euerie pistoll case, and the Cannons of the
pistolles ranforced backeward, and of small bullet; and of
the length of 12. inches, with good firelocks and no snaphaunces,
because in true vnderstanding for diuers causes
that I could alledge, firelocks are a great deale more certen
and of lesse failing then snaphaunces are. Also I woulde
that they should haue at their saddle pommels of the contrarie
side to the pistolles, men at armes axes; which besides
that they are good to fight withall, are verie commodious
for horsemen to vse for manie requisit purposes,
and vses, which because they are thinges so well knowne
to all men of Warre of experience, I omit. And these
kind of light horsemen Stradiots thus horsed, armed, and
weaponed, are meet for all sorts of skirmishes and incountries,
and also are of great execution against harquebuziers
and mosquetiers, and to bee briefe against al sortes of
horsemen and footmen.
            But because their so many weapons, as are before
mentioned for one horseman to vse may seeme strange to
such of this time as do not loue to trouble themselues but
with very few weapons, I say it is no strange matter, considering
that such as doo meane to fight wel, do like to haue
store of weapons, that incase one or two should faile, they

may presentlie betake themselues to the choise and vse of
others, according to the time and occasion: But such as
would thinke those weapons by me before mentioned to
be too many for one man to vse, woulde thinke it a great
deale more strange, to see a Turky horsman that trauelling
by the way doth besides his Cemeterie, and his crooked
dagger, voluntarily carrie his Launce, his harquebuze, and
his Turkie bowe, with his sheafe of arrowes, with another
weapon which now I haue forgot, and all those weapons
they doo weare and carie so conuenientlie, and aptlie, as
they may vse euery one of them in his most conuenient
time and place. And thus far concerning Stradiots. And
now concerning dimilaunces.
            Dimilaunces are horsemen next in degree and account
vnto men at armes, as well in greatnesse,Concerning the apparelling arming, ho
                     •
                  sing and weaponing of dimilaunces and puissance of
horses, as in strong and sure arming; and they ought to be
apparelled, as I haue in diuers partes before mentioned.
They ought to be armed also, with their helmettes, with
their beauers, with their sights not too high nor too lowe,
with collers, cuirasses, with rests verie conueniently set not
too high nor too low, backs, tasses, & short cuisses too vnder
the knee, or else with long Cuisses from vnder the lowest
lam of their Cuyrasses to vnder the knee, without tasses.
Also they ought to haue good and well compassed
pouldrons, vambrases, and gauntlets, and gussets of maile
well set for the defence of their armeholes, and their weapons
ought to be arming swords, and daggers, worne in
good and strong girdles, long, and strong launces, with a
curtilace of the one side of the saddle pommell, or a steele
mace, or a man at armes axe on the other side as aforsaid.
Howbeit I haue seene some both men at armes, and dimilaunces
vse tocks very conueniently worne after the Hongarian
& Turkie manner vnder their thighs; which Tocks
are long narrow stiffe swords onlie for the thrust: And others
I haue seene that in stead of Curtilaces & tocks haue
worn single pistols, which pistols bicause men at armes or
dimilances are to giue their charge in squadron with the

pointes of their Launces and shocke of their horses, they
cannot haue so much leisure to pull out, and to pul down
                  •
               
their cocks, as stradiots and other light horsemen that do
fight loose in skirmish or in other little troupes may: Besides
that the gauntlets of men at Armes and dimilaunces
are not fitlie made to handle pistols in, as all men may see
that list to prooue them: and those dimilaunces ought to
be all horsed vppon puissant horses for the shocke and not
vpon geldings vnlesse they be very puissant; And their furniture
for their horses ought to bee steele saddles of good
forme, and of a conuenient bignesse, and as light as they
conuenientlie may bee made with good headstalles and
raines with chaines as aforesaid; with good patrells and
croupers. Also if there were any gentlemen in those
bands of dimilaunces, I would wish them not to bee without
the forepart of steele barbes, to the intent that vppon
any day that were likelie to be of great seruice against the
enemie, they should arme and barbe the forepart of their
horses, because that they being placed in the first rank, or
two rankes, should bee the better able to giue and receiue
the charge and shocke with the lesse daunger to their horses.
And thus far for dimilaunces.
            Now as for men at Armes because all men that are of
any experience and vnderstanding in matters militarie,Men at armes out of vse in Christendome.
doo well know that they must bee all armed, cap a pie, and
their horses verie puissant, and all barbed aswell behind as
before, with the number of weapons that they ought of
ordinary to weare and vse: And because that in these daies
partlie in respect of their great pay; but chiefly because the
art and science militarie hath beene of late years, and presentl
                  •
               e
is in great declination and decaie, they are not in
vse in England, nor in any part of Christendome as they
haue beene, I ouerpasse them.
            But now it is likely enough that some Gentlemen that
haue beene trained vp in these late Ciuill wars of the Low
Countries or France may thinke that I haue forgotten my
selfe in not making mention in these aforesaid musters, of

Carabins or Argolettiers; vnto which kinde of horsemen
they are greatly affected: Whereunto I say that for the
smalle effect that by experience I haue seene those Carabins
in seruices worke,An obiection a
                     •
                  nswered. through their great and manie failings,
which I haue sufficientlie proued in the latter end of
my booke of discourses that I did set forth, and cause to be
printed the yeare 1590. as also in the former discourses of
this booke, where I haue written of them; I doo not any
waies hold them worthie to be compared in their effects
neither to archers on horsebacke, nor Crosbowers on
horsebacke; and therefore will in this place make but very
small mention of them, but do in stead of them wish that
there should be an election and inrollement made of certen
archers and Crosbowers on horsebacke in euery shire
who should be armed weaponed and horsed, and reduced
into 
                  〈◊〉
                bands vnder their Captains and leaders, as here
in this place I will out of my former booke sette downe againe,
and that is in this sorte following.
            All the Crosbowers on horsbacke vnder sufficient Conductors
well skilled in the weapon,How Crosbowers on hors backe should be horsed, armed, and weaponed. I would they should
haue Crosbowes of two pound and a halfe of the best sort,
with crooked gaffles hanging at their strong girdles after
the manner of Germanie, that they might on horsebacke
bend their Crosbowes the more easelie and readilie with
24. quarrels in a case, well, fitlie, and firmelie sette at their
saddle pommels, and mounted vpon good colde geldings,
of meane size, the
                  •
               selues armed with good morrions of
the spanish fashion vpon their heads, Collers, light, and
short wasted Cuirasses, and backes, with sleeues of maile,
or their doublet sleeues chained with ma
                  •
               le, betwixt the lining
and outside of their said sleeues; or with certen narrow
stripes of serecloth within their sleeues, as aforesaid; or
else chat they should be armed with morrions, light and
easie brigandines, and sleeues chained with maile, with
broade short swordes by their sides of not aboue a yard in
length, and short daggers. The archers on h
                  •
               rsebacke vnder
their Captaines or conductors skilfull in archerie, I

would likewise haue mounted vpon good quiet geldings
of mean size with deepe steele sculles in very narrow brimd
hattes, well stuffed for the easines of their heades: or rather
with certen light morrions of some gallant fashion inuented
and deuised for them; and either Iacks of maile according
to the auncient manner when they were called Loricati
Sagittar
                     •
                  , or else light and easie brigandines, or at
least Ilet holed doublets, verie easie and well fitted to their
bodies; their sleeues chained within with maile, or else
with certen narrow stripes of serecloth betwixt the lining
and outside of their sleeues for the easines of their armes;
with broade short swordes and short daggers, their bowes
of good yewgh, long, and well nocked and backed, and all
their stringes well whipt, with sheafes of .24. arrowes 
                  •
               
peece in cases, with shooting gloues and bracers after the
manner of our archers in times past. And all these both archers
& crosbowers I would haue them to be well practised,
that they might know how to discharge their arrowes
and quarrells galloping vpon the hand and in al other motions
of their horses, and the Crosbowers to bend againe
with great readines; and diuers bands being thus horsed,
armed,Crosbowers & archers on hors back of greater seruice then weapons of sire on horsebacke. weaponed, and exercised, as also reduced into
bands of fifties vnder sufficient conductors and other officers
skilfull in those weapons, should in mine opiniō be able
to performe far greater seruice in ye field either against
horsemen or footmen, then any of the forenamed weapons
offire on horsebacke: Considering that both archers
and Crosbowers may with their arrowes and quarrels verie
certenlie wound or kill in their points and blanks either
horsemen or footmen, that are in squadron, or troupe. 2.
or 3. skores of, and rouing 6. 7. or 8. skores or a great deale
furder may greatlie mischiefe and annoie any squadron either
of horsemen or footmen: where as the Argolettiers or
Pistolettiers are not to worke any effect against squadrons
or troupes of horsmen or footmen aboue 10 or 15. yardes
off, at the furdest, and if it be enemie to enemie single, then
they are not to discharge their peeces aboue 4. or 5. yardes

off; vnles they wil faile 5. times, before they hit once, so vncertaine
are those weapons of fire: The iudgement wherof
because this mine opinion may seeme strange to such as
doo not know the imperfections of those weapons of fire
on horsebacke, I refer vnto any Captaines or conductors
of those weapons, either Italians, Spaniards, Wallouns, or
French, that are souldiors of experience and iudgement.
            But now because I haue diuers times seene new bandes
of diuers sortes of horsmen verie sleightlie mustered,With what cur
                     •
                   os
                     •
                  tie musters of bands of horsmen, and footmen ought to be taken. aswel
beyond the seas, as also in England, I thinke it good in this
place brieflie to write with what curiositie I woulde wish
musters of bandes of horsemen and footmen for the defence
of the Realme to be taken: And therfore I say, that
I would wish that the Mustermaister of horsemen & footmen
of euery shire,Of what calling the mustermaister of euery shire should bee. should bee a knight or an Esquire of
greatworship of the same shire, or some other shire next
adioyning, and such a one as had serued in some warre or
warres in former times, and therefore of some good experience
in matters militarie, who in respect of his good calling
and worship would haue speciall care to the good and
faithfull seruice of the king and Realme, without any waies
abusing the performance of his dutie in those seruices, as
most of the common Mustermaisters of this time do; who
being either Captaines newlie come vppe and of small account,
or else such as haue beene souldiors and officers of
bandes, and now reteiners and seruants to Noblemen, and
doo procure and sue for such offices, rather to haue ordinarie
and yearely stipendes at the charge of the shires, as
also by diuers other waies and meanes to make their vnlawfull
gaines and profits of the subiectes (then any waies
to perform their duties in taking right and skilful musters,
and reforming of militarie lackes and imperfections) doo
wittinglie and willinglie in respect of gaine worke but very
little good effect in those emploiments.
            And because al the bands of horsmen of euerie shire are
composed of knights, of gentlemēs, & of yeomens seruāts
and that betwixt musters and musters they doo somtimes

change by putting out of their seruice, or otherwise, their
men that are inrolled into the bands of horsemen, wherof
it commeth to passe that sometimes a meane man of stature,
putteth on a tall mans armor, and sometimes a taller
man putteth on the armour of a man of smaller stature, in
such sort as many of them are very vnfitlie and vneasily armed,
and as vnskilfull in souldiorlie wearing, and vsing of
their weapons, and altogither ignorant to ride, handle, &
vse their horses: and that armed men being on horseback
may seeme to bee conuenientlie apparelled and armed,
when if they were a foot they would shew to be far otherwise;The order that all muster maisters are to vse in mustering o
                     •
                   their bands of horsmen.
I would therefore that euerie such principall Gentleman
Mustermaster should in calling ouer of euery horsman
by name in order as they are in his muster roll set
downe, make euery one of them in order as they are called
one after another to alight a foot, and to view euery horsman
well, whether hee haue an arming doublet fit for his
armour or no, and whether both the armour and doublet
be fit for the man, and 
                  •
               hether there bee any buckles, or
leathers broken, or any peece, or peeces lacking; none of
the which particular lackes are sufferable.
            Then he is to peruse whether he haue all the weapons
belonging to horsemen of his sort, as if he be a dimilaunce
with such weapons as I haue before particulerlie named
that do belong to a dimilaunce; and if he be a stradiot, then
the Mustermaister is to view him a foote as aforesaid, to
see whether his apparell and armor be fitte for his person,
and therewithall aptly and soldiorlie worne, as also whether
he haue all his weapons belonging vnto horsemen of
his sorte, and whether they bee good, and that he doth
weare them aptly and soldiorly, yea he ought to view how
he doth weare his hosen and Greigescoes, bootehosen,
bootes and spurres, and whether he doth weare them aptly
and fitly like a horseman or like a Clowne: And incase
there be any imperfections or imperfection in any of those
particularities, he is presentlie to giue order vpon some
conuenient penaltie according to the desault or imperfection

to be imposed vpon the partie that doth set forth the
horse and horseman, that the same with al speede by a certen
prefixed day be supplied or amended; Then he is to
view his horse, and euerie part of the furniture of his horse
to see whether there be any lacke, vnfitnesse, or imperfection
in any part of the same, or whether his horse since the
last muster hath bene chaunged, or whether since that
time he hath by misusage bene broken winded or made
lame; and therefore it behoueth the Mustermaister to
haue a skilfull Ferrar with him at his taking of Musters, that
can with skill Iudge of their lamenesse or soundnesse. All
which performed, then the Mustermaister must command
the horsman to mount on horseback,Muster maisters are to see that the horsemen can well vse their horses and weapons. and to put his horse
orderlie into his Carrire, and to charge his staffe presentlie
and soldiorlie from his thigh into his rest if he be a launce,
and not as they doo commonlie vse to carrie their staues
at the tilt to beautifie their courses, as is before declared,
and againe at the end of his Carrire to discharge the same,
and to set it againe vpon his thigh and to stoppe and turne
his horse both of the right and lefte hand; and if he be a
Stradiot, after that he is remounted againe on horseback
he is to commaund him to gallop the field as if he were in
skirmish, and to vse his double headed Launcegaie in striking
both forward and backward, as also on euerie side, as
though he were in action with his enemie, and suddenly to
cast frō him his double headed Launce, as if the same were
broken, or by some accident lost, and to draw his pistoll,
and pull downe the Cocke, and discharge the same, and
presentlie againe to pull vp the cocke, and to thrust it into
his case, and to draw his sword, or to handle some other
weapon of his with dexteritie; which being soldiorlike performed,
he is to be allowed to passe the muster for a sufficient
soldior: but in case his horse be restie or headstrong,
such a horse how sound soeuer, is not to be allowed, vnlesse
he may in short time be reformed. And so likewise if he
be an archer, or Crosbower on horsebacke, he must verie
particulerlie view, and see; whether his apparell, armor and

weapons with all other furniture belonging to the same,
bee all in as great, or greater order and perfection then I
haue before particularlie set downe: and so likewise hee is
verie curiouslie to view euerie one of their horses that they
be of conuenient age, and size, and sound of wind and lim,
as also whether their saddles, bridles, bittes, pattrels, and
croupers, and other furniture be in perfection.
            All which beeing by the mustermaister throughoutlie
viewed and found in order and perfection, then hee is to
command the archer to mount on horsebacke, and to galloppe
vppon the hand, and passing by some marke set vp
in the fielde, to drawe 2. or 3. arrowes out of his sheafe one
after another, and drawing euery one of them to the head,
to discharge them at the same marke, some 3. or 4. scores
off; which being by him souldiorlike performed, he is to allow
him for a sufficient soldior and archer on horsback; &
so al other archers that he shall muster & find to be armed,
horsed, weaponed and furnished, and of sufficiencie as aforesaid.
And so likewise, hauing viewed, and perused euerie
Crosbower on horseback, with all their armor, Weapons
and furniture, as also their horses with all other furniture
belonging to them, and finding them all in perfection,
then hee is likewise to commaund the Crosbower to
mount on horsback, and to gallop vpon the hande, and in
passing by to discharge a quarrell at some mark set vp some
30. paces off, and againe presentlie with his gaffle to bend
his crosbow and to discharge a second quarrell at that or
some other marke; which being by him, and al other crosbowers
orderlie and souldiorlike performed; then he is to
allow them to passe the muster as sufficient souldiors, and
so likewise he ought to allowe the Archers beeing in such
perfection as aforesaid.The reducing of bands into one or diuers formes appertaineth to the Captaine and not to the mustermaister.
            
            And in this curious sort a Mustermaister is to take the
view and Muster of euerie different sort, and kinde of horsmen;
For as for reducing any number of them into any
forme or formes with many other particularities. 
                  •
               hose
things doo apperteine to their Captaines, and higher and

lower officers; and so likewise the mustering of them in
such curious sort as aforsaid, doth appertain also vnto euery
good and careful Captain, that dooth desire to haue his
band in good order.When mustermaisters are to take their muster. But because some such gentlemen as
are appointed Captains of horsemen and footmen for the
defence of the Realm, are for lack of skil or care, not so curious
in hauing their bands in order as they ought to bee:
therefore the forsaid knight or principal gentleman that is
appointed to take musters, shoulde at certen conuenient
times in the yeare, when al sorts of men are at most leisure
from their country affaires & busines, muster them in conuenient
places, some at one time and some at another, to
see y• they should be alwaies in order, to be emploied for ye
defence of their Prince, and country: & should also in calling
them ouer one after another by his muster roll, bee as
curious in viewing not onlie the sufficiencie of the person
of euery soldior, whether he be any waies by any accident
decaied since his first election & inrolment: but also should
very curiously view ye fitnes of his apparell and armor, least
that since the first election and inrolment, or since the last
musters, the man, his apparel, or armour had beene changed.
Then he is to view his weapons, and ye apt and fit wearing
of them, & whether both armor & weapons be clean
and neat,Mustermaisters finding any abuses, lackes, or imperfections, are to giue order that the same be remedied, vpō some seuere penaltie to be imposed vpon the part
                     •
                   vnto whome the same doth appertaine. and in such perfection as I haue before very particularly
set down, in the election, apparelling, arming and
weaponing of al sorts of footmen by vs in these daies vsed:
and incase that he doth find any abuses, lacks, or imperfections
in any of the particularities aforsaid, or any other, he
is presently to giue order for the reforming of the same by
a prefixed day vpon some seuere penalty to be imposed either
vpon the parish that hath set foorth that souldior, or
vpon the priuate rich man that dooth finde and set foorth
the same souldior, or vppon the Souldior himselfe, incase
he be of that wealth that he is at his owne arming, and furnishing.
            Also wheras such soldiors either horsmen or footmen

as are inrolled in such bands as aforesaid,The order that is to be vsed for the suppliyng of soldiors maimed, or mischieued, or othe
                     •
                   wise decaied. do somtimes become
so maimed or mischieued by some accidental chaū
               ces
that they shall neuer be after able effectually to vse such
weapons as they were inrolled vnto, or that by long sicknes
they are so decayed as they are not likely in a long time
or neuer to recouer their forces therby soldiorlike to weare
their armors, and vse their weapons; Vpon those and other
like causes and accidents I would wish that the parish that
doth find such soldiors, or else the priuate rich men, incase
they be set forth and found by them, should presently notefie
the same vnto ye captain vnder whom & in whose band
the said soldior or soldiors do serue, & that they should with
in a certen and a prefixed day after, present vnto him three
other allowable, & able men, alreadie from their youth exercised,
in case they be archers, or apte and willing to learn
to be soldiors, incase they bee of other weapons, to the intent
that the captaine should to his best liking, make choice
of one of them to be inrolled and supplie the place of the
soldior maimed or by long sicknesse decaied.
            Also incase that the soldior, or soldiors of any band or
bands of horsmen or footmen should happen to die,The order that is to be vsed for the supplying of any soldiors deceased; or departing from their habitation into some other toune or hundred, or out of their maisters ser
                  
                     •
                  ice. or vpon
occasion of newe habitation, should remoue out of the
parish or hundred, wheras he at his first inrolment did inhabit,
or that any seruaunt, or seruingman inrolled to any weapon
to serue on horseback, should depart out of his miasters
seruice; that in those and other like cases, the parishes vpon
the death of any such soldior or soldiors, should presently
notifie the same vnto his or their captaine or captains, and
should within a certen prefixed daie after, present vnto him
3. other able and sufficient men to make his choice of one
of them, to serue with the armor and weapons of the party,
or parties deceased. But incase that such a soldior or soldiors
either horsman or footman should vpon the accasion
of inhabiting else where, depart out of the Townes where
they before had inhabited, or bene resident, or that such
souldiors had departed out of their maisters seruices to
serue elsewhere, as aforesaid: then I would in those or any

the like cases, that either the parish where such souldiors
did dwell, or the maisters of such seruantes should signifie
their intention of remouing and departure of such souldiors,
vnto their Captaines, a full moneth before their departure,
and that they should either 15. or 10. daies before
their departure at the least, present vnto him 2. or 3.
verie able men, of the which he may make choice of one
to be inrolled and to serue and supplie in the place of such
a souldior remoouing.
            And whereas all the armors and weapons of the souldiors
footmen are at this time placed diuersly in al the shires
of England,The di
                     •
                  ersitie of the placing of the soldiors armors and weapons, in all the shiers of England. in such partes whereas there are inrolmentes
of horsemen and footemen, as in some places that they
are placed in the chiefe Towne or Townes of the shire,
and in other places in the Captaines, or other gentlemens
houses, and in other partes that al the Corporals haue the
custodie of all the armor and weapons that doo belong to
the corporolates or societies that are vnder their charge;
and all this vnder pretence for the more safe, and clean, and
neat keeping of them, as also to take awaie the opportunities
of the peoples sudden arming of themselues incase
they should take armes,Not the placing of armors nor weapons here, nor there that can keepe a people disposed to rebell from rebellion. the same beeing alreadie in their
houses, with intention to reuolt, and rebell. Therevnto
I say, that it is not the keeping or placing of the armour
and weapons of a shire or diuers shires, heere or there out
of the souldiors handes as aforesaid, that can keepe them,
or a people disposed to rebell, from rebelling, if the souldiors
oathes of fidelitie at their first election and inrolments
will not restraine and conteine them; by reason that rebellions
doo begin so diuerslie, and vpon so many prepensed
or accidentall opportunities, as they cannot be any waies
preuented by such poore deuises.Rebellions begin sometimes vpon the ambition or discontentacion of some nobleman, or 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  en.
            
            For as rebellions in diuers Empires, kingdomes and
Common wealthes haue begun vppon the ambition or
discontentation of some Noble man, or Noblemen for
wronges and iniustices at their princes handes receiued,
that doo confederate togither, or otherwise resolue to take

Armes against the Prince: Vpon such conspiracies, or resolutions
I say, it is not the placing of armor or weapons,
heere or there in shires, that can 
                  •
               eepe the same out of the
handes of them,Armors placed in great tounes are more ready to arme an vntuly multitude, then if they were dispersed in the soldiors houses. and the people that follow them, the reuoult
and rebllion being once begun, but the armor being
placed in great Townes vnfortefied, as all our Townes of
England are, those armors and weapons being in such
Townes vnfortefied kepte, are a great deale the more readie
to arme and weapon a great multitude reuolted all at
one time, then if they were dispearsed in the soldiors custodies
and houses to whome they belong, to serue withall,
throughout such a whole Shire or diuers Shires. So somtimes
also rebellions do happen through the discontentation
of the Ignobile vulgus, or common people, and those
most commonly do begin in great Townes vpon the assemblie
of many people; as of faires, markets, and other
such assemblies of people,Rebellions do often happen vpon the discontentation of the ignobile vulgus so as great quantitie of armor,
and weapons being kepte in such great Townes, they are
the more readie for the people reuolting to possesse themselues
of them. And so likewise, armors & weapons, being
placed either in the Captaines or Corporalls houses, they
are a great deale more readie vpon a rebellion by the commō
people begon, to be by them taken to arme themselues
withal, then if they were dispersed into al the soldiors houses
vnto whome they belong to serue withall for defence
of the Realme, according to their oathes, throughout a
whole shire. But incase that the rebellion be vniuersall
througout one, or diuers whole shires, then it cannot be
avoided but that wheresoeuer the armor and weapons of
such shires are placed, they will presentlie possesse themselues
of them.
            And incase that all the armor and weapons not only of
a few shires, but of all the kingdome, were taken out of all
the shires throughout, and were placed in some place, or
places well fortified, and vnder great garrison to be the
more safelie and surelie kept: I say that the same out of the
handes of the people without other preuention, can no

waies hinder nor keepe a common people from rebellion
that are disposed to rebell, considering that according to
Virgill. Furor arma ministrat; as it may be apparant, by the
Bellum seruile,
               Bellum seruile that happened t
                     •
                   the romains when they flou rished most, begon and maintained by Spartacus & other fencers. that hapned against the Romaines in all
their greatnesse, which consisted most of slaues, and bondmen,
hauing one Spartacus a Fenser, and other Fensers for
their Chief
                  •
               aines, who at ye beginning of their reuoult had
but verie few or no armors and weapons of warre, but such
as their rage and furie taught them to inuent, take, and
vse, and so likewise the common people of the kingdome
of Hongarie,The daungerous rebellion of the peasants of hongary and 
                     •
                  raunce, who at the first had litle or no armors. and the peasants termed in the French Cronicles,
the Iaccarie of Fraunce when they first reuolted
and 
                  •
               ooke Armes against the Nobilite of those kingdoms
were vtterly disarmed, and all the Nobilitie of those Kingdomes
verie notablie armed, both for on horsbacke and
on foote; and yet after the rebellion was once begun,
those common people presentlie inuented & forged both
armor and weapons of warre in great numbers both offensiue
and defensiue, and in short time reduced themselues
into so great strength, as before that they could be vtterlie
suppressed, it cost the liues of a great parte of the Nobiltie
and gentlemen of those kingdomes: Notwithstanding
that both those kingdomes, I meane Fraunce and Hongarie
had many Cities, and Townes so well fortified for
the Kinges and Nobilitie to make their retraites into, as
the pesantes hadde neuer the skill nor power to possesse
themselues of, which the Realme of England hath
not.
            And so likewise if we list to looke vpon the RebellionsThe rebellions of the common people of England and specially the rebellion vnder Ke
                     •
                   in Norffolk
                     •
                   that had at the first little or no armor.
of the common people that happened in diuers partes of
England in one s
                  •
               mer in kinge Edward the sixthes time,
and chiefelie the Rebellion vnder Kette in Norffolke it is
most apparant, that at the first begining of the Rebellion
they had verie little, or no armor, and verie few weapons
of warre, but that in a verie short time after that they

had begun their rebellion, they did inuent, forge, & make
manie weapons of warre, in the which for a time vntil they
were suppressed, they behaued themselues in terrible sort;
And of later time within these 24. or 25. years, the Moores
of the kingdome of Granada in Spaine that was a people
vtterlie disarmed and without weapons and exercises of
warre,The reuolt of the disarmed mores of granada against king Philip of spaine in al his greatnes which was in the yeare 1568. did in al the greatnesse of king Philip of Spaine that
nowe is, reuolt; and ma
                  •
               ing of necessitie vertue, did first
betake themselues to fight with stones, and a few weapons
that they had long before got by stealth and hidde in their
houses: But after that their rebellion was begun, they in a
very short time, did inuent, and forge, and winne by force
of the Spaniards Christians great numbers of armors and
weapons both offensiue and defensiue, and did so resist,
preuaile, and defend themselues against the king of Spains
powers sent against them, that it was more then two years
after the first beginning of the Rebellion, ere it could bee
suppressed; in which space, it cost ye liues of aboue 50000.
Spaniardes: Amongst which number, there were manie
principall Gentlemen, and Captaines of good account
slaine.
            By all which examples before rehearsed with many others,
as all men that haue read and obserued many histories
doo well knowe, it is most apparant, that it is not the
placing of the armor and weapons, here or there, or the
disarming of the cōmon people, as the peasants in France,
and Hongarie, and the Moores in Spaine were disarmed,
that can preuent Rebellions that doo happen and are begun
vpon diuers occasions,Iustice dulie & equally ministred doth take 
                     •
                  way al occasiō
                  
                     •
                   and intentions of rebellion. and chieflie for lack of iustice
dulie and equallie ministred: Howbeit Iustice duly & with
great equalitie and order ministred throughout a whole
Empire, kingdome, or common wealth, with great care
had to protect, preserue, maintaine, increase and continue
the Common wealth of the subiectes in al prosperitie, and
by aduancing and fauouring the good, and by reproching
and punishing the bad: the same I say, how wel armed soeuer
the subiects and people are, dooth take awaie all occasions

and intentions of rebellion, as it is most apparant
by the notable Cittie, and state of Venice, and their dominions
in the continent and Ilands that doo belong to that
seniorie;The quiet and happie state of the Venetians these many hundred years, caused by Iustice. which haue beene euer in many ages so well armed,
as in Venice itselfe, the common multitude of the Citizens
and people, who neuer beare any office in the common
wealth, but certen base offices, doo so well content
themselues with the gouernment, and great and equal iustice
of the Magistrates and their superiors; that although
they haue all sortes of armors, and weapons of warre for
footmen in all their houses; yet it is not to be found in any
Chronicles or histories of Venice, that euer they did take
armes or reuolt against their Duke, Senate, nor Nobilitie:
And that in like sort, al the dominions that do belong vnto
Venice, that are in the continent of Italie and elsewhere,
although all the common people of those dominions, bee
armed and weaponed; yet through the great care had by
the state of Venice of their prosperitie, with equall & great
iustice ministred euen to the very least of them; they finde
themselues so well contented to liue vnder the quiet and
happie gouernment of the Venetians, that they haue not
in many and many yeares, once offred any kinde of reuolt
against them; but haue rather at such times as some parts
of those dominions haue beene by force wonne and possessed,
sometimes by the Imperiall, and somtimes by the
French and other Princes, at one time or other reuolted
from the gouernment of such straungers, and returned againe
to the obedience of the Venetians.
            
            Besides which, it is to be noted, that the Cantonnes and
confederate people of Suitzerland,
               The force of Iustice duly & equally ministred amōgst the Suissers and diuers other principalities of Germani
                     •
                  . since they through the
great extortions and iniustices of the Dukes of Austridge
and their officers and substitutes, did take armes, and by
battle and victorie (with the death of the Duke Lupold,
and slaughter of a great part of his Nobilitie) redeeme and
reduce themselues into a ciuill and popular State, haue neuer
reuolted; nor that the people of certen principalities
of Germanie through the great iustice by their princes

and Magistrats equallie ministred, and the well ordering &
vsing of the people, haue at any time rebelled: I mean the
Suissers against their Magistrates, nor those Almaines against
their princes. By which examples with manie others,
which for breuities sake I omit; this old prouerbe is
verefied,Princes that do duely & equaly minister Iustice need not to doubte any rebellion. 
               Opus Iustitiae pax; which may be interpreted, that
the effect of iustice is peace.
            From all which I come to conclude, that no Emperor,
King, nor Common wealth that doo gouerne their Subiectes
with great and equall iustice, and therewithall doo
effectuallie shew to haue great care of their increase, prosperity
and happinesse, need any waies to doubt any reuol
                  •
               
or Rebellion against them,A thing most requisite for all Emperors kings and common wealthes to well arme, weapon and exercise their subiects. by their subiectes and people,
although they haue al sorts of armors and weapons of war
in their houses; but that it is rather verie requisite & needfull
for all great Princes and Common Wealthes, that wil
maintaine and defend themselues and their dominions
against forren Nations, to well arme, weapon, and exercise
their people in matters militarie; and that they doo
establish good Lawes for the good and orderlie perfourmance
of the same.Where all the armors and weapons of all shires should be kept. All which before considered, mine
opinion clearelie is, that of all other places it is most conuenient,
that the armours and Weapons of all Shieres
should be kept by such rich men as doo finde those armors
and weapons, in their owne houses; and such as are found
by the common purse of parishes, that they should be kept
in the chiefe mens houses of those parishes where the soldiors
dwell; that vppon occasion of those seruices should
weare and vse them, aswell in respect that all men by all
reason will be more carefull to keepe and maintain in good
order such apparell, armor and weapons as were bought
at their owne charges, then great Townes, or Gentlemen,
or Corporalles, that neuer bought the same: Besides that
vpon any sudden alarum, or giuing of fire to the beacons
vpon the enemies comming to inuade, or other occasion
of seruice, when the souldiors of the whole shire, shoulde
with al celeritie arme themselues & march to the place of

assembly generall, there to reduce themselues vnder their
Ensignes and Captains, and vnder their higher and lower
officers; I say that all sortes of souldiours may presentlie,
and with a great deale more celeritie, apparell, arme and
weapon themselues in warrelike manner, the same beeing
in their owne houses, if they be owners of the same, or otherwise
presentlie to apparell arme and weapon themselues
in such houses of the same Towne whereas the furniture
is kept, and themselues doo dwell, then to runne
to Gentlemens or Corporalles houses, or to great townes
3. or 4. miles off; where their armors & furniture are kept,
& there in hubbledeshuffe disorderlie to arme themselues;
wherof, besides diuers other disorders that do ensue often
times vpon such sudden Alarmes, and armings, little men
doo put on great or tall mens armors, and leaue little armors
vnfit for great men to put on; according to the olde
saying, first come first serued; And so likewise they do mistake
the right choosing of their apparell and Weapons;
whereof inseweth great disorder and confusion. And these
sudden disorders with others that I omit, cannot vpō such
sudden alarmes be possiblie preuented, the armors & weapon
                  •
               
being so placed, although al the particuler names of
the soldiors, were written vpon the apparel, armor & weapons.
And now as I haue set downe mine opinion concerning
ye election and enrolling aswel of diuers sorts of horsmen
as of footmen, to diuers different sorts of armors and
weapons with many other particularities: So would I now
wish (al matters military being brought into the perfectiō
aforsaid) that all the souldiors aswell horsemen as footmen,
should in som conuenient place appointed for ye purpose,When and ho
                     •
                   soldiors that are enrolled to any kind of w
                     •
                  apon ought to exercise themselues.
vpon the holidaies, during certen moneths in ye summer,
in the afternoone after they come from church, exercise
themselues with such weapons as they are inrolled vnto, as
archers to shooting game at Rouers, & long buts, with their
long bowes, according to the ancient vse of England, and
that the harquebuziers in the presence of the chiefe men
or officers of y• parish in trauessing their grounds as if they

were in skirmish, should with their peeces well, and orderly
charged (as I haue in my instructions and discourses before
particularly declared) at a great But discharge 4. shot;
and so likewise that the mosquetiers should with their mosquets
well charged with full bullets from their restes, discharge
3. or 4. other shot: And this at the charge either
of the parishes, or of such rich men as doo find such souldiors,
or otherwise as it may be better considered of, and
deuised. Also I would that such soldiors as are piquers
being disarmed should with blunt piques, learne to march
soldiorly, as also with dexeritie to handle and manage
them, thereby the better to know how in seruice to handle
their sharpe piques; as also the halbarders with blunt
halbardes made for the purpose, should learne to giue
both blow and thrusts at their enemies with their greatest
aduauntage: Howbeit as for halbarders and piquers there
is no neede that they should be so often exercised to the
vse of their weapons as the soldiors with weapons of
volee; because that soldiors with weapons of volee, be they
horsemen or footmen shal neuer be able effectually to performe
the vse and effects of their weapons in seruices of
the field in earnest, if they be not often and long before
exercised in sporte with dexteritie to mannage and vse
those weapons. And so likewise vpon such aforesaid holydaies,
I would wish that all sorts of horsemen of what
weapon soeuer, should either before their maisters or some
other principall men where they dwel, appointed for that
purpose, ride their horses, and exercise themselues on horbacke,
with such weapons as they are inrolled vnto. And
all these aforesaid priuate exercises vpon holidaies I would
wish to be performed to the intent to make all the soldiors
of all sorts of armors and weapons as well on horsback
as on foote to be the more apte, & ready to performe
the effects of soldiors vpon all important emploiments
and seruices Militarie, as also at such generall musters, and
trainings as should be appointed, & thought requisite vpon
some two speciall times in the sommer, when the people

might haue best leisure to be absent from their mo
                  •
               
needefull and necessarie Countrie affaires.
            Also I would that no horsemen,No foot alter their 
                     〈◊〉
                   vpon 
                     〈…〉
                  . nor footmen to what
armor and weapon soeuer they bee inrolled, should alter
or chaunge themselues from the same kinde of armors and
weapons that he or they are inrolled vnto vpon verie seuere
punishment, without the special appointment of their
Captain, or Captaines; and therefore it is verie conuenient
that al Captains aswell of horsmen as footmen should
euer haue all their officers of their bandes alwaies ready
& wel known to their whole bands,The office al bands 
                     〈◊〉
                   to be well knowne to soldiors of 
                     〈◊〉
                   bands & the
                     •
                   bands to the as also the whole bāds
vnto them: as their Lieutenantes, their Ensignebearers,
their Sergeants: And that all those officers should be men
of credite and account, and inhabiters in the same shires,
and that al those officers should haue the muster Rolles of
the names of all the souldiors with their different wepons
that they are inrolled vnto, in as great perfections as the
Captaines: that thereby, as also for diuers other causes
they should haue a continual eie that the souldiors of their
bands should not through any kinde of negligence grow
into any imperfections, or disorders; And therewithall
that the Corporals of the footmen, who should haue 50.
souldiors vnder their seuerall charges, (their own persons
in that number conteined) should neuer be without a perfect
Roll of the particular names of the souldiors of their
Corporalates, and to what armor and weapons euery soldior
is inrolled, and where they dwell: And therewithall
that they should haue speciall care, to see and diligently to
inquire, whether the souldiors of their charge and Corporalates
do vpon such holidaies as aforesaid, exercise themselues
with their weapons, in the Townes, parishes, hamlets,
or pla
                  •
               es where they are ordinarilie resident as also
that at conuenient times they should see whether their
arming ap
                  •
               arell, armors and weapons be well and orderlie
kept without any thing lacking: And for the orderlie
obseruation and performance of all the most requisit matters
by me before set downe, as also others that haue no
                  •
               
               
               
                  〈◊〉
                present fallen into my remembrance, or that may

                  〈◊〉
                better considered of and deuised by others of greater
memorie and consideration then I am of, I would wish
they should be with great consideration & aduise of counsell
propounded,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                considered of, and established by Act of
Parliament with certen different penalties for the refourming
of the neglecters of such requisite matters militarie,
as also certen priuiledges, preheminences, or other aduancements,
a
                  •
                rewards for vertue, to be bestowed vppon
such as doo best or verie well behaue themselues in their
vocations, and 
                  •
               egrees militarie.
            And thus hauing for the great loue that I beare to the
continuall safetie and prosperity of the Crowne & Realme
of England,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                a
                  •
               d English Nation, performed and finished
my intended propositions and proiects militarie, I cease,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
attributing all such matters as I haue rightly fallen into the
reckoning of, to the most high praise, honor and glorie, of
Almightie God, (as the only giuer of all right vnderstanding,
wisdome and science) and all my failinges and errors
vnto mine owne great lacke and fault, in that I haue not
giuen and yeelde
                  •
                my selfe as I ought to haue doon, to his
deuine grace, and direction; thereby to haue considered,
learned, and obserued more of the Art, and scien
                  •
               e Militarie,
and of all other good thinges; then my simple capacitie
and power, by seeing, reading, and hearing hath been
any waies able to attaine vnto.
            Honor et gloria in excelsis Deo
omnipotenti, sempiterno, et
incomprehensibili
Amen.
            
         
      
   