
      
         
            
            
            A moſt excellent new Dittie, wherein is ſhewed the ſage ſayinges, and wiſe ſentences of Salomon: wherein each eſtate is taught his duetie, with ſingular counſell to his comfort and conſolation.
            To the tune of Wigmoores Galliard.
            
               
            
            
               THoſe that will run a Vertuous race,
               and learne the Precepts of the ſage
               Thoſe that true wiſedome will imbrace
               and learne to liue in youth and age:
               Let him approch hereto with ſpeed,
               And to theſe Leſſons giue good heed:
               for bearing well theſe thinges away,
               the Lord will bleſſe them night & day.
            
            
               My Sonne, ſayth Salomon the wiſe,
               if thou true Wiſedome wilt attaine:
               Then feare the Lord that rules the ſkies
               for ſo the ſcripture telleth thee plaine.
               Imbrace his word, and him obay:
               This is the chiefe and onely way:
               for they that do theſe thinges deſpiſe,
               are fooles to God, though worldly wiſe
            
            
               Vnto thy Father honour giue,
               and thou ſhalt ſurely bleſſed be:
               And be obedient while you liue,
               vn
                     •
                  o your Mother courteouſly:
               Then God will ſend thee euermore
               Sufficient wealth, and treaſure ſtore:
               all thinges ſhall proſper in thy hand,
               and ſong thou ſhalt inioy the Land.
            
            
               The bleſſing of thy Father deare,
               doth cauſe the childrens good ſucceſſe:
               But where the Mother doth appeare,
               to curſe the childrens wickedneſſe,
               Their whoſe foundation doth decay,
               Like withered leaues they fall away:
               Then all good children learne of me,
               to loue your Parentes faythfullie.
            
            
               Set not thy minde on worldly wealth,
               nor put thy confidence therein:
               For Riches doth conſume by ſtealth,
               and Couetouſnes is counted ſinne:
               For while thou liueſt on the earth,
               Thou art vncertaine of thy death:
               and when that death doth ſtop thy wind
               then muſt thou leaue thy goods behind
            
            
               Be friendly vnto euery man,
               but vnto few familiar be:
               And try thy friende if that thou can,
               his inward thoughts to proue and ſee:
               And if thou finde him iuſt and true,
               Change not thy old Friend for a new:
               For many promiſe much indeede,
               but cleane forſake thee in thy neede.
            
            
               If thou haſt Sonnes, inſtruct them well
               but on thy Daughter neuer ſmile:
               Their wanton wayes do farre excell,
               let no affection thee beguile:
               With due correction loue them ſtill,
               And giue not them their wanton will:
               for if that they do ſtubborne grow,
               their duetie then they will not know.
            
            
               Giue honour to the Aged ſort.
               and to thy Betters alwayes bow:
               So ſhalt thou winne a good report,
               for God him ſelfe doth him allow:
               Of hatefull Pride likewiſe be ware,
               And haue an eye to after care:
               be not too raſh in any thing,
               for that will ſoone repentance bring.
            
            
               Lende not thy goodes to Mighty men,
               whoſe countenance paſſeth thy degree
               For it is hard to get againe,
               as we by dayly proofe may ſee.
               For other men giue not thy word,
               No further then thou canſt afford:
               leaſt afterward thou chaunce to rue,
               and pay the debt when it is oue.
            
            
               With him that is a Maieſtrate,
               in any caſe go not to law:
               Leaſt thou repeut the ſame too late,
               for he will hold thee ſtill in awe:
               Be alwayes wary in thy wordes.
               For ſpightfull congues are euill ſworts
               and looke to whom thou doſt impare,
               the thoughtes and ſecrets of thy hart.
            
            
               Be neuer ieolous of thy Wife,
               leaſt ſhe thereby do miſchiefe learne,
               For ſo thou ſhalt ſoone purchaſe ſtrife:
               then wiſely do each thing diſcerne.
               And do no euill occaſion giue,
               But louiugly together liue:
               For where the man and wife do hate,
               the curſe of God waytes at thy gate.
            
            
               On Harlots caſt not thou thy minde,
               leaſt thou thereby thy ſelfe conſume:
               And waſte thy riches in the winte,
               whilſt thou in faunie fret and fume:
               Their ſoule inticements bringeth death▪
               
               And poyſon commeth from their breath:
               their eyes are wandering too and fro,
               and euery one their faſh
                     •
                  ons know.
            
            
               Prayſe no woman for her beauti
                     ••
                  
                  ▪ ſake,
               nor diſcommende no man by light:
               And with thy tongue no lying make,
               fulfill thy promiſe iuſt and right.
               Be mercifull vnto the poore,
               And God will thee reward therefore:
               Keepe not the Laborers wages ba
                     •
                  ke
               but comfort ſuch as comfort lacke.
            
            
               Grieue not the heauie harted man,
               nor ioy not at thy enemies harme:
               Rebuke thy Brother friendly than,
               againſt no man vſe open charme:
               Nor credite thou each tale in haſt,
               Till tryall proue the matter waſt.
               Frō hateful ſlaunder keepe thy tongue
               & worke for age, whilſt thou art young
            
            
               Three things there are which God doth hate
               as holy Scripture do declare:
               A man too proud in beggars ſtate,
               a Rich man for to lye and ſweare:
               To ſee an Old-man giuen to iuſt:
               And thoſe of God are ſure acurſt.
               The lying tongue the ſoule doth queſt
               but pride & iuſt throwes downe to hell.
            
            
               While you are liuing, call for grace,
               thy ſelfe is like the fading Flower:
               Death commeth ſtealing on a pace,
               thou ſhalt not know the day nor houre.
               Thy ſpeach at all times ſhall not laſt,
               Vſe well the time that now thou haſt:
               and from repentance do not ſtay,
               thou canſt no time with death delay.
            
            
               If thou conſider well the ſame,
               and beare theſe Leſſons in thy minde:
               And therevnto thy ſelfe do frame,
               great comfort ſurely thou ſhalt finde.
               Plant well theſe ſayings in thy hart,
               And from theſe precepts neuer ſtart:
               So ſhalt thou liue in perfect peace,
               and God will bleſſe thee with increaſe.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            At London printed by W. W. for T. P.
         
      
   