
      
         
            
            
            THE
Triumphs ouer Death:
OR,
A Consolatorie Epistle, for afflicted
mindes, in the affects of
dying friends. First written for the consolation of one: but now
published for the generall good of all, by R. S.
the Author of S. Peters Complaint, and Maoni
                     •
                  
               
his other Hymnes.
            
               LONDON
Printed by V. S. for Iohn Busbie, and
are to be sold at Nicholas Lings shop
at the West end of Paules
Church 1595▪
            
         
         
            
            
            To the Worshipful M. Richard Sackuile,
Edward Sackuile Cicilie Sackuile and Anne Sackuile,
the hopeful issue of the honourable Gentleman
maister Robert Sackuile Esquire.
            
               
                  MOst lines do not the best conceit containe,
               Few wordes well coucht may comprehend much matter:
               Then, as to vse the first is counted vaine,
               So is't praise-worthy to conceit the latter,
               The grauest wittes that most graue workes expect,
               The qualitie, not quantitie respect.
            
            
               The smallest sparke will cast a burning heat:
               Base cottages may harbour things of woorth,
               Then though this Volume be, nor gay, nor great,
               Vnder your protection I set foorth,
               Do not with coy disdainefull ouersight
               Deny to reade this well meant orphanes mite.
            
            
               And since his father in his infancie
               Prouided patrons to protect his heire,
               But now by death none sparing crueltie
               Is turnd an orphane to the open aire:
               I his vnworthy foster-sire haue darde,
               To make you patronizers of this warde.
            
            
               
               You glor
                     •
                  eng issues of that glorious dame,
               Whose li
                     •
                  e is made the subiect o
                     •
                   deaths will,
               To you succeeding hopes of mothers fame,
               I dedicate this 
                     •
                  ruit of Southwels quill:
               He for your Vncles com
                     •
                  ort first it writ,
               I for your consolation print and send you it.
            
            
               Then daine in kindnesse to accept the worke,
               Which he in kindnesse writ, I send to you,
               The which till n
                     •
                  w clouded, obscure did lurke:
               But now opposed to ech Readers view,
               May yeelde commodious fruit to euery wight
               That feeles his cons
                     •
                  ience pri
                     •
                  kt by Parcaes spight.
            
            
               But if in aught I haue presumptuous beene,
               My pardon-crauing pen implores your fauour:
               If any fault in print be past; vnseene
               To let it passe, the Printer is the 
                     •
                  rauer,
               So shall he thanke you, and I by duety bound,
               Pray, that in you may all good gifts abound.
            
            
               Your Worships humbly deuoted,
Iohn Trussell▪
               
            
         
         
            
            
               R Reade with regarde, what here with due regarde,
               O Our second Ciceronian Southwell sent,
               B By whose perswasiue pithy argument,
               E Ech well disposed eie may be preparde,
               R Respectiuely their griefe for friends decease
               T To moderate without all vaine excesse.
            
            
               S Sith then the worke is worthie of your view,
               O Obtract not him which for your good it pend:
               V Vnkinde you are if you it reprehend,
               T That for your profit is presented you,
               H He pend, I publish this to pleasure all,
               E Esteeme of both then as we merite shall:
               W Wey his workes woorth, accept of my goodwill,
               E Else is his labour lost, mine crost, both to no end:
               L Lest then you ill des
                     •
                  rue what both intend,
               L Let my goodwill all small defects fulfill:
               He here his talent trebled doth present,
               I, my poore mite, y
                     •
                  t both with good intent,
               Then take them kindly both, as we them ment.
            
            
               Iohn Trussell.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               CHancing to 
                     •
                  inde with Esopes Cocke a stone,
               Whose worth was more than I knew how to prise:
               And knowing, if it should be kept vnknowne,
               T 'would many skathe, and pleasure few or none,
               I thought it best the same in publike wise
               In Print to publish, that impartiall ei
                     •
                  s
               Might, reading iudge, and iudging, praise the wight
               The which this Triumph ouer Death did w
                     •
                  ite.
            
            
               And though the same he did at first compose
               For ones peculiar consolation,
               Yet will it be commodions vnto those,
               Which for some friends losse, prooue their owne selfe-foes:
               And by extremitie of exclamation,
               And their continuate lamentation
               Seeme to forget, that they at length must t
                     •
                  ead,
               The selfe same path which they did that are dead.
            
            
               But those as yet whome no friends death doth crosse,
               May by example guide their actions so,
               That when a tempest comes their Barke to tosse,
               Their passions shall not superate their losse:
               And eke this Tr
                     •
                  atise doth ech Reader show,
               That we our breath, to Death by duet
                     •
                  e owe,
               And thereby prooues, much teares are spent in vaine,
               When teares can not recall the dead againe.
            
            
               Yet if perhappes our late sprung sectaries,
               Or for a fashion Bible-bearing hypocrites,
               Whose hollow hearts doe seeme most holy wise,
               Do for the Authors sake the worke despise,
               I wish them weigh the words, and not who writes:
               But they that leaue what most the soule delights,
               Because the Preachers, no Precisian sure,
               To reade what Southwell writ will not endure.
            
            
               
               But leauing them, since no perswades suffice
               To cause them reade, except the spirit mou
                     •
                  ,
               I wish all other reade, but none despise
               This little Treatise: but if Momus 
                  
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  s
               Espie Deaths triumph, it doth him behoue,
               The writer, worke, or me for to reproue:
               But let his pitcht speecht mouth defile but one,
               Let that be me, let tother two alone:
               For if offence in either merit blame,
               The fault is mine, and let me reape the shame▪
               
            
            
               Iohn Trussell.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ The Authour to the
Reader.
            
               IF the Athenians erected an altare to an vnknowne god,
supposing hee woulde bee pleased with their deuotion,
t
                  •
               ough they were ignorant of his name: better may I
presume that my labour may be gratefull, being deuoted
to such men, whose names I kn
                  •
               w, and whose fames I haue heard,
though vnacquainted with their persons. I intended this comfort to
him whom a lamenting sort hath left most comfortlesse, by him to his
friends, who haue equall portions in this sorrow. But I thinke the
Philosophers rule will be here verefied, that it shall be last in execution,
which was first designed, and he last enioy the effect, which
was first owner of the cause, this let Chance be our rule since Choice
may not, and into which of your hands it shal fortune, much honour
and happinesse may it carry with it, and leaue in their hearts as much
ioy as it found sorrow: where I borrow the person of a Historian as
well touching the dead as the yet suruiuing, I build vpon report of
such A
                  •
               thours, whose hoary heads challenge credit, and whose 
                  •
               i
                  •
               s
and eares were witnesses of their wordes. To craue pardon for my
paine were to slander a friendly office, and to wrong their courtesies,
whome nobilitie neuer taught to answere affection with anger, or to
wage du
                  •
               ty with dislike: and therefore I humbly present vnto them
with as many good wishes as good will can measure from a best meaning
minde, that hath a willingnesse rather to affoorde, then to offer
due seruices, were not the meane as woorthlesse as the minde is willing.
         
      
      
         
            
            The Triumphs ouer Death:
OR,
A Consolatorie Epistle for troubled
mindes in the affects of dying
friendes.
            
               IF it be a blessing of the vertuous
to mourne, it is the rewarde of
this, to be comforted; and he that
pronounced the one, promised
the other: I doubt not but that
Spirite, whose nature is Loue,
and whose name Comforter, as
he knoweth the cause of your grief
                  •
               , so hath he salued
it with supplies of grace, pouring into your wound no
lesse oyle of mercie then wine of Iustice; yet sith courtesie
oweth compasion as a du
                  •
               tie to the afflicted,
and nature hath ingrafted a desire to finde it, I thought
it good to shew you by proofe, that you carry not your
cares alone, tho
                  •
               gh the loade that lieth on others can
little lighten your burthen, her decease can not but sit
neerer your heart, whom you had taken so deepe into
a most tender affection. That which dieth to our loue,
being alwa
                  ••
               s aliue to our sorow, you would haue b
                  ••
               
louing to a l
                  •
               sse louing sister: yet finding in her so many
worths to be loued, your loue wrought more ea
                  •
               
               n
                  •
               stly
vpon so sweete a subiect, which now being taken
from you, I presume your grief
                  •
                is no lesse then
your loue was, the one of these being eu
                  •
               r the mesure
of the other, the Scripture mooueth vs to bring forth
our t
                  •
               ares vpon the dead, a thing not offending grace,
& aright to reason. For to be without remor
                  •
               e in the

death of friends, is neither incident nor conuenient to
the nature of man, hauing too much affinitie to a sauage
temper, and ouerthrowing the ground of all pietie,
which is a mutuall simpathie in ech of others miseries:
but as not to feele sorrow in sorrowfull chances,
is to want sence, so not to beare it with moderation,
is to want vnderstanding, the one brutish, the other
effeminate, and he hath cast his account best that
hath brought his summe to the meane. It is no lesse
fault to exceede in sorrow, then to passe the limites of
competent mirth, sith excesse in either is a disorder in
passion, thogh that sorow of curtesie be lesse blamed
of men, because, if it be a fault, it is also a punishment,
at once causing & 
                  •
               asting torments. It is no good sign
in the sicke to be senslesse in his paines, as bad it is to
be vnusually sensitiue▪ being both eyther harbengers
or attendants of death. Let sadnes, sith it is a due to the
dead testifie a feeling of pitie, not any pang of passion,
and bewray rather a tender then a deiected minde.
Mourue as that your friendes may finde you a liuing
brother, all men a discreete mourner, making sorowe
a signell, not a superior of reason: some are so obstinate
in their owne wil, that euen time the naturall remedie
of the most violent agonies can not by any delayes
asswage their griefe, they entertaine their sorow
with solitary muses, and feede with sighes and teares,
they pine their bodies, and draw al pensiue consideration
to their mindes, nursing their heauinesse with a
melancholy humor, as though they had vowed them
selues to sadnesse, vnwilling it should end till it had
ended them, wherein their folly sometimes findeth a
ready effect,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                that being true which Salomon obserued,

that as a moth the garment and a worme the wood,
so doth sadnesse perswade the heart. But this impotent
softnesse fitteth not sober mindes. W
                  •
               e must
not make a liues profe
                  •
               sion of a seuen nights duety,
nor vnder colour of ki
                  •
               dnesse be vnnaturall to our
selues, if 
                  •
               ome in their passion ioynd their thoughts
into such laborinths, that neither wit knoweth, nor
will careth how long or howe farre they wnder in
them, it discouereth their weakenesse, but discerneth
our meditation. It is for the most the fault, not of
all, but of the 
                  •
               eeliest women, who next to the funeral
of their friends, deem it a second widowhood
to force their teares, and make it their 
                  •
               appinesse to
seeme most vnhappy, as though they had only been
left aliue to be a perpetuall map of dead folkes misfortunes:
but this is to arme an enemie against our
selues, and to yeeld Reason prisoner to Passion, putting
the sworde in the rebelles hand when wee are
least able to withstand his treason. Sorrowe once
setled is not lightly remoued, easily winning, but
not so easily surrendring possession, and where it is
not excluded in time, it challengeth a place by prescription.
The Scripture warneth vs not to giue
our hearts to sadnes▪ yea rather to reiect it as a thing
not beneficiall to the dead, yet p
                  •
               eiudiciall to our
selues, Ecclesiasti
                     •
                  us
               Eccles. 38. 
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
alloweth but seuen dayes to
mourning, iudging moderation in plaint to be a sufficient
testimony i
                  •
                good will, and a needeful office
of wis
                  •
               dome. Much sorrowe for the dead is eyther
the childe of selfe-loue, or of rash iudgement: if wee
should shead our teares for others death, as a meane
to our contentment, wee shewe but our owne

wound perfit louers of our selues, if we lament their
decease as their hard d
                  •
               stinie, we attach them of euil
deseruing, with to peremmatory a cēsure as though
their life had been a arise, and their death a leape into
finall perdition, for otherwise a good departure
craueth small condolling, being but a harbour from
stormes, and an entrance vnto felicitie. But you
know your sister too well to incurre any blame in
these respects. And experience of her life hath stored
your thoughts with notice of so rare vertues, as
might sooner make her memorie an inforcement to
ioy then any inducement to sorrow, and moue you
t
                  •
                esteeme her last dueties rather the triumph of her
victorie then the farewelles of her decease. She was
by birth second to none but vnto the first in the
realme, yet she measured onely greatnesse by goodnesse,
making nobilitie but the mirrour of vertue, as
able to shew things worthy to be seene, as apte to
drawe many eies to beholde it, she suted her behauiour
to her birth, and ennobled her birth with her
pi
                  •
               ty, leauing her house more beholding to her for
hauing honoured it with the glorie of her vertues,
then she was to it for the titles of her degree, she was
high minded in nothing but in aspiring to perfection,
and in the disdaine of vice, in other things couering
her greatnes with hu
                  •
               ilitie among her inferio
                  •
               s,
& shewing it with curtesie amongst her peeres:
of the carriage of her selfe, and her sober gouernement
may be a sufficiēt testimony, that enuy hir self
was dumbe in her dispraise, finding in her much to

                  •
               epine at, but naught to reproue: the clearenes of hir
Honor I neede not to mention, she ha
                  •
               ing alwaies

armed it with such modestie as taught the most vntemperate
tongues to be silent in her presence, and
answered their eyes with scorne and contempt that
did but seeme to make her an aime to passion, yea,
and in this behalfe, as almost in all other, shee hath
the most honourable and knowen Ladies of the
land, so common and knowen witnesses, that those
that least liked her religion were in loue with her
demeanour, deliuering their opinions in open praises.
How mildely she accepted the checke of fortune
fallen vpon her without desert, experience hath bin
a most manifest proofe, the temper of her mind being
so easie that she found little difficultie in taking
downe her thoughts to a meane degree, which true
honour, not pride had raised to the former height,
her faithfulnes and loue where she found tru frendship,
is written with teares in many eyes, and wil be
longer registred in gratefull memories diuers that
haue tried her in that kinde, auowing her for secrecie,
wisedome, and constancie, to be a miracle in that
sex, yea when shee found least kindnesse in others,
she neuer lost it in hirselfe, more willingly suffering
then offering wrong, and often weeping for their
mishappes, whome though lesse louing her, shee
could not but effect. Of the innocencie of her life
this generall all can auerre, that as she was gratefull
many wayes, and memorable for vertues, so was
shee free from the blemish of any vice, vsing, to
her power, the best meanes to keepe continually an
vndefiled conscience: her attire was euer such as
might both satisfie a curious eye, and yet beare witnesse
of a sober minde, neyther singular nor vaine,

but such as her peeres of least report vsed: her tong
was very little acquainted with oathes, vnlesse eyther
duetie or distrust did enforce them: and surelie
they were needelesse to those that knewe her, to
whome the trueth of her words could not iustly be
suspected, much lesse was she noted of any vnfitting
talke, which as it was euer hatefull to her eares, so
did it neuer defile her breath: of feeding shee was
very measurable, rather of too sparing then too liberall
a diet: so religious for obseruing all fasts, that
neuer in her sickenesse shee could hardly bee wonne
to breake them, and if our soules be possessed in our
patience, surely hir soule was truly hir owne, whose
rocke thought often stricken with the rod of aduersitie
neuer yeelded any more then to giue issue of eie
streames, and though these thr
                  •
               ugh the tendernesse
of her nature & aptnes of h
                  •
               r sex, were the customarie
tributes that her loue paied, more to her friendes
than her owne misfortunes, yet were they not accompanied
with distempered words or ill seeming
actions, reason neuer forgetting distancie, though
remembring pitie, her deuotions she daily obserued,
offering the daily sacrifice of an innocent heart, and
stinting her selfe to her times of prayer, which shee
performed with so religious a care, as well shewed
that shee knew howe high a Maiestie shee serued. I
neede not write how duetifully shee discharged all
the behoofes of a most louing wife, since that was
the commonest theame of her praises, yet this may
be saide without improofe to any, that whosoeuer
in this behalfe may be counted her equall, none can
iustly be thought her superiour, where she owed she

payed dutie, where she found she turned courtesie,
wheresoeuer she was knowen, she deserued a
                  •
               itie,
desirous of the best, yet disdaining none but euill
company, she was readier to requite benefits thē reuenge
wrongs, more grieued then angred with vnkindnes
of friends, when either mistaking or misreport
occasioned a
                  •
               y breaches: for if their words carie
credite, it entred deepest into her thoughts, they
haue acquitted her from all spice of malice, not onely
against her friends, whose dislikes were but a retire
to steppe further into friendship, but euen her
greatest enemies, to whom if she had bene a iudge
as she was a suppliant, I assuredly thinke she would
haue redres
                  •
               ed, but not reuenged her iniuries. In
summe, she was an honour to her predeces
                  •
               ours, a
light to her age, and a patterne 
                  •
               o her posteritie, neither
was her conclusion different from her premisses,
or her death from her life, she shewed no dismay,
being warned of her danger, carying in her conscience
the safeconduct of innocencie. But hauing sent
her desires before to heauen with a milde countenaunce,
and a most calme minde, in more hope then
feare, she expected her owne passage, shee commended
both her duetie and goodwill to all her friends,
and cleared her heart from all grudge towardes her
enemies, wishing true happinesse to them both, as
best became so soft and gentle a minde, in which
anger neuer stayed, but as an vnwelcome stranger:
Shee made open profession that shee did die
true to her religion, true to her husband, true to
God and the world, she enioyed her iudgement as
long as she breathed, her body earnestly offering hi
                  •
               
               
last deuotions, supplying in thought what faintnes
suffered not her tongue to vtter: in the end, when her
glasse was tunne out, and death beganne to chalenge
his interest, some labouring with too late remedies
to hinder the deliuery of her sweet soule, she desired
them eftsoones to let her goe to God, and her hopes
calling her to eternall kingdomes, as one rather falling
asleepe then dying, shee most happily tooke her
leaue of all mortall miseries. Such was the life, such
was the death of your dearest sister, both so ful of tru
comfort, that this suruey of her vertues may be a sufficient
lenatiue to your bitterest griefes. For you are
not (I hope) in the number of those that reckon it a
pa
                  •
               te of their paine to heare of their best remedies,
thinking the rehearsall of your dead friendes prayses
an vpbraiding of their losse, but sith the obliuion of
her vertues were iniurious to her, let not the mention
of her person be offensiue vnto you, and bee not
you grieued with her death, with which shee is best
pleased. So blessed a death is rather to be wished of
vs, than pitied in her, whose soule triumpheth with
God, whose vertues stil breatheth in the mouthes of
infinite praises, and liueth in the memories of all, to
whom either experience made her knowen, or fame
was not enuious in concealing her deserts: shee was
a iewel that both God and you desired to enjoy, he
to her assured benefit without selfe interest, you for
allowable respectes, yet employing her restraint among
certaine hazards and most vncertaine hopes.
Be then vmpier in your owne cause, whether your
wishes or Gods will importeth more loue, the one,
the adornement of her exile, the other, her returne

into a most blessed countrie, and sith it pleased God
in this loue to be your riuall, let your discretion decide
the doubt, whome in due should carry the suite,
the prerogatiue being but a right to the one, for nature
& grace being the motiues of both your loues,
she had the best title in them that was author of thē,
and she, if worthy to be beloued of either, as she was
of both, could not but prefer him to the dearest portion
of her deepest affectiō: let him with good leaue
gather the grape of his own vine, & plucke the fruit
of his owne planting, and thinke so curious workes
euer safest in the artificers hand, who is likeliest to
loue them, and best able to preserue them, shee did
therefore her duety in dying willingly: and if you
will doe yours, you must be willing with her death,
sith to repine at her liking is discourtesi
                  •
               , at Gods an
impietie, both vnfitting for your approoued vertue,
she being in place where no griefe can annoy her, she
hath little neede or lesse ioy of your sorrow, neither
can 
                  •
               he allow in her friends that she would loathe in
her selfe, loue neuer affecting likenesse: if she had bin
euill, she had not deserued our teares: being good, she
cannot desire them, nothing being lesse to the likenes
of goodnesse, than to see it selfe any cause of vniust
disquiet or trouble to the innocent.1. King. 
                     •
                  . Would Saul
haue thought it friendship to haue wept for his fortunes,
in hauing found a kingdome by seeking of
cattel: or Dauid account it a curtesie, to haue sorowed
at his successe, that from following sheepe came to
foile a giant, and to receiue in fine a royall crowne
for his victorie,1. King. 17. why then should her lot bee lamented,Psal. 112.
whome higher fauour hath raised from the dust

to sit with princes of Gods people, if securitie had bin
giuen, that a longer life shuld stil haue bin guided by
vertue, and followed with good fortune, you might
pretend some cause to complaine of her decease. But
if different effectes shoulde haue crossed your hopes
(processe of time being the parent of strange alterations)
then had death beene friendlier then your selfe,
and sith it hung in suspense which of the two would
haue hapned, let vs allowe God so much discretion,
as to thinke him the fittest arbitrator in decision of
the doubt:Psal. 86. her foundations of happines were in the
holy hilles, and God sawe it fittest for her building
to be but lowe in this vale of teares, and better it was
it shoulde be soone taken downe, than by rising too
high to haue oppressed her soule with the ruines▪
Thinke it no iniury that she is now taken from you,
but a fauour that shee was lent you so long, and shew
no vnwillingnes to restore God his owne, sith hitherto
you haue payed no vsury for it: consider not
how much longer you might haue enioyed her, but
how much sooner you might haue lost her: and sith
she was held vpon curte
                  •
               ie, not by any couenant, take
our soueraignes right for a sufficient reason of her
death, our life is but lent, a good to make thereof, during
the loane our best commoditie: It is due debt to
a more certaine owner than our selues, and therefore
so long as we haue it, we receiue a benefit, when we
are depriued of it, we haue no wrong, we are tenants
at will of this clayee farme, not for tearme of
yeeres, when wee are warned out, we must be ready
to remooue, hauing no other title but the owners
pleasure:Eccles. 10. it is but an Inne, not a home: we came but

to baite, not to dwell, and the condition of our enrance
was, in fine to depart. If this departure be grieuous,
it is also common, this to day to me, to morrow
to thee, and the case equally afflicting all, leaueth
none any cause to complaine of iniurious vsage.
            Natures debt is sooner exacted of some then of other,
yet is there no fault in the creditor that exacteth
but his owne, but in the greedinesse of our eger
hopes, either repining that their wishes faile, or willingly
forgetting their mortalitie, whome they are
vnwilling by experience to see mortall, yet the generall
tide washeth all passengers to the same shoare,
some sooner, some later, but all at the last: and wee
must settle our mindes to take our course as it commeth,
neuer fearing a thing so necessarie, yet euer expecting
a thing so vncertaine. It seemeth that God
purposely concealed the time of our death, leauing
vs resolued betweene feare and hope of longer continuaunce.
Cut off vnripe cares, lest with the notice
and pensiuenesse of our diuorce from the world, we
should lose the comfort of needfull contentments, &
before our dying day languish away with expectation
of death. Some are taken in their first steppe into
this life, receiuing in one, their welcome and farewel,
as though they had beene borne onely to be buried,
and to take their pasport in this hourely middle
of their course, the good to preuent change, the bad
to shorten their impietie: some liue till they be weary
of life, to giue proofe of their good hap, that had
a kindlier passage, yet though the date be diuerse, the
debt is all one, equally to be answered of all as their
time expireth:Psal. 88. for who is the man shall liue and not

see death? sith we all die, and like water slide vppon
the earth.
                  
                     •
                   Kings 14. 
                     •
                  enes. 5. In Paradice wee receiued the sentence of
death, and here as prisoners we are kept in ward, tarying
but our times till the Gaoler call vs to our execution.
Whom hath any vertue eternized, or desert
cōmended to posteritie, that hath not mourned
in life, and bin mourned after death, no assurance of
ioy being sealed without som teares? Euen our blessed
Lady the mother of God was throwen down as
deep in temporal miseries as she was aduanced high
in spirituall honours, none amongst al mortall creatures
finding in life more proof then she of her mortalitie:
for hauing the noblest sonne that euer woman
was mother of, not onely aboue the condition
of men, but aboue the glorie of Angels, being her
sonne onely, without temporall father, and thereby
the loue of both parents doubled in hir breast, being
her only Sonne without other issue, and so her loue
of all children finished in him. Yea, he being God,
and she the nearest creature to Gods perfections, yet
no prerogatiue either quitted her from mourning,
or him from dying: and though they surmounted
the highest Angels in all other preheminences, yet
were they equall with the meanest men in the sentence
of death And howbeit our Ladie being the
patterne of christian mourners, so tempered her anguish,
that there was neither any thing vndone that
might be exacted of a mother, or any thing doone
that might be disliked in so perfit a matron, yet by
this we may gesse with what curtesies death is likely
to friend vs, that durst cause so bloody sunerals in
so heauenly a stocke, not exempting him from the

law of dying that was the authour of life, and soone
after to honour his triumphs with ruines and spoile
of death▪ Seeing therefore that death spareth none,
let vs spare our teares for better vses, being but an idle
sacrifice to this dease and emplacable executioner,
and for this not long to be continued, where
they can neuer profit, nature did promise vs a weeping
life, exacting teares for custome as our first entrance,
and for suting our whole course in this doleful
beginning: and therefore they must be vsed with
mesure that must be vsed so often, and so many causes
of weeping, lying yet in the debt, 
                  •
               ith we cannot
end our teares, let vs at the least reserue them, if sorowe
cannot bee shunned, let it bee taken in time of
neede, sith otherwise beeing both troublesome and
fruitlesse it is a double miserie or an open follie. We
moisten not the ground with pretious waters, they
were stilled for nobler endes, either by their fruites
to delight our sences, or by their operations to preserue
our healths. Our teares are water of too high
a price to be prodigally powred in the dust of anie
graues. If they be teares of loue, they persume our
prayers, making them odour of sweetenesse, fit to be
offered on the aultare before the throne of God: if
teares of contrition,Apoc, 
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                they are water of life to the dying
and corrupting soules, they may purchase fauor
and repeale the sentence till it be executed as the example
of Ezechias doeth testifie, but when the punishment
is past,3. King. 1
                     •
                  . and the verdict performed in effect,
their pleading is in vaine, as Dauid taught vs when
his childe was dead,2. Kings 1
                     •
                  . saying, that hee was likelier to
go to it, than it by his weeping to returne to him.

Learne therefore to giue sorrow no long dominion
ouer you. Wherefore the wise should rather marke
than expect an end, meete it not when it commeth,
doe not inuite it when it is absent, when you feele it
do not force it, sith the bruite creatures which (nature
seldome erring in her course guideth in the
meane) haue but a short though vehement sence of
their losses you should burie the sharpenesse of your
griefe with the course, and rest contented with a
kind, yet a milde compassion, neither lesse then decent
for you, nor more then agreeable to your nature
and iudgement, your much heauinesse woulde
renew a multitude of griefes, and your eies woulde
be springs to many streames, adding to the memorie
of the dead a new occasion of plaint by your own
discomfort, the motion of your heart measureth the
beating of many pulses, which in any distemper of
your quiet with the like stroke will soone bewray
themselues sicke of your disease: your fortune, thogh
hard, yet is notorious, and though moued in mishap
and set in an vnworthy lanthorne, yet your owne
light shineth farre, and maketh you markeable: all
will bend attentiue eye vpon you, obseruing howe
you warde this blowe of temptation, and whether
your patience be a shield of proofe, or easily entred
with these violent strokes. It is commonly expected,
that so high thoughts which haue already climed
ouer the hardest dangers shuld not now stowp
to any vulgar or femal complaints: great personages
whole estate draweth vpon them many eies, as they
cannot but be themselues, so may not they vse the liberti
                  •
               
of meaner estates, the lawes of Nobilitie not

alowing them to direct their deeds by their desires,
but to limite their desires to that which is decent.
Nobilitie is an ayme for lower degrees to leuell at
markes of higher perfection, and like stately windowes
in the northeast roomes of politicke and ciuil
buildings, to let in such light, and lie open to such
prospects, as may affoord their inferiors both to find
meanes and motiues to heroicall vertues: if you
should determine to dwell euer in sorrow, it were a
wrong to your wisedome, and countermaunded by
your qualitie, if euer you mind to surcease it, no time
sitter then the present, sith the same resons that hereafter
might mooue you, are now as much in force.
Yeeld to Wisedom that you must yeeld to Time, be
beholding to your selfe, not to time for the victory,
make it a voluntarie worke of discretion that wil otherwise
be a necessary worke of delay. We thinke
it not enough to haue our owne measure brimme
full with euill, vnlesse we make it runne ouer with
others miseries, taking their misfortunes as our punishments,
and executing forraine penalties vppon
our selues: yea disquiet mindes being euer bellows
to their owne flames mistake o
                  •
               t times others good
for ill, their follie making it a true scourge to them
that how socuer it seemed was to others a benefite.
Iacob out of Iosephs absence sucked such surmises, as
hee made his heart a prey to his agonies, whereas
that that buried him in his owne melancholies raised
Ioseph to his highest happinesse: if Mary Magdalen
saide and supposed shee could haue suncke no
deeper in griefe than shee had already plunged her
selfe, and yet that which she imagined the vttermost

of euils prooued in conclusion the very blisse of her
wishes. The like may be your errour if you cumber
your minde with musing vppon her death, which
would neuer be discharged from cares, till death set
his hand to her acquittance, nor receiue the charter
of an eternall being, till her soule were presented at
the fealing: I loathe to rubbe the scarre of a deeper
wound, for feare of renewing a dead discomfort; yet
if you will fauour your owne remedies, the maisterie
ouer that griefe that springs from the roote, may
learne you to qualifie this that buddeth from the
bra
                  •
               ch, let not her losses moue you that are acquainted
with greater of your owne, and taught by experience
to knowe how vncertaine this chance is, for
whome vnconstant fortune throweth the dice, if she
want the woonted titles, her part is nowe in deede,
and they were du but vpon the stage, her losse therein
is but a wracke of woundes, in which shee is but
euen with the height of princes, surpassing both hir
selfe in them, and the new honors of heauenly stile.
If shee haue left her children, it was her wish they
should repay her absence with vsury; yet had she sent
her first fruits before her as pledges of hir own comming.
And now may we say that the Sparrow hath
found a home, and the Turtle Doue a nest, where
she may lay her yongling, enioying some, and expecting
the rest. If she be taken from her friends, shee
is also deliuered from her enemies, in hope hereafter
to enioy the first out of feare of euer being troubled
with the latter. If shee be cut off in her youth,
no age is vnripe for a good death; and hauing ended
her taske, though neuer so short, yet shee hath liued

out her full time: Old age is venerable not long, to
be measured by increase of vertues, not by number
of yeares,Sap. 4. for heauines consisteth in wisedome, and
an vnspotred life is the ripenes of the perfectest age.
If she were in possibilitie of preferment, shee coulde
hardly haue wanted higher then from whence shee
was throwen: hauing beene bruised with the first,
she had little wil to clime for a second fall: we might
hitherto truely haue said,Ruth 1. this is that Noemi, shee being
to her ende inriched with many outward, and
more inward graces. But whether heereafter shee
would haue bid vs not to cal her Noemi, that is, faire,
but Mara, that signifieth bitter, it is vn
                  •
               ertaine, sith
she might haue fallen into the widows felicitie, that
so changed her name to the likenesse of her lot. Insomuch
that she is freed from more miseries than she
suffered losses, and more fortunate by not desiring,
then shee would bee by enioying fortunes fauour,
which if it be not counted a follie to loue, yet it is a
true happinesse not to neede, we may rather thinke
that death was prouident against her imminent
harmes, then enuious of any future prosperities, the
times being great with so many broiles, that when
they once fall in labour, we shall thinke their condition
securest whome absence hath exempted, both
from feeling the bitter throwes, and beholding the
monstrous issue that they are likely to bring foorth:
the more you tender her, the more temperat should
be your griefe, sith seeing you vpon going, shee did
but steppe before you into the next world, to which
she thought you to belong more then to this, which
hath already giuen you the most vngrateful congee.

They that are vpon remouing, send their furniture
before them; and you still standing vpon your departure,
what ornament could you rather wish in
your future abode than this that did euer please you?
God thither sendeth your adamants, whither hee
would draw your heart, and casteth your anchors
where your thoughts should lie at rode, that seeing
your loue taken out of the world, and your hopes
disanchored from this stormie shoare, you might
settle your desires where God seemeth to require
them. If you would haue wished her life for an example
to your house, assure your selfe shee hath left
her friends so inherited with her vertues, and so perfit
patterns of her best parts, that who knoweth the
furuiuors, may see the deceased, and shall finde little
difference, but in the nūber, which before was greater,
but not better, vnlesse it were in one repetition
of the same goodnesse: wherefore set your selfe at
rest in the ordinance of God, whose workes are perfit,
and whose wisedome is infinite. The termes of
our life are like the seasons of the yere, som for sowing,
some for growing, and some for reaping, in this
only different, that as the heauens keepe their prescribed
periods, so the succession of times haue their
appointed changes. But in the seasons of our life,
which are not to the lawe of necessarie causes, some
are reaped in the seed, some in the blade, some in the
vnripe eare, all in the end, this haruest depending
vpon the reapers wil. Death is too ordinarie a thing
to seem any nouelty, being a familiar guest in euerie
house; and sith his comming is expected, and his arrant
vnknowen, neither his presence should be feared,

nor his effects lamented. What wonder is it to
see fuell burned, spice pownded, or snow melted? and
as little feare it is to see those dead that were borne
vpon condition once to die, she was such a cōpound
as was once to be resolued vnto her simples, which
is now performed: her soule being giuen to God,
and her body sorted into her first elements, it could
not dislike you to see your friend remoued out of a
ruinous house, and the house it selfe destroyed and
pulled downe, if you knewe it were to build it in a
statelier forme, & to turne the inhabitant with more
ioy into a fairer lodging. Let then your sisters soule
depart without griefe, let hir body also be altered into
dust, withdraw your eyes from the ruine of this
cotage, & cast them vpon the maiestie of the second
building, which S. Paul saith shall be incorruptible,
glorious, strange, spirituall, and immortall: night and
sleep are perpetuall, mirours, figuring in their darknes
silence, shutting vp of sences, the finall end of our
mortal bodies, & for this some haue entituled sleep
the eldest brother of death; but with no lesse conueniēce
it might be called one of deaths tenants neare
vnto him in affinity of condition, yea far inferior in
right, being but tenāt for a time of that which death
is the inheritance; for by vertue of the conueiance
made vnto him in Paradice, that dust we were & to
dust we should returne. He hath hitherto shewed his
signiorie ouer all, exacting of vs, not only the yerely,
but hourely reuenues of time, which euer by minuts
we defray vnto him: So that our very life is not
only a memorie, but a part of our death, sith the longer
we haue liued, the lesse we haue to liue. What is

the daily lessening of our life, but a continual dying:
and therfore none is more grieued with the running
out of the last sand in an houre glasse then with all
the rest: so should not the end of the last houre trouble
vs any more, of so many that went before, sith
that did but finish course that all the rest were stil ending,
not the quantity but the quality commendeth
our life. The ordinarie gaine of long liuers being
onely a great burthen of sinne: for as in teares, so in
life the valew is not esteemed by the length, but by
the fruit and goodnesse, which often is more in the
least than in the longest. What your sister wanted
in continuance, she supplied in speede, and as with
her needle shee wrought more in a day than manie
Ladies in a yeere, hauing both excellent skil, and no
lesse delight in working, so with her diligence doubling
her endeuours, shee won more vertue in halfe
than others in a whole life Her death to time was
her birth to eternitie, the losse of this worlde an exchange
of a better, one indowment that she had being
impaired, but many farre greater added to her
store. Mardocheus house was too obscure a dwelling
for so gracious an Hester, shrowding royall
partes in the mantle of a meane estate, and shadowing
immortall benefits vnder earthly vailes. It was
fitter that shee being a summe of so rare perfections,
and so well worthy, a spouse of our heauenly Ahashuerus
should bee carried to his court from her former
abode, there to be inuested in glorie, and to inioy
both place and preheminence answerable to her
worthines, her loue would haue beene lesse able to
haue borne hir death, than your constancy to brooke

her, and therefore God mercifully closed her eies
before they were punished with so grieuous a sight,
taking out to you but a newe lesson of patience out
of your old booke, in which long studie hath made
you perfect. Though your hearts were equally ballanced
with a mutual and most entire affection, and
the doubt insoluble which of you loued most, yet
death finding her the weaker, though not the weaker
vessell, laide his weight in her ballance to bring
her soonest to her rest: let your mind therefore consent
to that which your tongue daily craueth, that
Gods will may bee done as well here in earth of her
mortall body, and in that little heauen of her purest
soule, sith his will is the best measure of all euents.
There is in this worlde continuall enterchange of
pleasing and greeting accidence, still keeping their
succession of times, & ouertaking ech other in their
seuerall courses: no picture can be all drawen of the
brightest colours, nor a harmonie onely conforted
onely of trebles: shadowes are needefull in expressing
of proportions, and the base is a principall part
in perfect musicke, the condition of our exile heere
alloweth no vnmedled ioy, our whole life is tempered
betweene sweete and sowre, and wee must all
looke for a mixture of both: the wise so wish: better
that they stil thinke of worse, accepting the one
if it come with liking, and bearing the other without
impatience, being so much maisters of eche others
fortunes, that neither shall worke them to excesse.
The dwarse groweth not on the highest hill,
nor the tall man looseth not his height in the lowest
valley, and as a base mind, though most at ease,

wil be deiected, so a resolute vertue in the deepest
distresse is most impregnable. They euermore most
perfectly enioy their comfortes that least feare their
contraries▪ for a desire to enioy, carrieth with it a fear
to loose; and both desire & feare are enemies to quiet
possession making men rather owners of Gods benefits
then tenants at his wil: the cause of our trobles
are that our misfortunes happen either to vnwitting
or vnwilling mindes; foresight preuente
                  •
               h the one,
necessitie the other: for he taketh away the smart of
present euilles that attendeth their comming, and is
not amated with any crosse, that is, armed against al,
where necessitie worketh without our consent, the
effect shoulde neuer greatly afflict vs, griefe being
bootlesse, where it can not helpe, needelesse where
there was no fault: God casteth the dice, and giueth
vs our chance, the most wee can doe, is, to take the
point that the cast will affoord vs, not grudging so
much that it is no better, as comforting our selues it
is no worse. If men should lay al their euilles together,
to be afterwardes by equall portion diuided amongst
them, most mē would rather take that they
brought, than stand to the diuision; yet such is the
partiall iudgement of selfe-loue, that euery one iudgeth
his selfe-miserie too great, fearing if he can find
some circumstance to increase it & making it intollerable
by thought to induce it. When Moses threw
his rod from him, it became a serpent ready to sting,
and affrighted him, insomuch as it made him to flee,
but being quietly taken vp, it was a rod againe seruiceable
for his vses, no way hurtfull. The crosse of
Christ, & rod of euery tribulation seeming to threaten

stinging and terrour to those that shunne and
eschew it, but they that mildely take it vp and embrace
it with patience,Psalme 12. may say with Dauid, thy rod
and thy staffe haue been my comfort. In this, affliction
resembleth the Crokadile, flie, it pursueth and
frights, followed, it flieth and feareth, a shame to the
constant, a tyrant to the timorous. Soft mindes that
thinke only vpon delights, admit no other consideration,
but in soothing things becom so effeminate,
as that they are apt to bleede with euery sharpe impression.
But hee that vseth his thought
                  •
                with expectation
of troubles, making their trauell through
all hazards, and apposing his resolution against the
sharpest incounters, findeth in the proofe facilitie of
patience, and easeth the loade of most heauy cumbers:
we must haue temporall things in vse, but eternal
in wish, that in the one neither delight exceed
in that wee haue no desire in that wee want: and in
the other our most delight is here in desire, and our
whole desire is hereafter to enioy. They straighten
too much their ioyes, that draw them into the reach
and compasse of their sences, as if it were no facilitie
where no sence is witnes, whereas if we exclude our
passed and future contentments, pleasant pleasures
haue so fickle assurance, that either as forestalled before
their arriuall, or interrupted before their ende,
or ended before they are well begunne: the repetition
of former comfortes, and the expectation of
after hopes is euer a reliefe vnto a vertuous minde,
whereas others not suffering their life to continue
in the conueniences of that which was and shall be
diuided, this day frō yesterday, & to morrow, & by

forgetting all, and forecasting nothing, abridge their
whole life into the moment of present time: enioy
your sister in your former vertues, enioy her also in
her future meeting, being both titles of more certaine
delights, than her casuall life could euer haue
warranted. If we will thinke of her death, let it be as
a warning to prouide vs, sith that that happeneth to
one may happen to an other: yea none can escape
that is common to all. It may be the blowe that hit
her was meant to some of vs, and this missing was
but a proofe to take better aime in the next stroke: if
we were diligent in thinking of our own, we shuld
haue little leasure to bewaile others deaths: when
the souldior in skirmish▪ seeth his next fellow slaine,
he thinketh more time to looke to himselfe, than to
stand mourning a haplesse mischance, knowing the
head which sped so neere a neighbour, cannot be far
from his own head. But we in this behalfe are much
like the seely birds, that seeing one sticke in the lime
bush, striuing to get away, with a kind of natiue pittie
are drawen to goe to it, and so rush themselues
into the same misfortune; euen so many for their
frends decease by musing on their lot, wittingly surfet
of too much sorrow, that sometimes they make
mourning their last decease: but steppe not you into
this roile, that hath taken none but weake affections:
holde not your eies alwayes vpon your hardest
happes, neither bee you still occupied in counting
your losses. There are fairer partes in your bodie
than scarres, better eye-markes in your fortune then
a sisters losse; you might happily finde more comforts
left than you would willingly loose. But that

you haue alreadie resigned the solaces of life, and
shunned all comforts into the hopes of heauen, yet
sith there is some difference betweene a purpose and
proofe, intending and performing; a subdued enemy
being euer ready to rebell when hee findeth mighty
helpes to make a partie. It is good to strengthen reason
against the violence of nature, that in this and
like cases will renew her assaults, it was a forcible
remedie that hee vsed to withstand the conceit of a
most lamentable occurrent, who hauing in one ship
lost his children and substance, and hardly escaped
himselfe from drowning, went presently into an
hospitall of lazars, where finding in a litle rome many
examples of greater miseries, hee made the smart
of others sores a lenatiue to his owne wound: for
besids that, as lownesse & pouerty was common to
them, they had also many cumbers priuate to themselues,
some wanting their sences, some their wits,
other their limmes, but all their health, in which
consideration he eased his minde, that fortune had
not giuen him the greatest fall. If God had put you
to Abrahams triall, commaunding you to sacrifice
the hope of your posterities, and to be to your onely
sonne an author of death, 
                  •
               s you were to him of
life. If you had bin tied in the streights of Iepthaes
bitter deuotion in bruing his sword in his owne
daughters blood, and ending the triumphs ouer his
enemies with the voluntarie funeralles of his onelie
of-spring: yet sith both their liues and their labours
had bin gods vndeemable debt, your vertues ought
to haue obeyed maugre al incounters of carnall affection.
And how much more in this case should you

incline your loue to Gods liking, in which hee hath
receiued a lesse part of his owne, and that by the vsuall
easiest course of natures lawes. Let God strippe
you to the skinne, yea to the soule, so hee stay with
you himselfe: let his reproch be your honour, his
pouertie your riches, and he in lue of al other frends.
Thinke him enough for this world, that must be all
your possession for a whole eternity: let others ease
their carefulnes with borrowed pleasures, not bred
out of the true roote, but begged of externall helps.
They shall still carry vnquiet mindes, easily altered
with euery accident, sith they labor not any change
in their inward distempers. But by forgetting them
for a time by outward pastimes, innocencie is the
only mother of true mirth, and a soule that is owner
of God, will quietly bare with all other wants, nothing
beeing able to empouerish it but voluntarie
losses. Beare not therefore with her losses, for shee
is won for euer, but with the momentarie absence
of your most happie sister, yea it can not iustly bee
called an absence, many thoughts being daily in parlee
with her, onely mens eies and eares vnwoorthie
to enioy so sweete an obiect, haue resigned their interest,
and interested this treasure in their hearts, being
the fittest shrines for so pure a Saint, whome as
none did knowe but did loue, so none can nowe remember
with deuotion. Men may behold her with
shame of their former life, seeing one of the frailer
sexe honour her weakenesse with such a traine of
perfections. Ladies may admire her as a glorie to
their degree, in whom honour was portraied in her
full likenesse, grace hauing perfected natures first

draught with all the due colours of an absolute vertue:
all women accept her as a patterne to immitate
her giftes, and her good partes, hauing beene so manifested,
that euen they that can teach the finest stitches
may themselues take new workes out of this
sampler. Who then could drinke any sorrowe out
of so cleere a fountaine, or bewaile the estate of so
happy a creature, to whome as to be her selfe, was
her praise, so to be as shee is, was her highest blis
                  •
               e.
You still floate in a troublesome sea, and you finde it
by experience a sea of dangers, how then can it pittie
you to see your sister on shoare, and so safely landed
in so blissefull an harbor?Iud. 15. Sith your Iudeth hath
wrought the glorious exploite against her ghostly
enemies, for the accomplishing whereof shee came
into the dangerous campe and warrefare of this life,
you may well giue her leaue to looke home to her
Bethulia to solemnize her triumph with the spoiles
of her victorie: yea you should rather haue wished
to haue beene Porter to let her in, than mourne to
see her safe returned. For so apparant hazardes shee
caried a heauenly treasure in a earthlie vessel,2. Cor. 
                     •
                  
                which
was too weake a treasurie for so high riches, sinne
creeping in at the window of our sences, and often
picking the lockes of the strongest hearts. And for
this it was laide vp in a surer, to the which the heauens
are walles, and the Angelles keepers. She was
a pure fish, but yet swimming in muddy streames, it
was now time to draw her to shoare, and to employ
the inwardes of her vertues to medicionable vses,
that laid on the coles of due consideration, they may
draw from our thoughts the Deuilles suggestions,Tob. 
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
               
and applied to their eyes,Tob. 
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                which are blinded with
the dung of flying vanities, the 
                  •
               lime of their former
vanities may fall off, and leaue them able to behold
the true light, the base shell of a mortall body was
vnfit for so pretious a Margarite,Ma
                     •
                  th. 13. and the Ieweller
that came into this world to seeke good pearles, and
gaue not onely all he had, but himselfe also to buic
them, thought now high time to bring her vnto his
bargaine, finding her growen to a Margarites full
perfection. She stoode vpon too lowe a ground to
take view of her Sauiors most desired countenance,Luke 19.
and forsaking the earth with Zacheus shee climed vp
into the tree of life, there to giue her soule a full repast
of her beauties. Shee departed with Iepthaes
daughter from her fathers house, but to passe some
moneths in wandring about the mountaines of this
troublesome worlde, which being now expired, she
was after her pilgrimage by couenant to returne to
be offered vnto God in a gratefull sacrifice, and to
ascend out of this desert like a stemme of perfume
out of burned spices. Let not therefore the crowne
of her vertue be the foile of your constancie, nor the
ende of her cumbers a renewing of yours. But sith
God was well pleased to call her, shee not displeased
to go, and you the third twist to make a triple cord,
saying,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                Our Lord gaue, and our Lord tooke away,
as it hath pleased our Lord, so hath it fallen
out: the name of our Lord
be blessed.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               Clara Ducum soboles, sup
                     •
                  ris noua sedibus hospes,
               Clausit in offenso tramite pura diem
               Dotibus ornauit, super auit moribus ortum,
               Omnibus vna prior. Par fuit vna sibi:
               Lux genus ingenio generi lux inclita virtus,
               Virtutisque fuit mens generosa decus.
               Mors mutat properata dies orbamque relinqui
                     •
                  ,
               Prolem matre verum coniuge 
                     •
                  lore genus,
               Occidit a se alium tulit hic occasus in ortum
               Viuat, ad occiduas non reditura vices.
            
            
               OF Howards stemme a glorious branch is dead,
               Sweet lights eclipsed were in her decease:
               In Buckehurst line she gracious issue spread,
               She heuen with two, with four did earth increase
               Fame, honour, grace, gaue aire vnto her breath,
               Rest, glorie, ioyes were sequeles of her death.
            
            
               Death aymed too high, he hit too choise a wight,
               Renowned for birth, for life, for liuely partes,
               He killd her cares, he brought her woorths to light,
               He robd our eyes, but hath enricht our hearts:
               Lot let out of her Arke a Noyes doue,
               But many hearts were Arkes vnto her loue.
            
            
               
               Grace, Nature, Fortune did in her conspire
               To shew a proofe of their vnited skill:
               Slie Fortune euer false did soone retire,
               But double Grace supplied false Fortunes ill:
               And though she raught not to her fortunes pitch,
               In grace and vertue few were found so rich.
            
            
               Heauen of this heauenly Pearle is now possest,
               Whose luster was the blaze of honors light:
               Whose substance pure of euery good the best,
               Whose price the crowne of vertues hiest right,
               Whose praise to be her selfe, whose greatest blisse
               To liue, to loue to be where now she is.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   