
      
         
            
            St. Saiuour of Southvvarke.
            
               ❧ A rate of duties belonging to the Corporation of the Churchwardens of the Pariſh of St. Sauiour of Southwarke, in the County of Surrye, aſwell in the right of the ſaid Corporation, as alſo in reſpect of their title to the Rectory of the ſaid Pariſh, agreed vpon by the generall conſent of the whole veſtry, and confirmed by the Ordinary of this place, in Anno Domini 1613. As followeth, Viz.
            
            
               Mariages with licence.
               
                  IMprimis, It is ordered and agreed that the Churchwardens ſhal haue for euery couple that ſhal bee married with licence.—viij. d
               And for the ſeruice of a Miniſter—iij. s
               And for the ſeruice of a Clarke—xiiij. d
               And for the ſeruice of a Sexton—vj. d
               
                  Summe v. s. iiii. d.
            
            
               Marriages without licence.
               
                  Item that euery couple married without licence in the accuſtomed time of marriage ſhall pay to the Churchwardens—iiij. d
               
                  Item for the ſeruice of a Miniſter—xiiij. d
               
                  Item for the ſeruice of a Clarke—viij. d
               
                  Item for the ſeruice of a Sexton—iiij. d
               
                  Summe ij. s vj. d.
            
            
               Marriages without licence at extraordinary times.
               
                  Item euery couple married at extraordinary times ſhall pay to the Churchwardens—vj. d
               For the ſeruice of a miniſter—xx d
               And for the ſeruice of a clarke—x d
               And for the ſeruice of a ſexton—iiij. d
               
                  Summe iij s. iiij. d
            
            
               Offerings at weddings.
               
                  Item that the Churchwardens ſhal haue for euery offering—xij. d
               And for the Miniſter—nihil
               
               And for the Clarke—nihil
               
               And for the Sexton—ij. d
               And for the conductor—ij. d
               
                  Summe xvj. d
            
            
               Marriage of women out of the Pariſh.
               For thoſe women that ſhal be married out of the pariſh and did dwell in the pariſh the Churchwardens ſhall haue—as aboue ſaid.
               For the ſeruice of a miniſter as aboue ſaid
               For the ſeruice of a clarke—as aboue ſaid
               For the ſeruice of a ſexton—as aboue ſaid
            
            
               Certificat of banes asked.
               The Churchwardens ſhall haue for the ſeru
                     •
                  ce of a miniſter for euery certificat. he ſhall make of the bands aſked—xij. d
            
            
               Chriſams.
               For euery Chriſam the Churchwardens ſhall haue—j. d
            
            
               Churchings.
               
                  Item that the Churchwardens ſhall haue at euery Churching—v. d
               And for the ſeruice of a Miniſter—ij. d
               And for the ſeruice of a clarke—ij. d
               And for the ſeruice of a Sexton—nihil
               
            
            
               Burials in the Chuch.
               
                  Item that the Churchwardens ſhall haue for the ground for euery man or woman that ſhall bee buried in the church, with an afternoones knell, or without it—xx. s
               And for the beſt blacke cloth—xij. d
               And for the ſecond blacke cloth—viij. d
               And for the third hearſecloth—iiij. d
               And for the worſt cloth—ij. d
               And for the ſeruice of a Miniſter if he fetch the corps—xvi. d
               But if he fetch not the corps—viij. d
               And for the ſeruice of a Clarke if he fecth the corps—xii. d
               If he fetch it not—vi. d
               And for the ſeruice of a Sexton if he fetch the corps—viii. d
               If he fetch not the corps—iiii. d
               The grauemaker—xvi. d
               The conducter—iiii. d
               The foure bearers whether they beare the corps or not, ſo they giue attendance—xvi. d
            
            
               Burials in the Chauncel.
               
                  Item for the ground for euery man or womam buried in the chauncell with a knel, or without, the churchwardens ſhall haue—xxvi. s. viii. d
               And for the ſeruices of a Miniſtet and reſt of the officers as aboueſaid.
            
            
               Burials of ſtrangers.
               
                  Item for the burial of ſtrangers the Churchwardens ſhall haue double duties, and euery other officer double alſo.
            
            
               Burials of children in the Church.
               
                  Item for euery childe buried in the Church being vnder the age of twelue yeeres, the churchwardens ſhall haue—vi. s. viii. d
               In the chauncell—x. s
               For the ſeruice of a Miniſter if he fetch the corps—xii. d
               If he fetch it not—viii. d
               For the ſeruice of a clarke if he fetch the corps—viii. d
               If he fetch it not—vi. d
               For the ſeruice of a ſexton if he fetch the corps—vi. d
               If he fetch it not—iiii. d
               The grauemaker—xii. d
               For ſuch as ſhall die in this pariſh and be buried in an other pariſh, ſhall be paid ſuch like duties to this pariſh, as if hee or ſhe had been buried here in like manner,
            
            
               Burials in any Churchyard next the Church.
               
                  Item the Churchwardens ſhal haue for the ground for euery man or woman that ſhall bee buried with a coffin in any churchyard next the church—ii. s
               Without a coffin—xvi. d
               For the ſeruice of a Miniſter if he fetch the corps.—xii. d
               If he fetch not the corps—viii. d
               For the ſeruice of a clarke if he fetch the corps—viii. d
               If he fetch it not—iiii. d
               For the ſeruice of a Sexton if he f
                     •
                  tch the corps.—vi. d
               It he fecth it not—iiii. d
               The grauemaker if there be a coffin. viii d
               If no coffin—iiii d
               The foure bearers as afore ſaid.
               For the clothes as aforeſaid.
            
            
               Burials of a childe in either of the ſaid Churchyards next the Church.
               For the ground buried with a coffin. viii. d
               Without a coffin—iiii. d
               For the miniſters ſeruice if he fetch the corps.—viii. d
               If he fetch it not—iiii. d
               For the clarkes ſeruiſe if he fecth the corps—viii. d
               If he fetch it not—iiii. d
               For the Sextons ſeruice if he fetch the corps—iiii. d
               If he fetch it not.—ii d
               The grauemaker if there be a coffin—iiii d
               If no coffin—ii. d
            
            
               Burials in the Colledge Churchyard of man or woman.
               For the ground if there be a coff
                     •
                  n.—xii. d
               If no coffin—viii. d
               For the Miniſters ſeruice if he fetch the corps.—xii d
               If he fetch it not—viii. d
               For the Clarkes ſeruice if he fetch the corps.—viii. d
               If he fetch it not—iiii. d
               For the Sextons ſeruice if he fetch the corps—vi. d
               If he fetch it not—iiii. d
               The grauemaker if there be a coffin—viii. d
               If no coffin—iiii. d
               The foure bearers as aforeſaid.
               For the cloathes as aforeſaid.
            
            
               Burials in the Colledge Churchyard of a childe.
               For the ground if there be a coffin—iiii. d
               If no coffin—ii. d
               For the Miniſters ſeruice and other officers as aforeſaid in the other Churchyards.
            
            
               The Churchwardens duties for the Bels.
               For an afternoones knell with the great Bell, if the party bee not buried in the Church.—iiii. s
               For an houres knel with the Lady bell—
               For an houres knel with a leſſer bell viii d
               To the Sexton for an afternoones knel with the great bell iiii. s
               For an houres knell with the Lady bell—
               For an houres knell with a leſſer bel iiii. d
               For the paſſing bell if it be with the great Bell—xii. d
               With the Lady bell—viii d
               With the leſſer Bell—iiii. d
               To the Miniſter for euery child baptized Item the Clarke is to haue for regiſtring the name of the childe baptized—ii. d
               
                  Item, it is ordered that the grauemaker ſhall make euery man and womans graue (if there be a coffin) fiue foot and an halfe deep if the ground will ſerue, if without a coffin, foure foot & a halfe. Euery childs graue with a coffin foure foot deepe, without a coffin three foot and a halfe.
               For burial of the poore of of the Colledge and all other ordinary weekely penſioners of the poore of this paciſh—nihil Sauing to the grauemaker and bearers two pence a peece.
               
                  Item it is ordered that the Clarke ſhall make a bill of the charges of euery buriall, and ſhall deliuer the ſame bill to the party that is to pay the charges if it be demanded.
               Alſo it is ordered that the Clarke ſhall bring euery ſuch Bill to one of the Churchwardēs, to the end the Churchwardē may ſet his hand thereto, that ſo the party may know it to be a true bill.
            
         
      
   