
      
         
            
            
               
A TRVE RELATION OF THAT VVHICH LATELY HAPNED TO the great Spanish Fleet, and Galeons of Terra Firma in America.
            
            
               WITH Many strange Deliueries of Captaines, and Souldiers in the tempest, and other remarkable Accidents, worthy the Obseruation.
            
               ALSO, A Catalogue of those persons of account, which cytner perished in this Tempest, or were miraculously preserued.
            
               Faithfully translated out of the Spanish Originall, as it is printed and published in Madrid, Sevil, Lishbone, and other places.
            
            
               LONDON Printed for Nathaniel Butter, Nicholas Bourne, and William Sheffard, 1623.
         
         
            
            
            The Printer to the Reader.
            
               THis Spanish Originall comming to my hands most opportunely, tooke the aduantage of my liking it, and sudden apprehension, that it would please the Reader, whosoeuer: not so much because thereby is proposed a kinde of variety of Newes, as in that the glory of God is made apparant in his workes, and wonderfull prouidence, that can preserue men out of raging seas, and afford his mercy when wee thinke that it is quite denied vs: And although I may incurre an imputation by leaning more to the true sense, then to the words, as they lye in order: yet I will be bold to say, that the sentences here extended, shall neither receiue exoticke interpretation, nor bee carryed with any wanton hand from the true meaning:

Be therefore thus fauourable I pray, to reade it without a strict comparison of the originall. and accept of an honest intent, that aymeth as much at the satisfaction of worthy deseruers, as any profit can arise out of so meane a worke.
         
      
      
         
            
            A RELATION OF THE SVCCESSE of the Galeons, and the whole Fleet of Terra Firma.
            
            
               THe 22. of August, 1622, the whole Fleet of Terra Firma, (that is to say, such Ships of Spaine and Galeons belonging to his Maiesty, 
                  〈◊〉
                dispersed, or imploy
                  •
                in the seuerall Harbors or Ports of America, or, if you had rather, the West-Indies) assembled themselues and came together into the Port of Hauana, a place belike appointed, as a Rendezvous, whither the Nauy might repayre to make their returne home. Whereupon the Generall, or, as you please, the Admirall, on the 23 of August, by publique Proclamation commanded that euery ship should register the gold, siluer, bullion, merchandise, and other moueables, into their bookes of account, or office of the Admiralty, because they had a purpose to put to Sea and set Sayle the 28 day.
            
               
But considering the small dispatch was made, and the multitude of businesse wherewith they were encumbred, they cast many doubts of loosing at all, or putting from the harbour vntill the coniunction of the Moone was past, whose effects they expected the 5. of September: Whereupon the Marquesse Gouernour of Hauana and the Country, called a Councel, summoning the officers, and proposing to the assembly, what was most necessary and befitting to be done for the conueniency and security of the whole Nauy: so there came accordingly the land-Gouernor or Generall ouer the Souldiers, the Admirall of the Armado, the Captaine Generall of the Fleet, and his Admirall; the Superuisor or Treasurer, the Captaines of the Souldiers, and the Pilots, who with one consent determined, that in regard this Coniunction in September did commonly in those parts bring clouds and obfuscation of ayre, which would not vanish without tempests, and turbulent winds, it was a seasonable prouidence, and befitting the security of the Armado, to remaine quietly in harbour, vntill the foresaid Coniunction were elapsed, which no question the same night would manifest her operation to some purpose.
            Vpon this resolution they prepared themselues, and setled their affaires to tarry the times appointment, and then to set forward their pretended voyage. But that euening promised such faire weather, and a serene Element, with a pleasant and sociable gale of winde continuing two or three dayes together, made them all repent, and wish they had taken hold of opportunity, and set forward their iourney,

which caused the Generall to consent to their importunities, and associate them as I may say, in their hopes: insomuch, that after generall musters, on Sunday the 4 of September, by breake of day they weighed anchors, and hoysed their sayles, accommodating the ships out of harbour to the best purpose. There were 28. ships with their Admirall; 8. Galeons; 3. Pinaces; and other attendants, vpon the Fleet, with their consorts. They sayled forward very prosperously, and had a time of fayre expectation. But Munday approaching, which was the day of the Coniunction, the weather according to former coniecture seemed to change, and the winde comming to North-east raised both a care and a feare in the Admirall: Besides, the Galeons forecasting all the wayes to preuent subsequent mischiefe, woond vp their maine sailes, and tyed them fast to their yards, and aduanced only their Missens, making vse of their Bosprels, and in a word put in practice all the meanes which art and industry could afford to scape the danger.
            But it should seeme, that tempests will haue their courses, and are inexorable: For the wind increased and so whistled, that it would not hearken to the whistling of the Mariners, the clouds thickned and ouer mantled the Horizon, and the ayre was so dark and formidable, that they could not discerne one ship from another; by which chance, or rather disasterous mischance, ere it was full noone, the winds continuing, and as it were couenan
                  •
               ing to perpetrate some outragiousnesse, all the Galeons were dissipated and disseuered, and the most part of the Fleet

for their better passage went before the wind, and tooke a course to saue themselues as well as they could: In which violence they were driuen from one another, and the wind continued so impetuous, that it not onely vnloosed their tacklings and sayles, but brake asunder their fore-masts, and rent their maine yards in shiuers, so they had no shift but to beare no sayle at all, or crosse the wind as they could.
            But as waues roule after waues, one mischiefe followes another: for presently the wind turned to the South, which although it gaue them leaue the better to accommodate themselues, and endure the tempest, yet it brought raine, and the Sea wrought as high as it did before: then they seared another misfortune, to be thrust or hurried into some creeke or bay of the coast of Florida, which they much susspected by the great and wonderfull haste they had made (for they commonly ranne fiue or sixe leagues euery glasse) and then there was no hope but either splitting on the sands, or perishing on the shore.
            This storme and fearfull tempest continued with all outragiousnesse vntill Tuesday following, then by breake of day they assumed comfort that all was not lost and cast away: for they discried some ships afarre off, who as it seemed determined to returne to the Port of Hauana, in which course such as had masts and sayles prepared themselues, and the rest that were bruised and broken, as farre as they could discerne one another, laboured to doe the like, and prosecute the same course.
            
               
They began to enter the harbor the 10. of Septemb. and continued till the 14. The Galeons which were saued were the first, and so other ships followed, after they had knowledge of one another. The same day ariued the Galeon S. Ann de Real, hauing lost her maine Maste: with her came Captain or Admirall Esteuan Delgado, whose ship was laden with the merchandise of the said Port of Hauana, she entred in safety without any impeachment, or wrecke of the tempest.
            The 11. entred the Admirall of Terra firma, or the Continent, with the losse of her maine Maste: in her company was a ship of Cadiz, who sustained no detriment, but had all her masts and tacklings in order.
            The 13. ariued the Admirall of Manana, with all her Masts. The same day came the Admirall Reall, though somewhat late, hauing recouered 11 ships of of the Fleet, and certaine Pinaces, wherein were 50. persons of the bay of Tortuga, who liue vnder 25 degrees. This Admirall likewise escaped without losse of a tackling.
            Other ships which were not of the Fleet, came also from the Ilands into the same harbor without impeachment, obseruing the time of happy and seasonable departure from the North of S. Domingo.
            
         
         
            
            What Galeons and Ships were lost, and perished in this tempest.
            1 THe Admirall of the whole Fleete following the storme, and driuen by the winde with the fore-saile of the middlemost Maste, ran Northward all night and the next day; whereupon shee proposed to rest in some harbour, or place of securitie on those shores: but suddenly shee came to shallow water, and in short space ranne her selfe on ground at two fathome water and a little more, where her beake brake a pieces, with the losse of her people, except three men and two boyes: this was on the Coast of Maracumbe in Florida.
            
            2 The Galcon Margerita followed the same course, and participated with the same fortune: For shee was lost the 8. day, comming to three fathome water, but she was violently thrust on a flat or sand: so that the keele sticking fast with the gusts ouer-great, and the billowes extreamely raging, the body shiuered all to pieces, and the passengers when it was apparant they could not escape, saw as little mercy in the Sea, as they had endured in the Winde.
            3. and 4. In the same houre, with the same tempest, and almost at the same place, two Ships of the Fleet were swallowed in the Sea, and perished before they could approach the shore: but yet Captaine don Bernardine de Lugo was miraculously saued

on a piece of timber, though some say a broken hatch, which the Sea wasted toward the shore, and 60. persons or soldiours of his company escaped vpon diuers things, to the broken carkasse of the former Admirall, and so by degrees, made shift to saue their liues.
            5 A Frigot, which came from Cartagena with Portugals was lost at Tortuga, in one of those dangerous Creekes, and vnknowne Promontories: there were in her 56. persons, who all escaped vpon seuerall chests and plankes.
            6 The Admirall Th: de Luspam saued himselfe in a little shallop, which the Galeon drew after him: For when he saw no remedie, he cut off the rope, and with a conuenient number rowed aboue three leagues in the Sea, till at last they droue themselues into a streight, and so come ashore.
            7 The Galeon of our Lady del Rosario, wherein Captaine Chacurretta was Commander, likewise perished, not without great suspition before hand: she rann aground, as the Admirall did, so that none of the Ships that came into the Harbour could giue an account of her, vntill a certaine Barke arriued the 22. of September at the Port of Hauana with Letters from the said Captaine, which aduertised them, that the said Galeon perished in Tortuga, all the company escaping miraculously, who had the fortune to saue themselues with conuenient victuall and necessary suppliments, keeping firme stations on their chests, masts, and such other things.
            8. and 9. Moreouer two other ships were thought and adiudged lost, because they were not heard of after

the storme. But if you will be acquainted with a wonder indeed. The Pilot of the Margarita was miraculously saued vpon the rib of a ship, on which he was caried fiue daies together in the Sea, and sustained his life by a bird, or reasonable bigge foule which came to his hand, vntill a Pinace passing by him in a most seasonable time, tooke him in and brought him to safe Harbour.
            
               A Catalogue of those persons of account, which either perished in this tempest, or were miraculously preserued.
               IN the Galeon: N. S. our Lady Nostra Segniora of H. Hocha, the Admirall of the Fleet, there went these persons following, who all were drowned, except such as shall be afterwards named to be saued.
               The Admirall himselfe, Don Pedro Pasquies de Esparza: Knight of the Order of Calatraua.
               
               
                  Of the company of Captaine Bartholmew Garcia de Nodal.
                  Captaine Bartholmew Garcia de Nodal, with his Ancient, and Sargeant.
                  He that bare his Colours in the absence of the Ensigne, Iames de Aranda.
                  
                  The Drummer Iohn de Carmona.
                  
                  The Drummer Diego Hermandez.
                  
               
               
                  Of Souldiers.
                  
                     Ieronimo de Mencos the sonne of Iohn Taffulla.
                  
                  
                     Peter Baxelagayoso the sonne of Ferdinand of Orense.
                  
                  
                     Francis Corren de Meneses son of Anthony of Malaga.
                  
                  
                     M. Iacinto Rumiera the son of Michael of Valladolid.
                  
                  
                     Iohn de Flores sonne of Esteuan of Antequara.
                  
                  
                     
                     M. Gregory of Filguyera sonne of Antonio Gomes, a dweller, or naturall of Talaucra.
                  
                  
                     M. Iohn de Prado son of Antonio Gomes of Tataucra.
                  
                  
                     M. Iames Ruyz son of the same, of the port of S. Mary.
                  
                  
                     Don Anthony of Francosa sonne of Alonso of Tuy.
                  
                  
                     M. Aluaro de Medeos son of the same, of Cartagena.
                  
                  
                     M. Lewis de la Coba sonne of Alonso of Baesa.
                  
                  
                     M. Sebastian Guytan sonne of Andrew Hernandes of Cadiz.
                  
                  
                     M. Iacinto Ferrer sonne of Peter of Valencia.
                  
                  Sergeant Iohn de Valasio.
                  
                  
                     M. Rodrigo Diaz of Cardoniga sonne of Alfonso of Orense.
                  
                  
                     M. Peter Diaz of Curdoniga sonne of the same.
                  
                     Peter Pardo sonne of Diego of Castro.
                  
                  
                     M. Peter Ruyz de la Puente sonne of Iohn of Spinosa.
                  
                  Corporall Alonso de Guzman, sonne of Diego, an inhabitant of Marchuela.
                  
                  The Corporall of Cast. Don Alonso of Piedrota.
                  
                  
                     M. Diego of Suntigo sonne of Gaspar Paez of Balbol of Paz.
                  
                  
                     M. Peter Colodero son of Bartholmew Gomez of Iaen.
                  
                  
                     Anthony de la Chica sonne of Iohn Gomez of Buena.
                  
                  The Ensigne Christopher d' Solo guren, a man well knowne and reputed of.
                  Corporall Iohn Ramos sonne of Diego of Talanene.
                  
                  
                     Don Lopez de Vllon sonne of Peter of Ponteuedra.
                  
                  
                     M. Mathew de Solazar sonne of Bartholmew de Vega of Ponteuedra.
                  
                  
                     Iohn de Torres, sonne of the same man of Seuill.
                  
                  
                     Amaro Nunnez of Nodall sonne of Alonzo de S. Vincent of Ponteuedra.
                  
                  
                     
                     M. Iohn of the Church, sonne of the same.
                  
                     M. Iohn Baptista Aguado, son of the same of Valdalaien.
                  
                  
                     Iohn de Ribas.
                  
                  
                     M. Iohn Polo, sonne of Diego of Xeres de la Fontera.
                  
                  
                     Andrew Peres, son of Domingo, of the City Adrigo.
                  
                  
                     Corporall Iohn de Viso, sonne of Bartholmew of Bayon.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Fustamante, sonne of Iohn Bautista of Ronda.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Peres de Espinosa, sonne of Francis of Seuill.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Rodriguez, sonne of Albert of Tarisa.
                  
                  
                     Peter Maiordomo, the sonne of Peter Baiona.
                  
                  
                     Baltazar of Arenato, the sonne of Iaspar of Indel.
                  
                  
                     Alonson Valentine, the sonne of the same man.
                  
                     Antonio Rodriguez, sonne of Alonso of Ianaucra.
                  
                  
                     Diego Cordon of Contereras, son of Martin of Xezana.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Fernandes sonne of Melchar of Badez.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Daniel son of the same man of Zaragoza.
                  
                  
                     Francis Marinez son of Iohn of Seuilla.
                  
                  
                     Domingo Alonso son of Iohn of Carato.
                  
                  
                     Sebastian Montaro son of Iohn Rodrigues of Xeres.
                  
                  
                     Bartolmew Peres sonne of Iohn of Argurre.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Philippe Romero son of Iohn of Seuill.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Baptista de Sales sonne of the same of Burgos.
                  
                  
                     Alonso Vasques sonne of Sebastian of Lucar.
                  
                  
                     Iacinto de Montillo sonne of Diego of Granoda.
                  
                  
                     Pasqual Estcuan sonne of Iohn of Madrid.
                  
                  
                     Gregory Esteuan sonne of Alsonso of Madrid.
                  
                  
                     Francis de Aquirre sonne of Peter of Gibraltar.
                  
                  
                     Lorenzo Martinez sonne of the same of Sanclemente.
                  
                  
                     Don Fausto of Cauanillas and Castrexon, naturall of Iudela.
                  
                  
                     Sebastian Ferrer son of Iosehp of the port of S. Maria.
                  
                  
                     Sebastian Diaz son of the same, naturall of Cutatreza.
                  
                  
                     Don Iohn of Garibay sonne of Generall Iohn Gutierez
                     
                     de Gariba, he was the leader of a squadron of Pikes of the Company of Bernardine de Lugo.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Cauallero sonne of Sebastian Sanches, a naturall of the Port of S. Maria.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Cordero sonne of Iohn Viegas of Faro.
                  
                  
                     Laureano de Quinones sonne of Lazaro of Sevil.
                  
                  
                     Antonio de Feria sonne of the same of Gibraltar.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Vasquez sonne of Diego Alonso of Salamanca.
                  
                  
                     Rodrigo Nunnez sonne of Gracian of Gibraltar.
                  
                  
                     Alonso Romero sonne of the same of Caracena.
                  
                  
                     Diego Vrbano sonne of the same of Vitoria.
                  
                  
                     Don Martin of Cuena sonne of Michel of Zaragoza.
                  
                  
                     Don Alonso Farfan sonne of Don Alonso Fernandez of Trexo a naturall, or natiue of Sevilla.
                  
                  
                     Diego de la Cruz sonne of Diego of Albarquerque.
                  
                  The Serjeant Antony de la Cruz.
                  
                  
                     Rodrigo de Cequiero sonne of Antonio Peres.
                  
                  
                     Amaro Garcia sonne of the same of Ponteuedra.
                  
                  
                     Michael de Arregin sonne of Sanco of the town Ycaua.
                  
                  
                     Austin Embrun sonne of the Licentiate Embrun of Sevill.
                  
                  There was also a Souldier of Don Michaels Company de Reden.
                  
               
               
                  Men belonging to Sea-affaires of the said Galeon Almiranta.
                  THe Master of the siluer, or Ouer-seer of the treasure, Capt. Iames of Vreder.
                  
                  The Surveyor Iohn de Licaraza,
                  
                  Master of the allowances or Vittaile, Peter Camarillo.
                  
                  The Boteswaine Mathew Martin.
                  
                  The Guardian Francis Sanchez sonne of Doming of S. Lucar.
                  
                  The Marshall Peter Rodriguez sonne of the same of S. Lucar.
                  
                  
                     
The Cooper Sebast. Martin son of Manuel of Sevilla.
                  
                  The Cooper Iohn de la Iglesia son of Peter of Sevilla.
                  
                  The Chaplen & Licentiat Anth. Pernandezual Priest.
                  The Calcar of the ship Iohn Dominguez son of Peter Mathew of Ayamonte.
                  
                  The diuer Iohn Baptista Moreto son of Simon of Genoa
                  
                  The clark Philip Martin Culderon of Sevil his sonne.
                  The Surgeon Cicilio de Ribero sonne of Barnardo.
                  
                  The Calcar Iohn de Lagur son of Michael of the port of S. Maria.
                  
                  The Carpenter Pet. of Huerta, son of the same of Sev.
                  
                  The Carpenter Iohn de Burto son of the same of Seuil.
                  
                  The Pilot Martin Ximenez.
                  
                  His companion Francis de Cardenas Gargy.
                  
               
               
                  Mariners.
                  
                     DIego Gomez sonne of Simon of S. Lucar.
                  
                  
                     Gonsalo Rodriguez son of Francis of Ayamonte.
                  
                  
                     Diego Martin sonne of Francis Dias of Moguer.
                  
                  
                     Francis Carasio son of Christoual of Cadiz.
                  
                  
                     Ieronimo Ferete son of Peter of Cadiz.
                  
                  
                     Michael Esteuan son of Francis Vasquez of S. Lucar.
                  
                  
                     Peter de Chauarria of Cadiz.
                  
                  
                     Lewis Iordan son of Iocomo of Cadiz.
                  
                     Manuel Diaz sonne of Diego of Tauira.
                  
                  
                     Andrew Gomez sonne of Simon of Xerez.
                  
                  
                     Alonso Martin son of Ioseph of Cadiz.
                  
                     Ion Michael son of Michael of S. Lucar.
                  
                  
                     Peter Velasio son of Alonso Diaz of Ayamonte.
                  
                  
                     Francis Perez son of Iohn of Ayamonte.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Dominguez son of Christouall of Ayamonte.
                  
                  
                     Francis Rodriguez son of the same of Ayamonte.
                  
                  
                     Melchior Velasquez son of Mich. General of S. Maria.
                  
                  
                     Esteuan de Requaburen son of Domingo of S. Sebastian.
                     
                     Iohn de Xanregui, son of the same of Bernizo, Peter Quintero, son of Rodrigo of Huclua, Andrew Ximenes, son of the same of Seuill, Lucas Lorenzo, son of Lorenzo Lucas of Cadiz, Alonzo de Torris, son of Melchor Alfencio, of the Ile Tenerif, Domingo Pere
                           •
                        ra, son of Gonzalo of Lugos, Domingo Antonio, son of the same of Faro: Manuel Ferera, son of Vasco Vincente of Lugos, Stephen Rodriguez, son of the same, Vasco Ferera, son of the same, Francis Xauelo, son of the same, Domingo Rodriguez, son of Francis Perez of Lugos, Gonzales T
                           •
                        go, son of Sancho of Lisboa, Christopher Martoquin, son of the same, of Lugos, Antonio Hermandez, son of Peter Gonzales of Tanira, Manuel Diaz, son of the same of Lisboa, Martin Manuel, son of Matthew of Vellaneuua, Iacome Garcia, sonne of the same, of Ponteuedra.
                  
               
               
                  Ship-Boyes.
                  
                     Christopher de mirande, son of Peter Martin of Sanlucar, Iohn Munnos, son of Ambrosio of Sanlucar, Sebastian Rodriguez, son of the same, of Sanlucar, saued. Iohn de Villegaz, son of Ferdinand of Lufra: Iohn Diego, son of Diego Michael of Sanlucar, Sebanstian de Arnia, son of the same, of Moguer: Hernan Diaz, son of Iaspar of Tunira, Nicholas Romero, son of Iohn of Sanlucar, Peter Runez, son of the same, of Sanlucar, Melchor de los Reies, son of Matthew Rodriguez of Ayamonte, Francis Miscino, son of Matthew of Sanlucar, Iohn Peres, son of Gonzales of S. Leucar, Iohn Sobrana, son of Francis of Tercera, Peter Betinez, son of Damian of S. Leucar, Ieronimo Franco, son of Lewis Burexa, of S. Leucar, Iohn Diaz, son of Michael of S. Leucar, Christopher de Soto, son of the same, of Seuill: Mannuel of Petega, son of the same, of S. Leucar: Dionisius of Oliuera, son of Fratuoso of Furo: Diego Rodriguez, son of Francis
                     
of S. Lucar, Peter Maria Lopez, son of Lazaro of Genda: Iohn de Falas, son of Alonso Diaz of Ayamonte, Alonso de Perulfa, son of Iohn of Sanlucar, Martin Garcia, son of Alonso Ruiz of Monguer: Iohn Martin, son of Lorenzo of Seuill, Iohn Suarez son of the same, of S. Iiago: Iohn of Ecija, son of Lewis of Ecija: Matthew Buyz, son of Iohn of the valley of Baldiniofa: Diego de Calatraua, son of the same: Francis Nunnez, son of Antonie of Seuill, saued: Francis de Silua, son of Gonzules of Ayamonte: Dominigo Roifriguez: Iasper Hernandes, son of Domingo of Portiman: Aluaro Fernandes, son of Gregory of Lugos: Anthony Lorenzo: Sebastian Hernandez, son of Nicholas de Tupinna, a nationall of the Iland Mudera: Gregory Fernandes of Logos, Iohn Cordero, son of Diego Martin of Guelua: Anthony Fernandes, son of Christopher of Borges, Alfonso Lorenzo, son of the same of Ponteuidua, Iohn Francis.
                  
               
               
                  Seruants that were lost.
                  
                     Lazaro de Medina son of Diego of San Lucar, Thomas de Aquino, son of Lazaro of S. Lucar, Iohn Mumioz, son of Alonso of S. Lucar. Francis Rodriquez, son of Bartholmew Dominges of S. Lucar, Peter de Roa, son of Iohn of Seuill: Francis negro Allezudo, Luas Stenez, son of Francis Perez of Ayamonte: Blas de Iglesias, son of Aluaro of S. Lucar: Iohn de Aze
                           •
                        tuno, son of the same of Tulunaro delu Reyna: Peter de Flores, son of Iohn Dominques of S. Leucar: Manuell de Morales, son of Anthonio of Aymonte: Peter Garcia, son of Iohn of the Porte S. Mary: Peter de Casabon, son of the same of S. Lucar: Sebastian Ruyx, son of Alonso of Curtagena.
                  
               
               
                  Gunners or Officers of the Ordnance.
                  
                     The Constable, Lope Ramos: Armero Lewes de la Testa: Fernando de Vannos son of the same of Vbeda: Peter Sunchez,
                     
                     son of the same of Seuill: Lewis Galaiz, son of Christopher Daniell, of Port S. Mary: Iohn Prieto, son of the same, of Seuill: Mathew Fernandes, son of Manuel of Seuill: Francis de Gusinan, son of Christopher, of Seuill: Sebastian de Arumbara, son of Iohn Martinez of Fuenzabia, Alonso Palamine: Rexedel, son of V
                           •
                        icont of Seuill: Diego Henriquez, son of Gaspar of Cadiz, Ieronimo de Luna, son of the same, of S. Lucar
                           •
                        : Bartholmew de Cesar son of the same, of S. Lucar: Iohn Rodriuuez, son of Diego Ruyz, of Auentudo of Cadri, Mathew Gomez, son of Domingo de fonzecu of S. Leucar: Iohn Martin, son of Anthony of Seuill: Iohn Foelix Caro, son of Cristopher Rodriquez of Seuill.
                  
               
               
                  The Passengers in the saip Galeon, the Admirall.
                  
                     Father Master, or Frier Peter dela madriz of the order of S. Astin Visitor of Peru: Friar Francis de Currion, his companion: Frier Anthony of S. Austin: Friar Christopher of vrtega: Don Iohn de sayauedia: Don Martin Buesso: Don Gunzalo Tamago, the Licentiate, Don Antony of Silua: the Licentiate, Lorrenza, Arius Nuglaber: Don Diego de Guzman, the Iusticer of Cusio: Don Diego de Guenar: Don Publo de Silua: Iohn Delgudo of Leon El Moco: Cristopher de Aspatia: The Secretarie Martin, Salyado: Donna Maria de Ayala his wife: Catalina: her nurse, or nurse childe, two girles, her seruants: the Licentiate Fragosa Cinrinno de Alcula: Donna Froncisin his wife: Donna Isabella de Pernia: Lewis Quintero, a neighbour of Callao: Donne Ieronima his wife: Peter Quintero, a neighbour of Arica: Donna Luise Quintaro his daughter: Michael de Vzarraga: Laurence of Arriola, a neighbour of Poto: Francis Arriambo, a neighbour of Toledo: Peter Valuerede: Donna Luisa de los Rios his wife: Iohn de Valuerd his son: Benitt de Castra, a Merchant
                     
                     of the Kings who went to be emploied: Alonso de $Word$, another Merchant: Don Martin de Vergunzo: Peter Gonzalez: Anthony de La Cruz: Luis de mesones, a brother of Iohn de Mesones: Diego de Yllesio, of a Moore and a Christian, eight seruants and slaues of the chamber.
                  
               
               
                  Such persons as were lost in the Gallion, Santa Margarita.
                  
                  
                     The Company of Captaine Bernardine de Lugo: Captaine Don Bernardine de Lugo saued: the Ensigne Don Diego de Contreras: the Serieant, Don Francis de Burio, saued: Auanderado, or the Ensignes seruant, Iohn Lopez, saued: The fife, Phillip de Beninsa: the Drommer, Domingo Perez, saued.
                  
               
               
                  Of Souldiers.
                  
                     Captaine Peter Martinez de Aliende: Iohn Lorenzo, son of the same, of Pontiuedra, Master Alonso Guldumez, saued. Master Andrew de ribas, the Surgeant: Christopher a Horseman, Master Ieronimo de Moron son of Martin of 
                           •…
                        rcos, Captaine Ieronimo Ortiz. Master Iohn Antonio 
                           •…
                        uche son of the same, of Cartegena in the Leuant, saued, Alonso Hernandez de Zafra: Captaine Michael Rico, son of Iohn of Fonterraby: Master Gaspar del Real, sonne of Iohn of Carmona: Iohn Rodriguez son of Peter Gonzalez of Ayamonte: Michael Agnodo son of Anton of Vilasto: Antony de Castro, son of Peter Fernandez of Montilla: Francis Nauarro son of the same of Carmona, saued. Master Iohn de Esquia
                           •…
                        l, son of Iohn Baatista of Moron: Master Thomas de Herreta, son of Anthony of Seuill: Diego de Aliende son of Peter of Vtrera: Martin Munnoz, son of Andrew of montilla, saued. Hernando de
                     
                     Surabia, son of Diego Rodriguez of Caceres: Don Francis of Sepulu
                           •…
                        da, son of Peter of Seuill: Francis Cortes son of Iohn Cauallero of Saint Lucar: Don Roque de Valasco son of Don Alonso of Miranda Anthonio Pedrique son of Diego of Saint Lucar, saued. Don Anthony de Valasco, son of Alonso of Miranda, saued. Francis Desanda, son of the same, of Villareall: Iusepe Ribera, son of Peter of Seuill: Peter de Valasco, son of the same, of Niebla: The Ensigne Iohn Baptista de Fantiago: Alonso Guerra son of the same, of Seuill: Ieronimo de Morales, son of Gabriel of Seuill: Francis Clauixo, son of Peter of Malaga: Michael Fernandez son of the same, of Leon, saued. Iayme Ferrer son of the same, of Elda: Peter Martin, son of the same, of Saint Lucar: The Sergeant Diego Gomez: Andrew Perez, sonne of Iohn Lorenzo of Saint Lucar, Martin de Mora son of the same, of the Citie Rodrigo: Benet Sanchez Neuado, son of Iohn of Caceres: Peter de Cabria, son of the same, of Reynosa, Saued: Iohn of Villa Neuua, son of Iohn Stephen, of Saint Lucar: Captaine Anthony Romero, son of Francis Lopes of Seuill: Lewis de Iain, son of Andrew Perez, of Seuill, saued: Peter Nunnez Rebollur, son of Alonso: Garcia of Carmona, saued, Michael Sanchez de Auila, son of Marcos Sanchez of Carmona: Isidor de Volle, son of Iohn of Villa Frechosa: Iohn de Ortega, son of Peter of Saint Lucar, s
                           •…
                        ued. Bartholmew Nauarro, son of Thome of Carmona: Fernando de Acosta, son of Gutierez of Burguillos: Anthony de Saint Michael, son of Diego of Ledesina, Anthony Martin, son of Alonso of Carmona, saued. Peter Nauarro, son of the same, of Carmona: Hernando de Acosta, son of Gutieres of Burguilloz: Anthonie of Saint Michael, son of Diego of Ledesia: Iohn Inigo, son of Iohn of Valencia: Iohn Stephen, son of Rodrigo of Almendra Lexo: The Sergeant maior, Manuel of Abren, saued. Francis de Alochon, son of An
                           •…
                        res of Madrid: Diego Reyes, son of Melchor of Cordona, saued.
                     
                     Iohn de Salus, son of Michael of Barcelona, saued. Thomas Gonzales, son of Alonso of Villanoua de la Fuente: Antonio Baptista, son of the same, of Seuill: Don Iohn de Villabeta: Nicholas Montero, son of Saluader of Seuill: Peter de la Fuentes son of the same, of Seuill: Leandro de Aquita, son of Francis of Granado: Don Anthony de Montsalue and Figuero, son of Gaspar des Rio: he was souldier to Gaspar de Vergas, and tooke salary of him: Iohn Rumirez Ossoria, son of Diego of Alcuna de Chucena, he was a Souldier in the company of Don Michael de Redin, and tooke salarie of him, saued: Iohn Zeribo, of the said Company.
                  
               
               
                  The Sea-men belonging to the said Galeon of Saint Margerita.
                  
                  
                     The Officers.
                     
                        The ouerseer of the treasure Peter Gatierez Espinosa: the surueyer, or his agent Austine de Aquines master of the allowance of victuall Martin Peroundia the masters mate or boatswain, Christopher Bernitez, son of the same, of Sanlucaar: the Guardian Iohn Baptista de Valuord, son of Christopher Sunchez of Cadiz, saued. The Steward, Iohn de Ve as son of Hernando of port Saint Mary: the marshall for the water, Lorenzo Garzill son of Diego of Cadiz, saued. The Calcar of the ship, Hernando de Morales, son of the same, of Cadiz: The Cooper Iohn Michaell, son of Martin Fouar of Seuill, saued: another Cooper, Hieronimo de Leon son of Gasper Rimero of Seuill, saued: another Calcar, Lope Mexia, son of Alonso Diuy of Frima, saued: the Clarke Toribia de Valdes son of Iohn of Miedo the Carpenter: Luic Garcie son of Iohn Rumos of the Harbour, The Carpenter Diego de Rocha, saued: The Clerke to say seruice, the Lis
                              •…
                           rtate Anthonie Ortiz, Ponce, he was a Priest-Clerke:
                        
                        the Pilot, Diego Roman: his companion 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            saued. The Surgeant, Iohn de Mercubo.
                     
                  
                  
                     Mariners.
                     
                        Iohn Duarte, the sonne of Michael of Passage: hee could not come on shipboord, by reason hee was sicke in the Hospitall of Hauana. Christopher Sunchez, sonne of the same Cadez, saued. Francis Lovez Correa, son of Iohn Rodrigo of Cadiz, saued. Rodrigo de Hoieda, son of Peter Telley, of St. Lucar, saued. Iohn de Barrios, son of the same of Triana, saued. Michael Vicent, son of Vicent Michael of Saint Lucar, saued. Iohn Benitez, son of the same of vert Saint Mary, saued. Manos Munnos, son of Peter of Saint Lucar, saued. Anthony Cordero, son of Lewis of Ayamonte, saued. Anthony Zamorano, son of the same of Ayamonte, saued. Sebastian de Duennas, sonne of Alexo Rodriguez. Christopher Rodriguez, sonne of Stephen of Xeres, Christopher Duran, son of the same of Saint Lucar, saued, as hauing embarked himselfe in another Galeone. Francis Correa, son of the same of Ayamonte, saued. Rodrigo Alonso, son of Iohn de Moron, of Aumonte, saued. Peter Sanchez, sonne of Stephan of Ayamonte, saued. Michael Ruzio, son of Austin of Aymonte saued. Francis Melgarcio, son of Iohn Ruyz of Aymonte, saued. Peter Gonzales, son of Domingo of Seuill. Iohn Mendozu, son of Thome de Cauaries. Michael Serouimo, son of Martin Ribere of Cadiz, saued. Sebastian Munnos, son of Francis of Saint Lucar. Iohn Rodriguez, saued. Gaspar de los Reuez. Dumian Cordero, son of Anthony Christopher of Braudes. Iohn Aluarez, son of the same of Tauira, saued. Pasquil Cordero. Domingo of the Tower, son of Iohn of Cadiz, saued. Saluador Vicente, saued. Domingo 
                              〈◊◊〉
                           , saued. Iohn de Lugue, saued. Iohn de Castilla, saued. Bartholmew
                        
                        de Medina, saued. Austin de Los Lautos. Francisco de sosa. Peter Cintado, saued. Bartholmew Lopez. Sebastian Aluares, son of the same, of Lisbon. Anthony Hernandez, son of Domingo of Opertoni Portugall.
                     
                  
                  
                     Ship Boyes.
                     
                        Peter Mexia, son of the former of Triana: Iohn of Vriburri, son of Martin of Bilbao: he did not imbarke himselfe being sicke on the shore. Iohn de Castro, son of Alonso of Triana, saued. Gonzalo Rodriguez, son of the same, of Port S. Mary. Francis Tinoco, son of the same, of S. Lucar. Laurence Mendez, son of Iohn of Ayamonte, saued Manuel Correa, son of Rodrigo of Lepe, saued. Christopher Carrasio, son of Francis Correa of Aymonte: he remained sicke in Cartagena. Domingo de Las Nieues, son of Iaspar of Ayamonte. Diego Martin Francisco, son of Iaspar Rumirez, a nationall of Lope. Andrew Gonzales, son of Bartholmew of Ayamonte, saued. Michael Hernandez, son of Manuel Rodriguez of Triana, saued. Nicholas de Mendoza, son of Iohn of Carmona. Michel Carasco son of Francis of Seuill, saued. Francis Ramires, son of the same, of Toledo saued. Peter Fermandez. Bernabe de Pin
                              •…
                           da, saued. Diego Morion, son of Francis of Toledo.
                     
                  
                  
                     Seruants.
                     
                        Francis de Sierra, son of Iohn of S. Luar. Peter de Castillo, son of Gonzales, Martin of S. Lucar. Iohn Marquez, son of Peter of S. Lucar. Francis of Azenedo, son of Anthonio of S. Leucar. Diego Zaez, son of the same, of Seuill. Lucus Francis, son of Antonio of Cadiz. Anthony Garcia, son of the same, of Sanlucar: another, Anthony Garcia, son of Adrian of S. Lucar, saued. Iohn Baptista de Biedma, son of the same of Seuill. saued.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The Gunners of the said Galleon.
                     
                        The Constable Marcos Perez, son of Alonso of Seuil
                              •…
                            Armero Iohn Rodriguez, son of the same, of Seuill, saued. Diego Perez son of the same, of the Port: Antonio Periera, son of the same, of San Lucar: Hernando de Aremo, son of Alonzo de Vargas, son of Iohn of Seuill: Iohn Suarez, son of the same, of Saint Lucar: Simon Rodriguez, son of Christopher of Saint Lucar, saued. Iohn de Vtrera, son of Domingo, of Saint Lucar, saued. Gonsalo Perez, son of the same, of Ayamonte: Peter Hernandez, son of the same, of Saint Lucar: Christopher Ramirez, son of Francis of Saint Lucar: Francis de Barrio, son of Lope of Saint Lucar: Martin Aluarez son of the same, of the Port, saued. Iohn Va
                              •…
                           tista, son of Peter of Saint Lucar: Francis de Bannos, saued. Don Francis Cen
                              •…
                           o, a Knight of thirtie 
                              〈◊〉
                            a moneths entertainment, for his estate and dignitie: a Gentleman Don Iohn de Cabrera, saued.
                     
                  
               
               
                  The Passengers which went in the said Galeon: Santa Margarita.
                  
                  
                     Don Francis de Barrios, gouernour of Caracas: Gaspar de Roxas: Don Francis of Roxas his cosin: Don Iohn de Merl
                           •…
                         de la Fuente: Seraphin Francis of Valence, son of Doctor Valencio: Father Iusepe of Arr
                           •…
                        aga of the societie of Iesus: Father Claudio Colci his companion: Francis de Tou
                           •…
                        r: Marias Lopez de Estremos, a neighbour of Lima: Benit Rodriguez: Iohn Felix: Don Iohn Caro de Castro: Anthonio de la Crux, a neighbour of Cartegena.
                  
                  
                     
So that there were 462. persons, as you may perceiue and vnderstand by this Relation, of seamen, souldiers and passengers, who embarked themselues in these two Galeons, that is to say, the Admirall of the Fleet, called our Lady of A
                           •…
                        tocha, and the S. Margarite, which (as some will haue it) signifies the ship of pearle, amongst whom perished 391. and 71. were saued, as is by the same apparant.
                  Concerning the rest, I finde no other mention in the originall, but what is briefly handled before: only the Author falls to some businesse, wherein they were imployed after the storme, which accordingly I thus prosecute, not varying from the true meaning of the same.
                  The 25. of September 1622. the great Marquesse aforenamed, Gouernour of Hauana, assembled once againe a Councell, to which all the Officers were summoned, about the returne into Spaine with the rest of the Fleet, concluding to depart after the coniunction of October, to which it should seeme they all condescended, except the Generall Iohn de Sara moran, the Admirall Thomas de la ray pura, and two principall Pilots of the Armado, or the whole Fleet, with the Pilot of the Admirall, who for diuers reasons, besides the great prouision and treasure in the same, did not thinke it fit or conuenient in so dangerous a time, and after so fearfull a warning, to aduenture so great a substance and so rich a prize into the hands of fortune, wind or weather; but rather to returne into Spaine at the Spring of the yeare, and make vse of a more prosperous season: to which aduice (as it should seeme) this Nauall Councell subscribed.
                  The eighteenth of September there departed from the

Port of Hauana three Barkes or Frigots, vnder the command of Captaine or Admirall Gaspar de Vargaz, whose charge was to search for the Artillery and treasure of the lost Galeons: and on Monday the 28. of September, after safe arriuall, they there summoned all the souldiers, sea-men and passengers, who were miraculously preserued in the tempest, when the said Admirall was lost vnder the command of Michael de Cazaretta, and whom at their comming in Florida they found in safetie, and with whom the said Gaspar de Vargas returned after they had discouered where the Admirall lay, which they might doe by the top-mast appearing aboue water, and so very fortunately they dispatched their vnfortunate businesse.
                  They diuided into these Frigots or small Barkes, the most part of the Artillery or Ordnance, which with great labour and industrie they got out of the Galeons, beginning first with her that perished in the Bay of Tortaga, but they were much troubled and encombred with two speciall peeces, which put them to excessiue 
                        •…
                     oile. Thus were they able in respect of the Fortresse of Tabaco to search further, and at conuenient leasure to effect that, which they came about: for this Fort being built and erected of purpose to keepe the inhabitants in awe, and debar strangers from any intrusion, as also to accommodate them, if by disastrous chance they should be driuen into these places, so watched the two perished Galeons, that they found what was to be found vntouched: whereupon the said Gaspar de Vargas writ of his successe to the Marquesse, and of the toile he sustained in the Margarite, with other aduentures, as the danger and wonderfull paines which the Diuers endured, and the Sailers proued, euen when they

were in the waste of the lost ships, whose bodies were broken to peeces, and lay in a manner vnder water.
                  When this was done, and that they could finde or recouer no more, at a quiet and a still water, in the company of Captaine Cazaretta they searched the Creeke, and the Bottome more narrowly for the bullion and treasure of the said Galleon of Rosario, and had the fortune to finde the most part of it, though it seemed smoked, blacked, and impeached with the owse and frettings of the water, yea after foure naturall daies they drew it all out with the losse onely of one Ingot.
                  The next worke in the harbour of Hauana, was the Currying and trimming such ships as had escaped the tempest, whereupon to be more able to furnish the three distressed Galeons that came Mastlesse into the harbor (as you haue heard) they cast a crosse a ship of Cadiz, and disrobed her, as I may say, taking her Masts, Tackling and furniture, whereby they supplied many wants, and as well as they could, masted the Galeons againe, so that they were thought fit and seruiceable to prosecute the voyage of the sea, when occasion should inuite them to returne into Spaine.
                  
                  The fourth of October, there came into the Port of Hauana, a certaine Frigot with twentie persons, and two Friars Vittorians, who saued themselues in a ship of new Cumpechana in the first voyage, when they accompanied the Fleet of new Spaine, and were cast a shore on the rockes, and Ilands of Bermuda, hauing beene hurried and tossed two daies together with a strange storme and wonderfull tempest, and yet the Galeons and most of their Fleet were saued, God be thanked, onely some ships perished,

amongst whom was theirs in which they first imbarked themselues; so that there were drowned 83 persons, who could by no meanes be prouided for, because one morning very early all the ship was couered with water and ready to sinke, whereupon the better sort procured to get into the boat, which with much adoe they effected, affoording leaue to none to enter but themselues, lest they should all perish, and so better saue some. They which went vp prouided one great basket of bisket, and a little fresh water, wherewith they sustained themselues, vntill they came into the harbour of Hauana 26. daies after their Nauigation, by which occasion many haue reported, that they had no other shallop, but the boat of the ship.
                  The 24. of October being Sunday, the Marquesse called a Councell againe for the concurrency of al businesse, wherein it was propounded to acquaint his Maiesty by some pinnesse or other aduenturer, with their present affaires, and so to prouide for the furnishing of the other ships for new Spaine, and if Captaine Gasparo de Veruas returned in the meane while, then might the occurrences and particulars of the scarches of the lost Admirall and Galeon of Saint Margarite be aduertised all together, according to the agreement of the court and assembly.
                  The second of Nouember died the Generall of the fleet, Iohn de Lara Moran of a Calenture, which ouer mastred him.
                  
                     Don Pedro de Vrsula, was also sent into Florida, to make further search in the Margarite and Admirall, for treasure and other things, while Captaine Gaspar de Vargas went to prouide especiall necessaries: but no man was permitted

to search the sides of the broken ships, which by this time were come to the shore, but the licensed Officers.
                  The 18. of Nouember Don Peter Vrsula, arriued at the Creeks, where the Galeons were lost, and began his aduenture for the finding of more treasure, God grant a good successe may crowne his seruice.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   