
      
         
            
            
            A true Diſcourſe of the Armie which the King of Spaine cauſed to bee aſſembled in the Hauen of Liſbon, in the Kingdome of Portugall, in the yeare 1588. againſt England. The which began to go out of the ſaid Hauen, on the 29. and 30. of May.
            Tranſlated out of French into Engliſh, by Daniel Archdeacon.
            Whereunto is added the verſes that were printed in the firſt page of the Dutch copy printed at Colen, with anſweres to them, and to Don Bernardin de Mendozza.
            
            
               2. King. 19. ver. 28.
               Becauſe thou rageſt againſt me, and thy tumult is come vp to mine eares, I will put mine hooke in thy noſtrels, and my bridle in thy lippes, and will bring thee backe againe the ſame way thou cameſt.
            
            
            Imprinted at London by Iohn Wolfe. 1588.
         
         
            
            
            The Epiſtle to the Reader.
            
               IT hath beene alwayes (Chriſtian Reader) a continuall practiſe of the wicked and vngodly, not onely neglecting the almightie to truſt in their owne might: but relying on themſelues and theyr own power to glory and boaſt thereof vnto the world. So we reade in the firſt age of the world, Lamec truſting to the inuentions of his ſons Iabal, Iubal, and Tubalkaijn, boaſteth himſelfe vnto his wiues that hee would not take the leaſt iniurie, no not of the meaneſt perſon, but he woulde ſlay a ſtrong man in his wound and a yong man in his hurt.

               Nimrod in the ſecond age waxing mightie on the earth, and without all reuerence of the Lord, or (as the ſcripture ſpeaketh) in the preſence of the Lorde, hunting men like wilde beaſtes, neuer lefte vntill by his curſed ſeede hee had erected hym a tower whoſe top might reache vnto heauen, thereby to get him a name, and to ſhewe vnto the world what hee was able to doe. To conclude the like vaineglory, wee reade of Nabuchadnezar, Nichanor, and diuers other.
            But as this hath bene a continuall cuſtome of the wicked, ſo they haue not herein reſpected or had regard vnto any thing more, then firſt the encouragement of their owne, I meane the vngodly, then the diſcouragement of the faithfull and godly: for heereby they would ſeeme to perſwade them, that for as much as they are fewe and weake, as the

godly alwaies are in reſpect of the wicked, and therefore not able to match or counteruaile thē in power, they are not to ſtand with them, but as others haue done to yeeld to thē: to this end tendeth the proud boaſt, and vaunt of blaſphemous Rabſchake Embaſſadour to that wicked Senacharib. Make warre ſaith he to Eliakim with my maiſter the king of Aſſiria, and I will deliuer thee two thouſand horſes, if thou be able to ſet riders on them. And afterwarde haue any of the gods of the nations by any meanes deliuered their land from the king of Aſsiria: where are the Gods of Chanath and Arphad? where are they of Sepharuaijm and Hhiuua? nay haue they deliuered Samaria, that the Lord ſhould deliuer Ieruſchalaijm out of my hand. Thus to the diſcouragement of the people of the Lord Rabſchake vaunteth and boaſteth himſelfe.
            
               Inferiour to none of theſe are at this day our Italian Lamec and Spaniſh Nimrod, the pope I meane and the Spaniſhe king: the one whereof truſting to the inuentions and practiſes of his prieſtly progenie, to ſmall and great threatneth death without cauſe, being ſo much worſe then curſed Lamec, the other hauing with Nimrod, like beaſtes hunted men with dogges in India, woulde fayne vſe the like practiſe heere in England, and hath by hys ſhips, made like Babel towers, vaunted himſelfe to make vs afrayd: and becauſe the ſight of theſe, he knewe, could not come vnto all, hath heere as thou mayſt beholde, like Sancharib by Rabſchake by this booke, as by his embaſſadour, publiſhed vnto thee his whole power.
            Neither yet commeth this embaſſage either to Chirkija, or Eliakim, to our gratious prince or her honourable

counſayle, that they in his owne tongue might anſwere him againe, but he hath publiſhed it to all beſide our ſelues, in Italian, Spaniſhe, Dutch, and French, and yet to them thereby to diſcourage vs: for theſe he telleth, he hath thus many huge ſhippes, ſo many thouſandes of armed men, ſuch multitude of munition as no man could deliuer vs out of his hand, or as if hee cried out with Rabſchake: Let not England deceiue you, for it cannot deliuer you out of my hand, nor let not Elizabeth perſwade you to truſt in the Lord, ſaying, doubtleſſe the Lorde will deliuer vs, and not giue ouer our countrey into the handes of the king of Spaine. But make apointment with me, and come foorth vnto me, and ſo yee ſhall eate euery man of the fruit of his owne Vine, and of his owne Figge-tree, and drinke euery man the water of his owne

Ceſterne. Haue not I practiſed (by receiuing and cheriſhing diuers of their owne nations) to make them fit inſtrumentes by treaſon to ſerue my purpoſe, and what ſhoulde ayle me that I haue not already conquered their countrey. Thus beloued, the Spaniſh Nimrod practiſeth not onely to feare vs, but to allure all men from taking part with vs.
            But ſuch truſt beloued haue wee in the Lord, and ſo little account in reſpect of the Lord we make of the power of man, that we ſuffer them to ſay euen as much in Engliſh too, nay wee teach them to ſpeake it in our owne tongue, not that our purpoſe is as theirs was to daunt or diſcourage the fearefull multitude, but to propound vnto the world their folly in boaſting thus vaynely, and then to encourage our ſelues to go forward in that hope and confidence we haue had in the Lord.
            
               For touching their folly, how ridiculous hath it bene, that when as in reſpect of the time it hath bin a practiſe of long continuance, and of ſo mighty and many Monarchies, as the Pope, the king and the prince: and laſt, of ſuch prouiſion, that for ſhips they haue built them like Caſtels: for men, made choyſe of expert and mightie: for munition, they haue much and marueilous: they ſhoulde come ſo long prouided againſt a land as it were vnawares, ſo manie and mightie Monarchies againſt ſo ſmal and litle an Iland: ſuch huge ſhips againſt ſo ſmall pinaſes, as it were, and of theſe to take (as the Lord bee praiſed they haue) ſo ſtrange repulſe, is in reſpect of the truſt and confidence they put in them, and of the triumphes and boaſtes before the victorie they made in diuers places of them, no doubt in the feare of the Lord to be not onely derided and

laughed at, but acknowledged a moſt ſtrange and wonderfull worke of the Lorde, as who knewe their dwelling, and their going out, and coming in, and their furie againſt him. And therefore becauſe they had raged againſt him, and their tumulte was come into his eares, did put a booke into their noſtriſles and a bridle into their lippes, and brought thē backe the ſame way they came, not ſuffering them to enter into the land nor to come againſt it with a ſhielde, nor to caſt a banke about it, but hath deliuered it for his owne ſake, and for his ſeruants ſake.
            And concerning the confidence and encouragement, wee are on the view of this catalogue, to conceaue, how can it be but moſt ſpeciall and ſingular, ſeeing the deliuerance hath bin moſt ſingular? For when we ſhal ſee from what ſtrange crueltie, and forraine power we haue bene deliuered,

ſhall we not alwaies after ſay, Prayſed be the Lord which hath not giuen vs as a pray vnto their teeth but our ſoule is eſcaped euen as a bird out of the ſnare of the fowler the ſnare is broken and we are deliuered, our helpe therefore is in the name of the Lord which hath made both heauen and earth. For hence we learne that a horſe (and ſo a ſhip with men and all meanes els) is but a vayne thing to ſaue a man, neither that anie man is deliuered by much ſtrength, but that whereas they put their truſt ſome in horſes, ſome in Chariots, we muſt remember the name of the lord, & with Iehoſchaphat crie: We had no ſtrength to reſiſt ſo great a multitude coming againſt vs, neither knew we what to do, but our eies were fixed on thee O Lord.
            
            Thus therefore thou ſeeſt what was our drift and purpoſe in publiſhing this in our natiue toung which

hath bin heretofore in diuers languages, not as the aduerſarie would to diſcourage thee, but to make ſhew vnto thee how vayne it is to truſt in outward meanes, and then to learne thee to truſt in the Lord, who is able to ſaue thee, and as hee hath alreadie begun, will do ſtill, if thou go forward to truſt in him. For the lord hath cauſed the forces of the Spaniards, this their great Armado, to be daunted, and greatly endangered by his great wiſedome, putting into the minds of our Captaines and ſoldiours, to prouide ſixe or ſeauen of the worſt of the ſhips they had at ſea, with ſuch neceſſaries as ſhould ſerue beſt to ſet them on fire withall, which they ſent amongſt the Spaniards, thereby to remoue and ſcatter them, yea euen when they thought themſelues moſt ſure, and likelyeſt to receiue more ſuccor, & as they lay faſt at Ankor neere Calis. Wherefore

they aroſe and ſought euery man to helpe himſelfe, hewing and ſlipping their cables, & leauing their ankors behinde them. Yea and ſome he hath cauſed to run aground vpō one ſhore, and ſome vpon an other, and ſome ſuncke, and other ſome taken with diuerſe of their men, ſome of them of great name, with their enſignes, banners, ſtremers, and gitterns, wherof diuerſe were hanged about the battelments and croſſe of Paules, on the 8. of September 1588. & on the 9. at London bridge, thereby to comfort his Engliſh Elizabeth, and all her faithfull ſubiects. For the which his many and ſundry benefits, wee beſeech him graunt all that faithfully beleeue in him, grace to continue thankfull in glorifying him and his holy name for euer, to the good example of all other.
            
               E. B.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A Diſcourſe vpon the number of Galions, Ships, Pinnaces, Zabres, Galeaces, Galies, and other veſſels, which were aſſembled in the Riuer of Lisbon, whereof is chiefe and Generall, the Duke of Medina Sidonia. Togither with the burthen of them, the men of warre, Mariners, munitions, weapons, artillerie, pouder, and other furnitures for Warre which they bring, and for what time the ſaid munitions ſhall ſerue, as followeth.
            
               Squadron of the Galeons of Portugall.
               
                  THe Galeon of S. Martin, Captaine generall of the Armie, of 1000. tunnes, carrieth 177. mariners, 300 ſoldiours, choſen men, 50 pieces of cannon, bullets pouder, lead, corde, and all that which is néedefull.
               The Galeon of S. Iohn, Admirall generall, of 1050 tunns carrieth 170. mariners, 231. ſoldiours, 50. pieces of cannons, and

bullets, pouder, lead, cordes, and that which is neceſſarie.
               The Galeon of S. Marke is of 792. tuns, and carrieth 292 ſoldiours, 117. mariners, and pouder, bullets, lead, match, as much as is néedefull.
               The Galeon of S. Philippe of 800. tuns, hath 415. ſoldiours, 117. mariners, 40. pieces of artillerie, and bullets, pouder, lead, match, and all that which is néedfull.
               The Galeon S. Lewes 830. tunnes, hath 376. men of warre, and 116. mariners, 40. pieces of ordenance, and bullets, match, pouder, and other thinges as much as is néedfull.
               The Galeon of S. Mathew 750 tunnes, hath 177 men of warre, 50. mariners, 40. great pieces, & pouder, bullets, lead, match, and other thinges as much as is needfull.
               The Galeon S. Iames 520. tunnes, 300. ſoldiours, 100 mariners, 30. great pieces, and bullets, pouder, lead, match, and all that which is needefull.
               The Galeon of Florence, of 961. tunnes, 300 ſoldiours, 100 mariners, 52. pieces of ordenance, & bullets, pouder, lead, match, & all the reſt as much as is néedefull.
               The Galeon S. Chriſtopher, 352, tuns, 300. men of warre, 90. mariners, 30. great

pieces, bullets, lead, pouder, match, and all that which they neede.
               The Galeon S. Bernard 352. tunnes, hath 280. ſoldiours, 100. mariners, 30. cannons, and bullets, pouder, lead, match, & other neceſſarie things as much as they neede.
               The Zabra Auguſta. of 166. tunnes, carrieth 55. ſoldiours, 55. mariners, 13. great pieces, bullets, pouder, lead, match, & other neceſſarie thinges as much as they neede.
               The Zabra Iulia, of 166. tuns, hath 60. ſoldiours, 50. mariners, with ordenance. bullets, pouder, and other neceſſaries.
            
            There is in this Squadron 12. Veſſelles, 10 of them Galeons, and two Zabres, which are of 7737 tunnes, and there are imbarked in them 3330. ſoldiours footemen, and 1230. mariners, which are in ſumme 4624. men, and they carrie 350. great pieces, and all that which is neceſſarie to the reſt, as bullets, pouder, match, lead, &c.
            
               The Armie of Biſcay, of which is Captayne generall Ian Martines of Ricalda.
               THe ſhippe S. Angell, the Captaine is of 768 tunnes, & hath 323 men of warre, 114. mariners, 30. cannons, bullets, pouder, lead, match, and all that which is needfull.
               
                  The Gangrin, Admirall, of 1160. tuns, carrieth 300. ſoldiours, 100. mariners, 36. great pieces of cannon, bullets, pouder, match, lead, and all that which is néedfull.
               The veſſell of S. Iames, 660. tunnes, hath 250. ſoldiours 102. mariners, 30. great pieces, bullets, pouder, lead, match, and other neceſſarie prouiſions.
               The conception of Zubelzu, 468. tuns, hath 100. men of warre, and 70. mariners, 20 great cannons, and bullets, pouder, lead, match, and all other neceſſarie things.
               The conception de Iuaues del Cauo, 418. tunnes, hath 164. men of warre, 70. mariners, 24, great pieces, and bullets, pouder, lead, match, and all that which they neede.
               The Magdalene of Iohn Frauncis of Ayala 330. tunnes carrieth 200. ſoldiours, 70. mariners, 22 great pieces, and bullets, pouder, lead, match, and that which is neceſſarie to the reſt.
               The ſhippe S. Iohn 350. tunnes, hath 130. men of warre and 80. mariners, and 24. great pieces bullets, pouder, lead, match and all that which they neede for the reſt.
               The Marie of 165. tunnes carrieth 180. ſouldiers, and 100. mariners, 24. great

pieces, bullets, pouder, lead, match, and other neceſſarie thinges.
               The Manuela of 520. tunnes, hath 130. ſouldiers, 54. mariners, 16. great pieces, and bullets, pouder, lead, match, and the reſt of their fraught.
               The ſhippe of S. Marie of Monte-maior, of 707. tunnes, 220. ſouldiers, 50. mariners, 30. great pieces, bullets, pouder, lead and match, and other prouiſions.
               The pinnaſſe, called the Marie of Aguiare, of 70. tunnes, hath 30. men of warre, 23. mariners, 10. pieces of canon, pouder, bullets, lead, match, and other neceſſary thinges.
               The pinnaſſe, called Iſabella, of 70. tunnes, hath 30. ſouldiers, 23. mariners, 12. canons, bullets, and other neceſſary thinges.
               The pinnaſſe of Michel Suſo, of 96. tunnes, 30. ſouldiers, 24. mariners, 12. great pieces, bullets, pouder, lead, match and all other neceſſarie thinges.
               The pinnaſſe of S. Steuen, of 78. tuns hath 30. men of warre, 26. mariners, 12. pieces of cannon, bullets, pouder, lead, match, and other neceſſary thinges of prouiſion.
            
            
               There is in this ſquadron, foureteene ſhippes 10. of them great, and toure pinnaſſes, which are of 6567. tunnes of burden, in the which ſhips be imbarked 2037. ſouldiers, 868. mariners which make in all 2802. and 260. great pieces of cannon, 119000. bullets, 467. quintals of pouder, 140. of lead, 89. of match.
            
               The armie of the Galyes of Caſtille, of the which is generall, Iaques Flores de Valdes.
               THe Galeon S. Chriſtopher, captaine of 70. tunnes, hath 205. men of warre, and 120. mariners, and 40. great pieces, bullets, pouder, lead, match, and all that which is neceſſary to the reſt.
               The Galeon S. Iohn Baptiſt, of 750. tunnes, hath 250. ſouldiers, 140. mariners, 30. great pieces, and bullets, pouder, lead, match, and other neceſſarie thinges.
               The Galeon S. Peter, of 530. tunnes, 130. men of warre, 140. mariners, and 40. great pieces, bullets, pouder, match, lead, and all the reſt needfull.
               The Galeon S. Iohn of 530. tunnes, 170. ſouldiers, 120. mariners, and 30.
                  
great pieces, pouder, bullets, lead, match, and all the reſt.
               The Galeon S. Iames the great, of 530. tunnes, 230. ſouldiers, 132. mariners, 30. great pieces, bullets, pouder, lead, match, and all the reſt.
               The Galeon S. Philip and S. Iames of 530. tunnes, 159. ſouldiers, and 116. mariners, 30. great pieces, bullets, pouder, match, lead, and all that is neceſſarie.
               The Galeon of the aſcenſion of 530. tunnes, 220. ſouldiers, 114. mariners, and 30. great pieces, bullets, pouder, match, lead, and all other neceſſarie thinges.
               The Galeon of our Lady del Barrio of 530. tunnes, 170. ſouldiers, 108. mariners, and 30. cannons, bullets, pouder, lead, and all other neceſſary furnitures.
               The Galeon of S. Medel and Celedon, of 530. tunnes, 170. ſouldiers, 110. mariners, 30. great pieces, bullets, pouder, match, lead, and all the reſt.
               Galeon S. Anne of the port, of 250. tunnes, 100. men of warre, and 80. mariners, 24. great pieces, bullets, pouder, match, lead, and all the reſt.
               The ſhippe of our Lord of Vigonia, 750, tunnes, 190. men of warre, and 130. mariners,

                  30. great pieces, bullets, pouder, match, lead and all the reſt.
               The veſſell of the Trinitee, of 780 tuns, 200. ſouldiers, 122. mariners, 30. great pieces, bulltes, pouder, match, lead, and all the reſt.
               The ſhip of S. Katherine, of 862. tuns 200. men of warre, 160. mariners, 30. reat pieces, and pouder, bullets, match, lead, and all the reſt.
               The ſhippe of S. Iohn Baptiſt, of 652. tunnes, 200. ſouldiers, 30. mariners. 30. canons, bullets, pouder, match, lead, and all the reſt.
               The pinnaſſe of our Lord Roſarie, 30. ſouldiers, 25. mariners, 24. great pieces, pouder, bullets, lead, match, and the reſt of their prouiſion.
            
            There are in this ſquadron, foureteene Galyons, and ſhips, and two pinnaſſes, which beare 8714 tunnes. In theſe veſſels there are imbarked 2458. ſouldiers, 1719. mariners, which are in all, 4177. and 348. great pieces, bullets, pouder, lead, match, and all that which they neede.
            
               The army of the ſhips of Andelouzie, of the which is captaine don Pedro de Valdes.
               THe captayne ſhip of 1550 tunnes, carieth

                  304. men of warre, 118. mariners, 50. canons, pouder, bullets, and the reſt of their prouiſion.
               The ſhip S. Frauncis, the Admirall of 915 tunnes, 230. ſouldiers, 60. mariners, 30. cannons, pouder, bullets, and the reſt of their prouiſion.
               The Galeon S. Iohn Baptiſt, of 810. tunnes, 250. ſouldiers, and 40. mariners 40. great pieces, pouder, bullets, match, lead, and the reſt.
               The ſhip S. Iohn Gargaran, of 569. tunnes, 170. men of warre, 60. mariners, 20. great pieces, pouder, bullets, match, lead, and the reſt.
               The Conception of 862. tunnes, 200. men of warre, 65, mariners, 25. great pieces, bulltes, pouder, match, lead, and all the reſt.
               The Hulke Duqueſa, S: Anne of 900, tunnes, 250, men of warre, and 80 mariners, 30 great pieces, pouder, bullets, match, lead and all the reſt.
               The Trinitie, 650 tunnes, 200. men of warre, 80 mariners, 20. cannons, bullets, pouder, lead, match, and the reſt.
               The ſhippe S. Mary de Iuncar, of 730 tunnes, 240 men of warre, 80 mariners,

                  30 great pieces, bullets, pouder, lead, match, and all the reſt.
               The pinnaſſe of the holy Ghoſt, 40 men of warre, 33 mariners, 10 pieces, bullets, pouder, lead, match and cord, and all that which they neede.
            
            There are in this ſquadron 11, ſhippes, 10. great and a pinnaſſe, of the burden of 8762. tuns, in the which are imbarked 2400. ſouldiers, 800. mariners, and 260. great pieces.
            
               The armie of ſhips come from the Prouince of Gipouzce, of which is generall Michell de Oquendo.
               THe ſhippe of S. Anne, the captayne, of 1200 tunnes of burden, hath 300 men of warre, 60 mariners, 50 great pieces, bullets, pouder, lead, and all the reſt.
               The ſhip of our Lord of the Roſe, Admirall of 945 tunnes, 230 ſouldiers, 64 mariners, and 30 great pieces, bullets, pouder, lead, match, and all the reſt.
               The ſhippe S. Sauior, of 958 tuns, 330 ſouldiers, 50 mariners, 30 cannons, bullets, pouder, lead, match, and the reſt:
               The ſhip of S: Steuen, of 936 tunnes,

                  200 men of warre, 70 mariners, 30 great pieces, bullets, pouder, lead, match and all the reſt.
               The ſhip S. Marthe of 548 tunnes, 180 men of warre, 70 mariners, 25 great pieces, bullets, pouder, and the reſt.
               The ſhip S. Barbe of 525 tunnes, 160 ſouldiers, 50 mariners, 15 cannons, bullets, pouder, lead, match, and all the reſt.
               The ſhip S. Bonauenture of 369 tuns, 170 ſouldiers, 60 mariners, 15 great pieces, bullets, pouder, lead, and the reſt.
               The Mary of 291 tunnes, 120 ſouldiers, 40 mariners, 15 great pieces, bullets, pouder, lead, and the reſt.
               The S. Croix 680 tunnes, 150 ſouldiers 40 mariners, 20 great pieces, bullets, pouder, match, lead, and the reſt.
               The Hulke Doucella, 500 tunnes, 160 men of warre, 40 mariners, 18 great pieces, pouder, bullets, match, lead, and all the reſt.
               The Patax of the Annunciation of 60 tunnes, 30 men of warre, 16 mariners, 12 great pieces, bullets, pouder, match, lead, and all the reſt.
               The Patax S. Bernabe, is of the ſame burden as the aforenamed.
               The Patax of our Lady of guadaloupe
                  
is of the ſame burden alſo.
               The pinnaſſe of Magdelene, is alſo of the ſame burden.
            
            There are in this ſquadron, 14 ſhippes, ten great ſhips, two Pataches and two pinnaſſes, of 6991 tunnes of burden. In the which veſſels, there are imbarked 2092 men of warre, and 670 mariners, all commeth, 2708.
            
            
               The armie of the eaſt of the which is chiefe Martin de Vertendona.
               THe Regaſona, the captayne, which is of 1294 tunnes, hath 350 ſouldiers, 90 mariners, 35 great pieces, pouder, bullets, lead, match, and all the reſt:
               The Lama, the Admirall, of 728 tunnes, 210 ſouldiers, 80 mariners, 30 great pieces, pouder, bullets, lead, match, and all the reſt.
               The Rata S. Mary crowned of 820 tuns, 340 men of warre, 90 mariners, 40 great pieces, pouder, bullets, match, lead, and the reſt.
               The S. Iohn
                   of Cicile, of 880. tuns, 290 men of warre, 70. mariners, 30. cannons, and all the reſt.
               The Trinity Valencera of a 1000. tuns

                  240. ſoldiours. 90. mariners, 41. great pieces, and all the reſt of their furnitures.
               The Annuntiation of 730 tunnes, 200. ſoldiours. 90. mariners, 30. great pieces, & all the reſt.
               The S. Nicholas Prodaueli of 834 tuns 280. ſoldiours, 84. mariners, 30. great pieces, and all the reſt.
               The Iuliane of 780 tunnes 330 ſoldiours, 80. mariners, 36, great pieces, and the reſt.
               The Marie Piſon of 666. tunnes. 250. ſoldiours, 80. mariners 22. great pieces, and the reſt of their néede.
               The Trinitie Eſcala of 900. tunnes, 302 ſoldiours, 25 great pieces, and all the reſt of their furniture.
            
            In the which ſquadron there are ten ſhips which are of 7705 tunnes of burthen, and there are imbarked in them 2880. ſoldiours, 807. mariners, 310. great pieces, with the reſt of that they neede.
            
               The Armie of Hulkes in the which is Captaine, Iohn Lopez of Medina.
               THe great Grifon, the Captaine, of 650 tunnes, 250. ſoldiours, 60. mariners, 40, great pieces, and the reſt.
               
                  The S. Sauior the Admirall of 650. tuns, 230. ſoldiours, 60. mariners, 30. great pieces, and the reſt of their prouiſion.
               The Sea dogge, of 200. tunnes, 80. ſoldiours, 30. mariners, 10. great pieces, and the reſt.
               The White Faulcon the great, of 500. tunnes, 160. men of warre, 40. mariners, 18 great pieces, and all the reſt.
               The blacke Caſtle, of 750. tunnes 250. ſoldiours, 50. mariners, 25. great pieces, & all the reſt.
               The Barke of Amburg, of 600. tunnes, 250. men of warre, 50. mariners, 25. cannons, and the reſt.
               The houſe of peace the great, of the ſame burthen.
               The S. Peter the great of the ſame burthē alſo.
               The Sampſon, and Peter the ſmall, doe beare the ſame.
               The Barke of Auzique, of 450. tunnes, 210. ſoldiours, 50 mariners, 26 great pieces, and the reſt of their prouiſion.
               The Falcon, the meane white, of 300. tunnes, 80. men of warre, 30 mariners, 18. great pieces, and all the reſt.
               The S, Andrew of 400. tunnes 160. ſoldiours, 40. mariners, 15. great pieces, and the reſt of their prouiſion.
               
                  The little houſe of peace, of 350. tuns: 160. ſoldiours, 40. mariners, 15. great pieces, and the reſt of their prouiſion.
               The Flying Rauen, of 400. tunnes, 210. ſoldiours, 40 mariners, 18 great pieces, & the reſt of their furniture.
            
            
               Pataches and Zabres, wherein Don Antony of Mendoza commandeth.
               THe white doue of 250, tunnes, 60, ſoldiours, 30 mariners, 12 great pieces, and the reſt.
               The Aduenture S, Barbe fraughted of the ſame.
               The S, Iames 600. tunnes, 60 ſoldiours 40 mariners, 19 great pieces, and all the reſt.
               S. Gabriel of the port, of 280. tunnes, 50 ſoldiours, 25 mariners, 9 great pieces, and the reſt of their furniture.
               The Eſay is fraughted of the ſame.
            
            There are in this Squadron 23. Hulkes, which are of 10271. tunnes, in the which are imbarked 3221. men of warre, 708. mariners, 410. great pieces, and their neceſſarie prouiſion.
            
               The Captaine of our Lord of Pilier of Zaragoſſe of 300 tunnes, 120. ſoldiours,

                  50 mariners, 12 great pieces, and their furniture.
               The Engliſh Charity, of 180 tunnes, 80 ſoldiours, 36 mariners, 12 great pieces, and the reſt
               The Scottiſh S. Andrew of 150 tunnes, 51 ſoldiours, 30 mariners, 12 great pieces, and their furniture
               The Patache of the Crucifix, 150 tuns, 50 ſoldiours, 30 mariners, 8 great pieces, and their furniture
               Our Lord of the hauen fraught alike. The Conception of Caraſſa, and our Lord of begoua, and the Conception de Capitillo, and S. Hieroſ. being of the burthen of 60 or 70 tunnes, 50 ſoldiours, 30 mariners, 8 great pieces, a péece, and their furniture
               Our Ladie of grace, the Conception of Frauncys Laſtero, our Lady of guadalupe, S. Frauncys, the Holy ſpirite, our Lady of Freneſda, all fraughted alike
               The Zabra of the Trinity, the Zabra of our Lady Caſtre, S. Andrew, the Conception of Zomartiba, S. Clere, S. Iohn of Caraſſa, and the Aſſumption, all fraughted alike
            
            There are in this Squadron 22. Pataches, and Zabres, which are of the burthen of 1131. tuns

in the which there are imbarked 479. ſoldiours 574. mariners, and there is 193 great pieces, & all their furniture.
            
               The foure Galeaces of Naples, which are giuen in charge to Dom Vgo de Moncada.
               THe Galeace the Captaine called S. Lawrence, hath 270. ſoldiours, 130. mariners, 300. ſlaues, 50 pieces of cannon, and their furniture.
               The Galeace Patrone, 180 ſoldiours, 112 mariners, 300 ſlaues, 50 great pieces, and their furniture.
               The Galeace Girone, 170 ſoldiours, 120 mariners, 300 ſlaues, 50 great pieces.
               The Galeace Neapolitaine 124 ſoldiours 115 mariners, 300 ſlaues, 50 great pieces, and the reſt of their neceſſarie fraught.
               There are in theſe foure Galeaces 873 ſoldiours, 468 mariners, 200 great pieces, 1200 ſlaues, and the reſt of their furniture.
               The Galy Captaine, 110 ſoldiours, 106 mariners, 306 ſlaues, and 50 great pieces, and other neceſſaries.
               The Galy Princeſſe, the Galy Diana, the Galy Vacaua, do beare the like.
            
            
               
               The General ſumme of the whole Armie.
               THe army of the Galeons of Portugall 12: they are of 7737 tuns, 4330. men of warre, 1363 mariners, 400 great pieces, bullets, pouder, match, lead, and their prouiſion.
               The army of biſcaye, of the which is generall, Iohn Martines Ricalde is of 14 ſhips, of the burthen of 6567 tunnes, 2050 ſouldiers, and 600 mariners, 270 great pieces and the reſt of their neceſſary furniture.
               The Galeons of the army of Caſtile are 16 of the burthen of 8700 tunnes, 2560 ſouldiers, 1830 mariners, 420 great pieces, and their neceſſary thinges.
               The army of the ſhippes of Andelouzie are 11 of the burthen of 8762 tunnes, 2525 ſouldirs, 600 mariners, 260 great pieces, and all their furniture.
               The army of the ſhips of the prouince of Guipouſque, 14. which are of 6991 tuns, 2142 ſouldiers, 718 mariners, 280 great pieces and the reſt of their neceſſary prouiſion.
               The army of the ſhips Leuantines are

                  10 which are of 7705 tunnes, 2600 ſouldiers, 867 marinere, 310 great pieces, and all the reſt of their neceſſary fraught.
               The army of the Hulkes, which are 23 bearing 10271 tunnes, 3321 ſouldiers, 708 mariners 400 great pieces with all their furniture.
               
                  Pataches and Zabares, 22 in number, which beare 1221 tuns, 579 ſouldiers 574 mariners, 110 great pieces with their neceſſarie furniture.
               Galeaces of Napelles, which are 4, they beare 863 ſouldiers, 530 mariners, 200 great pieces, with their prouiſion.
               Foure Galies bearing 400 ſouldiers, 20 great pieces, and their other prouiſion:
               In the aboue named Galeaces, there are 1200 ſlaues, and in the foure Galyes, 888 which is in all 2088:
               Moreouer, they carry pouder for their néede, if it be offered to doe batterie, 600 quintales:
            
            So that there are in the ſayd army 130 ſhips of 57868 tunnes, 19295 ſouldiers and 8450 mariners, 2088 ſlaues, and 2630 great pieces of braſſe of all ſortes, among the which there are Coleurines, and de my Coleurines, and cannons to the ſtone, and the other neceſſaries for their fraught.
            
               
               The ſorts of Shippes and veſſels of this Armie.
               Galions and great ſhips 65.
               
               Hulkes of three or foure hundreth tuns 25.
               
               Pataches, of ſeuentie or an 100 tunnes 25.
               
               Zabres, with thoſe of Portugall, 13.
               
               Galeaces, 4.
               
               Gallies foure, which are in all, 130. veſſels.
            
            Moreouer, and aboue the afore named 130. veſſels, there are 20. Caranels for the ſeruice of the aboue named Armie, and likewiſe 10. Salues with, ſixe Dares a peece.
            
               Aduenturers which go in the ſaid Army, and their ſeruants that are able to fight.
               
                  
                     In the Rata. Don Alonſo Martinez of Leyua, Captaine General of the Horſmen of Milain.
               
                  
                     In S. Martin Captaine Generall.
                   
                  The Prince of Aſcuti.
               
                  
                     In the Galeon, S. Matthew. 
                  The Marques Pennafiel.
               
                  
                     In the Galeon, S. Iohn the Admirall.
                   
                  The Marques Ganes, Coſin to the Duke of Sauoy.
               
                  
                  In the Cap. Gen. 
                  The Counte of Gelues.
               
                  
                     In the Galeace, Captaine of the Count Fuente. Dom Gaſton de Mō
                  cada maieur Aytona.
               
                  Captaine Gen. Dom Petro de Cunniga, ſonne of the Marques Auila.
               
                  
                     In the Admirall of Oquendo. Dom Iaques Pacheco, brother to the Marques Villeua.
               
                  
                     In the Galeon S. Mark. Dom Garcia de Cardenas, brother to Counte Pueblas.
               
                  In the Cap. Generall. Dom Comes capata, ſonne to the Counte Varaiac.
               
                  S. Iohn d'Alcantara. Dom Diego Entiques, ſonne of Dom Fadriques, which was the great commāder of Alcantara
               
                  In the Cap. Generall. Dom Baltazar de Cunniga, brother to the Count Monterrey.
               
                  
                     The Galeon S. Mark. dom Alonſo Telleziron, brother to the Duke of Oſſuna.
               
                  
                  In the Venitian. Dom Francis Riuadeineiray, & Mendoca, ſonne of the Marſhall Noues.
               
                  
                     In the Galeon S. Lewis. Dom Loys Portocarrero, ſonne of the Count Medellin.
               
                  
                     In the Galeon S. Philip. Dom Laurent de Mē
                  doza, ſonne of the Count de Orgaz.
               
                  
                     The Galeō
                      S. Martin, Cap. Generall.
                   dom Loys de Cordodoua, brother to dō Iaques of Cordoua. Dom Petro Enriques, brother to ye
                   Marques of Villeneufue. Dom Ladron de Gueuare, brother to the Coūt de Onnate.
               
                  
                     In the Galeon S. Lewes. Dom Pietro Porto carrero, brother to the Marques Vilanneua.
               
                  
                     Capt. de Oquendo. dom Garcie le Toledo, Nephew to Dom Garcie de Toledo.
               
                  
                  Cap. Generall. dō Piedro de Caſtro. ſon to ye count Lemos
               
                  
                     Captaine de Oquendo. Dom Roderige de Mendoca, brother to the Marques of Cannette.
               
                  
                     Colonell of Vretā
                     dona. Dom Franciſque de Martique, brother to the count of Paredes.
               
                  
                     Cap. de Oquendo Dom Franceſco, brother to the Counte
               
               
                  
                     Galeon S. Lewes. Oropeſa, dō Petro Carrero, ſonto the Gen. of Gouletta.
               
                  Valencera. dom Rodrigues Lazo, of the habit of S. Iaques.
               
                  
                     S. Marie Couronnee. dom Rodrigues Mā
                  riques de Lara, brother to the Duke of Naiara.
               dom Petro de Guzman.
               dom Vaſco de Guzman.
               
                  
                     In Rata. dom Tho. de Crambela, brother in law to the Cardinall.
               
               
                  
                  S. Iohn Admirall.
                   dom Louys Vargas, ſonne to the Secretarie Vargas.
               
                  
                     Capt. de Oquendo. dom Franceſco Pacheco de Guzman.
               
                  S. Iohn diego Flores. dom Iaques Enriques, ſonne to the Vice-roy don Martin Enriques.
               dom Sancho de Zeuna, ſonne to the captain of ye Cuſtomes.
               
               
                  Valencera. dom Sebaſtian Capata, ſonne of Iohn Rodriques de Villa Fuerte.
               
                  
                     Galeon S. Matthew. dom Rodrigues de Riuero.
               
                  Captaine Generall. dom Iaques Sarmiē
                  to, ſonne to Garcia Sarmiento.
               dom Iohn Vicentelo, ſonne to Corco.
               
                  Rata. dom Gaſpar de Sandoual.
               
                  Galeace Captaine. dom Ramon Ladron de Mendoca.
               
                  S. Iohn de Bretendona. dom Chriſtoual de Robles.
               
                  
                  The Hulke Admirall. Henry Brenne, captain germain.
               Baltazar Broque.
               
                  
                     Galeon S. Matthew. Raphael Sal Engliſhman.
               
               
                  The Captaine Generall. Iaques de Mirande portiques Gentilman.
               
               
                  S. Anne de Ricalde. dom Carles de Aſdū
                  que.
               
                  
                     Captaine Oquendo. dom Loys de Vergas, & Figueroa.
               Sebaſtian Caſtro.
               dom Petro de Toledo.
               
                  Charitie the Engliſh. dom Antonio Martines Chermo.
               dom Franceſco Naruaez.
               
                  Regazona. dom Alonſo de las Roelas.
               
                  
                     Galeon S. Lewes. dom Franceſco Mannuell.
               
                  
                     Galeon S. Matthew. dom Guillermo Buē, Engliſhman.
               
               
                  
                     The Gangrin. dom Iaques de Mieres.
               
                  Valencera. dom Iaques Fernandes de Meſa.
               
                  
                  S. An de Ricalda. dō Paul de la Penna.
               
                  
                     Captaine Oquendo. 
                  The Captaine Pero Nunes Caſtelblāco
               
                  The Iulian. dom Fernand de Aranda.
               
                  The Rate. dom Heronimo de Magno.
               
                  
                     Galeon of Florence. Fernādo Bernardino
               Vincent Martelli.
               Paul Nilio Iuſtiniano.
               
                  In the Rat. dom Garcie Fredico Chauez.
               
                  S. Sauior of Oquē
                     do. dom Antonio Lopez Chauez.
               
                  The Rata. dom Manuell de Palilogo.
               
                  
                     Galeon S. Loys. Iaques de Mexia de Pardo.
               
                  
                     Galeon S. Marke. dom Michel de Gumarra.
               
                  
                     Galeon S. Peter. 
                  The captaine Hernan gomes de Tortolas
               
                  
                     Galeon S. Philip. 
                  Sergeant maior Lopus Gil Teieda.
               Iaques Hurtado.
               
                  S. Iaques de Ricalde. El Alferez Piedro Vicano.
               Toribio de Lubana.
               
                  
                  Admirall General. 
                  Captaine Francoys Maldonat.
               
                  Our Ladie of the Roſe. Ioſeph Iuſtin.
               
                  Admirall of Hulks. Gregorie Perez de Lara.
               
                  Our Ladie of the Roſe. Iohn d'Alua.
               Iohn Clere and Petro Clere.
               
                  Chaſteaunoir. Pietro Yrraguria.
               Antonio Rodrigues.
               
                  The Rata. dom Loys Aluarez Oſorio.
               
                  
                     Captaine Oquendo. 
                  The Captaine corcuera.
               Thomas Aluarez le caſtro.
               
                  Captaine General. Iohn Fernandes the Kings Courtier.
               
               
                  Admirall General. 
                  The Alferez Petro d'Eſtala.
               
                  
                     Captaine Oquendo. Petro Sance gallardo.
               
                  
                     Galeon S. Marke. Allonſo Ruys.
               
                  The Sergant Alonſo de Arquillos.
               
                  The Iulian. Bartholomy de Arrayo & Balduuas.
               
                  Admirall Gene. Petro de ydiaques.
               
                  
                  
                     Captain of Oquendo. dom Franceſco Bellaſtigni.
               Iohn Lopez de Ycaguiore.
               
                  Galeace Captaine. Iohn Deauti.
               
                  
                     Galeon S. Philip. Alonſo Captaine, and Joachin de Caſtaneda.
               
                  Galie captaine. dom Franceſco de Torres.
               
                  Captaine General. Gomez Perez de la marme.
               Iaque Peres Morcillo
               
                  
                     The Hulke S. Sauior. Antonio de la Vera, John de Caranca Aluaro de Caſtro Antonio de Penna Iohn Portillo.
               
                  
                     S. Sauior doquendo. Peter Mendez de Caſtro & Aluaro de Soſa, & Viuero.
               
                  
                     Galeon S. Iames the great of Florence. 
                  Sergiant Bernardin Figueroa & denis Ariſhman.
               
               
                  
                     The Rata. dom Loys Ponce de Leon.
               John Torres.
               
                  Galie, Captaine. El Alfarez Crazate.
               
                  
                     Galeon S. Iames the greateſt.
                   
               
               
                  
                  
                     In the Rata. El Alferez Iaques gō
                  cales de Aguero.
               
                  
                     Hulke S. Anne. Iohn Fernandes Hermoſa.
               Alfonſe Valiente.
               Iohn Fernandes de brueda.
               Chriſtoual de Funes.
               
                  Regacona. 
                  The Commander Iaques Marques, & Iohn Nauarro.
               
                  Regacona. El Alferez Iohn de Villauerde.
               
                  
                     The Hulke grifon. Vaſco de Lega.
               
                  S. Anne de Oquendo. dom Sancho Curita Noguerol & Iohn baptiſt Pantoia.
               
                  Conception. El Alferez Melchior de Silua.
               
                  S. Iaques the great.
                   
                  The Sergeant Iaques de Cea.
            
            So all the Aduenturers to whom ſhipping hath been giuen in the ſaid Army, are in number 124. the which doe bring with them 456. ſeruants bearing Armes and weapons.
            
               
               As for thoſe which are entertained and in paie in the ſaid Armie, they bee theſe which follow.
               The Count Paredes
               Dom Diego Maldonado
               Dom Alonſo Menrique
               
                  Captaine John Velaſco
               
                  Captaine Auguſtin de Oieda
               
                  Captaine Pedro Heredia
               Dom Rodrigo de Mendoca
               Dom Fernando de Ayala
               
                  Captaine Antonio Serrano
               Dom Iuan Sandoual
               
                  Captaine Marolin de Iuan
               
                  Captaine Alonſo de campo
               
                  Captaine Diego de Obregon
               Dom Pedro Ponce de Leon
               
                  Captaine Diego de Azedo
               
                  Captaine Franceſco Negrete
               Dom Mauricio Gerardino
               Almundio Diſtacio
               Dom Carlos Orconor
               Dom Thomas Gualdino
               Triſtan Vinglade
               Ricardo Baray
               Roberto Laſeo
               Chriſtoual Lombardo.
               Iuan Buruer
               
                  Gomez frere de Andrada
               Iuan Galuan
               dom Pedro Marley.
               Patricio Quimer Fort
               Maximiliano de Vilpix
               Diego Odor
               dom Pedro Quiroſqui
               Roberto Rifort
               Ricordo Siton
               dom Anthonio Menrique
               Gulliermo Eſtac.
               Duarte Riforte
               
                  Captaine Alonco Gayran
               
                  Captaine Alonſo de Eſquiuel
               
                  Captaine Pedro de Eugino
               
                  Cap. Franciſco de Harnandez Deperalta.
               
                  Captaine Hernando Pedraca
               Diego de Vilaſco
               dom Felix Arta Giron
               
                  Captaine Alonſo de Carrion
               
                  Captaine Hieronimo Quintauilla
               dom Aluaro de Soſa Biuero
               
                  Captaine Gaſpar Hermoſilla
               dom Diego Fernandes de Leon
               dom Iuan de Cardoua
               
                  Captaine Jean Antonio Marin.
               dom Juan de Toledo.
               dom Chriſtoual Maldonado
               dom Luys Brauo
               
                  dom Gonſalo de Eraſo
               dom Pedro de Alcegas
               dom Diego de Luzon
               dom Geronymo de Vargas
               dom Diego de Rocha
               dom Iuan de Caſtillo
               dom Geronimo de Mourroy
               Antonio Moreno
               Pedro Manſo de Andrada
               
                  Captaine Franciſco de Cuellar
               Damian Gato
               
                  Capt. dom Antonio de Caſtanneda
               
                  Captaine Diego de Valle
               
                  Captaine Pedro de Pacos
               
                  Captaine Antonio de Bonilla
               
                  Captaine Eſteuan de Mercadillo.
               
                  The Lieutenant Loys de Caſtanneda
               Philippe Cornetes
               dom iuan de Portillo
               dom Franciſco capata
               dom Iuſepe de Caſtilla
               dom Pedro de Bacan
               dom Anthonio de Cartagena
               
                  Captaine Criſtoual de Quiros
               Sancho Paternoy
               dom Pedro de Cegarra de las Craellas
               
                  The captaine Franceſco Angel
               dom Franceſco Pacheco
               dom Iuan de carate
               
                  dom Franceſco de Amendanno
               dom Gaſper de Eredia
               dom Fernando de Medina
               dom Gartia Giron
               dom Pedro de Toledo
               dom Fernando Galinaro
               Gaſpar Maldonado
               dom diego Guzman y Mollina
               
                  Captaine Pedro Ruiz Torquemada
               dom Alonſo Mendoza
               Iuan de Cea Marin
               
                  Captaine domingo de yracaga.
               
                  The Auncient bearer, dom diego Fernandes de Cordoua.
               
                  The Auncient bearer, Iuan de Villauerdo.
               
                  The auncient bearer, Franceſco Cortes
               
                  The auncient bearer, dom Pedro de Guzman.
               
                  The auncient bearer, George Arroyo
               
                  The auncient bearer, Franceſco de Vlloa.
               
                  The auncient bearer, Iuan Vazques de Sadoual
               
                  The auncient bearer, Gaſpar de Carrion
               
                  The auncient bearer, Harnando Rauures
               
                  The auncient bearer, diego Ayllon
               
                  The auncient bearer, Pedro Claramonte
               
                  The auncient bearer, Miguel de Vrbina
               
                  The auncient bearer, Alonſo Ordonnez
               
                  The auncient bearer, Luys diaca
               
                  
                  The auncient bearer, Iuan yannes Laſarte
               
                  The auncient bearer, Rodrigo S. Iuan
               
                  The ancient bearer, Leopoldo delaquadra
               
                  The auncient bearer, Franciſco de Vega
               
                  The auncient bearer, Luys de Vega
               
                  The auncient bearer, Franceſco de Leon
               
                  The auncient bearer, Iuan de Medina
               
                  The auncient bearer, Baltazar Calderon
               
                  The auncient bearer, dom Iuan Herrera
               
                  The ancient bearer, Franciſco Deſpinoſa
               
                  The ancient bearer, domingo Ruy
               
                  The ancient bearer, Iuan Madrano
               
                  The ancient Pedro Rodriguez de Ayala
               
                  The auncient bearer, Pedro Cercel
               
                  The ancient bearer, Hernando Cānaueral
               
                  The ancient bearer, Hernando Caſtāneda
               
                  The auncient bearer, Alonſo Gomez
               
                  The ancient diego Goncales Aguero
               
                  The auncient bearer, Sancho de Paredes
               
                  The auncient bearer, Hernando de Veras
               
                  The auncient bearer, Alonſo de Vargas
               
                  The auncient bearer, Gaſpar de Porras
               
                  The auncient bearer, Luys Hernandez
               
                  The auncient bearer, Diego de Andrada
               
                  The auncient bearer, Pedro de Rea
               
                  The ancient bearer, Andres de Pedroſo
               
                  The auncient bearer, Alonſo de Auila
               
                  The auncient bearer, Antonio Lara
               
                  The auncient bearer, Martin de cuacu
               
                  
                  Ancient bearer, Goncalo Rodriguez Carrado
               
                  Ancient bearer, Franceſco de Xaen
               
                  Ancient bearer, Michel deſquibel
               
                  Ancient bearer, Iuan de Pardilla
               
                  Ancient bearer, de Acedo
               
                  Ancient bearer, Gaſpar Ortiz
               
                  Ancient bearer, Martin Garcez
               
                  Ancient bearer, Alonſo Pizarro
               
                  Ancient bearer, Arnauda Xumence
               
                  Ancient bearer, Gregorio Carrenno
               
                  Ancient bearer, Pedro de Vzeda
               
                  Ancient bearer, Sebaſtian Carrauaial
               
                  Ancient bearer, Sancho de Ochoa
               
                  Ancient bearer, Iohn Sanchez Nauerreto
               
                  Ancient bearer, Iuan de Canniga
               
                  Ancient bearer, Luys Oſorio
               
                  Ancient bearer, Gomes claramonte
               
                  Ancient bearer, Gomes claramonte
               
                  Ancient bearer, Andres Salamanques
               Manuel Martin de Oliuares
               Franceſco Xmenez
               Pedro acunna
               Iuan de S. Iuan
               Pedro Eſtrada
               Diego del Roncon
               Diego de Cuellar
               
                  Sergeant, Franceſco de Leon
               Geronimo Frances
               
                  Thomas Sayanedra
               diego de Montoya
               Martin de Rue
               
                  Captaine Loys Rodrigues
               Iuan de Ollacareiſqueta
               dom Fernando Mounroy
               Pedro de Boca de Bacan
               Gaſpar de Mur
               
                  Ancient bearer, Pedro Martinez Chaues
               
                  Ancient bearer, Franceſco Peralta
               
                  Ancient bearer, diego Lopus de Medrano
               
                  Ancient bearer, diego Hernādez Moreno
               Alfarez Miguel Panduro
               
                  Captaine Franceſco de Conteras
               
                  Cap. Pedro Rodriguez Gentil-man
               
               Iuan de Sea Marino
               Gabriel de Roias
               dom Diego de Santillana
               
                  Captaine Paulo Chiſter
               dom Hernando de Eſcouar Soto maior
               Iuan Vaſquez d'Auilla
               dom Lorenco de Figueroa
               
                  Sergeant maior, Iuā de Cauallos Guzman
               dom Alonſo de Toledo
               
                  Ancient bearer, Anthonio Bacan
               Iuan de Chaues Eſquiuel
               
                  Ancient bearer, Martin decorral
               
                  Ancient bearer, Iuan Gil
               
                  Captaine Rodrigo de Orezco.
               
                  
                  Captaine Franceſco Angel
               dom Sancho de Herrera
               dom Aluaro de Brizanos
               dom Iuan de Ynurrera Engliſh-man
               
               Henry Michel Engliſh-man
               
               Raphael Aſal Engliſh-man
               
               Robert Daniel Cheualier
               Thomas Bitus Iriſh-man
               
               
                  Ancient bearer, Iuan, de Haro
               
                  Ancient bearer, Alonſo de Villaquitan
               
                  Ancient bearer, Michel de Leon
               
                  Ancient bearer, dom Anthonio de Ayala
               
                  Ancient bearer, Sancho de Vrquiza
               dom Rodrigo de Villacorta
               
                  Ancient bearer, Franciſco de Molina Soto
               Franciſco Correa de Silua
               
                  Captaine Pedro de campos
               dom Pedro de Veamont
               dom Iuan de Velaſco
               dom Ternando de Guzman
               dom Pedro de Guzman
               dom Andrez Vergara
               dom Iorge de Portugal
               Franciſco de Quinnones
               Alonco de Serua
               dom Alonſo de Mendoca
               dom Iuan de Alameda
               Vincencio de Pedro Biene
               Captaine Iuan Batiſta Marolin
               
                  Paulo Giſler
               Pedro Ruys de Torquemada
               dom Goncalo de Eraſſo
               Bernardo Pinelo
               
                  Ancient bearer, Sebaſtian de Carnaial
               dom Andrez de Vergara
               dom Luys Brano
               dom diego de Santillana.
            
            In ſome thoſe which are enterteined in the Army are two hundreth thirtie eight, with a hundreth ſixtie three ſeruants.
            
               All ſuch perſons as are imbarked for the ſeruice of the Canon.
               
                  Alfonſo de Ceſpedes, Lieutenant of the captaine Generall.
               A Prieſt Maior.
               Twentie Gentlemen.
               Two enginors.
               One of the great maiſter Gunners, with his helper.
               A Phiſitian.
               A Chirurgian
               An apothecarie.
               A great maiſter Carpenter.
               A Sergeant.
               A locke-Smith.
               Other workmen of Smithes.
               Officers Carpenters, and Locke-ſmithes, 9.
               
               Artilliers. 95.
               
               
                  A Commiſſarie of the Moyles, with two and twentie Boyes.
               The Officers ſeruants. 8.
               
            
            So they are a hundreth ſixtie ſeuen perſons which are imbarked concerning the Cannon.
            
               Perſons of the Hoſpitall.
               
                  Dom Martin de Alarcon, Generall Adminiſtrator, his Lieutenant.
               Fiue Phiſitians.
               The great Chirurgian.
               Foure other Chirurgians.
               Fiue perſons to helpe.
               Foure cures.
               A Controller.
               A great Maiſter.
               Sixtie two other officers & boyes of ſeruice: which are in all 85. for all the perſons that are in the Hoſpitall.
               Religious men which doo accompanie the ſaid armie of the order of S. Francis of the prouince of Caſtilla. 8.
               
               Of the ſame order, of the prouince of Portugall. 20.
               
               Friers Capuchins Caſtillians. 29.
               
               Friers Capuchins Portugais. 10.
               
               
                  Caſtillians of the order of S. Auguſtin. 9.
               
               
                  Portugais of the ſame order. 14.
               
               
                  Of the order of S. Frauncis of Portugall 16 Carmes pienus 12
               
               Of the third order of S. Frauncis of Portugall 8
               
               Fathers of S. dominique of the prouince danda louzie 22
               
               
                  Charmes of Portugall. 9.
               
               Fathers of the companie of Ieſus of Caſtille 15
               
               Fathers of the company of Ieſus of Portugall 8
               
               They are in all a hundreth and eightie religious men.
            
            
               The Regiments and companies which are in pay, that go in the ſaid Armie and what perſons they are.
               Dom Franceſco de Bonadilla, which ſerueth as maiſter of Camp generall.
               
               Regiment of Cicile, of whom is maiſter of the Camp, Dom diego de Pimendell.
               
                  Captaines
               
               
                  The aboue named maiſter of the Camp.
               
               Martin Daualos
               Miguel galarros
               Pedro de plego
               Dom Antonio Enrriquez
               
                  Pedro de Leon
               Andres de Muxica
               diego Iuarez
               Antonio Mario Centeno
               dom Franceſco Carrilio
               diego Caſtilla
               Phillip Sumer
               dom Antonio de Herrera
               Franceſco Marin Centeno
               dom gomes de corauaial
               Iorge Arias de Haruieto
               Lope Ochoa dela Vega
               Franceſco malo
               goncalo de Sanabria
               Martin de gallipienſo
               Franceſco marquez
               Sancho Sanchez dela Rocha
               dom Fernando de vera
               dom Pedro Pacheco
               Goncalo de Buitron
            
            
               Regiment of the maiſter of the Campe, Dom Franceſco de Toledo.
               
                  Captaines
               
               
                  The aboue named maiſter of the Campe
               
               dom Iuan maldonado
               dom Iuan Franceſco de Ayala
               dom Franceſco de Vmanto
               
                  Goncalo Beltran
               dom Alonſo Ladron de gueuara
               dom Franceſco de boria
               dom Rodrigo Tello de Guſman
               Bernardino Villagomez
               dom Antonio de Caſtillo
               Pedro Nunnes de Auilla
               Franceſco de Caſtreion
               goncala garcia delacarcel
               Geronimo de gueuara
               Anthonio de Valcarcel
               Blas de Xerez
               Iuan Alonſo de Caſtillo
               dom franceſco de Ceſpedes
               Prado Calderon
               Pedro y bannez de Luxan
               dom Pedro de ſandoual
               dom Franceſco de Chauez
               Iuan peres de Loyſa
               dom Alonſo de Godoy
               Chriſtoual Ribero
               Iuan de Torres de mendoca
            
            
               Regiment of Don Alonſo Luzon
               
                  The aboue named maiſter of Campe.
               
               Dom goncalo de mourroy
               Franciſco Peruill es
               
                  Dom Arias de Silua
               Iuan de ſoto
               dom franceſco preſoa
               Rodrigo Ortoz de carate
               dom pedro camacho
               Pedro de Yepes
               Geronimo de Aynar
               Alonſo Riquelme
               Luys Rentirez
               Hernando de Olmedo
               dom Garcia manrique
               diego ſarmento
               Andes de Valencuela
               dom Alonſo de guſman
               Eſteuan Ochoa
               Andres de pantoia
               dom Iuan de Sabedra
               Iuan de mandragon
               pedro ſanchez de ſepulueda
               Hernando de Queſada
               pedro de quintaua
               diego de morando Quiros
               Iuan poſſa de ſantiſo
            
            
               Regiment de Yſla
               
                  The ſaid maiſter of Campe.
               
               Patricio antolinez
               Vaſco de cantauaial
               Anthonio maldonado
               
                  dom Iuan de monſalue
               Lues macian
               dom Lope de mendoca
               diego de aranda clauiio
               bartolome brauo
               dom Luys de Cordoua
               Bernardino de paredes
               Luys de molina
               dom diego Laynez de auyla
               alonſo birues maldonado
               dom diego Caſao
               Luys Baruoſa
               andres berdugo
               alonſo de benauides
               pedro ſolano
               Duarte Nunnez
               Pedro Hurtado de corcuera
               diego Caſcarro
               Pedro de ſantiſteuan
               Eſteuan de Lycorreta
               Melchot de Auendagno
               dom Gabriel de cuaco
            
            
               Regiment de Dom Auguſtin de Mexia.
               El maeſtre de Campo
               dom diego de Loyua
               Luys de Leon
               Gregorio de Chinchilla
               Pedro de Quero Eſcauias
               
                  Pedro Carrillo
               dom diego Lopes de ayala
               Pedro de mendoca
               dom Hieronimo de Herrera
               Alonco Varrantes maldonado
               Diego de Nodera
               Chriſtoual Vaſquez de Peralta
               dom diego bacan
               Pedro Palomino
               dom Luys de carauaial
               Anthonio de Villafafila
               Geronymo de Valderama
               Garcilaſo dela Vega
               Ion Iuan de borrahona
               dom Franceſco Porcel de Peralta
               Franceſco de almonacid.
               dom Iuan de y barra
               dom Pedro Ponce
               dom Alonſo bracamonte
               dom Alonco de cayas
               dom Pedro de manrrique
               dom Iuan de Luna
               dom Baſco de mendoca
               dom Anthonio de Sylua
               Domingo ſanchez Chumazero
            
            
               Companies of Don Iuan de Guzman, taken out of Caſtille.
               
                  Three companies came out of Caſtille.
               
                  Rodrigo Albarez de Benauides
               Del Duque de Feria
               Lope Bazquez, del beiar
               Dom Baltazar de Salto
            
            
               Companies of the men which came in the Galeons and Shippes of Caſtille
               
                  That which is in the, Galeon Captaine in our Lord of Vigonara, of the which is Captaine Iuan Garibay
               
                  In the Galeon S. Iohn, of the which is
               
               
                  captaine Anthonio Moreno
               Dom Alonſo de Soto mayor
               Pedro ortiz Galerno
               Anthonio de Leyba
               Don Geronimo Cortes
               Capitaine Nicolas Ortez
               Alonſo Tauſte
               Diego Goncalez de Heredia
               Dō Pedro Goncalez de Mēdoca
               Iuan Fernandes de Lapila
               Alonſo Gomez
               Diego Aler
               Franciſco Maldonado
               Alonſo de Pedraca
               Dom Loys de Maeda
               Dom Franciſco ortis de Melgarcio
               Alonſo de Vargas
               Pedro Yrcana
               
                  Goncalo Franco de Ayala.
               Dom Pedro Enrriquez
            
            
               Companies of Portugall, which goe vnder the charge of Antonio de Soſſa, and Antonio Pereyra.
               The companie of the ſayd Antonio de Soſſa.
               
               The companie of Manuel Gabral de Vega.
               
               The companie of Loys Ferrera.
               
               The companie of Manuel Texeyra.
               
               The companie of Iuan Trigueros.
               
               Sergeant Maior of this companie.
               
                  Pedro Rodrigues de Ayala.
               
               The companie of the ſaid Antonio de Pereira.
               
               The companie of Coſmo Nabo.
               
               The companie of Roque Boriez.
               
               The companie of Iuan Rodriguez Caldera, Sergeant maior of this companie.
               The captaine Luys de Oieda.
               
            
            
               Sommarie of the Regimentes, and Ancients of Portugall.
               
                  The Regiment of Dom Diego Pimendel.
               
                  
                  The Regiment of dom Franciſco de Toledo.
               
                  The Regiment of Alonſo de Luzon.
               
                  The Regiment of Nicholas de Yſla.
               
                  The Regimēt of Dom Auguſtin Mexia.
            
            
               Nyne companies out of Caſtile.
               The companies of the armie of the Galeons of Caſtile. 24.
               
               Ancients of Portugall, vnder the charge of Gaſpar Soſa, and Antonio Pereyra, it is thought they are nine companies.
            
            So that there are in the ſayd army in thoſe fiue Regimentes, and companies of ſouldiers, 171. Ancients, which are 18973. ſouldiers, and the three hundreth which are yet to beſpoken of. ſhall accompliſh 19295. which are put in the generall number, becauſe they ſhall be taken out of all the reſt of the ſhippes that are choſen for the Galcon S. Martin.
            
            
               The captaine Generall of this armie, and the chiefe men of their ſquadrons.
               The Duke of Medina Sidonia captaine generall of all the armie
               
                  
                  Iuan Martines de Ricalde Admirall of it, and captaine of that of Biſcay
               
               
                  Diego Flores de Valdes, Generall of the armie of the Galeons of Caſtile.
               
               
                  dom Piedro de Valdes, Generall of the armie of Andeloucie.
               
               
                  Miguel de Oquendo, Generall of the army of the prouince of Guipouzque. Martin Bretandona, to whome is the charge giuen of the armie of the ſhips Leuantines.
               
               Gomez de Medina, which hath in charge the armie of the Hulkes.
               
               
                  dom Antonio Hurtado de Mendoca, chiefe captain of the Pataches and Zabres.
               
               
                  dom Vgo de Moncada, who hath in charge ſome of the Galeaces.
               
                  Diego de Medrano, which goeth as chiefe of the Galies.
            
            
               Officers.
               Dom Lopez Marrique controller Generall.
               
               Barnabe Pedroſo, the prouider of the armie.
               
               Alonſo de Alameda, Treaſurer.
               
               Iuan de Huerro, payer.
               
               Filippe de Porras, controller of the Galyes.
               
               
                  Bernabe de Alma, Treaſurer of the armie of Guipouſque.
               Pedro Higueldo, Treaſurer of the armie of Biſcay.
               Iuan de Los Ros, Commiſſarie of Monitres.
               Ochos de Anuncibay, Commiſſarie.
               
               Diego Inſante del Aguila, Commiſſarie.
               
               Iuan Martinez de Guilleſtegui, Commiſſarie.
               
               Melchior Parez, Controller of the Regiment of Cicile.
               Iuan Vngaro, Treaſurer of the ſayd Regiment.
               
               Andres de Roſero, which ſerueth as a Scriuener for the buſineſſe of the Regiment of dom Alonſo Lucon, and poſſeſſor of the prouiſion of the veſſels of the Regiment, which is come out of Sicile.
            
            
               Officers of iuſtice.
               The Licenciat Martin Aranda, Auditor generall.
               The Licenciat Magna his Liefetenant.
               
               
                  Thomas de Monte, the kings Sergeant his Lieuetenant & foure other Sergeants, and foure Scriueners, one Iayler.
            
            
               
               Six other Officers that are porters, and of other offices.
               Bartolomeo Andion de Lara.
               
                  Iudge Alonſo Cortez.
               Geronimo de Azero, Secretarie.
               
               Antonio Guitierrez.
               Dom Franciſco de Salazar.
               dom Antonio del Cortal.
               dom Alonſo farfan.
               Luys de Miranda.
               dom Iuan de Amaya.
               Gomez Patifio.
               dom Gieronimo de Santo Vſidro.
               dom Alonſo Quajardo.
               Pedro de Valejo.
               dom Franciſco Sarmiento.
               dom Pedro de deza.
               dom Aluaro de Mendoca.
               dum Aluaro de curita.
               dom Franciſco Neneyra.
               Pedro Diaz Ortiz.
               Tome de Eſpinoſa.
               Ypolito de Fuentes.
               Antonio Eſteuan.
               
                  Seruantes of ſeruice, 14.
               
                  Seruants of knights, 10.
               
                  Officers and ſeruantes of the controller, general, and others hauing charge. 100
            
            
               
               Sommarie of the perſons that goe in the ſayd armie.
               Souldiers, 18937.
               
               Mariners, 8050.
               
               Aduentures, 124.
               
               Seruants which they bring, 455.
               
               Entertained, 163.
               
               Officers of great gunnes, 167.
               
               Of the Hoſpitall, 86.
               
               Religious men of all orders, 180.
               
               Knights of the Duke his houſe, 22.
               
               Seruantes of the ſame houſe, 50.
               
               Controller Generall, and miniſters of the armie, 17.
               
               Officers & ſeruants that they bring, 100
               
               Miniſters of iuſtice, 20.
               
               So that there is in the ſayd armie, 28687.
               
            
            
               Moreouer there are in the Galeaces. and Galyes 2088. ſlaues.
            
            
               Prouiſions.
               Quintails. 11000 of Biſcuite, which ſuffiſeth to nouriſh the armie ſix monthes.
               There is Wine 14170 pipes, which ſhal ſuffiſe for the ſaid ſix monthes.
               Quintails of Bacon, 6500, that ſhal ſuffiſe for ſix monethes.
               
                  Goates cheeſe, 3458. quintaux
               
                  8000. quintals of Fiſh.
               
                  3000. quintals of Riſe.
               
                  6320. ſeptiers of Beanes and white Peaſe, which ſhall ſuffiſe for more then ſix monethes.
               
                  11398. pounds of Oliue oyle.
               
                  33870. Meaſures of Vineger, which ſhall ſuffiſe for the prouiſion.
            
            
               
                  •
               or the ſeruice of the ſayd armie, there is carried a great quantitie of Hogſheads full of water, Diſhes, Cuppes, Saſſers, in the which they ſhall part the portion Linkes, Lanterns, lamps, Lead in ſheetes, Neates lether, and Tampans in caſe that the enemies ſhot doe ſome hurt to the ſhippes, and quantitie of leather bagges for ponder, Torches of ware, Candles for Lanternes, creſſets, eight thouſand Romane bottels of leather for their wine and water, fiue thouſand payre of ſhoes, and a ſeuen thouſand bundels of corde.
            There is alſo all the furniture for the Sea, belonging to the Cannon.
            Moreouer, there is of prouiſion of ouerplus double wheeles, and other furniture for twelue doble Cannons of batterie, and for one & twentie Peeces of field Peeces, with three thouſand and fiue hundreth Bullets for them, beſides the prouiſion that are heere aboue written, and alſo cordes for ſhippes, Pitch, Flaxe, and there is alſo Standarts, Ancients and Banners, where the figure of Ieſus Chriſt and our Ladie

and of his Maieſtie are paynted.
            And for to bring the ſayd Cannon a land, they carrie Moyles, Cartes, Mantlets, Gabions, and ſuch like ſortes, and the reſt, which is neceſſary for the ſame purpoſe.
            Alſo beſides the weapons that ſouldiers haue, they carrie alſo for the neceſſitie, armes, which are herevnder written.
            
               Seuen thouſand Gunnes, with their furnitures.
               A thouſand Muſkets, and their furnitures.
               Ten thouſand Pikes.
               A thouſand Partiſanes and Halebardes,
               Six thouſand halfe Pikes.
            
            Alſo they carrie of ouer-plus, in caſe that they ſhould come a land, all their tooles, as Iron Crowes, Porters Baſkets, Maſons Hammers, Tents, Sacks for the Pioners in great quantitie.
            So that there is in the ſayd armie the Veſſels, the men of warre, munitions, neceſſarie furnitures, vittels, and the reſt of neceſſarie things which are contayned in this diſcourſe.
            Made in Lisborne the 20. of May. 1588.
            
            
               Afterwardes there went out of Lisbon towardes the end of Iune laſt, a ſupply of an armie in good furnitures, contayning foure ſcore ſayle of ſhippes, to ioyne with the ſayd armie.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               Diſtichon Colonienſium, Anglis Hiſpanorum Iugum minitantium, vnaè cum Anglorum, euentum rei praeſagientium, reſponſo appoſitiſsimo.
            
               Typographus lectori beneuolo, & veritatis
ſtudioſo. S. D.
               A Mice Lector, cum incidiſſem in diſticha quaedam à Colonienſibus edita, per quae, ex ſuo voto, quaſi iam deuicta ab Hiſpanis Anglia, triumphabant, volui vnum ex his, vnà cum alijs, veritatis amantium virorum carminibus, typis excudere, vt, quibus in lucem editis, & tibi, & omnibus ſinceris viris de ſumma in confingendis, & ſpargendis varijs rumoribus, Colonienſium, & pontificiorum omnium impudentia, deque Hiſpanorum profligatorum, & fugitiuorum incredibili, & inexpiabili in inuadenda aliena poſſeſsione, & cupiditate, & temeritate, certò conſtaret. Tu his interim fruere, & Deo, qui pro ſeruanda, a tanta tyrannide Anglia, pugnauit; mecum gratias age, & vale.
            
            
               Colonienſes ad Angliam, & eius aſſeclas Europae.
               Tu, quae Romanas voluiſti ſpernere leges,
               Hiſpano diſces ſubdere colla iugo.
            
            
               Anglus ad Hiſpanum Romanae Meretricis amaſium.
               Colla iugo, quid ni? nihil eſt, Hiſpane, quod optas.
               Sic vtinam poſsim ſubdere ſaepe tuo.
            
            
               ALIVD
               Hiſpane, Anglorum voluiſti ſpernere vires?
               Anglorum diſces subdere colla iugo.
            
            
               ALIVD
               Scis cur Romanas ſpernit gens Anglica leges?
               Haud ſeruile ferunt libera colla iugum.
            
            
               
               ALIVD
               Romanas meritò didici contemnere leges,
               Sic iub
                     •
                  t aeterna lex veneranda Dei.
            
            
               ALIVD
               Hoccine Romanas leges, Hiſpane, tueri?
               Hoc eſt noſtra tuo ſubdere colla iugo?
               Vix prius armatas Anglorum cernere claſſes,
               Abſque mora turpi quàm dare terga fugae.
            
            
               ALIVD
               Si numeres, Hiſpane, Duces, ſi vulnera, naues,
               Anglorum metues ne patiare iugum.
            
            
               ALIVD
               Ampla quidem, truculentè refers, Hiſpane, trophaea,
               Scilicet ad proprias ſequitur te dedecus eras.
            
            
               ALIVD
               Colla dabit, qui terga dedit, quid, amice, ſuperbis?
               Turpius Hiſpano quis mihi terga dedit
               Ergo age, ſi volupe eſt, Romanas diſcere leges,
               Exemplo Hiſpani diſcere perge tui.
            
            
               Aliud ad Poetam Colonienſem.
               Subdere eùm videas Hiſpanum colla Britanno,
               Vnum age, nec vates poſtea falſus eris.
               Scilicet ipſe tuum properans laqueo inſere collum
               Te dignum facies, & breue fiet opus.
            
            
               Aliud ad Bernardinum Mendoſum.
               Nil Mendoſe, facis, tua toxica, tela, triumphi,
               Sunt mihi ludibrio, nil, furioſe, facis.
               Hoc, Mendoſe, facis, ſi quid facis, improbe, technis;
               Cladis es Hiſpano maxima cauſa tuo.
               Ergo opus Hiſpano feceris, gratumque Britanno.
               Si laqueo vitam, perfide, finieris.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   