
      
         
            
            
            A PAGEANT OF SPANISH Humours. Wherin are naturally deſcribed and liuely portrayed, the kinds and quallities of a Signior of Spaine.
            
            Tranſlated out of Dutche, By H. w.
            
            
               Haud curo Inuidiam.
            
            
               I. W.
            
            Imprinted at London by Iohn Wolfe, and are to be ſolde at his ſhop in Popes-head Alley, neare to the Exchaunge. 1599.
         
         
            
            
            The Preface.
            
               TRuth intending to trauel triumphantly, the worldes circumferēce, doth by her true recording trumpe, blazon the ſeuerall and ſundry naturall humors of a Spaniſh Signior, as the limitation of time will permit her. Now this faire Princeſſe (all telling veritie) is landed on our Engliſh ſhore, wherein ſhe is pleaſed to make a further progreſſe, building vpon the ſure foundation of Englands gentle ſufferance. If her arriuall ſeeme gracious, ſhe will for euer harbor in this Iſle, explaining the contents (not only of Admirations records) but of ſuch effectuall preſidēts as ſhall profit the hearers and peruſers of the ſame. Her welcome by this firſt ſummon, ſhe may perceiue, the iſſue hereof, ſhe hourely expecteth: If fortunate, then happie ſhe, if aduerſe, contrary to her expectation, ſhe wil inſtantly embarque her ſelfe, for ſome other continent. Therefore as your fauourable iudgements ſhall award, yeeld vp your pleaſing verdits.
         
         
            
            The naturall kindes of a Signor of Spaine.
            
            
               
                  1 A Signor is an Angel in the Church.
               
                  2 A Diuel in his lodging.
               
                  3 A Woolfe at Table.
               
                  4 A Hogge in his Chamber.
               
                  5 A Peacocke on the ſtreete.
               
                  6 A Foxe to deceiue Women.
               
                  7 A Lyon in a place of Garriſon.
               
                  8 A Hare in a beſieged place.
               
                  9 A Lambe vnder the Gallowes.
               
                  10 Auaritious.
               
                  11 Ambitious.
               
                  12 Bloodthirſtie and tyrannous.
               
                  13 Greedie of reuenge.
               
                  14 Faithleſſe and periurous.
               
                  15 A miſerable eſtate to be vnder a Signors ſubiection.
               
                  16 A happie eſtate to be free from Signor.
            
         
      
      
         
            A Pageant of Spanish humours, wherein are naturally deſcribed, and liuely portrayed, the kindes and qualities of a Signior of Spaine.
         
            1 A Signior is an Angel in the Church.
            
               IN the ſacred Temple of the Almightie Iehoua, a place of reſidence of his faithfull ſeruants, there is no perſō on earth, more deuout then a Signor of Spaine, but in the middeſt of his Contemplations diuine, or making ſhewe of diuine, tending to the true ſeruice of God, it is his aſſiduate vſe (if his ſight be guilty of any ladies alluring bewtie) to gaze, and afterwards to caſt amourous glaunces, yet Guarda los oios fuera fuera la temptatie,
               Bridle the ſight, Baniſh temptation ther is no ſuch matter: for Sig. his vital powers are all occupied in deuotion. What with crowching, knéeling, and millions of croſſes, he makes an excéeding good outward ſhewe: After which, with a ſingular grace, kiſſing his thumbe he endeth: although he haue knéeled but on the one knée, be it no ſcandall, for it is his faſhion. Then for the laſt act of the Church matter to confirme the peace, Signor bids Signor as buenas Dias.
               Bids the Gentlewomen good-morrow.
            
            
               In fine, a Signor is a Saint, there want but workes,
               Vnder the greeneſt graſſe, the moſt venemous ſerpent lurks.
            
         
         
            
            2 A Signior is a Diuel in his Lodging.
            AS Signior is an Angell in the Church, ſo to the contrary, in his lodging, he is a raging Diuel or Furie, ſéemeth rather the Hoaſte then the gueſt, what his Signory deſires, muſt be the Hoaſtes liking the faireſt Chamber, the beſt bed and all elſe, is his to commaund, he thinkes it but the dutie of the Flemings which he eſtéems as beggars,     and the Wallons as Théeues, A la Horca ladromis.
               To the gallowes with theſe theeues, But Signor is a Caualliero, he muſt be reuerenced, Guarda ſu Signoria,
                Reſpect his worſhip. he muſt be ſoothed and flattered. You need not any way to miſtruſt him, for he wil neither filch nor ſteale, but you muſt indéed preuent him with giuing. Moreouer, you ought to know he is a Hidalgo,
                A Gentleman.  although he haue no patents thereof, euen whoſe name and race, doth terrifie the Moores, Honorada ſta la Caſa,
               The houſe is honored.  which alodgeth ſuch perſons. All mandado de ſu Signoria,
               At his worſhips commaund.
            
            
               Euery one muſt be readie, if he wil liue at eaſe,
               For he that lodgeth a Diuel, muſt ſeeke him to pleaſe.
            
         
         
            3 A Signior is a Woolfe at Table.
            
               SIgnior at his dyet, is as a rauenous Woolfe, with the one elbow leaning on the Table, openeth his Mawe like a Iudas purſe. He layeth his tallants on the meat, like a Woolfe that gripeth a Lambe: he eſtéemes it no ſhame to turne the diſh,   and tumble the cates topſie turuie, to ſeeke De buena gana with a good heart.los buenas boccades,
                The good morcels. the which, Ell Ventro del Ʋno,
                To the belly of one. he purpoſeth to ſend: what a Signior doeth not eate, he ſleaeth, or vnſéemly mangleth. A more lickoriſh wretch earth doth not produce, his fare muſt daily be freſh, both roaſted and ſod, beſides this, he is a wonderfull deuourer of Olia podridos, and Carbonadoes, togither with an infinit quantitie of fruites, Comfites, and Succados, yet it is a hard matter, if a man hath not one good qualitie, No es barachono, you muſt not thinke ſo, except it

were a chance. This is a Signiors dyet at anothers coſt, but alas if you finde him at his owne Table, you may ſée it ſtately furniſhed with a Sardinia, Or a cruſt of bread, a pot of Aqua, and perhaps a bone, yet abroad, if there be a Woolfe at the Table, Signior is one.
         
         
            4 A Signior is a Hogge in his Chamber.
            
               SIgnior in his Chamber, is as a Hogge in his ſtye: with filth and filthie ſauour he payeth his Hoaſte, euen the ſame which procéedeth from his pockey ſelfe, Las donas,
               1 The Wenches.   vſe him ſo kindly, that he is wholy infected, De los boubes. 2 The pockes. La mala canera, 3 The Chamber.
                ſticks in his buttocks. It is a Diauolos life, alwaies to be troubled with thoſe cliſters and pilles, ſirropes and conſerues, how is it poſſible Signiors daintie bodie can endure? but indéed the Apothecaries drugges are to eaſe the belly, Signior being ſtopped like a bottomleſſe barrell. Although he were honoured with the faireſt and neateſt Chamber in the houſe, he wil without reſpect, file it with his head or tuſhe. What matter is that, the Meſſima muſt conuey it fuera.
               The Mayd muſt carry it out.
            
            
               How then can the Hoaſte in quiet ſleepe?
               Who a Diuel, a Woolfe, and a Hogge doth keepe.
            
         
         
            5 A Signior is a Peacocke in the ſtreete.
            
               SIgnior being in the ſtréete, or any other publicke place, his firſt geſtures, are to bend the head, turne the eye, and Peacocke-like to behold himſelfe if nothing be amiſſe, his gate is like one who treades the meaſures, he ſcarce takes thrée ſteppes, but the fourth, he againe contemplateth, Su Signoria,
               His Signory. ſometime he wil caſt a léering eie a ſide, to eſpie if the beholders admire him not, his minde ſtil giues him, that euery ſpeculator ſaith, Ah mira ell Canalioro,
               Os beheld the knight. then he rowſeth himſelfe and expecteth a reuerence of euery one that paſſeth, he twiſteth his mouſtachoes, and ſtrokes his beard. His Trade in Spaine
               
perhaps was to ſowe hand-baſkets, or to blow glaſſes in the Furnaces, ſcarce truſted to guard a flocke of Cabritoes. And here we wil beare the name of a Hidalgo or don, yet the Aſſe is knowne, though he weare a Lyons ſkinne.
         
         
            
               6 A Signior is a Foxe to deceiue Women.
            
               SIgnior is ſtuffed with all maner of ſubtil deuices to deceiue women, which is his continuall ſtudie. As the Foxe often (not by force, but by ſubtiltie) catcheth a praie, lo Sig. where he can eſpye one to his liking, preſently his head is filled with a common wealth of ſubtil ſtratagems, although he ſée no likelihood, yet like a valiant Champion, he ſtands to his ſute very importunately, whereby he ſhewes them what mettal is in him, for he trieth in Loues ſcorching flames like a firie Furnace.    Si la Dona eſchoucha:
               If ſhe liſten, he intices her further to come, Fuera bowing his knées, Conquingentos ſuspiros,
                with 500. ſighs  and other fained adulations, he proteſteth to be a deuoted Seruidor de las Donas,
               Seruant vnto women. and with a Beſa los manos de voſtra Signoria, los ciueros cō Corteſia & buena Compagnia,
                Kiſſing his hands, and preſenting her with al dainties. he intices her to his entent, if ſo be for all this ſhe continue obſtinate, and wil not pittie this amourous Squire, he betaketh his farther ſuite to a cunning Bawde, and doth in ſuch ſort, that many a Lambe muſt voyd his Lodge.
         
         
            
               7 A Signor is a Lyon in a place of Garriſon.
            IN a Towne where a Spaniſh Signior lies in Garriſon, he rules like a Lyon, poſing all vnder his ſubiection, a Signior alone is wiſe inough of himſelf to do and leaue what he liſt, any others (great or ſmall) he maketh no account of, eſtéeming them all as Nada.
               Nothing. 
               Signior is the Cocke, he wil ouercrow all. If any one contrary his doings and ſayings, then one ſhal ſée him ſwear & ſwagger,  Villain tradidor del Re, Lutheriano,
               Villain, Traytor to the king. Hereticke. he ſtands ſo much on his owne reputation, that none (beſides himſelf and his) are Seruidors del Re,
                The kings ſeruants. he ſuppoſeth none may gainſay him,

for he is maiſter of the place: Guarda la cabecca.
               Beware thy head. He ſweares by God. If you abuſe him, Boto a Dios, he wil reuenge it with his blood: at leaſt he wil make you beléeue it. In fine, Signior wil be Signior, as long while as Signior is himſelfe.
         
         
            
               8 A Signior is a Hare in a beſieged place.
            IN a place of garriſon, where nothing is to be don but bragging and dominéering, there turn a Signior looſe, he wil play his part, he eſtéemes his ſkil, far to ſurpaſſe all others, but no ſooner doth he heare the thundring rumor of Los Ennemigos, or ſée them plant their Tents and ſtandards with any aduantage, before his reſidence, he is in a moment wholly metamorphoſed, his heart ſhrinkes like a péece of wet leather by the fire, all his Lyon like courage vaniſheth like ſmoake, for that from a Lyon he becomes a Hare, yet he wil ſéeme to cloake it, but neuer ſo wel, but you ſhal ſée him making of vowes to Signior Iago & noſtra dona de lorretto,
               S. Iames and our Lady of Loretta. the one vows a pilgrimage a foote, and the other rich gifts, his braine and ſences are ſo affrighted with the noyſe of the Artillery, that like a Hare he feareth euery cracke and blaſt of winde.
         
         
            
               9 A Signior is a Lambe vnder the Gallowes.
            NEuer was there any man more vnreſolute to die, then a Spaniard, eſpecially if his fortune be to be hanged, no ſooner doth he fal into ye hand of a Iuſtice, but Signior looſeth his téethe, he is a forlorne man, vale mee Dios,
               God defend me. from ſuch a lot,     for Signior ſtandeth more in awe of la Horca,
                The Gallows. as alſo la Stropada,
                Mercy.  then the diuel doth of the Croſſe: inſomuch that in that reſpect Signor nō va le nada,
                Is worth nothing. he cries Miſericordia, he vtters many gréeuous laments: but moſt, O dios de materra, O mal, auenturado,
               O thou Spaniſh God. in this ſort to caper aboue grounde, Signior had rather goe to Rome bare-foote, then to be hanged,

it is ſuch a hard morcell, and of ſo bad diſgeſture, it is as good as Stibbium, to make him vomit vp al his vilanie to the Fryer that cōfeſſeth him, which done, he recommends his ſoule, (with a thouſand croſſes) to ſome Saint, and then leapes at a Daſie, neuer was a Lambe more méeke then a Signior vnder a Gallowes.
         
         
            
               10 A Signior is auaritious.
            
               Some faults in particular perſons, are in ſome ſort to be tollerated, and other ſome not, in any wiſe, eſpecially in caſe of gouernment. IN caſe that Signior had but theſe aforeſaid vices, he were to be borne withall, although to many a ones coſt, but he is moreouer ſo wrapped and intangled in auarice, that for money he would almoſt fight with the diuel, as appeares by the writing of their owne Hiſtoriographers. The auarice of the late Romanes, Turks and Heathens, were but toyes to his, not only for money, but alſo to ſcrape to himſelfe euery thing elſe, and to tyrannize ouer all the worlde, the which they alſo ſhewe in the Indies, where aboue the Spaniſh Armies, at S. Domingo is written, Toth es nuestro toth es mio:
                The Biſhops of Chiapa Pedro de chiefe Franciſco loper, and other their writers. As alſo thereon ſtandeth a Horſe, with his hinder féete in the worlde, and ſéemeth with his fore féete, to leape out of the ſame, and out of his mouth this Motto. The world doth not ſuffice me, whereby they ſhewe their inſatiable couetouſneſſe. The Indians alſo ſay, that gold is Signiors God, but as he thinks the worlds containes not pillage inough for him, ſo vndoubtedly, one day he ſhalbe made pilladge to the world.
         
         
            
               11 A Signior is ambitious.
            
               Sign. of Spaine is ſo blinded in ambition, that he enuies at anothers honor, fretting exceedingly, to ſee that any one beſides himſelfe ſhould bear any ſway, and ſcornes them for his ſeruants, whō himſelfe is vnworthie to ſerue. The reiected Letters of an. 1589.IN ambition, Signior alſo is not behinde hand, he reputes himſelf ſuch, as none but he may be reuerenced (he witleſſe) thinkes himſelfe farre to ſurmount others manners, he vnſkilfull, thinkes his learning and doctrine greater then any others, his clowniſh and baſe diſcent, he extols higher, then others doo their true Nobilitie: and his beaſtly and ſenceleſſe opinion, before any reaſonable iudgement: he is ſo loftie, that

if any other will ſhewe his ſkill and experience, in inſtructing him in any thing, he both ſcornes the Teacher, and reiecteth his willing inſtruction, he will not ſticke (in his humor) to reuile and defame, with the name of Traytors, thoſe which to ſerue him, haue left and abandoned God and their Countrey, as well appeared by the Letters of the Spaniſh Commaundor Tepeda, who durſt preſume to miſcall the ſtates of ye other ſide, Traytors, which notwithſtanding were of their factions, In ſum, where Signor doth rule, he ſhews his diuelliſh actions.
         
         
            
               12 A Signior is bloodthirſtie and tyrannous.
            
               This appeareth moſt manifeſtly to be true, by the report of their owne Biſhops and other writers, which ſay that their bloodines and tyrannie, ſurpaſſeth all nations of the world, as alſo that his diſcent is from the moſt barbarous & cruelleſt people in Europe.
               SIgnior hath at ſundry times through his crueltie, without mercy, tyranized and ſuppreſſed whole Countries & Kingdomes, whereby many thouſands haue loſt their liues: his crueltie and inhumanitie is ſo extraordinary, that his minde is alwaies in ſuſpence, deuiſing and inuenting what new and greater torments he may vſe vnto them which he hateth, cutting & hewing off, of armes and legges, killing babes in their mothers armes, yea in the wombes, and ſuch like are common things. Moreouer, he wil take the dead bodies of the little Infants, tearing them by péecemeale, throw them to the dogges, to be enterred in their bowels. If he be victorious, all his vallor he ſheweth in ſurh like déeds: inſomuch, that he is neuer glutted with blood, he farre ſurpaſſes Pharaoh in crueltie, Herod in tyrannie, and Antiochus in bloodthirſtineſſe. It is inough, yea too too much knowne in our Netherlands, and not only in Europe, Aſia and Affrica, but alſo in the fartheſt part of America, whereby he ſheweth himſelfe to bee ſprung from the cruell Goths and blood-thirſtie Wandals.
            
         
         
            
               13 A Signior is greedie of reuenge.
            
               If a man be ambitious, it followeth that he is greedie of reuenge. This hath the Spaniard ſhewed in many ſorts and places, eſpecially in his owne Countrey, and on his owne Country men, viz. in the Citie of Saragoſſa, where he beheaded a Duke, an Earl, the head Officer, and many of the chief Citizens, only becauſe they defēded their priuiledges in the cauſe of an impriſoned man. To execute his reuenge, he muſt needs break his oth, for he hath not the heart to do it valiantly and really, for he had not only ſworn vnto thoſe of Saragoſſa, as to all the realme, to keepe, protect and defend their priuiledges, but moreouer according to the formal words and articles which were pronounced at his coronation, was to looſe his right by default thereof, he then that in ſuch ſort vſed his own country men, and thoſe which in Idolatry are as ſuperſtitious as himſelfe, what would he, nay what ought he to do vnto thoſe which are proclaimed heretickes rebels, and were ſo long ſince, by the holy Inquiſitiō damned to the pit of hell.ANy iniury which Signor may haue receiued or conceiued, how ſmall ſoeuer, he wil alwaies remember it in minde,

(though he ſhewe neuer ſo good ſemblance) vntill he finde ſome fit opportunitie, which if he cannot effect to his will, vnleſſe to his diſcredit, yet notwithſtanding, he wil neither reſpect honour nor oath, and therefore wil execute it after the moſt rigorous ſort poſſible. He will finde occaſions inough to accuſe one, and thoſe commonly ſuch, wherof ye Woolfe accuſed the lambe, ſaying that he troubled the water whereof he drunke. The Indians to their coſt knew it full well, as alſo the chiefeſt of Arragon and our Netherlanders the Nobler ſort whereof which he could not conuict nor accuſe, amongſt the number of malefactors, he hath ſought by all ſubtil meanes (ſome at one time, ſome at another) to make them all away by deceitfull ſtratagems, vnder the colour of pure loue, ſhadowed with the robes of true friendſhip, which he defileth.
         
         
            
               14 A ſignior, is faithleſſe and periurous.
            TO effect and execute this his inſatiable deſire of reuenge (in a periurous ſort) he abandoneth all faith, the which in any accord or agréemēt, he may haue ſworn or promiſed, for although his peruerſe nature be of it ſelf too much that way inclined, yet he is ſtrictly bound by the papal doctrine, and by the decrées of the counſel of Conſtans, that to the hindrance and dammage, not only of the offenders of his Maieſtie, but alſo of Los Lutherianos, they néed not keepe any oath or promiſe, but with all their might procure their vtter ruine and deſtruction. Such his déeds are not only exempt from ſin, but are moreouer reputed holy workes, in reſpect that they are done to the furtherance and in the behalfe of the Romiſh Church. And by Gods helpe when he moſt truſts theron, ſeeking to rock others a ſléep, through his fraudulent adulations, his deceit and faithleſſe intent, ſhall be manifeſt, and he puniſhed for the ſame: for there is no conueyance of ſinne, from the knowledge of God. But he that putteth his truſt in him, ſhall euer be bleſt.
         
         
            
            
               15 A miſerable ſeruitude to be vnder a Signiors ſubiection.
            
               Thoſe which know not the error wherein they liue, haue not only deſired the ſame aboue alworldly things: but alſo preferred the ſame aboue their liues, they eſteeming it ſuch a felicity, that they ſtil ſeeke and procure al other to be of the like religion, frō the which God keepe vs all, Amen. In ſtead of a tyrant, to be gouerned and ruled by a true and careful father, to ſerue God according to his holy inſtitutions, and to continue in his Countries libertie, are the higheſt things which a Chriſtian in this worlde may wiſh, which to attaine and defend: no worldly things nor life it ſelfe is to be ſpared, beſeeching God through his mercie, to aide and aſſiſt vs alwaies in the ſame, to his honor and glory, the aid of the oppreſſed, and our ſoule a ſaluation. Amen.FInally, it is a moſt deteſtable ſlauery to be vnder a Spaniards ſubiection, worſe then death it ſelfe, being hurtfull, not only to the bodie, but to the ſoule. Although he ſometimes diſſemble his nature, yet is he therefore not to be truſted: wherfore we beſéech his diuine maieſtie through his goodneſſe, to be mercifull vnto thoſe which are yet ſtooping vnder Signior his cruell and tyrannicall yoke, giuing them patience to endure it, vntill ſuch time as thou O Lord ſhalt find good to giue them a ioyful deliuerance, which vnto thée is eaſie, but aboue al, vouchſafe vnto thoſe (which by his falſe doctrine, liue in obſcuritie, from the diuine light) more grace and diſcretion, with a better conſcience, then to entice thoſe which are at libertie to the like error, therby both (to their repentance) to glut themſelues with his tyrannical ſuperioritie: for it is far better to be ſlaues vnto Turkes and Moores, then to be moleſted with the gnawing worme of Conſcience.
         
         
            
               16 A happie eſtate to be free from Signior.
            BVt to the contrary, to be frée from his tirannie, and in ſtéed of a Signior, to haue as cullars in our Countrey, our owne kindred & Countrey men, is (according to euery ones cenſure) the happieſt eſtate, and the greateſt felicitie in this tereſtiall orbe, yea a preparatiue & foundation of an enſuing fréedom, and a ſtrong defence againſt all enemies. God through his clemency and goodneſſe, grant vnto them a perpetuall fréedome, and bleſſe them with his celeſtial gifts, of wiſedome, foreſight and diſcretion, that they may vnmoueably as a ſturdie rocke, withſtand the violent & raging aſſaults of the Spaniards vntil the end, and for guerdon of their paines, remaine in a frée and happie eſtate with continuation. To the honor of God, and their ſoules ſaluation. Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   