
      
         
            
            
            A
Briefe Diſcourſe of
the Hypoſtaſis, or ſubſtance
of the water of Spaw; Containing in
ſmall quantity many pots of that
Minerall Water.
            
               
                  Ʋerie profitable for ſuch Patients, as
cannot repaire in perſon to thoſe Fountaines,
as by peruſing this Diſcourſe, it
will plainly appeare.
            
            Tranſlated out of French into
English, by G. T.
            
            This aboueſaide Hypostaſis, or ſubſtance of
the water of Spaw, is to be ſold by Doctor Hieronimus
Seminus, Italian, dwelling in S. Paules Alley, in
Red-croſſe-ſtreet.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A briefe Diſcourſe of the
Hypoſtaſis, or ſubſtance of the water
of Spaw, conteyning in ſmall quantitie
many pots of that Minerall water.
            
            
               WHereas the ſingular effects
that are yearely experimented,
by drinking
the water of Spaw, doe
cauſe the concourſe of
ſundry perſons of diuers
Countries and Nations
to thoſe Fountaines:
whereunto many more patients would willingly
repaire, were they not letted, either by extraordinary
defect of health, or ordinarie want of
wealth, or ſuch other impeachments, as dayly
occurre in the courſe of this tranſitory life.
            In conſideration whereof, it hath ſeemed verie
expedient to ſome, who haue diſpoſed their ſtudies

and labours, to the good of others; and
whoſe reſidences are not farre from thoſe Fountaines,
nor themſelues eſtranged from the enſearch
of naturall things, to deuiſe the meanes,
that ſuch as are abſent, may be made partakers
of thoſe Minerall waters; and conſequently, of
thoſe healthfull effects, that by the drinking of
them are produced.
            The accuſtomed courſe hitherto taken, hath
beene to fill numbers of Bottles with the water
of the vpper or the lower Fountaine, and to conueigh
thoſe Bottles (being cloſely ſtopped) vnto
their deſigned places; as to France, England, Italy,
Germany, Polonia, Moſcouia, and other farre
diſtant places. But this way is found by experience,
no leſſe troubleſome, then chargeable in
the carriage; conſidering, that a huge quantity
of water, containeth but a very little of the Minerall
ſubſtance, wherein the vertue of the water
conſiſteth; and the ſaide ſubſtance being ſo thinly
diuided into a great quantity of water, looſeth
much of the force and vertue, before it can bee
brought into ſo farre diſtant places; the which
hath beene the cauſe, why the perſons before inſinuated,
haue employed their ſtudye and Trauaile,
to reduce the pure Hypoſtaſis or ſubſtance
of the ſaide Minerals, into ſo little a quantitie, as
that one pot may ſupply for farre more then an
hundred pots; and withall, that no part of the
force or vertue of the ſaide Minerals ſhould bee

impaired.
            And to the end the Reader may receiue ſome
kinde of ſatisfaction, who perchance is curious
to looke into the practiſe heereof; or at leſt, into
the ſpeculation of this Maiſtry, three points hee
is then to obſerue.
            Firſt that the extraction of the ſaide Minerall
eſſence bee made in Sommer; in which ſeaſon,
thoſe Waters are of more efficacie: And if the
extracter bee himſelfe preſent at the Fountaines,
it is ſo much the better.
            Secondly, that he finde out the ſecret how to
part the Minerall ſubſtance from the VVater,
without diſtillation, (for that would not quite the
coſt) but by precipitation, whereby the Minerall
powder falleth downe, and ſetleth it ſelfe in the
bottome of the glaſſe, depriuing the VVater of
all Minerall taſte and operation; which ſecret, is
ſoone performed by a skilfull Artiſt.
            Thirdly, when he hath a ſufficient quantity of
that precipitated powder, hee muſt not diſſolue
it with any coraſiue, but with a competent meaſure
of ſuch Liquors as are agreeable vnto the
health of man: and in theſe three obſeruations
the whole practiſe conſiſteth.
            It followeth now, to declare in what quantitie
this Hypostaſis or extraction diſſolued thus into a
liquor, is to bee taken; which muſt bee as followeth.
            Take a dram weight of this Liquor, which is

the eight part of an Ounce; and contayneth as
much in quantity, as will fill a great Thimble;
poure this into a glaſſe or ſtone Bottle, & poure
thereunto fifty Ounces of the beſt and cleareſt
water that is to be had; whether it be Fountaine
water, Riuer water, or Well water: This water
is to be put vnto the dram weight of the other liquor,
at the time that the Patient is ready to
drinke it, and not before; not that any inconuenience
may enſue thereof, but becauſe the freſher
the water is, the more grateful it is vnto the
taſte, and the Minerall ſubſtance in length of
time, will deſcend vnto the bottom of the glaſſe:
and albeit it may bee newly ſtirred and mingled
with the water, and ſo taken; yet will it notwithſtanding,
be more to the liking of the Patient, as
before is noted, to haue his water brought freſh
from the Spring, &c.
            This quantity of fiftie Ounces of Water to
a dram of the Minerall ſubſtance, is the ordinary
and beſt proportion, which hetherto by practiſe
hath beene tried, being alſo leſſe diſtaſtfull vnto
the drinke; yet, in ſome diſeaſes, as in retention
of Vrine, or in quenching the heats of Agues, it
will ſtand the Patient in better ſteede to followe
this proportion, then to take it in leſſer quantitie
of water. And this is ſpoken vpon proofe and experience:
how be it, if the learned Phyſitian ſhall
thinke it expedient,Vt in morbis in quibus humiditas perualet. that in ſome diſeaſes the
quantity of the water be diminiſhed, the matter

is referred vnto his graue iudgement, conſenting
with the Philoſopher, that Fruſtra fit per plura,
quod poteſt fieri per punciora.
            
            The water being in the former proportion
prepared▪ the patient may drinke thereof according
to the quality of his diſeaſe;Till the water is paſt by the belly, or by the Vrine Meatus: & that the ſtomack is empty as for example.
            For the ſtone and grauell, or heate of the
raynes, he may take euery morning faſting fiftie
Ounces at ſeuerall times, and hee muſt abſtaine
from meate two houres after, and if within that
ſpace he be in plight to walke, or to vſe ſome other
moderate exerciſe, it will worke the better.
            Heere is alſo to bee noted, that albeit ſuch as
drinke the Spaw water, to take 100. 200. or more
ounces in a morning. Yet this notwithſtanding,
theſe-fiftie-ounces will be of as great efficacie,
becauſe there is more pure ſubſtance conteyned
in thoſe fiftie ounces, then in a far greater quantity
of Spaw water.
            Thus much taken in a morning, will be ſufficient
the firſt weeke for the whole day. The week
following, ſo much more may be drunken in the
afternoone, about three or foure of the clocke,
if it ſhall ſeeme good to the learned and expert
Phiſition, to whoſe diſcretion and direction are
referred, theſe and ſundry other particular circumſtances
that may happen (which in ſchooles
are tearmed Hic & nunc) in ſundry diſeaſes, and
in the diuers diſpoſitions of different patients:
in which occurrences all purgations and other

preparations that mny be preſcribed, are to goe
before the taking of this water, as in like ſort the
preſcription of dyets, and the like heedfull and
healthfull obſeruations, as when or how often
the patient may drinke the water alone, or mingled
with wine, at meates or at other times. Theſe
and other circumſtances muſt in all reaſon be referred
to the diſcretion of the learned Phiſition.
            In the retention of vrine it will be needfull to
take thoſe fifty ounces euery morning, and as
much more in the afternoone, vnleſſe the partie
finde amendment, and in that diſeaſe to walke,
and vſe ſome exerciſe, will bee of great importance.
            The ſame quantity may bee preſcribed in the
dropſie, morning and euening, eſpecially after
the firſt weeke, and if the diſeaſe haue not taken
very deepe roote, the patient will finde ſencible
amendment, and his ſtrength day by day verie
much to encreaſe.
            In Tertian and Quartaine Agues, the Patient
muſt drinke euery morning 50. Ounces on his
good dayes; but on the dayes of his fit, hee may
take before the acceſſe 20. Ounces, and in the
heate of the fit, thirty Ounces.
            The like obſeruations may bee vſed in Quotidian
Agues, to wit; that 20. ounces be taken before
the fit, and 
                  •
               o. in the heate thereof, if it ſhall
ſeeme good to the Phyſitian, whoſe iudgement
is alſo to be vſed concerning the time and quantity,

when and how much of this water may bee
vſed in continuall Agues.
            In peſtilentiall Agues, there hath not (as yet)
any aſſured triall bene made.
            In all Obſtructions, as the Greene ſicknes, and
the like,For the paines of the Spleen, hardneſse and ſwellings therof. the Phyſitian may preſcribe it in place
of the powder of ſteele, it being vndoubtedly far
more ſecure, and of more effectuall operation.
            In the weakneſſe of the ſtomacke and heate of
the Liuer, it is a ſingular water, being dayly taken
in the aforeſaide quantity of 50. ounces.
            In the Flux, and in the abundance of VVoment
Courſes it may alſo bee taken; and beeing
mingled now and then with red wine, it will bee
the better. In womens infirmities (as aforeſaid)
if this water bee mingled with diſtilled Plantine
water, it will worke the better. For other diſeaſes,
the Reader may ſee what is added in the end
of this diſcourſe, which is taken out of the Treatiſe
of the vertues of the waters of the Forreſt of
Arden, and principally of thoſe of Spaw, written
ſome yeares ſince in the French tongue, by the
learned M. Gilbert Lembourgh, Doctor of Phyſicke,
& dedicated vnto the Prince of Liege. Obſeruing
neuertheleſſe by the way, that as the ſaid
Fountaines of Spaw do not benefit euery one in
particular; ſo is it not promiſed, that this Hypoſtaſis
thereof ſhall worke infallible cures in all kinde
of diſeaſes, and vpon all perſons, as though one
ſaddle ſhould fit euery horſe; for diuers perſons

haue diuers conſtitutions of body; and the ſame
Medicine which is auaileable to one, is not alwayes
profitable to another, as reaſon and experience
dayly ſheweth. Wherefore to conclude,
the ordinary proportion as before hath bin ſaid,
is to mingle fifty ounces of pure water to a dram
of this Mineral Hypoſtaſis or ſubſtance of the Spaw
water; not that there is any danger if one ſhould
drinke one dram onely with an ounce of common
water, but for the more efficatious working:
this ordinary quantity is found to be more conuenient,
hauing therein ſome reſemblance with
the copious abundance of the Spaw water.
            Heere alſo the patient may obſerue, that it
ſhall not he needfull for him alwayes to weigh
the water; for hauing weighed it once, and put it
into a glaſſe of conuenient greatneſſe, hee may
ſee to what fulneſſe of the glaſſe his fifty Ounces
of water do reach, and ſo vſe that meaſure for the
ſaide weight. The Patient may moreouer mingle
the water with wine, in all ſuch Diſeaſes as
are not hot.
            They do vſe at the Spaw to make Breweſſe or
ſops of that water, boyling it with Butter, which
they finde both toothſome and wholeſom; in al
which particularities it will alwayes be good (as
before is ſaide) to follow the aduice of a learned
expert and vnpaſsionate Phyſitian.
            Of ſundry diſeaſes, which principally are cured
by the vſe of drinking the water of Spaw, taken

out of the treatiſe of the vertues therof, written
by M. Gilbert Lembourgh, Doctor of Phyſicke,
and conſequently of the Hypoſtaſis of the
ſaide water being mingled with pure common
water, as in the precedent diſcourſe is declared.
The drinking of this water doth mightily quench
thirſt, and it bringeth the hot Liuer vnto a good
temper, as alſo the Kidneyes.
            It ſtrengthneth the ſtomacke, and giueth it
appetite thorough the aſtrictiue vertue that it
hath, but for an extreame cold ſtomacke it is not
ſo good.
            It is greatly profitable againſt all obſtructions,
and debility of the Milt, for it doth diſſolue and
cure the cauſe thereof.
            It deliuereth the Kidneyes and bladder from
Grauell, and is aidefull againſt all defluctions of
thoſe parts.
            It correcteth Rheumes and Cararrhes, in what
part of the body ſoeuer they deſcend; as in the
breaſt, the ſtomacke, the Kidneyes, Sinewes, on
Muſcles.
            It cureth Dropſies, how be it ſuch as in whom
this diſeaſe is confirmed by length of time, and
that the forces of the Patients are thereby much
weakened, are verie hardly cured. And ſo are alſo
ſuch Dropſies as proceede of a hardneſſe of
the Liuar, which Galen ſaith, are incureable.
            Experience alſo ſheweth, that ſuch dropſies
as come of drineſſe of the ſtomacke, and of long

reſolution and humidity of the inteſtine parts are
not eaſily cured.
            But among ſuch as the beginning of this Diſeaſe
commeth of the ilneſſe of the Milt, the other
parts not naturally well, many perſons haue
bin perfectly cured.
            It helpeth greatly the parts that are ſoftned &
reſolued by defluctions, as the Sinews, Muſcles,
&c.
            It ſtrengtheneth the Matrix that i
                  •
                ſubiect to
too much humidity, and diſpoſeth it in ſuch ſort
that it retaineth the conceiued fruite, and ſo expelle
                  •
               h
barrenneſſe.
            It aydeth againſt ſtrangulations and ſuffocations
of the Matrix.
            As touching ſuch as are verie Leapers; if it
do not wholly cure them, yet doth the continuall
vſe thereof, impeach and hinder their diſeaſe
from any more increaſing.
            As for the curing of Agues, the Reader may
note what hath bin ſaide in the precedent Diſcourſe.
            The Reader is laſtly to be aduertiſed; That
whereas the moſt vſuall taking of the VVater of
Spaw is in Sommer, it is chiefly becauſe of the
abundance of Raine and Snow that falleth into
thoſe Fountaines in winter, which weakneth the
force of them; and ſo is the force alſo weakened
in Sommer in rainy weather; as contrary-wiſe in
winter, in froſty and dry weather, the water hath

his perfect force. In which reſpect, this Hypoſtaſis
thereof being mingled with pure VVater, in
ſuch quantity of the one and the other, as before
is mentioned, may aſwel be vſed in winter,
as in Sommer.
            FINIS.
         
      
   