
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                     
                        Longe paruula.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     WHat shalt thou do whan thou hast an englysshe to make in latyn? I shal reherse myn englysshe ones twyes / or thryes / & loke out my pryncypal & aske ye questyon / who / or what. And the worde that answereth the questyon shall be the noīatyf case to ye verbe / excepte it be a verbe impersonall / as in this example. The mayster techeth scolers / techeth is ye verbe. Who techeth / the mayster techeth. This worde mayster answereth to the questyon here / & therfore it shall be the noīatyf case / & the worde that cometh after ye verbe shall be the accusatyf case comynly / as Magister docet me / & whan I haue ad adiectyf nowne pronowne or partycyple / adiectyf or relatyf I shall aske this questyon who or what. And ye worde that answereth to the questyon shall be the substantyf to ye adiectyf / & the antecedent to the relatyf. ¶Whan two substantyues come togyder longynge bothe to one thynge / they shall be put bothe in one case. As my fader a man loueth me a chylde. Pater meꝰ vir diligit me puerū. ¶How shalte yu knowe the pryncypall verbe in a reason yf thou haue in it moo verbes than one. Euermore my fyrst verbe shall be my pryncypal verbe / excepte he come nygh a relatyf or a cōiunccyon / or be lyke ye infinityf mode. Wherby knowest yu whan he cometh nygh a relatyf / euermore whan he cometh nygh ony of these englysshe wordes / that / whome or the whiche. Wherby knowest yu whan he is lyke an infinityf mode. Euermore whan there cometh this englisshe sygne to or to be before a vbe as to loue or to be byloued / to be taught ¶What hath a relatyf / an antecedent. Wherby knowest yu an antecedent. For he cometh before the relatyf & is rehersed of ye relatyf. Wherby knowest yu a relatyf. For he maketh the rehersynge of a thynge that is spoken of before / whan there cometh a noīatyf case bytwene the relatyf & the verbe personall / than the relatyf shall be suche case as the personall wyll haue after hym. As ego quē preceptor docet aduerto. And there cometh no nominatyf case bytwene the relatyf & the verbe personall

than the relatyf shall be the noīatyf case to the verbe. As ego qui sedeo scribo. If the verbe that cometh nexte to the relatyf be a verbe impersonall / than the relatyf shall be suche case as ye verbe impersonall wyll haue after hym. Exemplū. Ego sum illequē ꝑtinet tꝑis perditi. ¶Also whan I haue a relatyf comynge bytwene two substātyues of dyuers gendres longynge to one thynge. If yt he cometh after the relatyf by a nowne appellatyf / than ye relatyf may accorde with eyther of them in dyfferently. Exemplū. Eo oxoniū 
                     qd est vel qi est locus studēdi But & yf the nowne that foloweth the relatyf be a propre name / than the relatyf shall accorde with hym in gendre. Exemplū. Est locus in carcere qd tullianū 
                     appellat. Unde versus

                        Quando relatiuum generum casus variorum
                        Inter se claudunt qui rem spectant ad eadem
                        Pergenus hoc poterit vtrilibet associari
                        Id nisi quod sequitur propriū tibi nomen habetur
                        Nam tunc concordet hoc semper posteriori.
                     
                  
                  ¶Two noīatyf cases hauynge a cōiūccyon copulatyf comynge bytwene them wyl haue a verbe plurel. Also two substantyues wt a cōiunccyon copulatyf wyll haue an adiectyf plurell & two antecedēs wt a cōiūccyon copulatyf wyl haue a relatyf plurell. Ut Iohānes & Ricardus sedent scribentes. Un̄ 
                     vsus
                     
                        Fixa duo sepe cum sint connexa reposcunt
                        Uerbum adiectiuum necnon plurale relatum.
                     
                  
                  ¶Whan I haue two nominatyf cases one of the fyrst persone / & the other of the seconde or the thyrde. The verbe shall accorde with the nominatyf case of the fyrst persone / as Ego & tu legimus. And whan I haue one nominatyf case of the seconde persone / & the other of the thyrde yt verbe shal accorde with ye noīatyf case of ye seconde persone & not with ye noīatyf of the thyrde. Ut tu et frater tuus estis discoli. Un̄ 
                     vsus.
                  Personam prima ternā trahit at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      secundam
                  ¶Also whan I haue two substantyues one of ye mascu. & the other of thefe. or ye neutre / the adiectyf shall accorde wt hym of

the mascu. gender / for the masculyn is better than the femy. or neu. & the fe. better than the neu. as ego & soror measumꝰ albi.
                  Femininum neutrum primū genus atrahit ad se.
                  ¶How many verbes haue strength to cople lyke cases. vbes sub. that betoken to be. as sū es fui / & other lyke. Uerbes vocatyues as noīor appellor nūcupor vocor & dicor / āglice to be cleped named or called. As I am called Thomas. Egovocor thomas. Thou arte called Iohn̄ / tu appellaris iohānes. Uersus

                        Sum fio maneo dic existo fore consto
                        Quando notant substans similis deposcere casus
                        Uerba vocatiua sicut vocor his simulantur
                        Nominor appellor cū nuncupor addito dicor.
                     
                  
                  ¶Also some verbes passyues as eligor reputor oruinor / haue strength to cople case / & generally whan ye worde yt gooth before the verbe & the worde yt gooth after ye verbe longe bothe to one thynge / they shall be put both in one case. Also these verbes appareo sedeo / & other lyke wyl cople case somtyme. Exemplū. Laycus nō sedet iudex in causis ecclesiasticis. Uersus.
                  
                     Purima passiua vim predictā retinebunt
                     Eligor edilis sapiens putor est generale
                     Si quod precedat verbum verbum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         sequatur
                     Pertineant ad idem casu ponantur eodem
                     Eminet apparet sedens iudex eo volex
                     
                     Hec poscunt similis post se prese quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         casus.
                  
                  ¶This verbe desino nis / anglice to leue or to cease is ꝯstrued with a genityf case / or elles wt an ablatyf case wt a preposicyon As in this exāple. Leue playenge. Desine ludi vel a ludo. Abstineo is construed with a genytyf case / & an ablatyf case / as in this example. We muste absteyne from flesshe the frydayes. Sextis ferijs a carnibus abstinere debemus. Unde vsus.
                  Desinit abstineo sexto dabis et genitiuo.
                  ¶Ego es. indigeo es. are construed with a genytyf accusatyf or ablatyf case. Unde versus.
                  Indigeo quarto iungas genito quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      sexto.
                  
                     ¶Dn̄or aris. miseror eris are cōstrued wt a geny. or datyf case Exē. Pat meꝰ dn̄at terris multis. Deꝰ misereat nr̄i vel nobis
Iunguntur genito terno dominor miseri.
                  
                  ¶Ualeo les / anglice to be worth / & consto as to cost are construed with a genytyf case of yt worde yt betokeneth pryce / yf the pryce be vncertayne as in this example / my boke cost more than it is worth. Libermeus cōstabit pluris 
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      valet. If the worde that betokeneth pryce sygnefyeth certayne pryce than it shall be put in the ablatyf case / as in this example. This boke cost .xx. pens. Hic liber viginti denarijs constabat.
                  
                     Finitum preciū quando tibi significabunt
                     Consto cum valeo cum sextis consociantur
                     Hec tamen incertum si signet des genitiuis
                  
                  ¶Accuso / arguo / damno / moneo / reprehendo / & other lyke are construed fyrst with an accusatyf case / and than with a genytyf case / or elles with an ablatyf case / as in this example. The mayster rebuked his scolers for theyr late comynge to scole to daye. Preceptor arguebat discipulos tardi sui aduentus. Uel de suo tardo aduētu hodie ad scolā accusabo te iniuriā. Uersus

                        Arguo cum damno monet accusat reprehendit
                        Quartum cum genito sextū
                           
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            petunt sibi casum
                     
                  
                  ¶Obliuiscor ris. recordor aris. & reminiscor aris / are ꝯstrued with a genytyfe case & an accusatyf case. Exemplū. I thynke vpon thy gentylnesse. Tuā humilitatē recordor. Un̄ versus

                        Est obliuiscor reminiscor siue recordor.
                        Quicquid est simile quarto iunctum & genitiuo
                     
                  
                  ¶These verbes Priuo as. spolio. lias / and other lyke wyll haue after them an accusatyf case and an ablatyf case. Exemplum. Iohannes priuauit me cultello. Unde versus.
                  
                     Cum priuatiuis tu casibus vtere quartis
                     Ac ablatiuis sic numinis me spoliarunt
                  
                  ¶Cōsulo is. Whan he is a verbe actyf he is englysshed to aske coūseyle & is construed wt an accusatyf case / & somtyme with a genytyf case / or an ablatyf case / as in this example. Consulo te

remedij vel de remedio. But whan ꝯsulo is a verbe neutre anglice to gyue coūseyle he is cōstrued wt a datyf case / & somtyme with an accusatyf case / as Consulo tibi cōmodū. Un̄ versus.
                  
                     Consulo te rogito tibi consulo consilium do
                     Primum cum quarto iungas terno
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         secundo
                     Et quando
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         alios poscunt sibi casus.
                  
                  ¶Benedico & maledico ben construed with a datyf case all onely apd doctos / though the chyrche saye bn̄dicite dn̄m. Also the englysshe of benedico is not to blysse / ne maledico to curse / but bn̄dico is to say well / & maledico is to saye euyl. Exemplū Discipuli habēt bn̄dicere nō maledicere p̄ceptori. The scolers ought to saye well & not euyll by theyr mayster. And latyn for to curse is. Execror aris. deueneo es / or imp̄cor aris / wt this aduerbe male. Ioyneth with hȳ. And latyn to blysse is. Optare bene. Exemplū. I haue cause to blysse my mayster. Habeo bn̄ optare magistro. Uel sic. Habeo bn̄ p̄cari magistro. Un̄ 
                     vsus
                     
                        Tertium non quartum benedico petit sibi casum
                        Quod contra signat similem maledico requirit
                     
This verbe cōsto as. after Guaryn is englysshed somtyme to stande togyder. As ego cū illis ad ignē ꝯsteti / somtyme he is taken for this verbe / est / or this verbe / ꝯtruor is to be buylded as we say. Domus ꝯstat ex tecto pariete & fūdamēto / somtyme he is put for this vbe 
                     stit / or this vbe patet. Exem. This is open or knowen to me. Hoc ꝯstat michi / & somtyme ꝯsto is to cost.
                  Consto notat valeo pateo simul est aliquando
                  ¶Also these verbes in these vses folowȳge wyll be cōstrued with a datyf case & in ye passyf yf they be verbes imꝑsonalles. And that yt semeth to be ye noīatyf case in comyn speche shal be the datyf case as in this example. I am serued. Michi seruit.
                  Obuio parco placet noceo respōdeo seruit. Precepit opponit cōcludo iūges datiuis. Supplicat arridet faueo vaco proficit heret. Subuenit addat succurrit propiciat. Congruo cō
                     patior ꝯfert succedit adulor. Incidit imponit cōuitior improperabit. Sufficit aspirat vale dico gratulor astat. Emittet eqi
                     ualet

alludit obedit & obstat. Occurrit restat & cedo quando lo cum dat. Insaneor pateo minor est obtempero sibo. Derogo condoleo preiudico detraho defert. Suppetit his iungas que sum cōponit eis dans. Hec est 
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      plura ternis cōiungere cura.
                  ¶All these vbes folowynge wyl be cōstrued wt a double accusatyf case & theyr passyues with ye later accusatyf case. Exē. Doceo te grāmaticā. Doceor grāmaticā. Unde versus.
                  
                     Postulo posco peto doceo rogo flagito celo
                     Exuo cum vestit monet induo calceo cingo
                     Accusatiuos geminos hec verba requirunt
                     Passiuis quo
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                         postremus iungitur horum.
                  
                  ¶Whan this sygne yt foloweth a nowne adie. vbe or partycyple & cometh before the parte of a mannes body or a worde that betokeneth parte of a casuall worde that gooth before the worde that betokeneth that parte it shall be put in the accusatyf without a preposicyon this fygure sygne or token. Ut hec est virgo venusta faciem. Unde versus.
                  
                     Adiectiua regūt passiua verba
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         neutra
                     Accusatiuos per sinecdochen sibi iunctos
                  
                  ¶These verbes folowynge wyll haue an ablatyf case after them. Exemplū. Uescor solo pane hodie careo byreto. Potior is construed with a genityf case & somtyme with an accusatyf case & somtyme with an ablatyf case. Exēplū. Potius est rerū sed potiri re
                        
                           
                        
                        rum
                      dr̄ ꝯsequi imperiū potius est res dicimus rebus.
                  
                     Uestitur ac fruitur vtor fungor
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         potitur
                     Cum careo sextos transitione regunt
                     Iungitur et potior quarto sexto genitiuo
                  
                  ¶Euery partycyple gerundyue & supyne may be cōstrued wt that same case that the verbe yt he cometh of wyll. Uersus.

                        Omne gerundiuum sic participans
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            supinum
                        Hos poscunt casus quos sua verba regunt
                     
This nowne opus vndeclined wyl haue an ablatyf case after hym / & somtyme an accusa. as ego habeo opus veste aut vestē.
                  Sextū vel quartū sibi iungit opus signando necesse.
                  
                     ¶The nownes plenus a ū / & vacuus a ū. & all other that betoken fulnes or emptynes may be cōstrued with a genytyf case or ablatyf case after them. Also suche as betoken plentefulnes or pouerte may haue a genytyf or an ablatyf case after.
                  
                     Plenus cum vacuus sic diues pauper egenus
                     Cum reliquis paribus sextis dabis genitiuis
                  
                  ¶These two nownes dignus and indignus be construed with an ablatyf case all onely. vt tu es dignus premio.
                  Dignus et indignus tm̄ poscunt sibi sextum.
                  ¶These nownes similis & dissimilis / & other lyke be cōstrued bothe wt a genytyf case & a datyf case. vt sū similis tui vel tibi.
                  Tu iungas similis genitiuo at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      datiuo.
                  ¶A nowne substantyf or pronowne with a partycyple dependynge of no verbe or particyple wherof he may be gouerned shall be put in the ablatyf case absolute / as in this example The mayster techynge scolers must take hede. Docente preceptore discipulos oportet animaduertere. Unde versus▪
                  
                  
                     Est ablatiuus quando
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         regente solutus
                     Si nomen vel pronomen cum participante
                     Iungitur & nullum dependens est sibi verbum
                     Ut vento flante gradior socio comitante.
                  
                  ¶The ablatyf case absolute shall be expowned by this aduerbe dum / or by this aduerbe cum. As docente preceptore sic exponitur. Cum preceptor docet. vel dum preceptor docet.
                  Per dum vel per cum sexti resolutio fiet.
                  ¶Whan I haue a nowne yt betokeneth tyme mesure or space / yf it be not ye noīatyf case of ye verbe or other wyse gouerned of the verbe it shall be put in the ablatyf case & ofter seasons it may be put in ye accusatyf case as in this example. I am .xxvij. yere olde. Ego sum viginti & septē annos natus. Therentius in eunucho. dies notes
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      me ames. Exemplū de spacio. London is from Oxeforde fyfty myle. Distat londoniū ab oxoniū quinquaginta milibus passuū. Exemplū de mensura. This scole is twenty fote brode. Hec scola est pedibꝰ viginti lata.
                  
                     
                     Quod tempus signat quarto sexto ve locetur
                     Mobile mensuram designans addito sexto
                     Iungitur est quarto testis virgilius extat
                     Tris pateat celi spacium non amplius vlnas
                  
                  ¶Whan I haue an adiectyf comynge by hymselfe without a substantyf it shall be put in the neutre gendre lyke a substantyf / as it is not good for me to stonde longe bare heed. Bonū michi non est diustare nudato capite. Unde versus.
                  
                     Mobile si quando preponitur sine fixo
                     Tunc neutrale genus ipsum sibi vendicat apte.
                  
                  ¶Also whan I haue the englysshe of this nowne res comynge with an adiectyf I may doo awaye this nowne res and put the adiectyf in the neutre gendre. Exemplum. Pauco habeo. multis indigeo. ¶Also whan I haue an adiectyf and a substantyfe comynge togyder I may put the adiectyfe in the neutre gendre lyke a substantyf / and the substantyf in the genytyf case. Exemplū. Habeo plus sibi 
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      potus. quis istic negocij est tibi. nichil pecunie habeo. ¶How knowest yu a verbe impersonal / for he hath no nombre nor persone nor nominatyf case before hym. And he is fourmed and declined in the voyce of the thyrde persone of the verbe that he cometh of. ¶How many maner of verbes impersonalles ben there? two / whiche two. A verbe impersonall of the actyf voyce / & a verbe impersonall of the passyf voyce. ¶How knowest thou a verbe impersonall of the actyf voyce / for he endeth in t in the voyce of the thyrde persone / as Penitet. miseret. How knowest yu a verbe impersonal of the passyf voyce / for he endeth in r / & is declyned on the voyce of the thyrde persone of the verbe that he cometh of / as placet 
                     bat 
                     seruit 
                     ebat. These .v. verbes impersonalles. Petitet / tedet / miseret / pudet / & piget / ben construed with an accusatyf case in the stede of the noīatyf case / & with a genytyf case in the stede of an accusatyf case. As I am wery of my lyfe. Tedet me vite mee. Unde versus.
                  
                     Penitet et tedet miseret pudet et piget ista
                     
                        Accusatiuos poscunt simui et genitiuos
                     Natura primum sed transitione secundum.
                  
                  ¶These verbes impersonalles in these verses folowynge wyll haue an accusatyf case in the stede of the nominatyf case As I must goo to the mayster. Oportet me ire ad preceptorē. Good scolers haue a pleasure to lerne. Bonos scolares iuuat discere. Not withstondynge somtyme they be verbes personalles and haue a nominatyf before them. Exemplum. Hic cibus delectat me. Hec res latet me. Unde versus.
                  
                     Quarto iunge iuuat decetac delectat oportet
                     Et latet illorum numero vult associari.
                  
                  ¶These thre verbes impersonalles refert. interest. & est sette for penitet wyll be construed with a genytyf case of nownes and an ablatyf of fyue pronownes / as mea tua sua nostra et vestra / as in this example. It is for my profyte. Mea interest It is for thy profyte. Tua interest. It is for his profyte. Sua interest. Also this verbe interest after Pryscyane is construed with an ablatyf case of the femynyne gendre of this nowne possessyue Cuius cuia cuium. Unde versus.

                        Refert inter et est genitū pro pertinet adde
                        Et sextum proprie denotat pronomina quin
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                           
                        
                        Nan
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            refert nostra me / tu / su / cu / quo
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            vestra
                     
These verbes imꝑsonalles in these verses folowȳge wyll be construed wt a datyf case. Exemplū. We may not ete flesshe on the frydaye. Nō licet nobis comedere carnes in sextis ferijs.
                  
                     Hec libet at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         licet placet & liquet accidit inde
                     Congruit euenit & contigit & expedit ista
                     Conuenit incumbit vacat et cedit quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         prestat
                     Cum reliquis paribus sunt consociata datiuis
                  
                  ¶Pertinet is cōstrued with an accusatyf case with a preposycyon & not wt a datyf case. Ut dicēdū ē. Hec res ꝑtinet ad me & nō michi.
                  Quarto cū terno coniūges pertinet apte.
                  ¶All the verbes impersonalles of the passyf voyce wyl be cō
                     strued with a datyf case or elles with an ablatyf case with a

preposycyon expressed or vnderstonde. Exemplū. I am pleased. Michi placetur. The mayster is gone. Itur a preceptore. It is not at all tymes to expresse the ablatyf case. Exemplum They be gone. Itur. They fyght. Pugnatur. What do they. Quid agitur. They sytte. Sedetur. Unde versus.
                  
                     Passiue vocis impersonale datiuis
                     Aut sextis iungas cum prepositio preeunte
                     A pueris itur a preceptore venitur
                     Tegi seruitur sed non sibi credo placetur
                  
                  ¶Suche verbes as betokeneth bodyly mouynge as eo is / & venio is / may haue oftentymes the sygnyfycacyon of ye passyf voyce in ye preterperfectens & in all the tenses that be fourmed of hym. Exemplū. My mayster is come. Magister meus venit. My felowes ben gone. Socij mei abierunt. Whan the englysshe of the infinityf mode cometh after ony of these nownes. Hora tempus causa / or locus it may be put in a gerūdyue in di. As it is tyme to praye. Tēpus est orandi. I haue cause to wepe. Habeo▪ causam flendi. It is vsed also after adiectyues and voyces of partycyples that be nownes whan they haue a gerundyue after them. Exemplū. Timens negandi doctus cantandi peritus dicendi. cupidus audiendi & similia.
                  
                     Tempus causa locus libertas ius
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         voluntas
                     Ars modus at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         licentia nomina talia que
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                     
                     Prima solent post se vocitare gerundia iure
                     Que nūc narrandi non est locus affricus inquit
                  
                  ¶Whan the englysshe of the infynytyfe mode cometh after a verbe or a parti. betokenynge prayenge / it shall be put in age rundyue in do / with this preposycyon de before hym. Exemplum. Oro te de scribendo michi latinitatē. ¶Also whan I haue the englysshe of a particyple be the presentens with this sygne of comynge after a nowne adiectyfe it shall be put in a gerundyue in do without a preposycyon. As I am wery of syttynge. Ego sum fessus sedendo. Uersus.
                  
                     Pone gerundiua do post rogitantia verba
                     
                        Post adiectiua mater mea fessa sedendo
                     Te rogo te dando veniam michi do
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         iuuando
                  
                  ¶Whan ye englysshe of a particyple of the presentens cometh after a nowne substantyf wt this preposycyon in / it may be put in a gerūdyue in do. Exēplū. Scolers in takyng hede growe to cūnynge. Scolastici in aduertendo euadunt docti. vsus
                     
                        Participans presens post substantiua reposcunt
                        In
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            gerundiuo vel participante locato
                        Ut gladiatores pugnando vulnera figunt
                        Est in cantando frater meus orphus alter
                     
                  
                  ¶Whan the englysshe of ye infinityf mode cometh after a reason & telleth the cause of ye reason it may be put in a gerundyue in dū / with this preposycyon ad before hȳ / as I come to lerne grāmer. Uenio ad discendū grāmaticā. Unde versus.
                  
                     Ad dum causa dabit non est cibus ad comedendum
                     Ad mea tergendum vulnera mappa deest
                  
                  ¶A gerūdyue in dum may come in comyn speche with this preposycyon inter pre / put in the stede of the noīatyf case & the verbes as inter sedendū / id est dū sederent / as they walked / in ter ambulandum / as they ryde / inter equitandum.
                  
                     Inter quando
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         cū dum preponitur apte
                     Inter prandendum pro dum prandere habetur
                     Hinc maro sit testis age titere & inter agendū
                     
                     Occursare capro cornu ferit ille caueto
                  
                  ¶Whan the englysshe of ye infynityf mode foloweth this englysshe it is / it may be put a gerūdyue in dū / with this verbe est / sed impersonali. Exemplū. The kynge it is to fyght. Regi pugnandū est. Scolers it is to studye. Scolares studendū est And that the semeth to be the nominatyf case shall be the datyf case. Also whan I haue this englysshe must where. As it semeth to be made with this verbe oportet / it may be put in a gerundyue in dum / with this verbe est. As I must goo in to the towne. Eundem est michi in vrbem. Unde versus.
                  
                     Impersonali verbo est quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         iungiturecce
                     
                        Uincendum est hostes regi per prelia nostro
                  
                  ¶Whan the englysshe of the infynytyf mode cometh after a verbe or a partycyple betokenynge mouynge or goynge to ye place it shall be put in the fyrst supyne. As I go on huntynge Ego vado venatum / & fro a place it shall not be set in the later supyne / but I shall take the nowne verball or an other nowne lyke / as I come fro souper. Uenio a cena. Exemplū. I come fro huntynge. Uenio a venatione. Unde versus.
                  
                     Post motus verbum primū tu pone supinum
                     Ad loca si signat verbalia nomina pones
                     Cun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         notant contra cum preposito preeunte
                  
                  ¶In ye stede of the fyrst supyne lackynge I shall take the gerundyue in dū with this preposycōnad. As I go to lerne grā
                     mer. Uado ad descendum grāmaticam. Unde versus

                        Pone gerundiuum dum deficient supino
                        Ad bona descendunt dogmata pergo celo.
                     
Whan I haue ye englysshe of ye infinityf mode comȳge after a nowne endynge in ilis or in bilis / it shall be put in ye later supyne / as our lesson is harde to cūne. Lectio nostra est difficilis situ. It may be vsed also after other adiectyues. Ut hoc est dignū factu. Hoc est turpe dictu. Unde versus.
                  
                     Post adiectiuum bilis ac ilis esto secundum
                     Flebilis auditu rumor est agilis puer actu.
                  
                  ¶Whan the englysshe of ye infynytyf mode cometh after this verbe. Sū es fui. If it be of the actyf voyce / it shall be put in a partycyple of the fyrst futertens in rus. As I am to go out of the towne to morowe. Cras profecturus sum. And yf it be the englysshe of the passyf voyce / it shall be pui in a partycyple of the latter futertens / as chyldren must be corrected. Pueri sunt castigandi. Unde versus.
                  
                     Participans in rus post sum tu pone vel in dus
                     Ut sum lecturus nasonis carmina summa
                     Laus adhibenda deo pro victis hostibus esto
                  
                  ¶Whan the partycyple fayleth I shall take this relatyf qui

que qd / with the verbe. Un̄ cū dicitur angli. I shall lerne grā
                     mer / or I am to lerne grāmer / the whiche maner of englysshe is not vsed. Non recti dicitur. Ego qui sum discā grāmaticā ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      dicimus. Ego fui vescens. fui reminiscens aut sum qui timebo. But in all suche englysshe I shall exclude the relatyf and make it by the tens that is equiualent or elles by another verbe that is of the sygnyfycacyon or equiualent. Ut ego discam grāmaticā. aut sic. Dabo operam grāmatice.
                  
                     Si tibi participans desit vitato relatum
                     Ne barbarises bene doctos non imitatus
                  
                  ¶Whan I haue an englysshe to be made by ony of these verses. exulo / vapulo / veneo / fio / or liceo / that doth the dede of the verbe shall be put in the ablatyf case with a preposycyon / and that the suffrer shall be put in the noīatyf case / as ye kynge hath banysshed many traytours. A rege multi traditores exularūt The fysshers sell theyr fysshe dere. A piscarijs pisces cari veneūt. Also whan I haue an englysshe to be made by this verbe nubo bis / that the dooth the dede of the verbe shall be put in the datyf case / & that the suffreth shall be put in the noīatyf case / as in this exāple. My broder shall wedde thy syster. Fratri meo nubet soror tua. ¶Whan I haue a propre name of a place towne or cyte / & yf it be the fyrst declenson or the seconde and ye synguler nombre & betokeneth at a place / it shall be put in the genytyf case aduerbyally. Exemplū. I go to grāmer at Oxforde. In cūbo grāmatice oxonij. I was borne at yorke. Natus sū Eboraci / but & the propre name of the place sygnefyenge at a place be the plurell nombre / or elles ony other declenson haue the fyrst declenson or the seconde it shal be put in the ablatyf case aduerbyally without a p̄posycyon / as I haue a broder at scole at Athenis. Est michi frater studens Athenis ¶Also to a place yf it be a propre name of a place it shal be put in the accusatyf case wtout a preposycyon on whatsoeuer declenson or nombre that it be. Notwithstondinge somtyme I may put a preposycyon before hȳ as here by this example. I go vnto

Oxforde. Eo oxoniū vel ad oxoniū. I shall go to London. Ibo londoniū vel ad londoniū. ¶Also fro a place & it be a propre name of a place is the sygne of the ablatyf case without a preposycion what soeuer declenson or nombre it be as I come fro London. Uenio lōdine. I come fro oxforde. Uenio oxonio notwithstondynge somtyme I may take a preposycōn before hym. Ut venio ab oxonio / venio a londino. ¶These rules or propre names ben to be vnderstonde of suche yt be not cōpouned / for & they be compouned euermore I must put a preposycyon before them / as I haue ben at saynt Iames. Fuit apud sctm̄ Iacobū. I go to saynt Iames. Uado ad sanctū Iacobū I come fro saynt Iames. Ueni de sctō Iacobo. ¶Also these foure nownes. Rusdomꝰ humꝰ belli. And militia foloweth the rules of propre names of places. As I haue ben at home. Fui domi. I go home. Uado domū. I come fro home. Ueni a domo. Notwithstondyngerus is put after aduerbyally in the datyf case than the ablatyf. Exemplū. Ruri tui / my fader dwelleth in the countree. Pater meus ruri habitat.
                  ¶This nowne domus is thus declyned. Ntō hec domꝰ / gtō huius domi vel domus / dtō huic domui / actō hāc domū / vtō o domus / ablatiuo ab hac domo. Et pl'r ntō he domus / gtō ha
                        
                           
                        
                        rum
                      domo
                        
                           
                        
                        rum
                      vel domuū / dtō his domibus / actō has domos / vtō o domus / ablatiuo ab his domibus. Unde versus.
                  
                     Per quartum domus est flectenda nisi sextus
                     Singularis quartus pluralis et est genitiuus
                     In numero vtro
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         semper flexus vtrius
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                     
                  
                  ¶Whan I haue a questyon asked I shall answere euermore by the same case yt the questyon is asked by excepte it be asked by a possessyf. Exemplū. Quē queris. Whome sekest yu Magistrū / Cuia filia est hec / Respondeat Socrates. Uersus.
                  
                     Quo casu queris hoc respondere teneris
                     Ni possessiuum sit quo tibi questie fiet.
                  
                  ¶Euery worde yt is put materyally / that is to saye taken for the voyce onely shall be ye neutre gendre the synguler nombre

and declyned and the thyrde persone. Exemplū. Amo est verbum. magister est nomen. The nownes in these verses folowynge lacke the genytyf datyf and ablatyf plurell.
                  
                     Os es mel maria rus thus ius ordea vina
                     Tres in plurali casus amittere debent
                  
                  ¶All ye nownes of nombre fro one to an. C. be nownes adiec tyues & the plurell nombre & vndeclyned. As in plurali numero ntō hu & he & hec quattuor. hij he & hec quin
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     . Un̄ versus

                        A tribus et centum numerum quotquot tibi signat
                        Sunt omnis generis plurali nec variantur.
                     
All nownes dystributyues / relatyues / interrogatyues / & wordes includynge a negacōn lacke ye vocatyf case. Also this worde nemo lacketh bothe ye vocatyf synguler & the plurel nōbre.
                  
                     Que querūt que distribuunt referūt
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         negant
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                     
                     Infinita quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         casu carnere vocante
                     Nemo caret quinto pariter numero
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         secundo.
                  
                  ¶These foure verbes incipit / desinit / debet / et solet whā they be Ioyned to infynytyf modes of verbes personalles or wtout ony infynytyf mode they be verbes personalles / & gouerne before them noīatyf cases. But whan they be Ioyned vnto infynytyf modes of verbes impersonalles they be verbes impersonalles & wyll haue the case of the verbe impersonall yt they be Ioyned tofore them. Exemplū. Me incipit tedere tui.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶Thus endeth the longe paruula or englysshe rules. Enprynted at London in Fletestrete at the sygne of the sonne by wynkyn de worde / prynter vnto my lady the kynges graundame. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCCC.ix.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                     
                     WHat nownys maketh comparison all adiectyues welnere that betokenyth a thynge that may be made more or lesse as feyre feyrer feyrest blacke blacker blackest.Dubiꝰ so briꝰ ebriꝰ mita
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         a lia significatiōes cōparati onē recipiūt / non tn̄ voce ¶How many degreys of cōparisons be ther .iij. the posyue the cōparatyue and the suꝑlatyue ¶How know you the posytyue degre? For he is the groūde & the begīnyng of al other degres of cōparisō ¶How know you the cōparatyue degre? For he passyth his posityue with this englysshe more or his englysshe endeth in Ras more wyse or wyser.
                  ¶Howe knowe you the superlatyue degre? For he passyth his posityue with this englysshe most or his englysshe endyth in yst as moste feyre or feyryst moste whyte or whytyst.
                  ¶Of whome is the comparatyue degre formyd? of the fyrste case of his posityue that endyth in I yf he be declyned by puttynge to or and vs as noīatiuo al bus a ū genitiuo albi put therto or and vs and it wyl be hic et hec albior et hoc albius.
                        Suot. qm̄ tenui orū tutelā locupletiores ī se ꝯtulissēt. Priscianꝰ dexterti (qd rarū ē) recti format ꝯparatiuū
                      Noīatiuo hic et hec tenuis & hoe tenue genitiuo huiꝰ tenuis datiuo huic tenui put therto or and vs and it wylbe hic et hec tenuior & hoc tenuiꝰ. Out of this rule be except bonus that makyth melor malus peior magnus maior paruus minor multus plus dexter dexterior sinister sinisterior potis potior Iuuenis Iunior and senex senior whiche lackyth the neutur gendur in vs also the superlatyue degre Adiectyuys compounde of facio dico volo and loquor forme the cōparatyue & the suꝑlatyue degree of the datyue case of the participull in cus as magnificus magnificentior magnificentissimus

lyke maledicus beneuolus vaniloquus with other lyke forme the cōparatyue & the suꝑlatyue.Istiusmodi parictipia (vt sētit / valla) ne in vsu qi
                        dē sūt preter
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         maledicens. Inuenit pientissimꝰ 
                           
                              
                           
                           sed
                         id a piēs nō a pius ¶Adiectyuys hauyng a woll before vs haue nether cōparatyue nor superlatyue degre in vse▪ but in ther styde we muste take the posityue with this aduerbe magis or maxime. yet somtyme of pius is founde piissimꝰ & of strenuꝰ strenuissimꝰ Also of egregius the posityue is founde egregius in the comparatyue. ¶Euery comparatyue degre passyth his posityue by one sillabul at the leste excepte these in these versys folowynge.
                  
                     Or superat positū tamē hecēquāt positiuos
                     Iunior egregius minor & peior quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         maior
                     Sic prior at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         magis 
                           
                              
                           
                           sed
                         plus minus est positiuo
                  
                  ¶Of whome shall the suꝑlatyue degre be formyd? If his posityue be declyned. of the fyrste case that endyth in I by puttynge to s and simus as albi albissimus felici felicissimus out of this rule be out take bonus that makyth optimus paruus minimus malus pessimus magnus maximus multus plurimꝰ potis potissimus nequam nequissimus also suche as hathe a woll before vs vt supra dictum est.
                  ¶These nownys agilis gracilis humilis docilis & similis with theyr cōpoūdys forme the suꝑlatyue degre of the noīatyue case by puttynge awaye is & puttynge to limus as facilis facillimus with dobyl▪ l. ¶When the noīatyue case of the posityue endyth in R the superlatyue shalbe formyd of hym by puttynge to rimus as pulcher pulcherrimꝰ out take dexter that makyth dextimus sinister sinistimus vetus seu veter veterimus maturus seu matur maturimꝰ vel

maturissimus.
                  
                     Pro gradibus primis maiores hec posuere
                     Subter sero secus satis ante parū prope pridē
                     
                     Intra sepe diu magus sic post ocis infra
                     Nuper pene supra penitus citra simul vltra
                  
                  ¶Subter formyth subterior sero seruis secus secius ante anterior and lackyth the superlatyue degre paruin formyth minus minimum pridem prior primꝰ intra interior intimus prope propior proximus but iutimus and proximus whenne there be the posityue degre make intimior proximior and lacke the superlatyue degre sepe sepius sepissime diu diutus diutissimus magnus magis maxime post posterior postremus ocys ocyor ocyssimus infra inferior infimꝰ nuper et pene nuperrime penissime / Ulpianꝰ Si qis eximior cognatꝰ nasceretur. and lackyth the comparatyue degre supra superior supremus vel sū
                     mus penitus penitior penitissimus citra ceterior citimus vltra vlterior vltimus extra exterior extimus vel extremus detero vel deter antiqua prepositio deterior deterimus.
                  ¶The comparatyue degre in vs by puttynge to culus maye make a diminutyue as of melius meliusculus a um of maius maiusculus a um suche diminutyuys be construyd with the same case that the comparatyuys be that they come of.
                  ¶The comparatyue degre is construyd by the reason of his degre with an ablatyue case and somtyme with ony other case with this coniunction 
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                     .
                  ¶The superlatyue degre maye be construyd by the reason of his degree with a genityue case plurell of all casuall wordys or an accusatyue case with inter

or an ablatyue case with ex not withstondynge nownys collectyuys be vsyd bothe syngler and plurel after the superlatyue degre.
                  ¶The comparatyue and the superlatyue degre by the reson of theyr significations maye be construyd with all casys that theyr posityue maye whyle they be of one parte of reson Inueniuntur tū alaqū ꝓpior & proximus cū casu positiui.Salustꝭ. ip̄i ꝓpior mōtē cum oī eqitatu at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         peditibꝰ suos collocat / Sum
                  
                  SUm es fui esse futurus Indicatiuo modo tempore presenti sum I am es est. In plri sumus estis sūt. Pretito imꝑfecto erā eras erat. In plri eramus eratꝭ erāt. Pretito ꝑfecto fui fuisti fuit. In plri fuimꝰ fuistis fuerūt vel fuere. Pretito plus
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      ꝑfecto fuerā ras rat. In plr̄i ramꝰ ratꝭ rāt. Futuro ero eris erit.
                        Tp̄e īstā
                           tꝭ hmōi ī 
                           uēit sim is it. vt vult diomedes. Inuenit 
                           intdū
                            fuero is it / ꝓ futuro huiꝰ modi
                        Uocꝭ p̄titi ꝑfecti & futi ꝯiū
                           ctiui ali-
                      In plri erimꝰ eritꝭ erūt. Imꝑatiuo modo sis vt es sit. In plri simꝰ este sint Futuro esto tu vel ille. In plri simꝰ estote sūto vel suntote. Optatiuo modo vti nam essem ses set. In plr̄i semꝰ setis sent. Pretito imꝑfecto cū preterito ꝑfecto vt fuerim ris rit. In plr̄i rimus ritis rint. Preterito plus
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      ꝑfecto vt fuissem ses set. In plri semꝰ setꝭ sēt. Futuro vtinā sim sis sit. In plri simꝰ sitis sint. Potentiali modo essem ses set. In plri semus setis sent. Pretito imꝑfecto cū 
                     p̄tito perfecto fuissem ses set. In plri semꝰ setꝭ sent. Perterito plus
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      ꝑfecto fuissē ses set. In plr̄i semꝰ setis sent. Futuro sim sis sit. In plr̄i simꝰ sitis sint. Cōiūctiuo mō cū sim sis sit. In plr̄i simꝰ sitꝭ sint. Pretito īꝑfctō cū essem ses set. In plr̄i semꝰ setis sent. Preterito ꝑfecto cū fuerim ris rit. In plri rimus ritis rint. Preterito plus
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                     ꝑfecto cū fuissē ses set. In plr̄i semus setis seut

Futuro cum fuero ris rit. In plr̄i rimꝰ ritis rint. In finitiuo modo instātis esse. Preterito ꝑfecto & plus
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      perfecto fuisse futuro fore vel futurū esse. Gernudijs & supinis caret vnicū participiū venit ab hoc verbo substantiuo prioris futuri tm̄ vt futurus.
                  ¶This verbe sum es fui with all his compoundys lackyth the gerūdiuys and the supynys also the participull of the present tens out take absum possum and presum but the participipull of the fyrste futur tens they haue all out take possum.
                  
                     Sum caret et sua nata gerūdijs at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         supinis
                     Ens tm̄ prebent absum possū quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         presum
                     Sed rus participans preter possū dato cū tis
                     This verbe sum hath .xiiij. compoundys
                     Ad subter potis ab sub in Inter de suꝑ ob pre
                     Pro simul ad iungas ex et per teste perotto
                  
                  ¶Adsum ades englysshed to be at p̄sent or by is cō
                     struydAdsum comenly with an ablatyue case with this preposition In and somtyme with a datyue case englysshyd to helpe or to fauer is construyd also with a datyue case but englisshyd to come he requirith no case of hym self ad somtyme he is vsyd for his primatiue

                        Adsum sū presens nūc sū prope nūc iuuo signat
                        Nūc faueo venio pro sū ponas align̄
                        
                        Prima duo dant in sexto quādo
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            datiuū
                           
                              Subtsū
                               subsum vꝰ. Pauca tū suber̄t priste vestigia
                        
                        Ast alias semꝑ ternū (nisi pro venio) vult
                     
                  
                  ¶Subtersū whiche is sylden foūde and subsū to be vndyr be construyd with a datyue case only.
                  
                     Infra sum subsū signat vel in esse latenter
                     Subtersū dat idem vox rara petūt
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         datiuū
                     
                  
                  ¶Posum potes anglice to may or to can gouernith

noo case of hym selfe but by the vnderstonge of another verbe.frauelis Possum.
                  
                  
                     Est queo vel valeo possū quod dat potis & sum
                     At
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         (subaudito nisi verbo) stat sine casu
                  
                  
                     Absum¶Absum es anglice to be awaye or absent and to be distant is construyd with an ablatyue case with the se prepositons a or ab.
                  
                     E conspectu sum disto quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         denotat absum
                     Et petit (a vel ab adiūcto) sextū sibi casū
                     
                  
                  
                     Insum¶Insum ines anglice to be in is construyd with a datyue case but comēly with an ablatyue case with this preposition in prosum anglice to helpe or to do good vnto requyryth euer a datyue case.
                  
                     Insum dic intra sum conduco quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         prosum
                     Insum ternū vult at crebrius in p̄eunte
                     Sextum 
                           
                              
                           
                           sed
                         prosum soli cōiunge datiuo
                  
                  
                     Intersū
                     ¶Intersum in all his significations is compoūde of inter and sum es fui except he be put for ꝑtinet for 
                        
                           Lic sepe intfui q̄
                           relis meorū equalum.
                        Sculto ī
                           telligens qid īterest Lic 
                           Int belluā et hoīem hoc maxime interest
                     then he is compounde of in re & est somtyme he is englysshyd to be present and thenne he gouernys after hym a datyue case somtyme he is englisshyd to be betwene or to be different and then he is cōstruyd with a datyue or ellys an accusatyue case with inter or an ablatyue case with these prepositions a or ab somtyme the thyngꝭ that be different shalbe put in the noīatyue case somtyme he is put for dystat anglice to be fro and then the thynge that betokenyth the distance shalbe put in the nominatyue case except the Infityue mode let it and the thynge that the dystance is fro in the ablatyue case with a preposition and the thynge that the dystance is to in the acusatyue case

with ad somtyme he is englysshyd to be for profyt to longe or to perteyne cuius constructio in paruulorum institutione patet.
                  
                     Intersum sū presto notans ternū petit apte
                     Hūc vult pro differt vel quartū vel bene sextū
                     
                     Iūctis prepositis: interdū ponito recto
                     Quod differt at pro distat quod abest dato recto.
                     De
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         loco signans sextū vult ad bene quartū
                     
                  
                  ¶Desum dees anglice to lacke or to wante is cōstruydDesum with a datyue case of the lacker and with a nominatyue case of the thynge that is lackyd excepte the Infinityue mode let it also obsum to hurte wyll haue after hym a datyue case.
                  
                     Desum deficio signat simul & nocet obsum
                     Deficiens terno vult pom res
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         negata
                     Apte vult rectum solum ternū regit obsum
                  
                  ¶Supersum anglice to be left to renityue or to be abundantSuꝑsū
                      is construyd with a datyue case and somtyme in these significations he is put absolutly

                        Pro restat superest ternū dato sepe
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            nullū
                        
                        Hūc etiam prebet cum significabit abundo
                     
                  
                  ¶Presum es anglice to haue preeminēs or to bere a rule is construyd with a datyue case.Presum
                  
                  
                     Ternū dat presum designat preficior
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                     
                     Presens multa significat
                     Propitius fortis prestans subitus quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         presto
                     Exsū / foris sū et persū / valde sū nullo indigent casuExum Persum Uolo
                     
                  
                  vOlo vis volui velle di do dū cū supinis volēs Indicatiuo modo tēpore presēti volo I wyll vis vult. In plr̄i voluinus vultis volunt. Preterito imperfecto volebā bas bat. In plr̄i bamꝰ batis bant

Preterito perfecto volui isti it. In plr̄i voluimus voluistis voluerūt vel voluere. Preterito plus
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                     ꝑfecto volueram ras rat. In plr̄i ramus ratis rant. Futuro volam les let.Diomeo les fac velis &c. In plr̄i lemus letis lent. Imperatiuo modo cum optatiuo modo vtinā vellem les let. In plr̄i lemꝰ letis lent. Preterito imperfecto caret. Preterito ꝑfecto 
                        vt
                        vter
                      voluerim ris rit. In plr̄i rimus ritꝭ rint. Preterito plus
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                     ꝑfecto vtinā voluissem ses set. In plr̄i semꝰ setis sent. Futuro vtinā velim lis lit. In plr̄i limꝰ litis lint. Potentiali modo caret. Coniūctiuo modo cū velim velis lit. In plr̄i limꝰ litꝭ lint Preterito imꝑfecto cū velētes let. In plr̄i lemꝰ letis lent. Preterito ꝑfecto cū voluerim ris rit. In plr̄i rimus ritis rint. Preterito plus
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                     ꝑfecto cū voluissē ses set. In plr̄i semꝰ setis set. Futuro cū voluero ris rit. In plr̄i rimꝰ ritis rīt. Infinito modo velle. 
                        Pretito
                        Preterito
                      ꝑfecto & psuls
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      ꝑfctō voluisse. Futuro caret. Gerūdia vel participalia verba sūt her volendi do dū supimꝰ caret vnicū participiū venit ab hoc verbo neutro & a nomalo presentis temporis tm̄ vt volens.
                  
                     FeroFEro fers tuli ferre ferendi do dū latū latu ferens laturus. Indicatiuo modo tempore p̄senti fero fers fert. In plr̄i feremꝰ fertis ferūt. Preterito imꝑfecto ferebā bas bat. In plr̄i bamꝰ batis bant Preterito ꝑfecto tuli tulisti tulit. In plr̄i tulimꝰ tulistis tuler̄t vel tulere. Preterito plus
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                     ꝑfecto tulerā ras rat. In plr̄i ramꝰ ratis rāt. Futuro ferā res ret. In plr̄i remꝰ retꝭ rēt. Imꝑatiuo mō ferferat In plr̄i feramꝰ ferte ferāt. Futo ferto tu vel ille. In plr̄i feramꝰ fertote ferūtol ferūtote. Optatīo mō 
                     vt ferre res ret. In plr̄i remꝰ retꝭ rēt. Pretito imꝑfecto cū p̄terito

ꝑfecto vt tulerim ris rit In plr̄i rimꝰ ritꝭ rint. Pretito plus
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      ꝑfecto vt tulissē ses set. In plr̄i semꝰ setꝭ sent Futuro ferā ras rat. In plr̄i ramꝰ ratꝭ rāt. Potētiali mō tp̄e p̄sēti ferrē res ret. In plr̄i remꝰ retis rēt. Preterito imꝑfctō caret. Pretito ꝑfecto tulissē ses set. In plr̄i semꝰ setꝭ sent. Pretito plus
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                     ꝑfecto tulissē ses set. In plri semꝰ setis sent. Futuro ferā ras rat. In plr̄i ramꝰ ratꝭ rāt. Cōiūctiuo mō cū ferā ras rat. In plri ramꝰ ratis rant. Pretito īꝑfecto cū ferrē res ret. In plr̄i remꝰ retis rent. Pretito ꝑfecto cū tulerim ris rit In plr̄i rimꝰ ritis rint. Pretito plus
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      ꝑfecto cū tulissem ses set. In plr̄i semꝰ setis sent. Futuro cū tulero ris rit. In plr̄i tule rimꝰ ritis rīt. Infinito modo ferre. Preterito ꝑfecto & plus
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                     ꝑfecto tulisse. Futuro laturū esse. Gerūdia vel participalia verba sunt her ferendi do dum. Supina latum latu. Duo participia veniunt ab hoc verbo actiuo & anomalo presentis vt ferens futuri vt laturus.
                  
                     Quot significationes hēt feroNumerꝰ cōpositorum
                     
                     Dico gero patior cupio fero significabit
                     Quot composita hēt fero
                     His fero componas ad ab ante cō ex quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         circū
                     
                     De dis in ob ꝓ pre post per trans iūgito sub re
                  
                  ¶Affero fers anglice to fetche or to brynge is construydAffero with an accusatyue case and a datyue & sometyme in the syde of the datyue he wyll haue an accusatyue with this preposition ad.
                  
                     Affert apporto quartū petit at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         datiuū
                     
                     Sine loco terni quartū tamen in vel ad addens
                  
                  ¶Aufeto fers anglice to take a waye to bere alwayeAufero or to stele is construyd with a datyue case / and an accusatyue

or ellys with an accusatyue and an ablatiue with a preposition.
                  
                     Uult ternū quartū tollo furor aufero signans
                     
                        Pre post ante cum feroInterdum sextū 
                        
                           
                              
                           
                           sed
                         preposito preeūte
                  
                  ¶Fero compoūde with an ante pre or post is cōstruyd with an accusatyue and a datyue case also prefero ioyned with me te se nos or vos is englysshyd to shewe and wyll haue bysyde the pronowne an other accusatyue case somtyme with out ony of these ꝓnownys he is englysshyd to showe.Uultu ī
                        patiēciam p̄ferens.
                  
                  
                     Pre post ante fero componens adde datiuo
                     At etiā quarto: signans ostendere prefert
                     Nūc vnū solū. duplicē nūc vult sibi quartū
                     
                  
                  
                     Confero¶Confero fers anglice to comen or to talke with all is construyd with an accusatyue and an ablatyue case with cū & somtyme with an accusatyue case with inter. And ofte tymes the first accusatyue case is not expressyd but vnderstond. somtyme he signifyeth to ascribe to put to or to put vpon and is cōstruyd with a dobyll accusatyue case of the whiche the latter is vsyd with this preposition In also he signifyeth to cō
                     pare and is construyd with an accusatyue and a datyue or ellys with an accusatyue and an ablatyue case with this preposition cū also he signifyeth to brynge to gether and thenne he is construyd with an accusatyue case many tymes with two of the whiche the lattur wyll haue a preposition somtyme he signifyeth to gyue and thenne he is construyd with an accusatyue & a datyue somtyme in the stede of the datyue case he wyl haue an accusatyue case with this preposition in also he signifyeth to be good or holsome

for / and is construyd with a datyue case or an accusatyue case with this preposition ad also ioyned with ony of these accusatyue casis me te se nos or vos he signifyeth to go.
                  
                     Confero cōuenio quartū (quē sepe taces) dat
                     (Cū iūcto) et sextū. crebro quartū dat et inter
                     Ascribens duplicem quartū ac in cōparo quartū
                     
                     Ac ternū seu cum sexto: pro dono datiuū
                     
                     Cum quarto vel pro terno quartū petit in
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                     
                     Ternū conducens aut ad quarto sibi poscit
                     Me te se nos vos illi iunctis notat ireEffero Addit sepe ablatiuus cum laudo significet
                     
                  
                  ¶Effero fers anglice to brynge forthe to bere forthe or to fetche forth to prese or to exalt is construyd with an accusatyue case anglice to translate one langage in to a nother is construyd with an accusatyue case and an ablatyue with a preposition.
                  
                     Effert extrafert extollo notans dato quarto
                     Quem pro verto dat ac sextū cū p̄positura
                  
                  ¶Circunfero fers anglice to bere aboute to sprede aCircūfero brode is construyd with an accusatyue case

                        Diuulgo circūporto circūfero signat
                        Et solum quartū patitur iungi sibi casum
                     
                  
                  ¶Defero anglice to bere or brynge is construydDefero with a dobyl accusatyue case of the whiche the latter wyl haue this preposition ad or in before hym anglice to vtter or accuse is construyd with an accusatyue and a datyue case or ellys with a dobyl accusatyue case of the whiche the latter wyll haue this preposition ad before hym.
                  
                     Defero porto notans altri quarto dat in ad ve
                     
                        Acousans termī quartū vult aut vice terni
                     Nonnun
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         quartū sed tūc ad presidet illi
                  
                  
                     Differo¶ Differo fers anglice to dyffer is construyd with an accusatyue case with this p̄positiō Inter or with an ablatyue case with a preposition anglice to tere or to deuyde is cōstruyd with an accusatyue case anglice to prolonge he is construyd with a dobyll accusatyue case of the whiche the latter wyll haue this preposition In before hym.
                  
                     Differo pro disco quartū vult inter adacto
                     Uel sextū cū preposito: protraho quartos
                     Uult geminos quartū sextū cū diuido signat
                  
                  
                     Infero¶Infero fers anglice to brynge in to bere in to fetche in or to conclude or to put in is cōstruyd with an accacusatyue case anglice to do or to make is ꝯstruyd with an accusatyue & a datyue case also ioyned with me te se nos or vos he signifieth to go ī or to come in.
                        Salust ignoscite adolescē
                        cie cethegi nisi iterū iā patrie bellū intulit Offero
                  
                  
                     Infert importo deduco immitto notans vult
                     Quartū: quē facio signans petit at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         datiuū
                     
                     Me te se nos vos adiūctis denotat ire
                  
                  ¶Offero fers anglice to offer or to profer is construyd with an accusatyue and a datyue case also ioyned with these accusatyue casys me te se nos or vos he signifyeth to mete and is construyd with a datyue case

                        Immolo polliceor vel porrigo iūgimꝰ offert
                        Quarto cū terno. quos postulat obuio signans
                     
                  
                  
                     Profero¶Profero fers anglice to showe or to brynge forthe to prolonge to put of or to defere is construyd with an accusatyue case.
                  Profero protelo parit eloquor addito quarto
                  
                     Suffero¶Suffero fers anglice to suffer to bere vp or out is

construyd with an accusatyue case.
                        Therēt nū
                        
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         sufferre erꝰ sūptꝰ q̄at Perfero
                  
                  Suffert sustineo patior quartū tibi prebet
                  ¶Perfero anglice to suffer gretly is construyd with an accusatyue case anglice to bere or to brynge is construyd with a dobyll accusatyue case of the which the lattur wyll haue this p̄position ad before hym.
                  
                     Perfero ꝑpetior signans quartū petit apte
                     At duplicē 
                        dr porto notat dabis ad
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         secūdo
                  
                  ¶Transfero anglice to ascribe to put to or to put apontransfero also to bere or to cary ouer is construyd with a dobull accusatyue case of the whiche the lattur wyll haue this preposition in or ad before hym also he signifyeth to translate one langage in to a nother and is construyd with an accusatyue and an ablatyue case with a preposition somtyme he hathe also a seconde accusatyue case with in.
                  
                     Transfero traijcio sil ascribo bene quartos
                     Uult binos quo
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                         postremꝰ ad in ve requiret
                     Pro verto quartū ac sextū cū p̄positis dat
                  
                  ¶Refero anglice to tell is construyd with an accusatyueRefero case and a datyue anglice to brynge agayne is construyd with an accusatyue and a datyue case and somtyme in the stede of the datyue case he wyll haue an accusatyue with this p̄position ad anglice to put in arbitriment he is construyd with a dobyll accusatyue case of the whiche the lattur wyll haue this preposition ad before hym And somtyme in the stede of the fyrste accusatyue case he wyll haue an ablatyue with this preposition de Also ioyned with these wordys gratia or par he signifyeth to quyght and is construyd with a datyue case also ioyned with me te se

nos or vos he signifyeth to go or to come & in al these significations he is compounde of this preposition re and fero.
                  
                     Narro refert signās quartū dabit at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         datiuū
                     
                     Quos proporto reget vel quartū vel ad vicetni
                     
                     Consultū pono duplicem poscit sibi quartū
                     
                     Ad prebēs alteri sextū aut cū de vice quarti
                     Gratia par iūctis cū terno reddo vicem dat
                  
                  
                     Oliedo is di edere edendi do dū dicebantur vt ait diomedes.EDo es edi esse essendi do dū esū esuvel estū estu edens esurus vel esturus. Indicatiuo mō edo I ete es est. In plr̄i dimꝰ estꝭ dūt. Pretito iꝑfctō edebā bas bat. In plr̄i bamꝰ batꝭ bāt. Pretito ꝑfecto edi disti dit. In plri dimꝰ distis derūt vel dere. Preterito plus
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                     ꝑfecto ederā ras rat. In plurali ramus ratꝭ rant. Futuro edam des det. In plr̄i demꝰ detis dēt. Imꝑatiuo mō es ete thou edat. In plr̄i edamus este edāt.Diomedes. Ede. at. amus. dite. aut. Futuro esto tu vel ille. In plr̄i damꝰ estote edū to vel edūtote. Optatiuo mō 
                     vt essē ses set. In plr̄i semꝰ setis sent. Preterito imꝑfecto cū p̄terito ꝑfecto vt ederī ris rit. In plr̄i rimꝰ ritꝭ rint. Pretito plus
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                     ꝑfctō 
                     vt edissē ses set. In plr̄i semꝰ setꝭ sēr. Futo 
                     vt edā das dat. In plri damꝰ datis dant. Potentiali mō tē
                     pore presenti essem ses set. In plri semus setis sent. Preterito imꝑfecto cū preterito ꝑfecto edissem ses set In plri semꝰ setis sent. Preterito plus
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      ꝑfecto edissem sesset. In plr̄i semꝰ setis sent. Futuro edam das dat In plri damꝰ datis dant. Coniunctiuo modo rū edā das dat. In plr̄i damꝰ datis dant. Preterito imꝑfecto cū essem ses set. In plri semꝰ setis sent. Preterito ꝑfecto cū ederim ris rit. In plri cū rimus ritis rint. Preterito plus
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                     ꝑfecto cum edissem ses set. In plurali

semus setis sent. Futuro cum edero ris rit. In plurali rimis ritis rint. In finitiuo modo tempore prē
                     senti esse to ete. Preterito perfecto et plus
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                     ꝑfecto edisse to haue eton or had eton. Futuro esurum vel esturum esse. Gerundia vel participalia verba sūt hec essēdi do dū. Supina esum esu vel estum tu. Duo participia veniunt ab hoc verbo neutro et anomalo presentis temporis vt edens. Futuro vt esurus vel esturus.
                  FIo fis factus sum fieri factum tu factus futurus.Fio. Indicatiuo modo tempore presēti fio fis fit. In plurali funus fitis fiunt. Preterito imperfecto fiebam ebas ebat. In plurali bamus batis bant. Preterito perfecto factus sum vel fuitus es vel fuistitus est. vel fuit. In plurali ti simus vel fuimus ti estis vel fuistis ti sunt fuerūt vel fuere. Preterito plus
                     
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                     perfecto factus eram vel fueram tus eras vel fueras tus et at vel fuerat. In plurali ti eramus vel fue ramus ti eratis vel fueratis ti erant vel fuerant. Futuro fia
                        ••
                      es et. In plurali emus etis ent. Imperatiuo modo fi be thou made fiat. In plurali fiamus fite fiant. Futuro fito tu vel ille. In plr̄i fiamus fitote fiunto vel fiuntote. Optatiuio mode vtinam fierem wolde god I were made res ret. In plurali remus retis rent. Preterito imperfecto cum preterito perfecto vtinam factus sim vel fuerim I pray god I haue be made tus sis vel fuerꝭ tus sitvel fuerit. In plr̄iti simus vel fuerimꝰ ti sitis vel fueritis ti sint vl fuerint. Preteritoplus
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      perfecto vtinam factus essē vel fuissētus esses vel fuisses tus esset vel fuisset. In

plr̄i ti essemꝰ vel fuissemꝰ ti essetis vel fuisse tis ti essēt vel fuissēt. Futuro fiam let me be made fias be thou made fiat. In plr̄i amꝰ atis ant. Potētiali modo fierem res ret. In plr̄i remꝰ retꝭ rent. Pretito imꝑfecto cū p̄terito ꝑfecto factꝰ essem vel fuissē tus esses vel fuisses tus esset vel fuisset. In plri tiessemꝰ vel fuissemꝰ ti essetis vel fuissetꝭ ti essent l fuissent. Pretito plus
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      ꝑfecto factus essem vel fuissē tus esses vel fuisses tus esset vel fuisset. In plr̄i ti essemꝰ vel fuissemꝰ ti essetis vel fuissetis ti essent vel fuissēt. Futuro fiā I may be made or can be made as at. In plr̄i amꝰ atis ant. Cō
                     iūctiuo modo cū fiā whē I am made as fiat. In plr̄i amꝰ atꝭ ant. Pretito imꝑfctō cū fierē res ret. In plr̄i cū fieremꝰ retis rent. Pretito ꝑfecto cū factꝰ sim l fuerim tus sis vel fueris tus sit vel fuerit In plr̄i ti simꝰ vel fuerimꝰ ti sitis vel fueritꝭ ti sint vel fuerīt. Preterito plus
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      ꝑfecto cū factꝰ essē vel fuissē tus esses vel fuisses tus esset vel fuisset. In plr̄i ti essemꝰ vel fuissemꝰ ti essetis vel fuissetis ti essent vel fuissēt. Futuro cū factus ero vel fuero tus eris vel fueris tus erit vel fuerit. In plr̄i ti erimꝰ vel fuerimꝰ ti eritis vel fueritis ti erint vel fuerint. Infinitiuo modo fieri to be made. Pretito ꝑfecto & plus
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                     ꝑfecto factū esse  vl fuisse to haue be made or had be made. Futo futurū esse to be made. Gerūdijs caret Supina factū factu. Duo parcipia veniunt ab hoc verbo passiuo & anomalo preteriti vt factus futuri vt futurus.
                  ¶Finis.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶Emprynted by Rycharde Pynson.
                  
               
            
         
      
   