
      
         
            
            
               
                  If I were not DIOGENES I would wiſh my ſelfe ALEXANDER
               
            
         
         
            
            
            STAFFORDS Heauenly Dogge: OR The life, and death of that great Cynicke DIOGENES, whom Laertius ſtiles Canem Coeleſtem, the Heauenly Dogge, By reaſon of the Heauenly precepts he gaue. Taken out of the beſt Authors, and written to delight great hearts, and to raiſe as high as Heauen the minds that now grouell on the earth, by teaching them how to ouercome all affections, and afflictions.
            LONDON, Printed by George Purſlowe, for Iohn Budge, and are to be ſold at the great South-doore of Paules: and at Brittaines Burſe. 1615.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE HONORAble, my all-worthy, and no leſſe deare friend, Sir IOHN WENTVVORTH Knight, Baronet.
            
               APplauſe attended mine eie, noble Friend, when I firſt read in a pleaſing writer, Amicos primū eſſe deligendos, deinde diligendos,

that friends are firſt to bee choſen, then to bee loued. Notwithſtanding my applauſe, with mee it fell out otherwiſe when I firſt ſaw you, who paſſed through mine eye into my heart, where you ſhall euer ſit. Yet was not my affection ſo ſottiſh, but that (diſdaining to haue Fooliſh for an Epithete,) it went to my iudgement for approbation, which in a ſhort ſpace ſatisfied it to the full of your compleate Worth. And (as I remember) the foundation on which my iudgement encouraged my affection

to build, was, the loue I diſcerned in you to thoſe better ſtudies, & to Schollers, the beſt of men. I ſaw that as GOD had giuen you an ability of minde; ſo you (not vnthankefull) ſought to polliſh that excellent part. Neither did you thinke it inough to beautifie your Soule, but withall tooke a courſe to conforme it to Reaſon, and to fortifie it againſt the forces of falſe Fortune. To that purpoſe you made choyſe of Seneca, and other authors that might furniſh you as well with the Helmet, as

with the Feather. Of the ſame nature, and, I dare ſay, of the ſame height is this Booke, and therefore will deſerue your reading. It treateth of a ſtrange, inimitable man, who had nothing, yet neuer knew aduerſity. His happines was euer the ſame, and he euer himſelfe. The cruell effects of Fortunes malice could neuer make him change his minde, nor his countenance. And ſo he liued, as if ſhee had ſtood at his award, and not hee at hers. To you I dedicate this deare Dogge, together with my hart.

That, which made me ſet your Name before it, was my ambition, the mawe of which will be full, when I ſhall haue the honour to be reputed your friend, which (vpon ocaſion) I will proue my ſelfe to bee, with the hazzard of my life. In death I will profeſſe my loue to Sir IOHN WENTVVORTH, and till then reſt
            
               
                  His fixed friend, and ſeruant Antony Stafford.
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MODEST READER.
            
               THe wiſeſt of Kings, and men, ſaies, that of writing Bookes there is no end. True, ſaies a late, but witty comment, there is no end of writing Bookes which are written to no end. The expoſition ſeemes good, and agreeable to the meaning of

               Salomon, (who in my opinion, which I write, not maintaine) in all probability meaneth ſuch Bookes when he ſaies, that much reading is awearineſſe to the fleſh: for certainely there are authors, of which a man can neuer reade ſo much but he will ſtill deſire more, according to that of Lipſius vpon Epictetus, Pluris facio cum relego, ſemper vt novum, & cum repetiui repetendum. Amongſt thoſe Bookes which neuer can be read inough (next to the ſacred) the morall take place, which are written to an end as noble as are their effects

admirable. Theſe are they which make vs men indeed, without which (as ſaith ſingular Seneca) men would be but maiuſculi pueri. O my Reader! let vs neuer abādon morality, vnleſſe we meane to baniſh all ciuility, and giue our ſelues ouer to ſenſuality. Neither let vs ſcorne theſe things, becauſe the Heathen writ them; for ſet the three ſupernaturall workes aſide, taught vs in our Creede, Creation, Redemption, and Sanctification; and tell me, good Reader, in what we excell them. In what goe we beyond them? nay, in what come we not ſhort of them?

Are we not cōtent with their knowledge? doe we not ſee the whole life of a moderne ſchollar ſpent onely to expound one of them? God grant that we (who haue receiued from them all their naturall helps, and in a higher degree haue beene diuinely taught from aboue by Truth, and Life it ſelfe all truth, and goodneſſe) be not found vnthankfull for thoſe humane gifts. If we proudly (vnder the pretence of learning diuinity) deſpiſe the ſtudies of humanity, we ſhall do like him that greedily plucking a fruite, throwes away the leaues that both adorned, and defended it. Let

vs then admire, Reader, let vs then reuerence the Ancients, from whoſe Ocean of knowledge haue flowed theſe Riuerets of ours. And amongſt all let vs not beſtow more wonder vpon any, then vpon the Heauenly Dogge this Booke treates of; whom, if I cannot ſtile the moſt learned, certainely I may call the happieſt of the Heathen. His carriage was ſo ſtrange and auſtere, and his life ſo voide of perturbation, that I wonder the ſuperſtitious people of his time did not adore him as a God, or (at leaſt) as a Semo. A Tubbe confined his body, but his minde the

bounds of the World could not limit. I know not thy degree of admiration, Reader, but I vow, that if Diogenes were now at Corinth with ioy to Corinth I would hie me, and kiſſe his feete. I had rather go thither to ſee him that hath the minde, then a furlong to ſee him that hath onely the fortune of a King. If this treatiſe giue not a perfect modell of his worth, I craue no pardon, Reader; ſince I thinke any baſtard, languiſhing language vnable to expreſſe his excellencies. As for his Oration to Alexander, I thinke thou wilt thinke it not his owne.

They had many enteruiews, and therfore, no doubt, much conference; at all which hauing gueſſed, ſome part thereof I may haue bit. I confeſſe, Diogenes made it not, yet many things in it are his owne, and Posſibility ſaies they might haue beene ſpoken to Alexander. Suppoſe the Oration were mine own, I ſhould in this imitate no worſe a man then diuine Plato, who in moſt of his writings makes Socrates ſpeake for him; or Epictetus, who ſpeakes more then a little in the perſon of this olde Cynicke. Some things I haue borrowed of other Philoſophers,
               
which if thou happeneſt to diſcouer, carpe not at it, but thank my iudgement, that for thee did ſelect them. Thinke not the Spider (which produceth a cobwebbe out of her owne body) better then the Bee which gathereth her hony abroade. Yet I acknowledge my ſelfe to be of his minde, who held that a man ſhould haue ſomthing à ſe, as well as in ſe, and therefore haue not ſo much tyred my wit with tranſlation, as I haue refreſhed it with contemplation. Whatſoeuer is borrowed, or mine owne, I here make thine; for which my hope expectes thankes.

Though thou deny to ſtroke, I truſt thou wilt not ſtrike my Dogge, which neuer yet bit honeſt man. Thou canſt not deale ſo vngently with him; for I know that either his head, his body, or his taile will pleaſe thee, if modeſt thou art, and not preiudicious. I know there are Coltes who will venture to row in waters wherein (to vſe the ſeafaring phraſe) they cannot liue, that is; they will cenſure things they cannot ſee into; not vnlike to that German clowne, who vndertooke to be very ready in the ten commandements, and being asked by the Miniſter

which was the firſt cōmandement, anſwered; Thou ſhalt not eate. Theſe I would wiſh to read Ballads, & books Balladicall, works not befitting a wit that dwels with the Seraphins and Cherubins. Notwithſtanding their ſiniſter opinions, I affirme that he, who cannot pick ſomthing out of this booke worthy the reading, is vnworthy to read it. To thee, modeſt Reader, I preſent my book, offer my ſeruice, and promiſe the fruites of my future ſtudies.
            Farewell.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
      
         
            
            STAFFORDS Heauenly DOG: Or the life and death of that great Cynicke Diogenes, who by Laertius is ſtiled Canis coeleſtis, the Heauenly Dogge, and Iouis filius, the ſonne of Iupiter.
            
            
               HEe that was before the beginning, made nothing ſince the beginning, which hee

thought worthy to participate of reaſon but man.The happy eſtate man was created in. God let al other creatures ſee their beeing; to man hee gaue to know his being, that is, how he came to bee, and to what end hee was made. He ſuffered the beaſts to ſee the things themſelues; to man he granted to know the cauſes of them, both how, and why they were. The wandring ambitious ſpirit of man, not content with this free gift of his maker, ſought yet to know more, and by that meanes came to know leſſe.Mans Fall. No ſooner did hee diſobey

God, but a ſinnefull miſt ſo dimmed the eies of his intellect, that of little he could iudge aright. What hee did then know, was but as a dreame of what he knew before. Whereas he might haue bequeathed to his Succeſſors Freedome and Innocency, he left Obſcurity to their vnderſtandings, and Slauery to their wils. So that man (who was formed a ſacred, ſtable, innocent, perfect creature) is now iuſtly ſtiled, The dreame of a ſhadow, the ſon of Calamity, the example of Imbecility, the ſpoyle of

Time, the ſport of fortune, the image of Change. In a word, A little filth digeſted into forme.
            
            
               God repayres the ruines of mans mind two ſundry wayes.All that miſerable man now knowes, is, that hee knowes nothing. And vndoubtedly, his knowledge would not farre ſurmount that of beaſts, did not hee that is mercy, and bounty it ſelfe, deale mercifully and bountifully with him two ſundry wayes.The firſt way. Firſt, when by the omnipotent, and abſolute power of his Godhead, he imparteth knowledge of things vnto his creatures freely, without much ſtudy and labour

of the party ſo indued. So was Solomon taught by God the knowledge of all things in the world. The Apoſtles likewiſe were taught ſundry languages from aboue without any ſtudy at all; and vnto Saint Iohn in particular, the knowledge of things to come was reuealed from God by his Angell.
            Theſe kinds of gifts, & theſe ſorts of knowledge, as they bee moſt diuine, and certain, immediately proceeding by influence from God aboue: ſo be they not common, euery

where, in all places, or in all perſons to bee found.
            
               The ſecond way.The ſecond way, God hath ſhewed vs to repaire the aforeſaid ruines of the mind, is more vſuall, euery day practiſed, and neceſſarily followed; to wit, the ſtudy of Philoſophy, to which the Arts giue entrance; the onely ordinary meane which God hath left vnto vs frō time to time, in all ages, in all nations, to reſtore memory, to enlighten vnderſtā
               ding, and direct will for the finding out of ſolitary Truth, who goes ſtill alone, and the refuting of

Errour, the damme of all diſeaſ'd opinions. The excellency of the former ſcience, which comes by inſpiration, though the treatiſe of it bee more noble, and the contemplation of it more pleaſing then of the latter, I will not here handle, it being, perhaps, a ground too hard for a deeper Diuine then my ſelfe to plow vp. Of the latter then onely I will treate, and yet not of al that (what wit can compaſſe it all?) but of that part onely, the neceſſary vſe whereof ſhall moſt commend it. That is, ac-

                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
               tus? No. Socrates? No. Seneca? No. Though theſe bee men ſomewhat aboue men, greater then the greatneſſe of their fame, whoſe meaneſt actions exclude all exceptions, yet I will not make them my guides in the Morall path I am to treade.
            The Names of theſe men ſufficiently cōmend them, their deeds prayſe them aboue the power of my words. I, who in all things am a vowed aduerſary of the opinionated Vulgars, wil picke me out a Tutour, whom the giddy

headed Rout neuer nameth but in deriſion, yet deſerues to bee had in great eſtimation. Who may this bee? Diogenes the Cynicke. A man,Diogenes prayſed. who certainly neuer ſaw his equall for greatneſſe and conſtancy of mind, and yet with the cōmon ſort is in ſo vile repute, that euery ſcuruy, ſordid fellow they nickname with Diogenes, and bring him vp in their bald, witleſſe Prouerbs. And (which is a thing remarkable) hee that loathes their ſaucy, ſenſeleſſe conuerſation, & ſtands amongſt them, as

                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
iudgement, the Ariadne in the labyrinth of life. The Prouerbe goes, that hee, who would finde Piety, muſt ſeeke her farre enough from the Court; & I dare depoſe, that hee who would trace out Verity, muſt runne farre remote from the groſſe-headed Multitude. This courſe tooke Diogenes, who though hee affected Populum, the people, yet hee hated Plebem; the plebeians, and wiſhed for a gulfe betweene him and them. It is a thing memorable of him, that ſtanding on a day in the market place,

and crying with a loude voyce, Heus homines: He, men, many of the ignorant frie came about him, whom he beat away with his ſtaffe, and ſayd, Homines, non purgamenta vocau
                     •
                  : I called men, and not cleanſings.
            
            Cōming out of a bath, one asked him, whether many men were within: he ſaid no; but being queſtioned if a great throng were there, he ſaid, yes. Being demaunded, why the charity of the people extended it ſelfe to the lame and the blind, and not to Philoſophers: Becauſe

                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
well as an iſſue-male at the hands of Iupiter.
            
            Thus hee taught, thus he derided,The loue of Diogenes to the wiſe. thus hee ſcorned the rude ones. On the contrary, the poliſht, and learned ſpirits hee had in as much admiration, as the former in deteſtation. Laertius writes, that whē he came to Athens, hee went to viſite Antiſthenes, from whom hauing receyued a ſhamefull repulſe, he yet tarried, neyther would depart; at which Antiſthenes angred, lifted vp his ſtaffe to ſtrike him: Diogenes nothing moued thereat,

bowing downe his head, bade him ſtrike, telling him, he could not driue him away with the hardeſt ſtaffe he could finde, ſo long as hee diſcourſed of any thing, whereby his vnderſtanding might bee bettered. O thou glory of Greece! did pouerty according to thine owne confeſſion driue thee to ſtudy Philoſophy, & ſhall not ſtripes now driue thee from it?
            Pauſe here a while, Reader, & if thou beeſt yong, learne here to loue learning; and if in age thou art, let this example comfort

                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
quiſition. One ſaying, there was no ſuch thing as Motion; he roſe vp & walked. In this he pointed at the ſottiſhneſſe of thoſe, that deny things vniuerſally granted. Spado a rich knaue, writ ouer the portall of his houſe theſe words: Nihil hic ingrediatur mali: Let nothing euill enter here: Alas, ſaid Diogenes, Where ſhall the Maſter of the houſe goe in? Who ſees not in this place the pretended purity of Spado pointed at, and laughed at? A neat briske young man ſpurred him a queſtion, to whom Diogenes
               
anſwered, that hee would not reſolue him, til he had felt whether hee were a man or a woman. Here an effeminate dreſſe not be fitting a man, is reproued. He reſembled a rich Buzzard to a ſheepe, with a golden Fleece. Seeing many women hā
               ged on an Oliue tree, I would, ſaies hee, All trees bore ſuch fruit. Being queſtioned what hee would take to receiue a blow on the pate, he anſwered, An Helmet. Being demanded, what Wine he loued beſt, he ſaid Another mans. Comming to

               Myndum, ſeeing great gates, and a little City; he thus exclaimed: O men of Myndū, ſhut your gates, leſt your City goe out. He gibed at beggary, that would obſerue ſtate. To a bad, ſluggiſh wraſtler, newly turned Phyſition, he ſaid; Thoſe that threw thee vpon the ground, thou wilt now throw into it.
            
            
               Xeniades asking him, how he would be buried; hee anſwered, Vpon his face; and made this his reaſon, that the world would ſhortly bee turned topſie turuy, and then ſhould he be buried on his back,

his tayle would come to be vppermoſt.Here hee mockes alſo the Macedonians Here he ſcoffes at thoſe, that before death haue a great care of buriall. He prayſed thoſe that were about to take wiues, but neuer tooke them; that were about to ſayle, but neuer ſayled.
            Being demanded what was the fitteſt houre to dine at; he replyed, that a rich mans houre was, whē hee would, and a poore mans, when he could get it.
            Many more of theſe ingenious ſpeeches had he, for which, a very barren

wit may finde fitte applications: but I will not here ſet them downe, leſt the length offend, and the number take away the ſweetneſſe. Beſides, I ſhould much wrong Diogenes, who hath yet better ſtuffe in him, and more worthy the dwelling vpon. I will therefore now arriue at the Port, where all Diogenes vertues lie at anchor. At anchor, ſaid I? Yes ſurely, Vertue neuer tooke a deeper root in any mind, then in that of Diogenes. By reiteration of actions, he had gained ſo ſtrong a habite for euery

vertue, that they were of proofe to abide the battery of Fortune. He was no Statiſt; and therefore of his prudency, and iuſtice, I ſhall not need to make relation. Hee had not ſo much as need of that part of Iuſtice, which wee call Commutatiue: for hee neither bought, nor borrowed any thing.
            
               Socrates going on a time into the Market, pō
               dring the infinity of things vendible, cried out; Yee Gods, how many things I want not! Diogenes might better haue ſaid ſo, his drinke being

water, his food roots, his houſe a tubbe. Certainly, had he wanted a nurſe, no beaſt on earth but might haue bragged of as choyſe keeping. Nature was his Cooke, and prouided him no ſauce but hunger.His Temperancie. Can his Tē
               perancy better be expreſſed?His Continency. As for his Continency (in which he is held defectiue) I can read but one thing in all his life, which can eclypſe it; and vndoubtedly, had hee thought it a breach of Continency, hee had neuer acted that. It is a thing to me ſtrange, that

               Diogenes ſo great a teacher of Modeſty, ſhould him ſelfe be incontinent.
            He was ſo ioyfull a beholder of Modeſty, that ſeeing once a youth bluſh, he ſaid, Truſt to it, my Sonne, this is the colour of Vertue. Hearing a comely youth to vſe vndecent ſpeeches, hee thus rebuked him: Fie, Sonne,
               His loue of Modeſtie. 
               doe not you bluſh to draw a Leaden ſword out of an yuory Scabbard? Speake Enuy, could Modeſty herſelfe haue ſpoken more? To a young man too curious in his dreſſing, hee gaue this checke: If thou

goeſt to men, all this is in vaine; if to women, tis wicked.
            
            
               His patience.His Patience next preſents it ſelfe, which in him was ſo great, that beleefe wil reiect it, as a thing incredible. His pouerty, his old age, his baniſhment, the hiſſes of the people, the whooping of boyes, he bore with ſuch a calme of mind, that a man would haue thought his diſcontents had contented him. Hauing receiued a blow on the head from one, all his reuenge lay in theſe words: Truly, I neuer thought till now, my

head had beene armed with an helmet.
            
            Thus he ouercame himſelfe, and conquer'd his aduerſary, who was ouercome by anger. They hit him in the teeth with his ſtamping of falſe coyne in his youth; to whom, this was his anſwere: In my youth I piſſ'd apace, but now ſoftly. The worſt ſpeeches they could giue him, ſtirred not vp his wrath, but his contempt. Hee ſayes himſelf, that this Worlds moſt miſerable creature, is an old Man poor. How wee ſhould beleeue thee, Diogenes, I know not: for

thou thy ſelfe art poore, thou thy ſelfe art aged, & yet thy felicity admits no equiparation, nay, hardly a compariſon. To ſhew Fortune, that ſhee hath not croſſes enow to load thee, thou plaieſt the Voluntary, and makeſt thy burthen more weighty, induring more then the hard-hearted Goddeſſe would haue thee, putting thy ſelf to a penance, which ſhee neuer enioyned. I call you to witnes all that now breathe; was there euer (without a meaſure of grace) ſuch a patterne of patience? Hee

renders Fortune backe, part of her allowance, as if it were too large. Shee giues him a diſh, hee throwes it in her face; and ſeeing a boy drinke water out of the hollow of his hand, he does the like, neuer vſing his diſh more. What, ſayes he, & ſhal a boy excel Diogenes in humility?His Humilitie. No, Diogenes, no boy ſhal ſurpaſſe thee in Humility, in Magnanimity no man. Thou couldſt neuer haue been thus humble,His Magnanimity. hadſt thou not beene Magnanimous.
            
               Ariſtotle here ſtaies my hand, and teacheth mee,

that Magnitudo animi magnis in rebus (vt nomen ipſum declarat) elucet: The Magnitude of the mind (as the name it ſelfe declares) appeares in great things, & therefore Magnanimity cannot bee aſcribed to Diogenes. Yes Ariſtotle, I will conuince thee with a ſentence of thine owne, & by it proue, that Magnanimity was in Diogenes. Theſe are thy wordes: Magno animo habendus is, qui magna ſe mereri exiſtimat, idque ſuo merito: He is to be accounted Magnanimious, that thinks he deſerues much, his merite anſwering

his eſtimation. That Diogenes knew his owne deſerts, and was neerer the ouer then the vndervalew of himſelfe, the whole courſe of his life will diſcouer.
            When he was taken & ſold, it was demanded of him, what hee could do: to which he anſwerd, that he knew how to cōmand men; and therefore turning himſelfe to the Cryer; Proclaime, ſayes he, if any man will buy him a Maſter, &c. He told Xeniades, who bought him, that though hee was his Slaue, yet he muſt be obeyed;

               For, ſayes hee, a phyſitian & a Pilot, though they be ſeruants both, yet they rule all. Being inuited to ſupper, he denied his preſence, and made this his reaſon; that hee had not yet receyued thanks for his laſt company.
            He was ſo far from a low opinion of himſelfe, that hee thought his fellowſhip was richly worth a thankſgiuing. Some counſelling him to ſeeke out his ſeruant run away, hee told them, it would be ridiculous, if Manes could liue without Diogenes, and Diogenes could

not liue without the helpe of Manes.
            
            Going from Lacedemon towards Athens, one encountring him on the way, queſtioned with him from whence hee came, and whither he went: to whom he returnd this anſwere, that he came from men, and was going to women. His bigge hart could not ſmother his ſcorne of womaniſh perſons, nor his approbation of the manly. He denied himſelfe to be a Slaue; for, ſayes he, Lions ſerue not their Keepers, but the Keepers the Lyons. Hee

thought himſelfe to bee the ſame amongſt men, that the Lyon was amongſt the beaſts; & that though Fortune kept him from the exerciſe of his authority, yet he was indeed their Emperour; & therefore a feare, and a reuerence was due vnto him. Neyther was this onely Stoicall Magniloquē
                  cy: hee did the great things he ſpake. Though Fortune allotted him the portion of a Slaue, yet did he vndergo no office ſeruile. The worſt of his office was, to teach; a function, then which none is

more Noble and Royall. What higher happineſſe can Inuention find out, then to bee able to teach reaſon to Creatures rationall? We ſeeing thoſe not to want their prayſe, that haue the gift of teaching a Dogge, a Horſe, or a Hawke.
            If then the preſtancy of inſtructing be ſuch; ſurely Diogenes (with whom it was ſo frequent) may in name, but not in deed bee a Slaue. A Prince hee was rather, who gaue lawes and precepts worthy a Prince, his mind being a fountain, in whoſe

                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
went himſelfe in perſon to viſite him.
            In the ſuburbes of Corinth, at a place called Cranium, hee found him layed al along in the Sun: but when the good olde man ſaw ſo many comming towards him, hee ſomewhat rayſed vp himſelfe, & fixed his eyes ful vpon Alexander. He that in warre ſo furious, was here as courteous, and aſked the Cynicke, if hee lacked any thing: Yes, ſaid he, that I doe, That thou ſtand out of my Sun a little. Alexander had the Magnanimity of this man in ſo

great admiration, that hee was ready to wiſh a tranſformation of Alexander into Diogenes: but when hee remembred his immortall race; his ſelfe-loue made him think that thought baſe; and yet to his deriding followers he ſayde, that if hee had not been Alexander, he could haue wiſhed himſelfe Diogenes. I cannot blame him: for if he, that approcheth neereſt in knowledge to the Deity, deſerue amongſt men the principality: Surely then Diogenes ſhall be the ſuperiour of Alexander.
            
            
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
               ſpirit, one World is too narrow to containe, whom the riches in, & vpon all earth cannot content: Behold here, (beyond thy hope!) a ſight; a happy man, the reſolution of whoſe mind no externall thing can ſhake. Without enuy,
               Paſsion an enemy to Vertue. 
               without feare, without hope I liue, being ſubiect to as little paſsion as any, the gods excepted.
            
            
               See here the vniuerſall happineſſe of this Vniuerſe contracted into a Tubbe, which I no ſooner goe out of, but all the ground I walke on, is mine owne. My foote treads on not anothers earth; all belongs to Diogenes.

               Mine eye cannot diſcouer any thing, I am not Lord of. Nature made all things in this inferiour world for the vſe of Diogenes. Nothing on the earthes ſurface, nothing in her entrailes, that is not mine. I dare call the Sun mine, the Stars mine, nay, Iupiter himſelfe, mine. If (according to thy vaine ſuppoſition) he were thy Father, yet ſo precious in his ſight thou couldſt not be, as is Diogenes. There is an affinity and a friendſhip betweene good men, and the gods, whoſe goodneſſe they imitate. If then thou bee the Sonne of this Almighty

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
uoyding of any thing. Vertue makes me rich, and pouerty ſecure. What is it I lacke? Am I not voyde of feare? Am I not free? Who euer ſaw me fruſtrated of my wiſhes? Could Fortune euer yet force mee to accuſe the gods of iniuſtice, or men of falſhood? How often hath ſhee put me to the racke, and yet could neuer make mee confeſſe her Deity? All my actions are generous, bold, honeſt, and endure the light. It may be Nature, being haſty, was not curious in the frame of my body, but made me all at one ſitting, not gracing my viſage with her

pureſt colours. What of that?
               The faireneſſe of the mind is to be preferred before that of the body. 
               In this Tunne of filth, a mind as fayre as the Sunne I carry about. My conſcience is my guarde, Vertue my Armour; by the former backed, by the latter armed, I am inuincible. I loue honeſty ſimply, for it ſelf without hope of reward, or feare of puniſhment. Others haue houſes to keepe them from the rage of the wind and weather, whereas I lye at the Signe of the Moone, and the ſeuen Starres; hauing nothing but mine innocency to defend mee from the heauens cruelty.
            
            
               I need not bluſh at any

one of my actions: I make the people my ſpectators, & my Iudges. I approue my ſelfe to God; the cenſures of men,
               The cenſure of mā not to bee regarded. 
               I regard not, nor care I, if all my thoughts were regiſtred. What is good, I applaud: what is euill, I reprehend in whome ſoeuer I finde it. Thus it often fals out, that my Patients beate me, and will not attend the cure of their bad affections. My mind alters not, notwithſtanding their ſtubborneneſſe: but I ſtill endeuour to teach thoſe that correct me; and with the fondneſſe of a Father loue them.
            
            
               
               Liberty, (the very ſound of which allures all men (whom many haue ſought) through fire, through bloud, through famine, yet could not find her) ſhines in this breſt of mine, where ſhee is ſo ſurely ſeated, that from thence the power of al earth cānot hale her. Thou (who haſt conquerd Climates, and brought ſo many kingdoms to obedience) with the ſtrength of althine hoſt, cāſt not force the mind of Diogenes.
            
               Tis poſsible thou mayeſt conquer al this Hemiſphere, and lead it againſt that other, but impoſsible thou

ſhouldſt compell Diogenes.Man is called a little World. 
               Thou haſt already terrified all the great World; but this little world with all thy forces thou canſt not affright. Stile not thy ſelfe Conquerour, before thou haſt ouercome Diogenes. What canſt thou lay vpon me that I cannot vndergoe with an vpright ſhoulder? I can as freely ſuffer as thou canſt puniſh. Make Diogenes acknowledge himſelfe miſerable, and then thy victory is complete. Which way canſt thou vexe me? An exile I here already ſtand, and wilt thou baniſh mee hence too? Doe ſo; confine mee to what

place thou wilt, and that is part of my Country. I am not a Citizen of Athens, nor of Corinth, but of the World.
               The whole world is a wiſe mans Country. 
               I am free of this capacious Circumferēce, and therefore cannot bee ſent from home.
            
            
               Any place habitable for man or beaſt I can liue in. Thou canſt not ſend me thither where I ſhall not tread vpon ſome earth, drink ſome water. Hauing heauen ouer, and earth vnder me, I cannot doe amiſſe. The baſeſt Souldier of thine army was neuer driuen by Neceſsity to that hardneſse, which I voluntary put my

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
age, The lees of Life; for on my neuer violated word, my later dayes are as pleaſing to mee, as were my firſt. Sure ſome woman firſt broached that opinion, who had rather bee ſtrucken dead, then ſtrucken in yeares. I haue not a Character of age but my haire. My ſight is quicke, my ioynts nimble, my backe ſtrong, my heart good. No man that ſees me would think that the earths lappe were my beſt Lodging.
            
            
               Thou ſeeſt by this time, great Alexander, that thou canſt not ſend mee out of mine owne Country, or if

thou couldſt, yet that I am ſo armed againſt the miſeries of an exile, that baniſhment to me would rather be a iourney of pleaſure, then of penance. But thou wilt ſay, that thy power extends it ſelfe farther, and that thou art Maſter of my life. I graunt it, thou art ſo. What of that? Hee is not a Philoſopher that this can moue. It would trouble me no more to lay downe my life, then it would do thee to take it.
            
            
               Yea good Gods! what a ſight it is to behold an auſtere,
               Hee is no Philoſopher that feares death. 
               buſhbearded Philoſopher (who feares a razor, as much as a rope) quake at

the name of death, euen as a treuant boy does at the name of his Tutor? Such a one was old Antiſthenes, whom I hearing exclaime, and ſay, Who ſhall free me of my griefes? I forthwith gaue him a dagger, and told him, that could eaſe him: to which he made reply, that he deſired to be rid of his griefes, not of his life. I cannot abſtaine from extremity of laughter, when I ruminate Homers Mars, whom he deſcribes beaten, and howling ſo, that the clamours of ten thouſand men could not drowne the noiſe hee made.
            
            
               
               Perhaps he wanted Venus there to wipe his face, to ſtroke his head, and to drie his n'eyes. Though he was a god, and could not die, yet he could not contemne paine,
               A good man feares not death, but to deſerue it. 
               which a weak woman in trauaile can endure. A lofty ſpirit indeede feares not death, but to deſerue it: and verely, he deſerues it, that cannot ſuffer it.
            
            
               He that abhorreth death telleth vs, that hee hath yet done nothing to make himſelfe liue heereafter, and therefore would yet bee, becauſe hee neuer yet was.
            
            
               An earthly body is too

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
in hers. Alexander condemnes Diogenes to die, and Nature Alexander.
            
               Take this old head off, & ſee if not vndaunted I ſtand the ſtroke, and why? becauſe I know thou art but natures Executioner. I will ſtare my headſmā in the face with as much confidence, as if he came to barbe mee.
               Neceſſity is to be obeied. 
               What I muſt, that I will do, without ſo much as a repine, or a ſtruggle. I am not ignorant that Neceſſity & Fate are twins; what Fate decrees, that Neceſſity exacts. I profeſſe to thee, I would neither eate, nor drinke, but that Neceſſity will haue it

ſo, neither would I die, did not Neceſſity will it: but, Neceſſity bidding, I will as willingly die, as either eate, or drinke. And if I ſhould not,
               Nothing horrible in Death. 
               ſtripes were my due, ſince I ſee nothing horrible in death.
            
            
               No euill can happen to him in this life, that truely comprehends, that in the priuation of life there is no euill. Thoſe, who compare death to ſleepe, ſhew vs the little harme is in it. Death is nothing to him that contemplates it aright; for while we are, Death is abſent, & when death is come, we are then departed.
            
            
               
               So that it is a falſe opinion of deaths cruelty, and not death it ſelfe that torments vs. Certainely, had Nature written the day of each mans death in his forehead, al the world would haue died with thought, and not one haue liued to his aſſigned day.
            
            
               No death miſerable, but that of profane men.
               There is no death miſerable, but that which giues an end to a profane life, the wicked leauing their infamy as an inheritance to their poſteritie. Bleſſed is hee, and next to the Gods happy, that dies, his head begirt with a Garland of glorious actions, whoſe ſweet ſauour ſhall perfume

the world. Thus ſhall I die, who haue liued with more innocency then Men, and with approbation of the Gods. Deſtroy then my body, victorious man, make it a ſubiect of diſhonour, and ſhame, nay, exerciſe all imaginable villany vpon it, and thou ſhalt ſee me ſtand like one elected by Ioue, to trie how much humane Nature can ſuffer. All thy torments cannot alter the temper of my mind, nor can any puniſhment diſpleaſe mee.
            
            
               Is it thy will the rage of fire conſume mee? with a thankefull heart I accept it,

thinking it better to hau
                     •
                   my body conſume in an Element noble, and borne with Heauen it ſelfe, then to haue putrifaction, and corruption prey vpon it. Wilt thou drowne mee? Though this bee the moſt terrible of deaths, becauſe the ſubſtance of the Soule (as ſome thinke) is fiery, and therefore abhorrs to be quenched, yet it ſhall nothing at all ap
                  
                     •
                  ale me. I had as liefe the Fiſhes ſhould deuoure me, as the Wormes. All paines, all deaths are to mee indifferent.
            
            
               As a ſtrong conſtitution can away with heates, and

coldes, and all ſuch annoyances: ſo a good diſpoſition can withſtand the malice, and the fury of Tyrants, together with all ſuch afflictions. Thou canſt prouide no torture, mighty Monarch, againſt which my minde is not forearmed.
            
            
               Thus much on the paſſiue part; now on the Actiue. Leauy Diogenes an Army of men, and ſee if he do not, as well as thou, teach them the military Diſcipline, and bee to them an example of Valour. But what ſhall draw mee into the field? An Ambition to be ſtiled Monarch of the World?

                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
               ſtanding; for I had rather giue my body to the ground, then giue ground. In this cauſe I would not care to die with conquering, ſo by death I might conquer.
            
            
               Here ſhould my proweſſe proclaime to my Souldiers, that Fortune is ſometime wanting to the valiant, but euer to cowards. In this quarrell were Alexander my foe, I would ſingle him out, and fiſt to fiſt encounter him, though I knew deſtruction to be the certaine wages of his ſword. I would then make it apparant to Alexander, that a Philoſophers courage cannot fall,

though his Body cannot ſtand,
               A Philoſophers courage falleth not with his body. 
               and that though it be the taske of one man to take Diogenes priſoner, yet millions of men cannot ſubdue his ſoule.
            
            
               Nay (which more is) Fortune (to whoſe will thou and thine army are ſubiect) could neuer yet cauſe the mind of Diogenes to ſtoop. That blind Queene of this Ball, who is aboue thee, and Kings, is vnder mee. My mind is not deiected, but erected againſt Fortunes worſt. If thy pride will let thee learne, I will teach thee too how to lay her proſtrate at thy feete. Liſten

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
and his laſt gaſpe will grone out loue. In death hee will loue me, and I him after it. His memorie ſhalbe as deare to mee, as euer was his preſence. But graunt it to bee a croſse deſeruing griefe, no more to taſte the ſweetneſſe of my friends conuerſation. How then? Muſt I therefore breake out into immoderate whining? No. Fortune hath yet left mee Philoſophy to moderate betwixt me and ſorrow. Philoſophy telles mee that my friend was borne ſubiect to that fatall law of Nature, which as it allowes an entrance into life; ſo it commands

a departure out.
            
            
               The earth neuer produced any thing that was not reduced to that firſt,
               The firſt minute of 
                     •
                  ife, wee march to meet death 
               predominant Element. The firſt minute of our life, wee lake our iourney towards death, which ſome finiſh in that minute, ſome in an houre, in a yeare ſome, and all once. Hee that endeth ſooneſt his pilgrimage, is in my opinion moſt in grace with Prouidence. As wee prize our meate, not according to the quantity, but the quality of it: ſo ſhould we life; not according to the length, but the ſweetneſſe of the ſame.
            
            Iupiter I haue often called

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
port him, that his curſes ſhall ayme at, though they cannot hit Iupiter. He will dare to ſay that the ſoule of his Loue grudged to leaue her body, as being loth to leaue a true heauen to goe to a ſuppoſed. Exclaime he will againſt death, and call for his fatall ſtroke, bidding death to be pittileſse towards him, ſince to her he was not pittifull. He will ſay that Nature, to auoide the imputation of a lyer, let death ſeize her, Nature hauing in her promiſed more to the World, then ſhee could performe. In contempt hee will mention the

flinty wiſedome of vs Cynicks, and ſweare that wee are as void of vertues, as of affections▪ and by way of argument will avouch, that no Vertue makes a man loſe his vnderſtanding. But were hee conuerſant in our Schooles, hee ſhould there learne that a man,
               A wiſe mā ſubmits his minde to God, al other things to his minde. 
               who vnderſtands himſelfe aright, will ſubiect his mind to God, all other things to his mind, and not loſe his vnderſtanding for the loſſe of a woman. Wee could teach him that they are fooles, who will not lay downe for their owne ſake, the griefe which they haue taken for anothers.
            
            
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
               in thy breſt, not in the field. It is not bloud, not famine, not warre that can bring peace to thine owne conſcience.
               The feliciis falſe that depends on things externall. 
               If on Externall things depend thine inward content, with thoſe externall things thy content will vaniſh. If thy quiet of ſoule be procured by things without thee, Fortune (of theſe things the Miſtreſſe) will command all the thoughts within thee. Thy mirth, and thy ſadneſſe ſhall bee at her appointment. Is there a beauty on which thy thoughts ſeede? That beauty ſhe will blaſt. Is there an eie, the very thought

whereof enlightens thy minde? That eye ſhall bee extinguiſht. Lies all thy pleaſures in thy poſſeſſions? Within one houre Fortune will lay all thy wealth in anothers lappe. Art thou now one of the earths mightieſt Kings? Anon thou ſhalt be rancked amongſt Slaues. Thus ſhall thy minde bee as changeable as is all mutable Fortune.
            
               Liue then another while vnder the gouernmēt of Vertue, and belieue me (whom in al things thou ſeeſt to be aboue Fortune) that thy ioyes ſhal farre exceede the number of thy daies. But a ſubiect of

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
thy ſtomacke, not inflame thy blood. The fulneſse of wickedneſse hath often followed repletion of the grape. If to liue ioyfully, and bleſſedly be thy wiſh, haue a care thy attendants be honeſt.
            
            
               The company of the honeſt to be imbraced.
               Honeſt they ſhall bee, if thou baniſh the vicious, and retaine the vertuous. In the flight of the one, villany and ſlauery will depart thy Court, and with the good that tarry with thee, goodneſſe, and liberty will remaine. It is better to haue one true, honeſt attendant, then a flocke of fooles, and knaues. Liſten no longer to flatterers, whoſe ſoothings

are pernicious. As a Wolfe is like a dogge, yet they are of farre different natures: ſo is a flatterer like a friend, though their intents bee diuers.
            
            
               Suffer not Sycophants to perſwade thee to the erecting of thy Statues, nor let Apelles drawe thee any more, but, that Cittie which thou meaneſt to grace with thine Image, there ſtriue to make the memory of thee a Monument of Gentleneſse, of Mercie, of Iuſtice, of Liberalitie.
            
            
               
               As the Sun attends not on the prayers of mortals, but riſes of his owne accord, ſhines freely, and is of all all-hailed: So neither do thou reſpect the praiſes, the applauſes, and inuocations of the people, but doe good freely, without ſolicitation; ſo ſhalt thou be as welcome to thy ſubiects, as is the Sun to Mortalitie. If thou beeſt not thus gracious, and thus good, thou art not worthy to be a Prince; and therefore reſigne thine office to mee. I will make it manifeſt to thee, that a Philoſopher can preuaile more with perſwaſion, then thou by violence. But

me thinks I heare thy inſolēt tongue bid mee betake my ſelfe to the gouernment of my Tubbe, the onely Kingdome I was borne to.
               He is moſt miſerable, that cānot gouerne his paſſiō and confine his d
                     •
                  
                  ſires. 
               Mocke on, moſt miſerable of mortals, who canſt neither gouerne thy paſſions, nor confine thy deſires; Diogenes deſpiſes thy deriſion. This Caſke I dwell in, is to my minde as ample, as all thy Dominions are to thine.
            
            
               As hee that is borne in Perſia, will not couet to liue in Greece, but in Perſia ſet vp his reſt: So I beeing born in Pouerty, with pouerty am contented, nor does my higheſt thought ayme at abundance.
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
            
            
               
               For Alexander to ſay he is better then Diogenes, becauſe hee is richer, is as much, as if one horſe ſhould ſay to another, I am better then thou, becauſe I haue more Prouender, more hay, and finer trappings: or as if one bird ſhould ſay to another, I am to bee preferd before thee, becauſe I haue finer feathers and a neater neſt.
            
               As it is the ſwiftneſſe of the wing, & the foote, which commends the Hawke and the Horſe: ſo is it the quickneſſe of capacity that commends the man. In this ability of ſoule, if Alexander

               ſurpaſſe Diogenes,The ability of ſoule, is that which commēds the man. Alexander ſhall haue the vpper hand. But in that, Diogenes cannot be excelled; and therefore will neuer yeild to Alexander the precedency. Get thee gone then to thoſe that worſhippe thee as a God; for I thinke thee not a compleate man. Tell thy Idolaters, thou didſt meet with a man that prooued himſelfe happy, and thee miſerable.
            
            
               And if they aske thee who? Say it was Diogenes, who neither feared thee, nor Fortune. God and mine innocency protect mee againſt thee, and her. My

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
uours,
               The body is ſubiect to many inconueniences. 
               to tyrants, to fire, to water, and to all things in ſtrength aboue it; but nothing is aboue the heauenly part, but heauen, and the almighty maker of all things, Iupiter. If then thou haſt nothing that can ennoble, and enrich my ſoule, keepe all to thy ſelfe; for concerning my body I am not ſolicitous. So baſe a thing is the body, that had not Nature giue to euery man a ſelfe loue, each man would haue ſought his owne deſtruction, rather then haue his ſoule dwell in ſo loath ſome a lodging. This he ſhall ſoone apprehend, that does but imagine what a trouble, and

vexation it would be vnto him for a week only to dreſſe, and mundifie any mans body but his owne. With what indignation he would rubbe anothers teeth, and cleanſe other parts, which nature of necesſity muſt foule.
               The loue we beare our ſelues, makes vs beare with our i
                     •
                  firmities. 
               It is then the loue we beare our ſelues, which makes vs beare with our infirmities. If then it be true, that in our bodies we are ſubiect to ſo many diſeaſes, to ſo many diſcōmodities; and that it is the diuine Miſtreſſe of this clayie manſion that giues vs freedome, I wil ſeeke to poliſh and adorne the latter, but beſtow little coſt on the former. Why? this
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
Phyloſopher,Diogenes had a greater ſpirit then Alexander. whoſe mind was greater then the Monarks to whom his ſpeech was directed. He that looks into their deaths (the onely touchſtone to finde a counterfeit courage) ſhall ſee Diogenes die like a man, and great Alexander like a little child.
            Hee that had made ſo many Natiōs patiently put on the yoake of ſeruitude, became himſelfe ſuch a ſlaue to feare, that hee ſent to death all thoſe that did but mention Augury,The ſuperſtition of Alexander. and trembled at the whiſtling of the winds. Euery ordinary accident was to

him ominous, and any noiſe he heard, he thought to be the voyce of death. His end was much like that of Lewis the 11.The ends of Alexander and of Lewis the eleuēth of France much alike. of France, who in his latter daies ſuſpected the faith of his old ſeruants, cooped himſelfe vp in an Iron cage, & ſecluded himſelfe frō all ſociety. He gaue his Phiſitian 10000. Crownes a moneth, to prolong his too well beloued life. He commanded the obſeruation of ſolemne daies, faſts and prayers, not ſo much for the ſaluation of his ſoule, as for the preſeruation of his putrified part:

                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
not the eternity, yet it ſeemes that death was more afraid of him,Death was more afraid of Diogenes, then he of it. then he of it, in that hee was faine to ſeeke it. So ſome report, and that, by keeping in his breath, hee let out his Soule. Others (with more probability) denie that his death was violent, and deſcribe the manner of it. By this latter Narration wee ſhall learne, that though he layed not violent hands on himſelfe, yet hee ſhooke hands with death, and welcomed him as the only Phiſitiā that could cure him of all his aches. He

cryed when he came into the world, becauſe he was a child: but, being a man, he ſcornes to howle at his going out.
            There was no more motion, no more reluctation of Nature in his death, then in the ſleep of others. A little before life left him, a ſhort ſlumber vſherd death, out of which being awaked, his Phiſitian aſked him how he did, & enquired whether or no his pain leſſened;The admirable anſwer of Diogenes to 
                     〈◊〉
                   Phyſition. to whom he anſwered, that anon it wold diminiſh; for hee had entertained the one brother already, and looked

                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
               tam ſtertere noctem,
            
            
               Diogenes halfe aſleepe, halfe awake, anſwered thus,
Qui popules moderatur, & ampla negotia tractat.
            
            This anſwere expreſſed to the full the worth, and office of Diogenes, who taught the people to obey, and Kings to rule aright.Their vertues compared. 
               Alexander ſurpaſſed Diogenes in ſtrength, wherein a horſe ſurpaſſes Alexander; Diogenes excelled Alexander in knowledge, wherein the gods excelled not Diogenes.
               Diogenes greater thē the gods he worſhipped. He was, indeede, greater then the gods hee worſhipped,

who were of mortall race as hee was, and had not ſo much deſert to claime a Deitie as he had. Alexander could not temper his paſſions, but in his anger put to death Philotas, and ſlew Clitus as braue a Souldier as himſelfe, and all for remembring him, that hee was the ſonne of Philip. Diogenes made his affections conformable to his will, and his will to reaſon. Alexander ſought to ſhun ineuitable death; Diogenes met it boldly. The Sunne in the ſpace of twelue houres

                  〈1… pages missing〉
               
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
   