
      
         
            
            
               
                  FRIDERICVS STAPHILVS
                  FRIDERICVS STAPHILVS
STAPHIL WAR ERST EIN LVTTRISCH MAN
DARNACH NAM ER DAS PAPSTVM AN
VERLEVGNET CHRISTVM VND SEIN WORT
KAM AN ISCARIOTES ORT
TETS CRISTENTVM SCHANTLICH VERLIG
IST SEIN STAFFL IN DIE HELL ESTIGN
                  1565
                  BI
               
            
         
         
            
            THE APOLOGIE
OF FRIDERICVS STAPHYLVS
COVNSELLER TO
THE LATE EMPEROVR
FERDINANDVS, &c. Intreating

                  Of the true and right vnderstanding of holy Scripture.
                  Of the tanslation of the Bible in to the vulgar tongue.
                  Of disagrement in doctrine amonge the protestants.
               
            
            Translated out of Latin in to English by THOMAS
STAPLETON, Student in Diuinite.
            Also a discourse of the Translatour vppon the doctrine of the
protestants vvhich he trieth by the three first founders
and fathers thereof, Martin Luther, Philip
Melanchton, and especially
Iohn Caluin.
            
               Matth. 24.
               Videte ne quis vos seducat.
               Take hede that no man deceaue you
            
            
               Matth. 7.
               Ex fructibus eorum cognoscetis eos.
               Ye shal knovve them by their frutes.
            
            
               SPES ALIT AGRICOLAS ·
            
            Imprinted at Antwerp by Iohn Latius,
at the signe of the Rape, with Priuilege.
Anno. 1565.
         
         
            
            REgiae Maiestatis Priuilegio permissum est
Thomae Stapletono Sacrae Theologiae candidato
vti per aliquem Tipographorum admissorum
impune ei liceat imprimi curare & per omnes
suae regionis ditiones distrahere librum inscriptum
The Apologie of Fridericus Staphylus
&c. & omnibus alijs inhibitum ne eundem absque
eiusdem Thomae consensu imprimant vel alibi impressum
distrahant sub poena in Priuilegio contenta.
            
               Datum Bruxellae. 17. Nouembris. Anno. 1564.
               
               Subsig.
Facuwez.
            
         
         
            
            THE PREFACE OF THE
TRANSLATOVR.
            
               THe blessed apostle S. Paul (good Chri
sten readers) not without the instinct
of the holy ghoste and a sure foresight
off the troubles to come in
Christes church, writeth vnto the
Corinthians these wordes.1. Cor. 11. 
               There must be heresies, to the
entent that they which are perfyt amonge you, might be knowen.
In which waighty and graue prediction of the
Apostle two things I see especially to be notised. The
one for our comfort, the other for our instruction.
For our comfort it is, that we be not dismaied or ouer
much offended when we see in the holy profession
of our Christen religion, heresies, sectes, and schismes
to arise: that we forsake not therefore the field of our
faith.1. Cor. 9. 
               Wherin we warfare to god and rūne not as at an vncertain
thing, and fight not as one that beateth the ayre, but
rūne to obtaine, and fight to winne the reward: that we let
not go the holdfast of our hope Which we hold as the
sure and stedfast anchor of our soule:
               Hebr. 6. but rather with the
patience of Abraham,Rom. 4. 
               We beleue in hope contrary to hope,
continuing and cleauing stedfastly to the rocke
of oure faith, against the which, Hel gates shall neuer
preuaile.
               Matth. 16. For as we see by the verdit of the Apostle,
There must be heresies. It is now sithen the time that the
Apostle spake these wordes a thousand fiue hundred
and odde yeares, Yet neuer was there aage sence that
time but that in some part of Christendom heresies

haue ben sturring. In the very first ofspring of the
Apostles there lacked not such euil wedes amonge
the corne of Christes church yet grene.2. Tim. 2. Apocal. 2. 
               Simō Magus,
Hermogenes Philetus, Hymeneus, Alexander, Nicolaus,
and such other are mencioned in holy writ to haue
swarued from the faith and after the knowledg off
righteousnes to haue turned back from the same.
               2. Petri. 2. Beside
holy writ we reade in the ecclesiastical histories
of Ebion, of Cerinthus, of Marcion and diuers other
plāters of heresies in the Apostles time. After whom
howe from age to age heresies being alwaies cutte of
and destroied haue yet spronge vp again and flourished
for a season as the venimous heades of Hydra. I
remitt you (to auoide prolixite) to the writinges of
Epiphanius, S. Augustin, Philaster and others, I reporte
my self also to the Chronographies of Alexander
Sculteti and such other: which deducting the estat
of Christes church from the beginning hitherto, setting
forthe in tables seuerally the Popes and supreme
vicars of Christ, the Emperours, the generall and
prouinciall councels, the heresies of al times, haue in
no time nor age left vs bare the leafe of the heresies.
The figure of this calamite in Christes church we
see to haue gone before in the lawe of Moyses. For
at what time the children of Israel had by the mighty
hand of god entred in to the land of promis, chased
oute Idolaters and were setled in quiet possession, yet
god of a iust indignation conceiued against them suffring
the Cananites to dwell amonge them pronounced
by his Angell that he would not therefore cast
               Iud
                     •
                  . 2.
               
               those Idolaters out before them, to the entent they might haue
them as enemies amonge them, and their gods should be as
asnare vnto them. And thereby the children of Israel
were tried as now the Christians are, they by Idolaters,
we by heretikes. Though therefore his our
present time be so entangled with schismes, seuered
in sundry sectes, and embrued with hainous heresies
as neuer at any time sence the first preaching off the
ghospel: Yea and though it haue so ouerrunne the
small plat of Christēdom that remaineth, as euer any
heresy did (except that of the Arrians) yet bicause we
see the holy ghost suffreth it so to be, and warneth vs
by the mouthe of the Apostle that is behoueth so to
be, we must yelde to the prouidence of almighty god.
and saie with the prophet Daniel.
               Dan. 3. 
               We haue sinned with
our forefathers. Yea thousand fold more then oure forefathers,
and therefore no maruaile if the dreadfull
wrath of god haue fallen vppon vs that we maye wel
crie and lament with the prophet Hieremy.Hierem. 5 
               Consider
and see o Lorde our confusion: our inheritaunce is turned to
straungers.
               1. Ioan. 2. Such surely as haue departed from vs but were
not of vs: for if they had ben of vs: they would no doubte haue
continued with vs.
            
            An other lesson in the wordes of the Apostle for
our instruction is this, that heresies therefore are suffred
to be, to the entent that they which are perfect
amōge vs might be knowen. For by heresies the churche
as gold by the fire is tried, and as the riuer or sea
by trouble and tēpest casteth his froth and filth awaie
(the pure water keping his bondes and course) so the

churche in time of tribulation and stormes of heresy
voideth awaie the foule and vncleane membres of
her,The duty of a Christen man in time of heresy. the sounde and faithful remaining vnder her roufe
and abiding in the receaued faith and belefe. For in
time of schismes and heresies the part of euery good
Christen man is, to do as the good souldyars in the
cāpe when a ciuil seditiō ariseth, or as the quiet passan
ger when the sea stormeth: for euen as the true and
faithfull souldyars in such a case runne all vnto their
Capitain and General, looking to be of him directed
where, howe, and when to strike, and as the wise
and sober passanger when the tempest and storme
disordreth the passage, suffreth quietly the master to
rule the sterne, medling not with that he hath no
skill of: right so when preuy rebells or open apostatas
of Christen religion sowe seditious schismes
and preache hereticall doctrine, troubling thereby
the quiet and settled consciences of true and vpright
beleuers, euery Christen man, especially such as are
of the laye and inferiour sorte, ought to cleaue vnto
their heades and rulers in Christ his church medling
not with the determination of any point called then
in controuersy: but looke to be directed as they haue
allwaies ben by their catholike pastours and ouerseers
to whom they are commaunded by the Apostle
to obey and submitte them selues:Heb. 13. truly no lesse
then the souldiar to his Capitain or the passanger
to his master.
            Therefore oure Sauiour biddeth the people to beware
and Take hede of false prophets,
               Math. 7. 
                     •
                  . Ioan. 4. 
               nor to beleue euery

spirit, but trie and discern whether they be of God or no. But
this lo howe maye it be? Howe shal the ignorant
and laye man trie false doctrine from the true? It hath
ben put in to mens heads of late yeares that euery
man for this purpose ought to reade holy scripture,
and thereby to trie and discern truthe from falshood.
It were perhaps to be wished (if it had so pleased
God) that as holy scripture is the true triall thereof,
so it were open and euident to all men that seke
the triall therein:Scripture hard to be vnderstanded. Lib. 2. de. doctr. Christi. Cap. 6. but what haue lerned men iudged
in times past of holy scripture? Many things, saieth
S. Augustin, are darke in scriptures, and it hath so ben prouided
of God to the entent that our pridemight be tamed by
trauail and our knowledg not cloyed with facilite: which
quickely contemneth that easely hath ben lerned,
               In Ezech. Cap. 45. In like maner
S. Hierom. All prophecy or interpretation of scripture
contayneth the truthe in darcknes and obscurite, to the entent
that the scholers and lerners within may vnderstande,
but the rude people set without may not knowe what is saied.
Orels we shall cast precious stones before hogges iff we
open the treasure of holy scripture to euery man.
               In anchorae tu. 
               Epiphanius
likewise. The Scripture, saieth he, telleth all truthe: but
we haue nede of good intelligēce and perceiuerance to knowe
God and his word. There is in the ghospell,
               Lib. 7. in Leuiticum. saieth Origen,
the letter that killeth: for the destroying letter is not only
in the olde Testament, but also in the newe Testament to him
that vnderstandeth not spiritually that which is saied. Tertullian
speaketh yet more vehemently hereof. I am
not afeared,
               I
                     •
                  praescrip. haeretico
                     •
                  ū
                saieth he, to saie that the scriptures them selues
haue ben so disposed by the will of God that they mought minister

matter vnto heretikes: seing that I reade that heresies
must be which without scripture coulde not be. This is the
iudgement of the lerned fathers who haue trauailed
more in holy scripture then any new preacher of oure
time, and yet can espie no greate facilite in it,
but rather do complaine of the maruailous difficulte
thereof.2. Petr. 3. And doth not S. Peter write plainly that in
the epistles of S. Paule Certain thinges were very harde to
be vnderstanded which the vnlerned and inconstant depraued
euen as other parts of scripture to their owne destruction?
Doth not S.2. Cor 4. 
               Paule write that The ghospell is vailed
and couered from those that perish?
               Ioan. 5. Are we not commaunded
to serch holy scripture? doth not this serching
importe a diligence and difficulty more then laye
men can either attend vppon or attaine vnto?Act. 8. The
Eunuchus vnderstode not the prophet, vntill the Apostle
had expounded it vnto him, And Christ after
his Ascension opened the vnderstanding off his disciples
that they might vnderstand the scriptures.
               Luc. 24. And
thincke we oure selues able to vnderstand all that we
reade?
            This then being so howe shall the laye and vnlerned
man perfourme the commaundement of the
ghospell bidding him, To beware of false prophetes and
to discern the sprits whether they be of god or no?
               Math. 7. 1. Ioan. 4. Euery
secte nowe a daies chalengeth the worde of god and
the right vnderstanding thereof. The Catholike likewise
by prescription out of memory standeth in
possession thereof and will not be brought from it
for all the bragges the heretike maketh. Howe then

shall the vnlerned man hearing bothe tales conclude
with him selfe which to folowe? Were it not nowe
good readers much to be wished that some clere and
euident doctrine were taught, by what meanes and
howe the holy worde of God maye rightly be vnder
standed, and the false prophets, preachers, and protestants
of oure time might be auoided? Truly as the
sauegarde of the soule passeth all worldly interest, so
euery Christen hart ought aboue all thinges tender
the same: and with all diligence possible procure spedy
remedies for the pestiferous venim off heresy
which crepeth on like a cancre,
               2. Tim. 2. and corrupteth the whole
estat of our saluation.
            Hauing therefore sene and perused a certain booke
of Fridericus Staphylus, writen first in the Allemain
tongue, and after translated in to Latin, wherein
he first teacheth the vnlerned laye man howe to beware
of false and wrong interpretation of holy scripture
which is no lesse necessary then the reading off
scripture it selfe, secondarely detecteth certain false
translations of the Bible by Luther in to his mother
tongue: laste of all declareth the maruailous dissension
and variaunces of the Lutherans in their doctrine
and chiefest articles of our faith (which is a most euident
argument of the sprit of dissension (the diuell
him selfe) speaking in thē and a clere proufe of hereticall
doctrine, for the truthe is but one) I haue thought
good to translate the whole in to our mother tongue,
trusting in almighty God to profit hereby many
a Christen soule of my dere deceined countremen

which (as God is my witnes) was my only respect in
this smal labour.
            The first part of this booke is a very necessary lesson
for the vnlerned laye man.The contents of the Apologie. For without the true
and right interpretation of holy scripture such as the
church teacheth he can haue no right faith, and so
hazardeth his soule and euerlasting life which he
ought aboue all worldly respect tender and procure.
For as our Sauiour saieth, What auaileth it a man to winne
the whole worlde and lese his soule?
               Lucae. 9.
            
            The second parte is a good admonition for al such
as are not sene in the tongues to beware of newe
translations of holy scripture falsely forged for a vauntage.
Our english bibles sette forth these last yeares
lack not such foisting in of false termes. In the epistles
of S. Paule as ofte as the worde Idoll is founde
in the greke and latin text, so ofte they turne it Image
as though 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                in greke, idolum and imago
in laten or idol and image in english were all one.
When God saieth in holy scripture.Genes. 1. 
               Let vs make man
according to our image, will these men saie that God
hath an idoll according to the which man was made?
and howe be they not ashamed to call couetousnes
worshipping of images when that S. Paule calleth
it idolorum seruitus,
               Ephes. 5. that is, seruice of idols bicause
the couetous man maketh his mony his idoll? But
this shift serued them to digge vp againe the olde carren
heresy of the I conoclaste, image breakers, condemned
in the seuenth generall councell and second off
Nice, and to throwe downe images out of churches

setting in their places their owne and their wiues, as
in some parte of Germany it is practised. Likewise to
take away the sacrament of holy Orders,Epiphanius li. 2. cō
                  trea har. & August. ad Quoduult. and to renewe
the olde heresy of the Arrians and the Pepuziani
denieng priesthood aboue a thousand yeres past, as
the Sacramentaries and zelous Lutherans do now,
for 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                in greke and presbiter in laten, they turne
allwaies elder, not priest, as though euery presbiter in
S. Paule were an elder.1. Timo. 4. then Timothe was no lawfull
bishop being but young and farre from the accompt
of an elder, onles by these mens doctrine a bishop
may be younge, but the priest may be only an elder.
And these men marke not that this worde priest is
the very proper etimology of the worde presbiter. For
of presbyter in laten cometh first the frenche worde
prebstre and the dutche worde priester. Oute off
which two languages we (as in thousands of other
wordes) shortning yet more the terme, haue made of
prebstre and priester, priest. So for churche they turne
allwaies congregation, and that of a very wicked intent,
meaning thereby to disanull the authorite and
estimation of Christes churche, making it to be euery
peltinge congregation of priuat heretikes: or as iff
that which we call the churche, were nought els but
the stones and morter it is made of. But as touching
the corrupted text of our common translation nowe
vsed, it is beside our purpose to make any speciall note
thereof: and in our Discours we shal haue occasion
to specify some other places of more importaunce:
As for these false and hereticall foistinges of Luther
               
here noted by Staphylus, though in the cōmon translation
of our countre (thanked be God) they are not
readen, (one excepted) which when I come to the
place, I shall in the margin note you, yet it may serue
to the Lutherans of oure countre for a most euident
argument of the sprit of Antichrist speaking in Luther,
and of a wicked and detestable archeheretike.
For what is more conuenient for Antichrist, or more
proper for an archeheretike, then to corrupt gods holy
worde, and geue vs in stede of it, his owne poisonnous
and hereticall worde? Neither may the sacramentaries
of oure conntre thinke that this toucheth
not them. For they are of Luthers broode no lesse
thē the other: Beside that their master, Caluin, is not
behind hand for his part, as in our Discourse we shal
by occasion declare vnto youe in diuers textes and
passages of holy scripture by him corrupted.
            The third part of the booke is an euident and sensible
detection of the abhominable schismes of these
protestans (what soeuer smothe countenaunces they
beare to the world) not only profitable for the laye
and vnlerned common people, but right worthy to
be read, waighed and considered of the rulers and higher
powres: to the entent that seing euidently before
their eyes the horrible schismes, diuision, and
disordre, that these protestants haue caused in Christendom,
and do foster vp and brede daily, where
they may haue their full swaie and course, they may
thinke vpon some spedy remedy for the restitution
of vnite and agrement amonge them, and the

church of Christ from whence they haue parted.
And truly by the example of this cōfusion in Germany
(where heresy hath had his free course in a state
of liberty these fourty yeares and more) we may see
as in a glasse the like inconueniences to be feared
amonge vs, if it should continew many yeares (which
God of his tender mercy forbid) as also it would ere
this haue showed it selfe amonge our protestāts at home,
if worldly policy had not refrained their vnruly
liberty.Disagrement in doctrine among our protestans. And yet amonge the pretended bishops of oure
countre it is well knowen that some allowe the order
of priesthood, as the ciuill Lutherans do at Wittenberg,
some preache openly that all men and wemen
are priestes, as the Illyricans do in Saxony and
all the flocke of the zelous Lutherans. Againe some
in the matter of the blessed Sacrament are very Zuinglians,
as the Apologie and their articles at the laste
Cōuocation declare: some yet and that not the smallest
starres of the realme,Caunterbury. Chichester. Glocester. Rochester. are in that point Lutherans,
as the trouble of certain of them after the ende off
the last parlement witnesseth. Notwithstanding (according
to the counsell of Melanchthon in his booke
against Fridericus Staphylus they pretend outwardly
agrement and vnite amonge them selues, to the
entēt that like the people of Creta (whereof such protestans
are called Syncretisantes) they may with more
ioyned force sett vpō their cōmon aduersaries the Papistes,
and ouercome them the sooner. The late suppressed
abhominable booke of Bernardinus Ochinus
the Apostata, Peter Martirs companyon lately printed,

defending stoutely amonge other straunge heresies
the pluralite of wiues (which began to be opēly
practised in Polevntel the Kinge banished him thence)
may geue vs to vnderstand, what ioyly newe doctrines
and heresies the scholers of Peter Martir which
are not fewe, nor of the basest sorte in our countre,
woulde plant and preach amonge vs, were it not that
matters being not yet ripe, nor thouroughly settled,
they were like to marre all the game, if they kept
not wel their countenaunces. Where in they folowe
wel and wisely the counsell of Nicolaus Amsdorffius,
which he writeth in his booke entituled Publica cōfessio
purae doctrinae euāgelij & confutatio praesentium Suermerorū.
In the which complaining that Brentius and
the masters of Wittenberg being at a conference and
diet helde at Wormes would not condemne Zwinglius
and Osiander whose doctrine vtterly repugneth to
their Confession of Augspurg,In the yeare. 1557. he writeth these wordes.
In this doing they haue departed from the Confession of
Augspurg although they pretend to remaine in it, they haue also
caused dissension and taken away all meanes of agrement,
for if they would (as we doe) condemne the errours of Zuinglius
and Osiander, then might we al agre together against the papistes.
These be the very wordes of Nicolaus Amsdorfius
a famous Superintendent amonge the Lutherans
well and truly obserued of our protestant preachers
and Ministers. And is this the pure worde of the gospell,
so to beare two or rather twenty faces in one
hood? For although amonge our protestants bicause
of the estate of our countre (where not whatsoeuer
listeth them is lawfull also to sett forth) there

semeth in this newe religion an apparent vniformite
of doctrine, yet they vary not only amonge
them selues, as we haue before touched, but also
from their owne doinges. The order of communion
now practised in England differeth as much frō the
first order of cōmunion vsed in King Edwardes time,The difference of the present communion from the first.
as the Lutherans do from the Zuinglians, and as
the Illyricans do now from the Melanchthonistes. For
the first bothe allowed the real presence in the Sacrament
as Luther did, and vsed also many olde ceremonies
of Christ his church as the Melanchthonistes,
and the ciuil Lutherans do yet in Wittenberg in Misnia
in Franconia, at Norimberg, at Vlmes (where passing
by of late we sawe in the churche the holy Roode,
and aultars of stone yet standing) in the Dukedom
of Wirtenberg, at Breslaw at Briga in Silesia and
in many other places. The last and present order off
communion denieth the reall presence, as Zuinglius,
and Caluin do, and reiecteth the ceremonies of the
Masse, as the Zuingliās and Caluinistes do in the fiue
Cantons of Suitzerland Basil, Zurich, Berna, Schafusa
and Clarona, at Geneua in Sauoye, in Scotland and
emong the seditious rebelles in Fraunce. Now Luther
in his litle confession De caena Domini condemneth
Zuinglius and his cōplices for heretikes.Tomo. 6. fel. 60. So do
Nicolaus Amsdorfius in the booke aboue alleaged,
and Nicolaus Gallus in his booke intituled. Theses &
hypotyposes etc. Likewise Melanchthon condēneth Illyricus
and his felowes as in diuers writings, of Illyricus
it is to be sene. By the iudgement then of Luther,

of Melanchthon, and of all the ciuill Lutherans, yea
and by the iudgement of all the ghospellers in Kinge
Edwardes time, and of the stinking martirs of that age,
our communion now practised in England is hereticall,
and against the pure doctrine fo the ghospel.
It were ouer long to recite here all the variaunces in
doctrine amonge our protestants. I remitt you to the
daily experience which you may see better at home
then we which are abrode. And thus much of the
argument of this booke. What remaineth then for
our part to do, but as S. Paule commaundeth vs that
we be Solliciti seruare vnitatem spiritus in vinculo pacis,
that is,Ephes. 4. 
               carefull and diligent to kepe vnite off minde
in the bonde off peace, being one body and one minde,
as we be called in to one hope and vocation? For there
is but one lorde, one faith, one baptim, one God, and father
of all, that we hence forth be no more children wauering
and caried aboute with euery winde of doctrine by the wilynes
of men, and craftines laying waite to deceaue vs. It is
truly a world to see what labour and toile, what posting
and running, what paines and charges, men sustaine
for their right in temporall traihe, in worldly
commodites and present pleasures, which we haue
renounced in our baptim, which with care being
gotten with sorow is kept, and yet soone loste, and
how colde, negligent, and careles we are, aboute
the true and sincere worshipping of God, which we
haue promised and professed in our baptim, and
which only hath his sure, certain, and euerlasting rewarde.
We spare no labour, no coste, no trauail for the

one, we moue not a foote, nor will not departe from
a peny for the other. but nodding and sleping in wilfull
ignoraunce, fuffer our selues to be lead by the noses
with euery tinkard and cobler prating in pulpets,
and planting poisonnous doctrine. If rebells arise
ageinst their Prince, they are with all spede possible
and force brought downe again. Well and worthely.
And shall we winke at the rebelles of Christes
holy worde and his church? The thefe that robbeth
and pilleth our temporall riches, is hanged: and worthely.
and will we not labour to espie oute and auoy
de heresies which bereue vs of the treasure of eternall
life? If we be thus recheles and careles for our saluation,
we perish worthely, and the plage of god ligh
teth vppon vs for our deserts. if we will not wittingly
be deceiued but haue a care of our soule helth, and
think vppon the life to come, let vs in this perilous ti
mes of schismes, and abundāce off iniquite harken to
such as can teache vs to discerne the true and right in
terpretation of gods worde, from the peruerted persuasions
of heretikes. let vs beware of such guides in
matters of conscience, as stick not to corrupt the ve
ry text of gods worde, against all honesty and conscience.
Let vs behold for the better assurance of our
Catholike faith, which is but one, the horrible schismes
of the Lutherās, Sacramētaries, Anabaptistes, Cō
               fessionistes,
and other amonge them selues, all the
which are here liuely and expressely sette forth by
Fridericus Staphylus. and we shall I trust gladly kepe
our selues vnder the wing of our mother the Catholike

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
church and geue no more eare to euery new forged
fantasie of seditious schismatikes.
            As touching the Author of this booke Fridericus
Staphylus, in his life time (for within these fewe moneths
he departed the worlde to the great grief of all
good men) he was a vertuous, lerned, and wise, Noble
mā. His vertu wel appereth not only in the feruēt zele
of gods worde and the truthe, for the setting forth
of the which, he toke such trade of life as bothe empaired
much the helth of his body, and procured also
greatiosse of his substaunce (as he writeth in the first
part of this worke) but also in the great patience and
modesty that he vsed alwaies against his aduersaries
writing pasquils, libels, and famous epigrams, against
him, calling him Iudas, runneagat, traitour and so
forth (as the modesty of this new ghospel vseth) bycause
he forsoke their abhominable heresies after
a thourough knowledge of them, and detected their
iuggling deceites to al the worlde as especially he doth
in this worke folowing. And this only were they able
to obiect against him, which declareth well the innocēcy and vprightnes of his life, For as herein they spared
no kinde of rethorike to exaggerat his departing
from them (which was a singular grace of God and
most in him to be commended) so if they had had better
matter, it should not haue lacked the telling on
their part. Smidelinus, one that of all other to his perpetuall
shame and ignominy toke vppon him to encounter
with Staphylus labouring to fasten vppon
him some great blow of reproche and shame, at the

lēghth for lacke of better aduauntage,In Apologia absoluta pag. 78. entuiteth him
his naturall behauiour that he vsed commonly to loke
downe to the grounde as he walcked, thinking
he had thereby raught him a great rappe. Which how
light a philip it is, euery wise man seeth. And that gre
at ghospeller and doctour of Gopping had forgotte it
was writen of our Sauiour that Non secundum visionem
oculorum iudicabit He shall not iudge according to the
eye sight.
               Esa. 1
                     •
                  . Truly it is no small argument of his innocency
that his most aduersary could laie no greuouser
matter vnto him.
            
               His lerning well appeareth in this and other his
workes as in his Absolut apology, his epistles and orations
against Melanchthon, Flaccus, and other: where
he showeth him selfe no lesse lerned Diuin, then eloquent
oratour and expert of the tongues. But of his
education in lerning and prospering in the same, of
what estimation also he was amonge the protestants
them selues yow shall vnderstand by his owne wordes,
being forced to declare the same by the impudent
reproches of Smidelinus his aduersary. In his
Absolut apology writē in the yeare 1562. thus he writeth.
Whereas Smidelinus obiecteth to me that I was Luthers
and Melanchthons scholer, I denie it not, for I liued in
the vniuersite of wittenberg ten yeares of my owne costes
and charges studying there vnder Luther, Melāchthon and
others. At that time also being a younge man rash and vnskilfull,
I was infected somwhat with the poisonnous doctrine
of Luther. Howbeit that was not so rooted in me, but
that it was soone driuen out again. And that I neuer consented

thoroughly to the fifte ghospell of Luther, many thinges
do euidently proue. First that whereas the Masters off
Wittenberg would nedes persuade me to procede Doctour amonge
them,Staphylus refuseth to be Doctour bicause of the othe. I would neuer do it. And that only bicause I
would not take the othe of the vniuersite and make open confession
of my belefe in that place. And this Doctour George
Maior who yet liueth can beare me witnes of. Secondarely
bicause I would neuer take vppon me the Lutheran Ministery
in any church: though fewe yeares past I haue ben required
of certain Princes to high dignites: as to be Superintendent
in sondry places: as at Augspurg, at Lubeck and at
Brunsuick. Thirdly this may declare how litle I fancyed
in my hart the doctrine of Luther, that being called and chosen
of the Duke of Prussia to be a Reader in his dominions
(at Coningsberg) and a Counseller, I caused in the write of
my stipend this cōdition expresly to be put that I would be cō
               pelled
to no religion or doctrine that in any point repugned
with the doctrine of the primitiue, Catholike, and Apostolicall
church, and of this my condition I am able to show iff
nede shall require sufficient testimonies. By these wordes
ye may see off what reputation and opinion of lerning
and vertu this man was at Wittenberg, Augspurg,
Lubeck and Brunsuick the most famous cytes
of the Lutheran profession.
            
            His wisedō and other noble qualites he well declared
first in the seruice of a counseller to the Duke of
Indefensione contra Musculum Prusia from whome he was forced to depart and
that (as he writeth) to the losse of some thousands
of marks, bicause like a worthy and faithfull Counseller
he frely aduertised eftsones the Duke to beware

of the cursed heresies of Osiander and his felowes.
Secondarely in the like seruice vnder the Catholike
and vertuous Duke of Bauaria, vnder whom he was
in such credit that he was made ouerseer and Chauncelour
of the vniuersite of Ingolstad iointly with
the Bishop of Eistat. Thirdely for his wisedom, lerning
and vertu he was of longe time and many yeares
Counseller to the late most worthy Emperoure
Ferdinandus. vnder whom he hath done noble seruice
as well in the diets and conferences in Germany
as in embassages of Liflande, Pole, and other countres.
            As for the great labour, and diligence he bestowed
to shift him selfe oute of the captious and contentious
controuersies of this time (wherein he was
nouseled in his youth) it may wel appeare in that (as
he writeth in the first part of this booke) He emploied
only the study of Diuinite and matters of Cōtrouersie about
two and twenty yeares: not medling in all that time with
any worldly or ciuill matter. And what thinck you
after so many yeares study and labour, after so great
experience and lerning, was the chiefest argument
and reason whereuppon he forsoke the Lutherans
and claue vnto the Catholikes? forsoth he declareth
it in the very same place last alleaged: and it is right
worthy to be noted. This saieth he, was the chief and
principal cause why I actōpted the diuers doctrine of Luther
and his felowes to be hereticall and for such do vtterly forsake
               VVhy Staphylus forsoke the Luthe rans.
               it and detest it, this again is the cause why I esteme the
doctrine in all Christendom (which they call the Popedom)

receiued, to be the only true and holesom doctrine, bicause this
doctrine is the Catholike and vniuer sally receiued interpretation
of holy scripture, but their doctrine is only their priuat
opinion and their priuat deprauation of holy Scripture.
This lowas the principall reason that drew this
wise, lerned and vertuous man from the sectes of his
Masters, Luther and Melāchthō: and brought him home
to the perfect vnite of the Catholike faith. for he
sawe by lōg experiēce that al the doctrine of the new
ghospellers, was nought els but their owne traditiōs,
their propre inuentions, and priuat imaginations: for
ging vpon the worde of God such sence as them listed,
and telling then the people that the same was the
very worde of God: whereas the Catholikes folowed
such sence and meaning of the writen worde
as by the lerned fathers, continual tradition, and vniuersall
consent of Christendom was receaued and allowed.
And truly this only reason may be sufficient
bothe for the vnlerned and deceaued protestants to
reduce them home again to the Catholike churche
of Christ, and to kepe also within the same such as
by the grace of God, vertuous education, and good
instructions haue not yet swarued from the same.
Which I beseche almighty God it may so do.
            And thus much hitherto of this present Treatise
and the author thereof. Many other things there are
which I would gladly aduertise the Reader of. But
bicause we haue (I feare) ben ouerlong allready and
the Author him selfe hath prefixed a long but a lerned
and profitable preface and therefore not to be omitted,

I wil here breake of, and after the ende of the
Authors whole discourse, put for conclusion the rest
of my meaning, aduertising in the meane season
the reader of this one thing, that this our labour being
an interpretation, and bound to the inuentiō of
the Author, we haue not, ne coulde not vse the like eloquence
as the free stile geueth: beseching the notwithstanding,
gentle Reader, to take our paines in
good part.
            Farewell.
At Louain the 12. of Nouember.
1564.
               
               Thomas Stapleton.
            
         
         
            
            THen (saieth Nicephorus of the time of Constantius
               Lib. 9. cap. 46. histor. 
               his empire vnder whom the Arrians
flourished) new deuises were commended and increased
daily growing to a straunge alteration, so farre that
euery man setting light by all auncient lawes and ordonaunces,
forged him selfe fresh of his owne. And yet their doctrine
(he meaneth the Arrians) was not of all such receiued:
but eche one imagined new opinions, heaping vp euer doctrine
vpon doctrine. Then Aetius, Eunomius, Eudoxius (eche
one diuersly) Vttered their blasphemies against Christ.
Then Macedonius also blasphemed against the holy Ghoste.
            
               Gregory Nazianzen reasoned against those
newe doctrines in this sorte.
               
                  IF our faith be but yet thirty yeares olde foure hundred
yeares being now passed ouer sence the coming of Christ,
                  Epist. 2. ad Clidonium.
                  then our ghospell hath ben so long in vaine, our faith also
hath ben to no purpose. Then so many Martirs haue invaine
testified their faith in Christ. Then so many Bishops
and pastours haue in vaine so longe fedd the flock of Christ.
If prescription of foure hundred yeares serued then
this lerned father against the thirty yeares of the Arrians
how much more may fiften hundred and twise
thirty yeares serue vs for a most stronge presciption
against the protestants of our countre who haue
not yet half thirty yeares among vs ben in possession
of this their pretended religion in such sorte as it
is now professed.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT
REVEREND FATHER IN GOD
PRINCE AND LORDE, HIS
SINGVLAR GOOD LORDE,
the Lorde Martin Bishop of
Eystat, FRIDERICVS
STAPHYLVS
wisheth health.
            
               VVhereas you areThis epistle vvas vvriten in laten by the author him selfe. (most Reuerēd Prelat)
as you forefathers were by orderly
vocation placed as Patrone and protectour
to this vniuersite of Ingolstad,
sithen that also the right honorable
Prince Albert Duke of Bauaria hath
set me ouerseer and gouuerner of the same, it had becomed
me long ere this time to haue offred vnto you
my seruice: especially hauing certain matters committed
to my charge, whereof I should before this time
haue conferred with you. But whereas oure voluntarie
deliberation by trouble of time was defeated, being
constrained, not as I would but as I was forced,
to yelde to necessite, and therefore must omitte the
one, and do the other: Yet in this busines to be somewhat
occupied, and in the principall by the waye to
be doing, I haue not suffred suche leasure as at times
happened, to passe withoute some frute of publicke
commodite. Whereof hauing longe thought, it semed

me, I coulde not by the waie more profitably be
doing then if (at what time other plaie or banquet) I
laboured vppon some such thing as might enforme
the poore deceaued people, and not offend rulers and
magistrats. And to this ende truly, these darke winter
dayes as leasure serued me, I haue compiled this
booke, framing my stile after a rude and simple sorte,
that the vnlearned might vnderstande me, but letting
passe no iote of the truthe, to cure and remedy the
falshood. Although therefor the lerned by this booke
shall not perhaps be much instructed, yet the good
witte shall finde herein that is right worthy to be
knowen. and truly in medecines the wise Phisician
will not so much regarde that they be pleasaunt or
fayre to the eye as that they be holesome.
            This is therefor my meaning and the marke I shoote
at,The intēt of the author in this vvorke. that the good people may be admonished of their
saluation and aduertised of the daungerous deceites
of heretikes by whose crafte and guile we see the
noble Romain empire much weakened and empaired
euen nowe to fainte, and thousands of Christen soules
other where daily to perish. But the deceites of these
heretikes being spredd so farre and so diuersly in
Christendom, that the vnlerned can not comprise
them and the lerned scant espie them, it shall be inoughe
for the people to lerne to knowe them selues to
be people, that is to vnderstande that it is ynough for
their parte to learne of the spirituall magistrat, howe
to do their duty to God, and of the ciuill or temporall
magistrat to learne their duty to their prince, and

in all thinges rather to lerne then to teache, rather to
obey then to commaunde.
            For these two estates the spirituall and the temporall
haue of God him selfe ben ordained, duly receaued
of vs, confirmed and established by lawes: and
haue serued vs as two walles by the which the power
of the Romain empire hath ben in Germany stayed
vp and continued all most these eight hundred yeares.
And truly as longe as matters appertaining to
God were by the spiritualty, and the common welthe
by the temporalty gouuerned, and the lawes off
bothe estates ordained were inuiolatly obserued, thē
Germany might contend in wisedō with the grekes,
in stoutnes of courage with the Romanes, in godlines
with all Christen nations: then it mought more
surely of vs then of the Romanes be saied.
            By auncient lawes and men doth stande
            Thestate of Germany and Allemain lande.
            Then it could, when lawes ruled men, not men the
lawes maintaine peace abrode, and reste at home: kepe
out their enemie valiantly and gouuerne their people
in all felicite.
            But Satan not abiding the repos of this countre,
stirred vp Martin Luther a German borne, pricked
him with furious rage: and draue him so forwarde,
that he ouerthrew all auncient lawes, by the which
this Empire hitherto hath staied and continued: and
placed for them newe by the which it should perishe
and fall. Luther iolted and enraged by this rider Satan,
began with a fury to set vpon the two saide walles

of the empire, and in shorte time, as well by his battering
the walles were sore beaten, as by the sounde
slepe of the rulers the warde and watche was forsaken:
And that in such sorte, vntel one of the walles,
the Spiritualty, was vtterly ouerthrowen: the other,
the Temporalty, was put in greate hazarde: For so it
proueth in dede. when that (as the poete saieth)
            The sore dissembled doth fester and groweC
                     •
                  or. 3.
            
            While the idle shepeard taking his ease,
            Sercheth not spedely the wounde to knowe,
            But asketh the Gods to cure the desease.
            But this negligence being ones committed and done
it can not nowe be vndone: Yet although of thinges
past we haue the remembraunce only, consultation
or deliberation we haue none, truly I can not forget
with what a perpetuall ignominie and shame we are
to be noted, that coulde suffer a lewd frier, and that
neither craftely cladde in his shepes cote, neither excellently
lerned, to worcke so foule and so pernicious
a mischef against all Christendom, that hauing first
all most ouerthrowen the Spiritualty, he hath so
shaken and weakened also the Temporalty, that it semeth
rather already fallen downe then liekely to
fall.
            But what entry made Luther? Howe began he to
ouerthrowe these two estates? His beginning was
surely vaine and foolish, and stuffed all with lies.
The principles and growndes (saieth he) of the papistes are the
traditions of men not expressed in holy write, the pope of Rome,
doubting and vncertainte of the grace of god. But who

saieth this? Luther euery where. What witnes hath
he? Ihon Brentius in his booke of the causes of dissension:
But howe proueth he it to be trewe? for none other
reason forsothe but for that Luther is (as he saieth)
an Euāgelist, and Brentius is an other S. Ihon. I
thinke the thirtenth Apostle. But as for these principles
or groundes, there was neuer Catholike that so
much as dreamed them. so farre is it that any man affirmed
them or defended them.
            The true principles of Diuinite with vs are and
haue allwayes ben these.The principles of the catholike religion. first the worde of God to wit
the doctrine of the prophets and the Apostles, and
brefely al the holy Scripture whiche we call the Bible.
The seconde principle is the right and Catholike sence
and vnderstanding of tbe worde of God deliuered by
the Apostles to their successours and by them spred
through the whole worlde, declared also in many
Councels of the holy fathers and brought in to Canons.
For this Catholike exposition of the holy scripture,
bicause it was deliuered vnto the Apostles by
Christ him selfe, and by them left vnto their lawfull
successours with the very text of the scripture, therefore
it is cōmonly called the Tradition of the holy
fathers, and oftentimes, the vnwriten verite in respect
of the writen texte. And bicause the truthe off
the text and of the right vnderstanding of the texte
must nedes be all one, truly our aduersaries do slaunder
vs, fayning that in triall off cōtrouersies we woulde
beside the worde of God sett as iudge the traditions
of men directly against the worde of God.

The third principle is that holy continuall succession
of the See Apostolike and other bishops in the Catholike churche.
For if we be able to proue by order of continuall
succession that all bishops as well before vs as nowe
haue allwaies expounded the holy scriptures euen as
the first Apostles did, can there be any more certain
waye for the vnderstanding of scripture then this is?
I would gladly heare what can be saied against it.
The fourthe principle is the vnite and consent of the Catholike
churche, Whereby it is made that the like truthe
be in euery part that is in the whole, and so contrary
wise. These are (moste Reuerend Prelate) the right
principles of Christian doctrine: these are the foundations
of all truthe: these as foure quarres or corner
stones holde vp the Catholike churche: and therefore
it is called One, Holy, Catholike, and Apostolike churche.
For of these principles dependeth the Authorite
of the councels. Of these the holy Canons haue their
beginning: and of these, all laufull and laudable
rites of the church take force and strength.
            These then being the principles of our religion,
not those which Brentius falsely chargeth vs withal,
Princes and rulers ought to looke more nerer vnto
the doings and sayings of their preachers. But nowe
Bretius to make an oppositiō of the foresaide forged
principles, our principles are (saieth he) the worde of God,
Christ, and an assured certainte of oure confidence in Christ,
But what is I praie you, this your worde of God?
This it is, that all maner of folke, mē and womē, cookes
and coblers, baudes and buchers, tinkers and tailers,

pedlers and poticaries, minstrels and mummers,
and all such like, be priestes, be bishops, be doctours,
and pastours, and haue authoritie to administrat the
Sacraments, to interpret Scripture, and what interpretation
eche one by the drifte of his braine draweth
out of scripture, that to be the pure ghospell off the
Lorde, and the expresse worde of God. This is not
(right Reuerend father) the worde of God, but the
worde of the diuell him selfe, inuēted of Luther, not
inspired by the sprit of God. For that man entending
to peruert all that appertained to God or to man,
laboured, trauailed and endeuoured by al meanes possible,
that there might remaine no spirituall magistrat
whiche might by authorite discerne betwene leper
and leper,
               Leuit. 13. maintaining the right doctrine of the ghospell
and remouing the bastard. And this labour of
Luther being well liked of Sathan, he imagined an
other worde of God, as that among Christen men shoulde
be no ciuill magistrat: for all princes were fooles tyrans and men
of no religion.
               In his booke de seculari potestate. to thentent that, if perhaps the heresies
of Luther were condemned by the Spirituall magistrat
and so forth with cōmitted to the secular sworde
princes therunto might haue no authorite. Hereuppon
he forbiddeth Christen men to kepe warre against the Turke,
               In a booke against the tvvo commaū
                  dements of the Emperour.
               and commaundeth subiects to rebel against their princes.
Strait vppon this arose an other worde of an other
God, that all lawes of chaste and single life shoulde
be taken awaye, teaching amonge a sorte of maydes
and yonge men that Man was no more able to refraine his
fleshly lustes then not to spet when nature prouoked.
               In lib. de Matrimo. Againe

that fasting and abstinence from flesh nothing helped prayer,
               In libel. de matrimo.
               nothing furdered deuotion made nothing to sobriete.
These smaller pointes being first all most conquered,
he reacheth to higher and diuiner matters. First bicause
he teacheth that sinne is not by the grace of baptime
taken away in dede,
               In Assertiō ad Leonē. 
               but is saide and fained only to be taken away,
hereof he savve it vvolde folovve that mē oughte not
be estemed righteous and good in dede,
               In his sermons at Smalcaldium. 
               but onely accompted and
imputed for such. Then bycause he made no difference
nor degre of grace, he admitted no encrease in vertu,
and therefore could not abide the Sacramēt of Confirmation.
Fardermore bicause if sinne be not rooted
out if there be no encrease of grace nor goodnes, but
al is only by maner of accōpte and imputing, thē must
he also infer, that the presence of Christes body may not be in
earthe, that no sacrifice be admitted, and (vvhich folovved
thereupon) no priesthood nether. And of this point the
Zuinglians picked out one worde of their straunge
God and the Lutherās an other. of this spring also arose
the doctrine teaching mā to be iustified by only
faith: hope, charite, repentaunce and other good workes
being pernicious and hurtefull to saluation. what
frute then thinke you proceded hereof? This sothely
and many other.Caluin in his institutions. For if God doth compell man
to sinne, as Luther and the Caluinistes do write, howe
can God require good workes or by what lawe
can be punish sinne, seing that he worketh sinne in
vs, and good workes are thought to be pernicious?
And truly if there be no rewarde for vertu there shall
be no punishment for sinne. And then there is no hel
nor place of punishment: as in the seacoste townes

of Germany it is taught: there is no diuell to execute
that punishment as Osiander teacheth.
            This worde not of God but of the diuell beyng
laied,Abhominable heresies of the Lutherans touching Christ. this principle being put, an other principle concerning
Christ ensued: as that the humain nature of
Christe is god, as the Swenckfeldians will haue it, or
contrairely that Christe is not God as the Seruetians
teache and Mathias Flaccius,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                affirming that the worde
in the first of Iohn is not the sonne of God.
            Lo how fertill and abundant was this principle
of Luther and Brentius. There were in times past and
are also nowe a dayes whiche openly denie Christ
to be the son of God: affirming him to be the son of
Ioseph and Mary. Which Mary also had (as they saye)
many other children beside Christ. Other there be
nowe which teache the ghospell of S. Iohn to be a
tale of Plato, baptim to be the inuentiō of the diuell.
And that there is not in God the Trinite of persons,
some other doubting whether this Trinite be man
or woman. So taught euen this winter a certayn new
ghospeller in Sternberg a towne of Morauia,Detestable heresies cōcerning the Blessed Trinite. and
that with the fauour of the people, but much against
the will of the Bishop of Omoluke their diocesian.
There be nowe in Hungary also, which in their baptim
leaue out cleane the name of the Son. There be
in many places the Seruetians, which call the blessed
Trinite by the name of the hellhownd Cerberus
whom the poetes fained to haue thre heads. With like
horrible blasphemies two other ghospellers daily
preache, the one in the hilles of Gutni, the other in

               Zary a village of Silesia. In Pintzou a towne of Poleone
George Brandat and Peter Statorius teache openly
that there is not one, but thre Gods, and eche
of them of diuers and distinct natures no lesse then
thre diuers men. So that there is not one substaunce
of the godhed but thre, and thre different operations
thre diuers willes. And that the Son is lesse then the
father. As for the crede of Athanasius that it ought
rather be called the crede of Sathanasius the diuell
him self. And these felowes Brandat and Statorius being
admonished of such blasphemous doctrine, and
required by what authorite or whose persuasiō they
durste sowe suche blasphemies, they answered, they
were moued thereunto first by the authorite of Caluin,
of wolfgangus Musculus, of Peter Martyr of Bullinger
and such like masters, then by the euidence of
the holy truthe, which hitherto hath layen hidd and
nowe was from God vnto them reueled: These thinges
to be as we saye, Stanislaus a Baron of the realme
of Pole, Mathias Stadnitzky, and Franciscus Stancarus
do write.
            But bicause this parted confusion of so diuers opinions
can not well be perceaued and is harde to be tried
or discerned of such as gladly receaue al nouelties,Lutherās in Bohem teache the soule to die vvith the body.
there is vpsterte this very winter in Bohem a newe
Secte. The which to take awaye this confusion, and
to sett forthe a brefe and compendiouse waie of the
Lutheran doctrine, teacheth openly and affirmeth,
that all other opinions and doctrine of God, of the

worshipping of God, of faith, of good or euill workes,
and to be short of any saluation of man, be but
olde wyues tales and fonde inuentiōs. This onely to
be a sure and infallible lawe and the true sincere
doctrine, that man bothe body and soule after this
life vtterly perisheth, no sence or life remaining after
death here. Lo to what point the preachers of
the newe ghospel haue brought their doctrine vnto.
Lo the marke and scope of all their doings.
            The third principle of the Lutheran ghospell is,
saieth Brentius, an assured certainte that euery mā
hath of his faith in Christ. But for the loue of God,
what is this assured certainte of faith? May we not
as well call day night and light darknes?No certainte of faithe in Lutherās. But what I
praye you is this so assured and vndoubted certeinte
of faith amonge the Lutherans? It is peraduen
                  •
               ure
that certainte of faith which for the clerenes and euidence
of it, hathe so surely and with suche constāt
consent and maruaylous agreement ioyned together
the Lutherans, that in all their new ghospell no dissension
can be founde, no variaunce in any article of
their faythe, no heresyes at all in their doctrine may
be espied. For if constant certaynte bredeth true concorde
and agreement (as a certain philosopher wittely
reporteth) then surely vncertainte and wauering
in opinions muste nedes brede strife. Hereof then we
may clerely gather howe trew this thirde principle
of Luther is: for such is the certaynte of their faithe
as the agreement of their opinions is. The whiche

howe greate and of what maner it is, they haue them
selues declared,See the third parte of this booke. and we will not dissemble it. These
are the principles of the reformed ghospell laied by
Luther, repeted by Brētius, and admitted of the whole
swarme of sectaries. Nowe bicause in the principle
all is contained and many labels depend thereof,
what roufe thinke yow will the diuell buyld vppon
these foundations of Luther? For the effect neuer excelleth
the cause. Truly these consequents and labels
depended of suche holy principles.the labels of the Lutherās prī
                  ciples. 
               To make of chaste
membres of Christ filthy membres of an harlot, of deuoute
and well disposed Christians, wicked and vnruly subiects, of
sober and temperat, glutons and Epicures, yelding to all filthy
lust and pleasure, whose bely is their God, whose faithe is
perfidiousnes and no faith at all. And to this butte and
scope of Luther many haue preuily aimed at, but those
of Bohē haue nowe openly shott at it and stroken
the very marke, preaching in open pulpits that the
soule dieth with the body. But bicause Epicure him
selfe taught, that to get pleasure, a coulour of vertu
must be caste, and the diuel perceauing wel that publick
magistrats could better be chaūged thē vtterly takē
away, he thought better to traine this herde of Epicures,
fleshly and worldly mē, to the yoke of Mahometās
doctrine, being so sure they should be his owne, thē
to leaue thē vnder the roufe of the Catholike church
where he stoode allwayes in doubte to lese them. The
diuell therefore hath so directed allwaies and trayned
all contentions and variaunces in religion, that
all heresies ende in the Alcoran Mahomets lawe.
            
               
All historiographers that write of the first beginningThe lavv of the Turkes compiled by heretikes.
of Turkes affirme with one assent that the lawe
of Mahomet writen in the Alcoran was compiled
by one Sergius an Arrian, and Ihon a Nestorian
bothe auncient heretiques, and of a certain Iewe
of the Talmudistes. Now although the heresies
which haue in our vnhappy time spronge vp be many
and diuers, yet if the chiefe of thē and moste receaued
were examined and cōferred diligētly with those
thre sectes aboue mencioned, we should plainely
and euidently perceaue that the drift of the diuell is
no other nowe a dayes,Note the ende of present heresies. then by the meane of these
heresies to traine vs vnwares from the faith of Christ
to the cursed infidelite of Mahomet. Petrus Statorius
chargeth Franciscus Stancarus with the heresie of
Nestorius, and he againe the other with the heresie
of Arrius. And bicause Stancarus is a famous Iew and
Talmudist, and Statorius is by professiō a Caluiniste,
partes hath so hotly and earnestly bē taken on bothe
sides, that nowe not only in Pole and Hungary, whiche
are Realmes nighe vnto the Turkes, but also in
Silesia, in Morauia, in Bohem and other prouinces more
remote, greate contentions haue ben kindled thereupon
and be yet hotte. And what other thinge (o
mercifull God) can we looke for? If Christen men
call the faith of Christ in doubte, if they denie it openly,
if they embrace the abhominable doctrine off
Mahomet, is it likely that whose doctrine they allowe,
his power and rule they will refuse? no truly. But
these may seme paradoxes and beyonde all credence.

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
Woulde God they were so. But I feare me they are as
true as the ghospell. The causes be euident and open.
surely the euent of all likelyhood will be correspondent.
Let them enquire that be ignorāt, and those
that see and knowe the thinges to be as we saie, let
them well waighe them. But I will not make so euill
abodement. I will rather wish and hope well. and
much more rather woulde I be counted a lyar and
vnprouident, that it might not so proue, then true
and wise, that they shoulde so proue.
            But nowe to couple more closely and to strike
more directly oure aduersarie whom I labour here to
saue, I saye, the only remedy for the mischef that hangeth
on vs, the only meanes to escape this vtter destruction
of Christendō, is to come backe frō whence
we departed, to returne to the vnite and cōsent of
Christendom and all Catholike people. For why? be
we Germans Christē men? So are other nations and
countres also. Yf then we be not the whole corps off
Christendom, we are yet a parte of it. But that parte
is foule (say the S. Austen)
                  
                     •
                  ib. confes. whiche agreeth not with
his whole. What then? surely this is the only medicine
for our desease, the only remedy for this mischef,
the only hope of amendment, if that we being not
the whole corps of Christendome but a parte of it,
suffer not our selues to be persuaded, that any one
parte of the body can be saued: when the whole perisheth.
The nature and property of a generall councel
is, to cure euery parte of Christendom, neglecting
none. Such a councell nowe therefore being called

and prouulgated we are al called,The councell being novve ended vve ought vvith other Christen countres conforme ou our selues thereūto. no man is excluded.
Truly no mans greafe or desease can be so greate, but
that the Coūcel is able to remedy it. Nor none is of
such vertu and perfection but that by the councel he
may be more commēded. Will we therefore auoide in
time ths paganisme of these Epicures? let vs all embrace
the wholesom rule of Christen faithe, submitting
our selues to the holy Councell. Will we
caste of the yoke of Mahomet? Will we flie the idolatry
of the Alcoran? Let vs seeke vnite, let vs come
vnto the Councell, and (all force of armes laied aside)
let vs quietly and with leasure debate our cause,
let vs in al softnes and loue deliberat and cōsult of the
publike weale of vs al.1. Cor. 13. For Charite as S. Paul teacheth is
patiēt, is gētle, Charite striueth not, it doth not frowardly, it
is not prowde, not ambitious, it seketh not her owne interest.
it is not prouoked, it thinketh no euil, it reioyseth not of iniquite
but is delyted in verite. it suffreth al thinges, it beleueth
al things, it hopeth al things, it abideth al things.
               If Chatite vvere in protestāts they vvoulde neuer refuse the Councel. Let this lawe
of the Apostle and rule of Christian Charite be
the foundation of the proclaimed councell, the maner
of ordering it, and the intent of debating in it.
But you will saye. VVe are greuously offended with
them. Truly that is greate pitie. But Charitie is patient,
suffreth all thinges, is not prouoked. Our aduersaires be
vnlerned: Charite striueth not, is not proude not ambitious
Our aduersaries be riche and kepe that is not their
owne. yea they haue that is oures. Charite seketh not
her owne interest, it doth not frowardly. It semeth the

councel wil deceaue vs and not kepe promis with vs
Charite thinketh no harme, but beleueth al things, hopeth all
thinges. But what if peraduenture we be there cast
and condemned Charite reioyseth, not of iniquite, but is
delited in verite. Truly I am fully persuaded that if we
woulde all with this minde and intent come to the
Councell, we shoude seking all for the truthe quickely
see an ende of controuersies, and seeking all vnite
returne home in perfit agreement.
            But you require to knowe the iudge and order
of this councell? In good time. for the protestants
woulde one of their flocke to be iudge and likewise
the Catholikes of theirs: againe they desire one order
and these an other. For priuat affections are on bothe
sides feared, lest the true iudgement be thereby
corrupted. Howe shall we then do to haue a Iudge
voide of all suspicion that may vprightly iudge?The Catholikes desire no other iudge of present Controuersies Let
the worde of God and the Catholike and right interpretation
of that worde be iudge: in the whiche
interpretation there is surely no lesse truthe then in
the very texte of the worde of God. For what can be
more impudent and vnreasonable then to embrace
the text only and reiecte the right and Catholike vnderstanding
of the same,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . to admit that is spoken, and
refuse that is mēt, to vrge the letter that of it selfe killeth
and flye the spiritual meaning which geueth life?
Herein therefore the greatest point of our debate cōsisteth
whē the Catholike shal interpret holy scripture
otherwise then the protestant or the protestāt otherwise
then the Catholike, to knowe which of these

two bringeth forthe the more Catholike, more right
and more receaued interpretation. And in this debate
the ende must nedes be, that they be iudged to
haue brought the righter, the more Catholike, and
the more receaued interpretation, which are able euidently
to showe their interpretation alleaged to be
Catholike and Apostolicall, that is, to haue proceded
from the Apostles, to haue ben receaued of their successours,
deliuered from hande to hande by continuall
succession, and spred through the whole corps of
Christēdom, and so to haue come and reached euen
to vs. They agayne must nedes be thought to haue
alleaged the false and bastard interpretation of holy
scripture; which are not able to deduct it from the
Apostles, nor to proue it vniuersall.
            As for example.A clere example off debating a controuersy. Let vs suppose, that now in the
councell with these newe Arrians of our dayes this
question were to be debated: Whether Christ be in dede,
the Son of God and of aequall substaunce with the father, or
no. where as the Arrians denie this, the Catholikes do
affirme it, and the Arrians for their parte alleage that
place of scripture where it is writē, Pater maior me est,
The father is greater then I am,
               Ioan. 14. Ioan. 10. againe the Catholikes
alleage an other place, Ego & pater vnum sumus, I and
the father be alone: and eche of them interpreting their
place alleaged, but bothe of them diuersly, what can
now help the very writen worde of God and bare
text of the scripture to terminat this debate? the writen
worde is on bothe partes expresse and of bothe
admitted. Wherein then standeth the controuersie?

truly not in the text but in the right vnderstanding of
the text. Not in that which is spokē but in that which
is ment. Is not this I praie you agreable to the worde
of God? standeth it not with all reason, that the same
interpretation and vnderstanding of an alleaged text
be iudged right and lawful, which can euidētly be proued
to haue ben deriued from the Apostles and so receaued
and vsed in the whole corps of Christēdom? I
verely can imagin no better. And with this my iudgmēt,
agreeth wel that Noble and wise Emperour Theodosius,
the first, who in this very question of vs propounded,
chose for iudge in that controuersie the Catholike
and receaued interpretatiō of holy scripture.
For thus we reade in the ecclesiastical historie of Socrates,
of one Sisinnius who gaue the Emperour this
councell to aswage the greate contentions that were
then in the church, through that heresie of Arrius.
This Sisinius was,Socrates. li. 5. cap. 10. Sozomenus li. a. ca. 17 Nicephor. libro. 12. Cap. 15. as Socrates writeth, an eloquent mā,
a man of much experience, very well sene in the olde
writers expounding holy scripture and a good philosopher.
This man therefore perceauing that by disputations
and conferences with heretikes, the schisme
grewe on more, and wexed more cōtentious, he aduised
Nectarius then Patriarche of Constantinople in
this maner. The olde writers (saieth he) teache all waies the
Son to be coeternall with the father, wherefore they neuer
would affirme that the Son had any beginning of substance.
               Good Counsell of Sifiniꝰ to defeate heretiker.
               Let vs thē leaue these Logicall disputations, and looke vnto
the expositiōs of the olde writers. Put it therfore in the Emperours
head that he cal the heretikes before him and aske thē
                  
what accōpt they make of such doctours and fathers, as wrote
before their heresie began: and whether they iudge them to
be Christen men or none of the church. If they mislike thē, let
them (if they dare) condemne and anathematise them. If they
so do, the very people will ouerrunne them. And so truthe
shall ouer come. But yf they do not repell the olde doctours, it
shall thē be our part to bring forth their sayengs, and by their
testimonies confirme our doctrine. This being tolde of
Sisinius, Nectarius goeth forth with vnto the Courte,
and declareth vnto the Emperour the aduise off
Sisinius. who liking it very well, and going wisely aboute
the matter, called the heretikes before him, and
dissembling his purpose demanded them only whether
they made any accompt of the Doctours of the
church which liued before their heresie began or no.
They not reiecting those writers but calling them
their masters and fathers, the Emperour asketh them
againe whether they woulde admit them as worthy
witnesses of the Christen faith. The chief masters
of that heresie, hearing those wordes, doubted much
what they might answer. Whereuppon they striued
amonge them selues, some thinking the Emperourment
wel, some mistrusting the issue of his demaundes,
and perceauing they made litle for their purpose.
For they were not all of one minde touching the
writinges of the olde fathers, differing in that point
not only from other religions, but also from them selues
who professed all one religion. Thus their wicked
doctrine was discouered and confounded, as the
buylders of Babel by their variaunce in language. For

the emperour preceauing their disagrement, and seing
they trusted only vpon contentious disputing, regarding
not the exposition of olde writers,Olde heretikes dispise the holy fathers as our protestāts novv. he toke an
otherwaie with them commaunding that eche religion
should in writing shortly comprise the effect of
their doctrine and opinion. Thus farre the history of
Socrates. That Sisinius though good not to dispute
with heretikes, it was not his first deuise. The holy
canons had commaunded the same.In prescript Tertullian and
other holy fathers had writen the same.
            And the cause why they thinke it not expedient
to trie by disputation matters of our faith is,vvhy it be houeth not to dispute vvith heretikes. that all
heretikes do vtterly take away the true principles off
Christen religion, which are the sure groundes off
good disputation, and place in their stede false and
forged which are all vncertain: and maye serue (as we
see in coūting) sometime for more, sometime for lesse,
sometime nothing at all. For he that taketh away
the generall and the whole, howe can he be sure of
the partes? Or if ye denie the substance, to what
purpose were it to dispute of the accident? To none
at all. Therefore he that listeth dialectically and schole
like to reason with an heretike, if he agree not first
with him for the principles, he shall fight he woteth
not against what, nor to what purpose. and sooner
shall ye take a hare with a taburin then conclude
a suttell heretike with an argument. For he hath no
certainte in his doctrine: but is ready to denie that he
graunted the last worde before, and likewise to graunte
that he laste denied flitting and flieng as vauntage

serueth.
            
               Brentius affirmeth the only text of the writen
worde to be the first principle of Lutheran religion.
But in such sorte that it may be lawfull out of this
writen text to cut of the epistle of S. Iames,Vide praefationes Lutheri in hoslibros primae editio. cast awaie
the epistle to the Hebrews, refuse the Apocalypse
of S. Ihon, and condemne the bookes of Machabes.
This principle serueth also to reiect any other part of
the whole Bible. for if any sentence euidently expressed
in sctipture be brought against him, strayte
Brentius crieth. The Hebrewe text readeth not so.
The greke copies haue otherwise. And this principle
of the only text serueth so fit for these heretikes purpose
that for conference with them no waye can be
made, nor ende can be founde. Then the Catholike
and Apostolicall vnderstanding of holy Scripture
which is euery where one and allwaies agreable with
it selfe, which is deriued from the Apostles, which
is the present iudge in all controuersies, they vtterly
refuse, and very rudely and impudently appeale vnto
Christ, whom in earthe present iudge we can not
haue.In Bohem and in the seacost tovvnes of germany. Whom yet some of them denie to be God, some
to be man, and some other saie he is but a tale of Plato.
And yet forsothe they boaste of the certainte of
their faith, which in dede is most vncertain, as their
most manifest dissension well declareth.
            A very vaine and childish crake it is, to crie allwaies
that their Cōfession of Augspurg is grounded vppon
the doctrine of the prophetes and of the Apostles.
For who saieth so, but they them selues and of

their only fecte, which first inuented it and would
impudently compel all Christendō to receaue it? But
if you ask them howe they proue it, they will saie
vnto you, All the articles of our Confession agree
with the prophets and the Apostles, and differ frō
thence in no point. O the madnes of our countre.
That which is called in question, they laie for their
groūdes, bringing for proufe that which ought to be
proued. What child in logick would so fondly reason?
For if you denie againe that the articles of this their
confession is grounded vpon the doctrine of the prophets
and the Apostles, what haue they then to saye?
peraduenture left they may seme to be put to silence
they will beginne to interpret and cōfer Scripture together,
after their maner. But is not this the foule faute
in logike called Petitio principij, that is, to aske that
whiche ought to be proued? For when we blame the
Cōfessiō of Augspurg we blame nothing els but the
false and wronge interpretation of holy Scripture vsed
in that Confession. But you will saye. We may as
well refuse the interpretation that the Catholikes do
bringe of their owne. Well truly and worthely. For
who will heare the Catholike doctour if he bring
forthe nothing, but saie only that the doctrine of the
Catholike churche is grounded in holy Scriptures?
This must not be tolde but be proued.
            What then will the Catholike bring that the heretike
shall not be able to bring? He will surely bring
and declare first the interprerarion of Scripture which

he vseth to be vniuersall, to haue ben deriued from
the Apostles, to be receaued and allowed in all Christendom.
Then he will showe that euery article and
principall point of our faith hath ben confirmed by
miracles. Last of all he will teache you that all matters
of the Catholike church, which be proper of the
newe testament, are founde expressed by euident figures
in the olde Testament:The difference betvvene catholikes and heretikes. What difference then
is there betwene the right Catholike and the deceaued
heretike? Truly herein heretikes agree with the
Catholikes, that bothe embrace, alleage, and defend
holy scripture as the very worde of God, hut herein
differ all heretikes from the Catholikes, that these
bring the Catholike and vniuersall interpretation of
holy scripture, they bring their owne priuat and heretikall.
These are able to proue their doctrine by miracles,
they are neuer able: Last of all, that these are able
to showe the matter of the newe Testament by the
figures of the olde lawe (as in the sacrifice, in the s
                  •
               craments,
and ceremonies) they can not.
            These two different waies being by iust balances
indifferently pondered, and tried, it will soone appeare
whiche ouerwaieth the other. And in dede if they
bereue vs of the common and receaued iudgement
of the whole churche, wherewith all thinges in the
church are iudged, why may they not in like maner
take away all the rest? For as if ye plucked out a mans
eyes and yet wolde saie that ye bereued him not of
that which might be sene, euen so it is, if heretikes
graunt vs the text of the bible and yet take from vs

the true vnderstanding thereof. If it forceth not
whether we vnderstand holy Scripture rightly or
no, howe shall we then discerne fashood from the
truthe? Whereby shall we trie the truthe, or what iudgement
shall the churche haue of the truthe? And
who woulde folowe such teachers of religion whiche
confoundeth truthe and falshood together,
which spoileth vs of all iudgement of the truthe,
which leaueth vs no meanes to trie the truthe, which
blindeth and blereth our eyes of all intelligence? Yet
in better case were the Cimmerij, who although they
had loste the light of the Son, yet might vse the fire.
But these men that take awaye from vs the consent
of Christendom and the iudgement of the churche,
which mocke and scorne at the miracles of
God, which refuse the doctrine and figures of Moyses,
do leaue vs in such horrible darcknes, that we
haue not so much as one sparckle of light remainin
                  •
               
Euen in the time of the Apostles heresies sprange
vp,Actor. 8. as of Simon Magus, of Hermogenes, of Philetus,
and such like.2. Tim. 1. The marke of the heretikes of the primitiue church. But by what marke trowe ye was
the doctrine of these heretikes knowen from the doctrine
of the Apostles, but that the Apostles and all,
that folowed them were Of one harte, one minde, and one
belefe? And this only touchestone left Christ to
knowe the church by:Actor. 4. that whereas two or thre be gathered
together in his name, and agree in any matter,
               Math. 18. 
               there he
is to be founde in the middest of them. This consent then
and agreement in any matter, as in the Apostolicall
doctrine, and right vnderstanding of holy Scripture,

being vniforme and all one in all, howe can it not be
the sure and certain iudgement of the Apostolicall
doctrine and of the churche? Beside as in Christ him
felse, so in his Apostles it happened that such as beleued
not their wordes through infirmitie, were yet
forced to beleue their miraculous workes, they being
an euident proufe from God of their doctrine. Farder
such ordre of the church, as the Apostles began
to frame, and left to their successours to be perfited
and thoroughly poolished: they thought it to be shadowed
in the figures of Moyses lawe, and expressed
in the light of the newe lawe. But what like to these
marks of the true church did Simon Magus, Hermogenes,
and Philetus bring? euen so much as nowe of
late, Luther, Melanchthon, and Caluin. For these newe
doctours be not of one harte, one minde, nor one beleefe,The same marck in our heretikes.
and much lesse such disciples as folowed these
false preachers. For these dissent in euery point, agree
in no point: and therefore Christ the author and
God of vnite is not among them, but the diuell the
master of all dissension. Caluin very childishely and
vainely going about to excuse him selfe, saieth that
the Lutherās are no more to be blamed for that so diuers
and so horrible heresies springe vp nowe a daies
in euery place, then the Apostles were in their time,
vnder whom many haeresies also sprange vp.A notable testimonie of the Caluinistes against Luther. This
maketh nothing for your excuse, Caluin. You denie
flat Master Caluin and so do al your companyons of
Zurich that Luther was any prophet at all or in any
point like to the Apostles. But you saie the diuell

spake in his mouthe, not the holy goste.In the third treatise of the churche of Zurich against Luther. The which
testimonie of your church of Zurich the truer it is,
the more ye proue the very same diuell to speake in
your selues. For the very same Luther in diuers pointes
of your doctrine you folowe, whom you write
and affirme to speake by the instinct of the diuell.All nevve sectes haue begon of Luther
And what newe secte is nowe in any place of Christendom
which hath not drawen the first acte of his
tragedie out of Luthers schole? whēce toke Munzer
the beginning of that greate rebellion of the commons
in Germanie but of Luther?In a booke against the tvvo cōmaūde
                     •
                  ments off Caesar. For He forbad
men openly to obey their princes and condemned al
warre againe the Turkes whom he writeth to be
tenfolde better then our foolish and madde princes.
So he termeth them. Whence digged out the Anabaptistes
that carrē of the olde heresie of the Donatistes?
Out of a certaine epistle of Luther ad Waldēses, in the
which he writeth, That it were better not to baptise
children at all then to baptise them without
faith. Whence toke Carolostadius occasion to renew
the heresie of Berengarius? Out of his commentary
on S. Ihon and the translation of these wordes

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               The fleshe profiteth nothing.
               
                  Ican. 6. See the 3. treatise of the churche of Zurich and The 
                     •
                  eauenly prophets off Luther. I reaken
here vp the notable and principal sectes only of
our time. I coulde saye as much of the baser sorte, if it
were nedefull, whiche are so diuers and so many, that
we see almost as many sectes as families amonge the
Lutherans.
            
               
For these therefore and other waighty considerations,
which all to recounte were now out of time,
If I mought be credited or beare any authorite amonge
princes in this matter, (most Reuerend prelate) I
would geue thē that aduise that Sisinius made vnto
the Emperour Theodosius. That is. They should charge
and commaund their preachers and ministers to
accept and acknowledg for right, that sense and vnderstāding
of holy scripture, which is Catholike and
may be deriued from the Apostles, and approued by
the testimonie of miracles: and that to be false which
is priuat, of their owne forging, and whereof they be
not able to showe any furder euidence. And truly vnlesse
this aduise other by my suggestion or by some other
mās be not put in to the head of princes and persuaded
them, we shall neuer liue in quiet: the churche
will be ouerrunne, and we of Germany shal other become
slaues to the Turkes as the grekes are, or to the
Moscouites, as the Liflandmen are, or (whiche will
be more miserable) we shall be vtterly in perpetuall
thraldome as the Iewes, the Hungarians, and many
other countres are now. But I will leaue (as I saide)
these euill abodements. and will praie vnto God,
that it will please him rather to beare downe our sinnes
with the balance of his mercie then to exacte
them to the rigour of his iustice: graunting to
our aduersaries the loue of Christian and Cathol
                  •
               ke
concorde, and to vs the amendment to a perfi
                  •
                life.
            The wrath of God is slowe, and although allwais

iust, yet neuer without mercie, if at lest we labour
rather to trie it mercifull then iust. For it inuiteth vs
first to acknowledg our sinne and expecteth our repentaunce
before it pronounceth sentence to condemne
vs. And what may we thinck of the prouidence
of God, taking awaye the auncient and aged
princes and leauing aliue the yonge, which for their
tender age and small experience are like to swarue
and misse in many matters? Within the cōpas of these
thre yeres or there about what number of princes,
kinges and Quenes, haue departed this worlde? And
to begin with the most principall, The Emperour
Charles the fifte died the laste yeare.The deathe of many greate Princes in a shorte time. About that time
died his two sisters, Leonore wife vnto Frauncis
thē frenche kinge, and Mary wife vnto Loys kinge
of Pannonia. Mary also Quene of England maried
vnto kinge Philip his son. About that time also died
Ihon kinge of Portugall, Bona wife vnto Sigismunde
kinge of Pole, and Isabell his daughter maried
vnto Ihon kinge of Hungary. Not longe after also
died two kinges in Denmark, Christern and Christian
sonne to kinge Friderike which had longe kept the
other in prison. Shortly afther these Harry the
Frenche kinge died, and a litle before him Paule the
fourth B. of Rome. What shall I nowe talke of the
death of inferiour princes? In the compasse of a shorte
time died fowre of the Princes Electours of the
Empire,Moguntia. the bishops of Treuires, of Ments, and of Colonie,
and Ottohenricus, Counte palatin of the Rhene,
and in Italy the Duke of Venis. But what shall I speake

of those whiche died this laste moneth,In No
                     •
                  th. An. 1560 
               Gustanus
king of Suethland, Frauncys the second, the frenche
kinge, and Ernestus Duke of Bauaria? Michael also Archebishop
of Salisburg a vertuous and lerned bishop,
the bishops also of Frising and of Eystat your predecessour
haue about this time ben taken out of this
worlde. And although it be true that Euripides saieth.

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                al mē are borne to die, and that
Eschilus an other poet writeth 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
To serche out the cause of death is in the secrets of fortune,
yet the like is not of such straunge and rare maner
of chaunces. True it is and by a most iust order
of nature hath allwaies ben a constant and sure ratified
lawe that which Horace the poet writeth. Pallida
mors aequo, & cae.
            
            VVith like force and foote, death striketh at the doore
            Of the princes highe palais and the cottage of the poore.
            But that so many kinges, so many Quenes, so many
Princes in so short a compas (as of thre yeares) should
all departe this life, it is a rare matter: the like whereof
hath in fewe ages happened. And may we thinke
this to be a mere chaunce and casualtie, or rather to
haue proceded of the vnfallible prouidence of God?
Truly as the first I can not thinke, so the last I must
nedes beleue. For doth not God by the mouthe of
his prophet Esay declare vs his diuine prouidēce herein?Esaiae. 3.
For Lo (he saieth) the Lorde God of hostes doth take
away from Hierusalem and Iuda euery valiaunt and
stronge, abundance of bread and of water, the mighty
and man of warre, the iudge and the prophet, the wise and the

aged mā, the prince of fiftie yeares olde and the honourable, the
Senatours and mē of vnderstāding, the master of craftes and
the well spokē wisemā. And I shal geue thē childrē to be their
princes, and the delicious, and wāton shall haue the rule of
thē, the people shall be ouerrūne, and one mā shall be set against
an other, euery mā against his n
                     •
                  ighbour. Tbe boye shall presume
against the elder, and the vile p
                     •
                  rson against the honourable,
and so forthe. Thus the p
                  •
               ophets in times past did
so pronounce of the Iewes, that it may well seme to
be mēt also of vs Germās. The truthe of the prophet
concerning the Iewes the euent declared. And that
he will not lye touching vs, it is not nede to declare in
wordes, the daily experience dothe showe it.
            But seing that this mischef is so farre growen,Non nisi 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . that
by only repentaunce we may escape the rodde, better
it were for vs to amend our selues quietly, then to reprehēd
other sharply: seing that so it is now, that if as
an inferiour you do brotherly aduertise men, you auaile
nothing by entreating: and againe if as a superiour
you commaunde you get nothing by forcing.
Peraduenture therefore (as S. Basile saieth) in the like
cause of a cōmon vice 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               Better
a man to holde his peace then to speake,
               In orat. aduers. ebrios Being the parte
of a good oratour as well in time to kepe silence as
when occasion serueth to talke. For as by doing the
one he profiteth much, so by neglecting the other he
hurteth sometime. And this the nerer I considre, the
more lothe I am to set vppon this enterprise. And truly
if I folowed herein my owne priuat quarel, I might
worthely seme vndi
                  •
               cret and rash, which would

prefer my priuat commodite or incommodite before
the publick and common, or woulde esteme my priuat
displeasure more then the profit and instruction
of many. But the loue of truthe shall here ouercom.
which as it is oppressed by silence, so being discouered
taketh force againe. I had rather therefore, if I
must nedes somewaies offend, smarte for telling the
truthe, then for dissembling by flattery. Therefore iff
I declare that which I haue perceaued, if I aduertise
men to beware of the mischef that I haue incurred
my selfe, I trust in so doing I shall offend no man. I
knowe there are amonge the rulers and noble men,
which if they plainly perceaued the deceites of these
heretikes, and knew what mischef ariseth thereby to
them selues, to theirs, and to the whole common welthe,
they would not slowly and slackely as I did very
vnwise, but with spede as wise men returne to the trade
of auncient and Catholike religion.
            Therefore writing this booke (most Reuerend)
I haue eftesoones ioyned teares with praiers beseching
allmightie God as well for my enemies as for
my frendes, that it will please him of his goodnes to
geue vs all one minde, and one vnderstanding, that
we may knowe no other thinge,1. Cor. 2. 
               nor thinke our selues
wise in any other point, then in Iesus Christ and he for vs
crucified, For he is the shoot anker of all Christian religion,
he is the only porte of our saluation. Who so
straieth from him, he leseth God and life euerlasting.
And to this ende haue I directed bothe all other trauaill
of my life, and this my present labour, that the

vnlerned might hereby charitably be admonished,
and the lerned might haue occasion better and depelyer
to consider these matters. In the meane season I
haue endeuoured that in such thinges as I bring out
of stories and factes of our time I might content all
men, offend no man. But if there be any man that
thinketh him selfe offended with this my booke, othe
                  •
               
bicause I haue spoken more plainely then he
would I should, other bicause he taketh my wordes
otherwise then I meaned, him I beseche most hartely
that he call vpon me and heare what I can saye for
my selfe. Surely I shall not be so frowarde nor so vnkinde,
but being better instructed of any man, I will
with all courtesie thanke him therefore: and much
more will I be glad to submitt my selfe to the lawfull
and Catholike censure of the church. Which being
most reasonable, if I can nether by entreating, nether
by any right obteine of my aduersaries, I will patiētly
suffer, by God his helpe, all that may happen, and
will defend notwithstanding according to my power,
the truthe of God his worde as longe as I liue.
Contenting my selfe for al rewarde of my paines, if
I may by this small trauaill either call any one backe
thas is gone astraye, or confirme any man that hath
hitherto remained in the truthe. Especially in this
your Diocese, most Reuerend Praelat to whom this
vniuersite of Ingolstad is subiect. Wherefore I most
humbly commend vnto yow bothe this schole, especially
the study of Diuinite therein, and me and all
myne.
            
               
Fare yow well.
            
               Writen on Christmas eue, in the ende
of the yeare. 1560.
               
               To your most Reuerend highnes
the most affectioned FRIDERICVS
STAPHYLVS
Counseller to the Emperoures
Maiestie, &c.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE CHRISTIAN
READER GRACE
FROM GOD AND
PEACE.
            
               IT is an olde and much receaued, but
a very euill custome, that such as can
not abide the truthe tolde them,De
                     •
                  ost. proc
                     •
                  ro
                     •
                  a. vse
to slaūder, backbyte and raile at other,
especially for that by instinct of nature
(as a wise ethnike writeth) men are more busy to espie
other mēs fautes then vertues. And although this
wicked custome hath allwayes from the beginning
ben practised, proceding of the corrupted nature off
man: yet neuer in any age it hath so much bē vsed as
now sence Martin Luther brought out to light the
fifte ghospell, and sent abrode in to the world these
vnhappy and vnghostely ghospellers, which all
Christendom now allmost to their greate lost and
destruction, is stuffed and stifled with all. For where
as this ghospel can neither be proued by any euidence
of truthe, neither (as the true ghospell was) be cō
               firmed
by operation of miracles, these new preachers
of our dayes haue turned all their force and power an
other waie,A charitable shifte of the protestants. labouring to the and nayle, by right and
by wronge, and by all meanes possible to bring the
olde Catholike doctours, and al such as folowe them

in infamie, obloquy, and reproche to all the world.
And this lesson our aduersaries haue very perfitly
lerned of their Master Luther, and haue practised
this precepte all waies hauing to do with me or any
other Catholike man. Neither will they by any meanes
be brought from this their charitable custome
while they liue, perceauing well that by this crafty
meanes they gett more grounde and deceaue more
the people, then euer they were able to do by plaine
and vpright dealing. Truly as for my part, I confesse
before God and his diuine iudgement, my sinnes to
be greate and many, which can reioyse in no other
thing, nor otherwise praie, then that good kinge Dauid,
vsing these wordes.Psal. 141. 
               Lorde heare my praier: heare me
in thy righteousnes, and entre not in to iudgement with thy
seruaunt, for no lyuing man may be iustified in thy fight,
to the whiche that notable sentence of S. Austen also
agreeth, saying.Lib. confes. 9. cap. 13. 
               Wo euen to the commendable life of men, if
thou o Lord doest examin and trie thē without thy mercie.
And thus must euery man (be he neuer so holy and
perfit) iudge of him selfe, if he respect the terrible
iudgement of almightie God, wherewith no man can
stand without his mercie through Christ Iesus. But
in ciuill policie and trade of this worlde, where the
good a bearing of subiects is required, euery mā ought
so to ordre his life that he maye without groudg of
conscience saye. I can be charged with nothing, howebeit
I iustifie not myself herein.
               1. Cor. 4. And that saying of the
prophet.Psalm. 7. 
               Iudge me o lorde according to my righteousnes.
For this is our glorie,
               2. Cor. 1. as the Apostle sayth, the testimonie

of our conscience. Although therefore as I saied before, I
acknowledg my selfe for a greate sinner, yet not with
standing all daies of my life (be it not spoken for
any pride) I haue allwaies endeuoured to haue the
testimonie of an vpright conscience, that I might geue
a counte to such as required it of me, bothe of my
belefe and of my cōuersation. For this is the straight
commaundement of almightie God, and the doctrine
of S. Peter the Apostle, saying: Be ye ready allwaies
to geue an awnswer to all that shall aske you a reason of the
hope that is in you,
               1. Pet. 3. 
               and that with mekenes and feare, hauinge
a good conscience: that whereas they backebite you as euilldoers
they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good conuersation
in Christ. The which waighty precepts of holy
scripture commaunding expresly euery man to be
ready to geueaccompte of his hope and conuersatiō,
I being so bitterly and roughely prouoked of my aduersaries,
could not but purge and defend my selfe as
reason required: For as S. Hierom 
                  •
               aieth: He that neglecteth
his good name, is cruell and vnnaturall toward him
selfe,
               Lib. de bono viduita tis. cap. 22. and as S. Austin saieth, Our life we maintaine for
our owne sakes. our good name for other mens. The wise
man also saithe. Better is a good name then much riches,
and to be loued is worth better then gold or siluer.
               Prou. 22. And the
common talke telleth vs, who hath lost his good name,
is more thē halfe hāged. For these reasons therefore
and diuers other, I haue thought expedient to
write, and set forthe this brief and short Apologie to
thētēt that according to the duty of a Christē mā (bicause
other ordinary meanes of triall our aduersaries

admit not) I may declare to the world my innocency
herein, and remoue the haynous flawnders of my aduersaries,
which they laye out continually against me
in pulpits, in grammer scholes, in their writinges and
in famous libels.
            To suspend therefore no longer the Godly and
Christen reader, we will nowe enter our Apologie being
diuided in to thre partes. The first is of the true
and right vnderstanding of the worde of God and
the ghospell which they saie I did before embrace
and folow, but now, I abhorre and persecut. The secōd
part is of the trāslation of the holy bible in to the
vulgar German tongue. whereof they bable that I
go about amd deuise to make an inhibition against
the reading of the german bibles. The third part is of
certain articles in controuersie, which the Lutherans
partly for shame denie, partly go about to reconcile
with the rest of their doctrine. To the ende that hereby
they may persuade the worlde that I belied thē
hitherto, affirming such to be their articles, and charging
them with dissension amonge themselues.
            With these thre pointes, by the grace of god, I shal
defend my simple conuersation and geue due information
of my belief, vsing herein a plaine and familiar
stile of our vulgar tongue: that the simple lay mā
may also vnderstande me, declaring sincerely and
with all modestie, the truth in all pointes, without railing,
biting, or any other vnciuill demeanour. For so
it becometh well meaning men to do. Although my
aduersaries to bring me in infamie and reproche omitte

no such kinde of rethorike, laieng on greate
lode of lies and reproches, whereby they haue cut awaie
all honest meanes of reconciliation, auoiding al
maner of iudgement and ciuil triall. Being yet frō god
commaunded by Moises, That all controuersies and debates
should be tried by the lawfull Magistrat.
               Deute. 17. For this hathe
alwaies ben my only desire and is yet, that my aduersaries
which either priuely or in open libels cease
not to backbite me, cōuēt me before my ordinary and
lawfull magistrat, and there make their complainte:
not making them selues the partie plaintif and defendant,
yea and iudges in their owne cause: as against
all order and lawe, bothe spirituall and temporall thei
haue hitherto most impudently done. Truly as I haueben
allwaies, so am I now ready and desirous to
present my self before my ordinary Magistrat, and to
abide the whole ordre and proces of the lawes against
me. For thanked be God I knowe my life and cō
               uersation
hath ben such (be it not spoken for any pride)
that I am not ashamed nor afeard to showe my face
before any mā a liue.The cause of the protestāts grief against Staphylus. And sure I am that if I had not
laboured with the Emperours Maiestie and other
Catholike princes for the maintenaūce of the Catholike
religion against heretikes, my life shoulde neuer
haue bē touched of thē. But seing that the Catholike
doctrine it self (praised be God) can not by any good,
reason or coulour be impugned, they laie at my person,
and fight against me, letting the doctrine it selfe
alone. Vsing this argument that I against my owne
conscience only for honour and riches sake, defend

the Catholikes, whereas yet they knowe well them
selues, that I haue sustained the losse of some thousands
of crownes, and empaired much the helthe of
my body, in the quarell of the Catholike faith. But
howsoeuer the matter goeth,2. Tim. 2. 
               Our Lorde knoweth who
are his, and he trieth the hartes of men,
               2. Thess. 2. Lib. 5. st
                     •
                  
                  matum. and (as Clemens Alexandrinus
writeth,Math. 16. 
               No man is so great but God passeth
him, nor no mā so smal but God espieth him, and he shal geue
to euery man according to his desertes. If I therefore do against
my conscience herein, wo is vnto me, For only
God knoweth the conscience of man. But if I
do vprightely herein, wo is vnto you that take vpon
you the secret iudgement of God. Aud thus farre off
my selfe inough. Let vs nowe come vnto the matter.
         
      
      
         
            
            OF THE TRVE
AND RIGHT VNDERSTANDING
OF HOLY
SCRIPTVRE.
            
               AS touching the first part, whereas they
laye to my charge that I labour to oppresse
and tread vnder foot the holy
ghospell and worde of God, hauing
before professed the same, &c. To this
I aunswere plainely that herein they deale very vncourteously
with me, and do iniuriously slaunder me.
And I am very sure they haue not one iote to proue
this their saying by. But to remoue this their vaine,
and forged opinion with sure and vndoubted reason,
I would gladly knowe of them what is that they call
the holy ghospell and worde of God. Here if they
awnswer me that the worde of God is no other thinge,
then the holy scripture, commonly called the Bible,
that is, the olde and newe Testament, thē againe
I awnswer thē they do most iniuriously slaunder me.
For they are neuer able to proue that euer I reiected
or persecuted any one litle peace or parcell of the
ghospell or of the lawe. But I embrace and reuerence
al the holy Bible, the lawe, and the ghospel: and take
it for no lesse thē the very worde of Gods mouth.
Yea and I graunte, that sooner heauē and earth shal perish
then any one iote of that worde.
               Mar. 13. Which I dare saie not

only for my owne part, but in the name of all Catholike
Christians:The Catholikes haue the vvorde of God no lesse then the ptotestants. which hitherto euen from the
Apostles time allmost these thousand six hundred
yeares without any intermission haue read in churches,
songe alwaies in publick seruice of the Masse,
and taught openly in pulpits, and haue also in the
common breuiaries and portyses of the Romane vse
comprised almost the whole corps of the Bible: and
that in such ordre, that the priestes are bounde wekely
to reade ouer the whole Psalter, and yearely for
lessons allmost all the ghospell and epistles, and prophets,
as the most auncient custom practised so many
hundred yeares past, of the Canonicall howres, the
Prime, the Third, the Sixt, the Ninth howres, Euensong,
and Complin doth well declare. which disposition
and ordre of times,Actor. 3. was off the Apostles them
selues (as it may appeare in the Actes and other where)
so well and diligently appointed, that to euery daye
for the howres of our lordes passion, psalmes, lessons
and ghospells do correspond, with a reuerent
and deuoute remēbraunce of Christes benefits. whereby
the church from the beginning vnto our time
through out the whole worlde, would testifie and
teache vnto vs, that all holy scripture ought to be
construed and grounded on the passion of our Sauiour
Iesus Christ, as in the true corner stone for the
saluation of our soules, as hereafter we shall in his
due place by the scripture most plainely proue. It is
therefore a wonderfull slaunder that these men saye
of the Catholikes. That hitherto the ghospell and

the worde of God hath ben bannished from the
church,
               A lovvdlie of the Lutherās against the Catholike churche. 
               kept in hucker mucker, and at the length
vnder the pope to haue ben vtterly extinguished:
but now is reuoked vnto light: therefore those that
embrace this newe ghospell, to be worthely called
men of the ghospell, but that we which folow our
swete parents and forefathers with the whole Catholike
church, keping and maintaining the olde
Apostolicall doctrine must be called wicked papistes.
            
            But here,Note vvel. he that hath eyes to see, let him open
them, and he that hath any regard of his saluation,
let him here take hede. for this is that suttell deceit
of these protestants, and the mist wherewith they
dimme the eyes of the simple people, making them
beleue that they only professe the worde of God.
And yet these newe preachers and masters knowe
very well them selues the contrary: as Luther him
selfe in his booke against the Anabaptistes and the
Zuinglians witnesseth, saying that among the papistes,
that is, in the churche of Rome, the holy
ghospell aud all holy scripture with al the bookes,
sentences, wordes and prickes thereof hath remained
in continuall succession of time, vncorrupted
whole and perfite. whiche maketh me more to maruaill,
what wicked and malitious sprit moued these
protestants, to terme them selues only ghospellers and

professours of Gods worde, calling the Catholikes
papistes, and enemies of the worde of God: seing
that bothe nowe and in all ages, we reade the ghospell
in our churches, we preache the worde of God
in our pulpits, and interpret it to the people: we expresse
it by outward ceremonies, rites, and gestures,
such as we haue receaued of our forefathers, euen
from the primitiue church and the Apostles time.
And this Luther knewe him selfe well inough. But
why dissembled he it then? forsothe to deceaue and
entrappe the easier the simple people in to his pretē
               ded
religion. For Luther and all his ministers knowe
very wel that in the ghospel and worde of God twoIn the vvorde of God tvvo thinges are to be considered.
thinges are to be considered. First that the text be
sownd and not corrupted: then that the same text be
expounded Catholikely and not heretically. For as
S. Bernard saieth, looke with what sprit the scriptures
were writen,
               Ad fratres de monte Dei. 
               with the same must they be read and vnderstanded.
Seing then the text by the instinct of the holy
ghost hath ben geuen vs true and perfit, the vnderstanding
also and interpretation thereof, coming
of the holy ghost must be true and perfit: so that one
shall be as true, and of as much force as the other. It is
not inough therefore to reade holy scripture perfitly,
but to vnderstande it well also.Aduers. Luciferianos. For (as S. Hierom
sayeth) The scriptures consist not in reading but in vnderstanding.
All this Luther was not ignorant of. But to
depraue and corrupt the right interpretation of holy
scripture, and to bring in place his owne hereticall
and forged expositions, he maketh no mencion off

the text, but crieth still the worde of God, calling
the dreames of his braine, pure and holy scripture. For
if ye aske of the Lutherans when they preache that
God cōstraineth men to do euill,
               Lutherus inassertio. Melāchthō in Paulū ad Rom. Caluinus i
                     •
                  institut. 
               that God was the
cause of Iudas his reprobation and obstinat desperation,
that good workes are hurtefull to saluation,
and such like matters, what maner of doctrine that
is, they will incontinently awnswer you, that This
is the pure ghospell, the sincere worde of God, and
holy scripture it selfe. But then if ye go farder, and
desire them to showe yow these very wordes and
propositions in holy scripture, there they hush. Yet
will they tell you, that the wordes in dede them selues
be not in the Bible, but the meaning of them is
there. To the which if ye replie agayn, and vrge them
farder it will soone appere, that the controuersie betwene
the protestants and vs, is not of holy scripture
it self, but of the true vnderstanding of the same. And
so S. Hilary hauing to do with heretikes in his time
pronounced.Lib. 2. de Trinitate. 
               Heresie, sayth he, is in the vnderstāding not
in the scripture. And truly all heretikes neuer cried other
thing thē the holy scripture, the worde of God:
and we that are Catholikes also haue holy scripture
allwaies in our mouth.
            Nowe then a man may maruaill and aske, howe
cometh it to passe that the Lutherans and the Catholikes,
the protestants and the papistes striue and
contend so one with an other, where as yet bothe haue

the ghospell, bothe loue and embrace it, bothe cleaue
vnto it, and bothe are ready to spende their good
and their life for it? Here I beseche the, Christian reader
marke and perceaue well:Note vvel that this is not the cō
               trouersie,
whether the Catholikes or the LutheransVVhat is al the cō
                  trouersy betvvene the catholikes and the protestants.
haue the worde of God, but which of them, doth
truly, rightely, and sincerely expounde that worde
off God. For this is the Lutherans common saying:
The papistes vnderstand not the Bible, but we haue
founde the right interpretation thereof and the
kaye of all truthe. And to set a good coulour vppon
this holy protestation they saye farder. That all bisshops,
prelats, priestes and Monkes be all without
lerning, all incōtinent, all of euill life, geauen to couetousnes,
to pleasure, and to the bely. But they thē
selues, that is, the Lutherans be learned, chaste, sobre,
liberall, deuowte, and of perfit life, and such as
haue done great miracles and yet do. Neither are
these impudēt heretikes ashamed of these lowde lies,
although all the worlde well knoweth it is nothing
so: while they see Churches,Remēbre the state of germany of Scotland and the late spoyle in Fraū
                  ce. hospitalls, religious
houses of all sorte, colledges, and bishoprickes, of these
men partly cleane ouerthrowen, partly rifled, all taken
into their handes, and conuerted into palaces, armories,
barnes, cole houses, shops of Marchaundrise,
yea and in some places, in to stables.The miracles of the nevve ghospell. These lo be the
miracles of this new ghospell abundantly practised
all this fourty yeares. As for other miracles, not one

of these new ghospellers was euer able so much as to
cure a lame colte, or a halting biche. so farre is it, that
these mē could euer cast out deuils, heale the lame, cure
the blinde, restore the deafe, or raise vp the dead. all
which miracles many holy fathers of the olde ghospell
(as I may so speake) which these men call Papistes
haue wrought from time to time in Christ his churche,
as right approued histories do manifestly declare.
            Now as for the good and perfit life of these men,
and excellent lerning, all the worlde seeth it. An olde
sorte of heretikes called Donatistes obiected in
times past to S. Augustin the very same argumēt, saying
that their church only was vpright, holy, pure and
lerned. But the Catholike churche was nothing so.
And therefore the doctrine of the Donatistes was
vndoubtedly soūde and perfit, but that of the Catholikes
false and vntrue. But what awnswered thē here
S. Augustin?In lib. de vnitate ecclesiae. 
               The argument (saieth he) that proueth mens
doctrine by their life is false. But let vs suppose that these
holy protestants passed al the vniuersall Catholike
church of Christ sens the time of the Apostles, bothe
in godlines of life, and excellency of lerning. Which
I thinke in good sothe they wil not al together affirme,
But if it were so, it wil not yet thereuppon ensue,
that only the Lutherans vnderstande holy scripture,
and the Catholikes neuer vnderstoode it.Differēce betvvene life and doctrine. For if the
right intelligence of holy Scripture be only to be
sought amonge such, as will stoutely affirme of them
selues to passe all the rest of men, in vprightnes of life
and excellency of lerning, then in very dede must

we nedes leaue this great treasure of the right meaning
of holy scripture vnto heretikes. For in all ages
heretikes allwaies craked of their great lerning and
perfit life: as the ecclesiasticall histories well declare of
the Arrians, the Man
                  •
               ches,Luther in parua Confessione cō
                  tra Zuinglianos. the Pelagians and such like.
And what other thinge dothe Luther in many of
his workes, especially in his booke against the pope,
Then call the olde Catholike writers and holy fathers,
fooles, asses,
               Libr. quod Papatus supra infernū exstructus sit. 
               rude and vnlerned, babes of the
pope, hermaphrodites, and such like. Neither contemneth
he only the Catholikes,Libr. cōtrae coelestes prophetas. but euen his owne
cōpanions and felow heretikes also as Zuinglius, Oecolampadius,
and other of that batche.The pride of Luther. Yea this mā father
of all this bessed broode of protestāts, so highely
extolleth him selfe,In sua Apologia cōtrae postremam Lutheri cō
                  fessionem. so presumptuousely dispiseth all
the worlde, like an other Lucifer, that the protestants
them selues of Zurich write plainely, that now no
more the holy ghost, but the spirit of pride and presumptuousnes
speaketh in M. Luther. Illiricus also
and his companions crake they not likewise of their
vertu, and great lerning? especially Illiricus, how boasteth
he that he was perfitly sene in Aristotle, and had
writen maruailouse much vppon him? But what
doth holy scripture speake to these proude boasters?
S. Peter saieth. God resisteth the proude,
               1. Pet. 5. 
               and geueth grace
to the make and humble. And the prophet saieth of god.Psal. 103.
               Thou arte he which poorest out the fountaines in the lowe
vallies. not in the toppes of hilles. Againe in an other place.
Euery vallie shall be exalted,
               Esaiae. 40 
               and euery highe hill shall be

plucked downe. It is therefore a great vanitie of them to
iudge and pronounce so proudely of thē selues, seing
that the Apostle of such men saieth.Rom. 1. 
               Saying them selues
to be wise they haue proued fooles, and their foolish hart hath
ben darkned.
            
            But nowe touching the integrite of life and vertuous
behauiour of the Lutherans, I would be lothe
to reporte thereof my selfe. Surely I see Luther to
doute very much thereof. For in his great postill vppon
the ghospell of the first Sonday in Aduent, he
crieth out and complaineth. That by his ghospell
men were become farre worse then they were before
               A notable testimonie of Luther of the life of his scholers.
               vnder the Pope. For wickednes and vice had
so farre growen in his ghospellers that they semed
allmost become deuills. And truly this is a sure token
of false prophets. For Of thornes who gathered grapes
or of brambles who gathered figges at any time?
               Math. 7. Luc. 6. For looke
what the tre is, such is the frute. such master such scholer,
such doctrine such liuing.
            Now where as they againe obiect vnto vs the euill
and disordinat life of the prelats of the church and of
the clergy, as that they be gloutons, dronckards, ambitious,
horehunters, and so forthe, I will not here
presently defend them, that are such. It is surely
much to be lamented, that the life and behauiour off
the reuerēt priesthood awnswereth not to their godly
and highe profession: but is very scandalouse to
the worlde, euen in such places as the church is by heretikes
corrupted and persecuted. Notwithstanding I

doubt not although in many of the clergy it be founde
true that the Lutherans saye of thē touching euil
life, yet there are a great numbre of vertuous and lerned
bishops and priestes, of deuowte and perfit religious
men, such as amonge the Lutherans were harde
to find. But it were better in this case and more semely
for Christen charite, that eche part looked in
his owne wallet,Math. 7. and first Tooke out the beame of their
owne eyes, for so shall they see better to take out the mote off
their neighbours eie,
               2. Timo. 2. And herein whatsoeuer the iudgement
of man saie, God knoweth who are his, and who
are in dede vertuous or contrary. Wherefore our faith
and belefe must not be pinned to the life of the clergie
or preachers.Againe repetaūce of the most vvicked may be soden and secret. For by this reason we are not sure of
the due administration of any Sacrament, neither can
we truste any preacher of the worde of God, seing
that we are not able to iudge whether the priest or
the preacher be a mā of vpright life or otherwise. But
our Sauiour Iesus Christ to take awaie this doubt, and
to assure vnto vs the verite of his Sacraments duly
administred by the clergy thereunto chosen,A perfit rule to discerne fal se preachers. and the
preaching of his holy worde by their mouthe, he
hath left vnto vs a sure and certain rule to knowe the
false preachers and prophets from the true, and to discerne
the doctrine from the person that teacheth.
And this rule hathe thre parts.
            The firste is when the doctrine is good in it selfe,
but the life of the teacher is euill and fauty. The secōd,
whē the life of the teacher is good and vertuous,
but his doctrine false and vitious. The thirde is to

knowe howe the doctrine may be tried by the life off
the teacher, and howe the life of the teacher may be
tried by his doctrine.
            As for the first part, Christ geueth vs a very good lesson
what to do,The first part. whē the doctrine is good and the life
is naught, saying The scribes and pharises sitt in the Chaire
of Moises.
               Matth. 23. 
               What soeuer they shal saie vnto you, kepe it and
do it: But do not according to their doings. By the which
wordes of our Lorde, we see that the lerner ought
not so much to regard the life of the teacher as the
doctrine. For it may be that his doctrine be sownde
and good, wose life is euill. For although that as well
in the former ages, as now a daies we finde many of
right good lerning, whiche haue preached and taught
the worde of God sincerly, yet some of such liue not
accordingly. Neither is there at this daie any point
wherein the people more grudgeth against the clergy
then that many of thē leade their life cleane cōtrary
and repugnant to their owne Canons and constitutions.
For many of them can tell a trim tale in the
pulpit, exhorte the people very demeurely to a sobre
and perfit life, but will not ones moue a foote to liue
well them selues. And now (alas) it is to true that our
lorde sayeth by the prophet of his church.Esaiae. 5. 
               I haue longe
looked that my vineyarde shuld haue brought forth grapes,
but lo it hath brought forthe brambles, and a litle after.
Wo be vnto you which rise vp early to folow dronknes, and
to drinke vntell the euening, that they be set on fire with wine.
In your companies are harpes and lutes, tabrets and pipes,
but ye regard not the worke of the lorde. Can this be

denied? it is, alas, to true. But what then? is this their
liuing accompted vertuous? is this Catholike? No
Catholike nor Christen man wil saie so. The doctrine
of our religion vtterly forbiddeth these thinges
and the Catholike church condemneth them. Neither
cā al this preiudicat in any point to the doctrine
of the Catholike church. For (as our Sauiour saied)
Do all that they shall saie vnto you,
               Math. 23. 
               but do not as they do.
and againe. First cast out the beame of thy owne eye,
               Matth. 7. 
               and
then thou shalt see to cast out the mote of thy brothers eye.
And in an other place.Ioan. 8. 
               Who so euer of you be without sinne
let him cast the first stone against her. Agayne.Galat. 6. Rom. 2. 
               We must
carye one an other his burden that we may be all saued. We
must not rashely iudge other, least we be iudged to.
            
            The second part now is cleane contrary to this:The scōd part of the ruie. as
when men of good and sobre behauiour preache false
and hereticall doctrine: of these our Sauiour geueth
vs warning, in these wordes.Matth. 7. 
               Take ye hede of false prophets
which come vnto you in shepes clothing, but are within
rauening wolues. Did not the Picards clothe them 
selues trimly in shepe skinnes?Heretikes of greate vertu in apparē
                  ce. for they suffer not amonge
them selues any vsurers, dronkards, aduouterers,
theues or any such haynous offenders. The Anabaptistes
also haue they not (thinke you) faire sheepes 
cotes? They weare no weapon, to pretend patience:
they haue nothing of their owne, but all in common
to auide couetousnes. They eate their bread in
the sweate of their browes. they labour truly: they
praye much. The Maniches, what cotes had they?
shepelike I warrant yow. They neuer eate flesh to

chasten their body they dranke no wine, abstained
 from frutes, &c. The Encratitae likewise abstained
vtterly from wine to folow their bookes the better.
 The Cathari, (so called as men of pure life) abhorred
all pleasures and pastimes of this worlde, neuer contended
with other. Can any man denie but that these
were gaye frutes, and ioly shepe skinnes? Therefore
iff doctrine and religion were to be tried by the
apparence of vertu and holynes, who can condemne
these men for heretikes? truly no man. And why? bicause
their frutes are good. And therefore it semeth
thetre can not be euill. We see the simple shepe skinne,
we see no lookes nor tokens of the wolfe. Of
the outwarde shewe therefore of good life, doctrine
can not be tried.
            But then a man may here aske. What meaneth
Christ when he saieth,Matthae. 7. 
               by their frutes ye shall knowe
them. For if false prophets must be knowen by
their frutes, how can I mislike the Anabaptistes, the
Waldenses,
               The third part of the rule. Hovve to knovve doctrine by the frutes. and such other, whose life and behauiour
can not be reprehended? yet their doctrine is and semeth
detestable. What shall I here do? for so the now
the third part of this rule shall instruct you, how you
may trie the doctrine by the frutes and how the frutes
by the doctrine. Wherein you must first diligently
marke that the doctrine is not tried by the only frutes,
but so that the doctrine and the frutes be all alike
and correspondent. For vndoubtedly where the doctrine
is like the frute, and the frute like the doctrine,
one must nedes trie the other. Whereupon our lorde

hath geuen a yery good note and rule, in S. Matthew
teaching after this sort.Matth. 12. 
               Other make the tree good and his
frute good, or make the tree euill and his frute euill, For by
the frute the tree is knowen. And by this rule Christ reasoneth
against the vnbeleuing Iewes, when he saieth
If ye wil not beleue me, yet beleue my workes.
               Ioan. 10. and why
so? bicause the workes and doings of Christ did agre
very well with his doctrine, and the doctrine with
his workes. So was the life and the doctrine allwaies
agreable of the prophets, the Apostles, the Martirs,
and all other holy men. Whereof it will well be concluded
that seing their life was holy, vertuous, and
perfit, their doctrine also was sounde, good and holesome.
And why may we so conclude in them? bicause
euen as they preached and taught so they liued:
and what they taught other to do, they did them selues:
and againe as they did so they taught. Therefore
of them it is well saide.Math. 7. 
               Of their frutes ye shal knowe them
For their frutes being good in dede, the tre could not
be euill.
            The like reason is of euill doctrine and wicked life:The frutes of the Lutherās doctrine.
for one foloweth allwaies the other. It is the doctrine
of Luther.In libro. de Matrimonio Tom. 6 
               That a man can no more refraine
from satisfising the filthy lust of the flesh, then
from spetting. Of this tie what frutes proceded?
For so the these: that bicause to liue chast is an vnpossible
thing, then no man, no woman must liue chast
or single. But if occasion serue not to mary, they may
lawfully seke after baudes and hoores. Which is now

a common thing in Germany: and hath proceded of
this doctrine of Luther. Luther teacheth that if the
husband can not do his dutie to his wife, she may
in this maner speake vnto him. You see good husband
that you can not do your dutie vnto me.
               Luther in the 6. tome libello de matrimo.
               
               Let me with your good leaue mary priuely with
your brother or next kinsman, so that allwaies
yet you beare the name of my husband, lest your
goods come into other mens handes: &cae. To
this request of the woman (saieth Luther) the
man ought to accorde and prouide: or els she ought
to go priuely from him. Is not this (thinke you) a
blessed graffe? but what buddes trowe ye brought
it forthe? Truly these that now the brother may mary
his brothers wife, he yet liuing, as Herod did,Marc. 6. as it
is much now practised amonge the Lutherans Againe
that one woman may haue many husbandes, and
one man many wiues, as the Turkes vse: and as we
see in germany, not only in the cite of Mounster,
but in many other places also openly practised. And
do not these frutes agree well and iust with the doctrine?
            In Luthers doctrine we reade: If the wife wil not,
               In the 6. tome of his vvorkes printed in the yeare 1553
               let the mayde come. Out of the which wholesome
tree this goodly frute is spronge, that nothing
is more common now amonge the Lutherans then
wanton baudery and aduoutery, so much that the
Lutherans them selues are ashamed of it, and affirme

that it was neuer so badde vnder the pope.
            Againe this is the doctrine of Luther.Lib. de christiana libertate. 
               Fasting is
but mans inuention: Christen libertie abideth not
any fastinges or difference of meate. Of this noble
tree hathe growen the excellent frute of banketing,
ryot and drocknes a hundred folde more in our time
then euer before in Germanie.
            Luther teacheth there is no magistrat can force
Christians to obedience,
               Contra du
                     •
                   Caesaris mā
                  data. 
               that it is not lawefull to
fight against the Turkes. And what were the branches
of this stock? First the rebellion of the commons
vnder Munzerus, then the ciuill warres of the Swicers,
the enormous vsurping of the Anabaptistes in
Moūster and many such like, which I had rather passe
ouer by silence:Remēbre the late rebellion in Fraunce. speaking nothing of sundry priuat
conspiracies against publick magistrates.
            The doctrine of Luther is,In Captiuitate Babilonica. 
               That Christendom
ought not to be gouuerned by ciuill lawes and ordinaunces,
that no Prince, no nor angel of heauen hathe
authoritie or power to make any lawe against
Christen men. Lacked this tre his frutes? no surely:
For hereby all iustice hathe quailed: and that either
by preuy corruption, or open and violent oppression.
beside that amonge the nobles of this secte, that is
accompted most right which can best be maintained
by force of armes.Lnther
                     •
                  s in 3. ca. ad Gal. & Illyricani mul
                     •
                  is lib.
            
            An other lesson of Luthers schole was. That the

loue of God and our neighbour, repentaunce also
for sinne, were not necessary to saluation but
(as the Illyricans do write) bothe these and other
good dedes were very pernicious to saluation. And
what frute proceded of this tre? for sothe that men of
the Lutherans ghospell were of a farre more enormous
life,Aboue in the 36. leafe. as Luther him selfe withnesseth, then the
when they were vnder the pope.
            Luther and Caluin do write that God forceth mē
               
to sinne, and all sinne committed of man is not done
by the permission of God,
               Caluinus in instituti onibus. cap. 14. In assertio nibus. art. 31. but by his propre will
and operation: yea and whensoeuer men labour to
do well, that then they sinne deadly. Of this tre haue
growen all mischef, fornication, aduoutrie, ryot,
dronknes, extorsions, robberies, rebellion, periuries,
deceites, lies, all contempt of honesty and vertu, procliuite
to all vice, beside blasphemies of Gods holy
name, backbiting, slaundering, reproches, iniuries,
and all kinde of wickednes frely and without
grudge of cōscience practised. Be not these noble and
faire frutes of Luthers ghospell? May not well the
rule of Christ here take place?Matthaei. 7. 
               By their frutes ye shall
knowe them.
               Note the differēce betvvene the euil life of the Catholikes and the Lutherans. 
               For looke what the tre is, such is the frute and
looke what the frute is, such is thetre.
            
            Although therefore we can not denie, but amonge
vs Catholikes much enormite is, and much euill
life, yet no man can saie that we teache and allow
these vices: or that our doctrine is the cause off oure

naughty liuing, no man I saye can charge the Catholike
doctrine to prescribe any thing against holy scripture,
against ciuill policie, or publike magistrates as
the newe forged ghospell of Luther doth. Exacting
therefore the Lutherans vnto this rule of Christ,
we worthely iudge them of their frutes to be false
prophets and daungerous deceiuers.Note. The like they cā
not do of vs, for that the euill frutes that are in vs
procede of oure selues not of our doctrine, of swaruing
from the precepts and godly constitutions off
our faith, not of obseruing them. But the Lutherans
naughty life procedeth euen of their doctrine, as we
haue in some certain pointes for example before declared.
            Yet as touching the life of spirituall teachers and
rulers, god hath prescribed to the laitie and common
people a perfit and absolute rule to discerne true doctrine
from the false, saying. The scribes and Pharises sit
in the Chaire of Moyses:
               Matth. 3. 
               Do as they commaunde you to do,
not as they do thē selues, in the which saying of Christ,
euery Christen man that regardeth his soule helth,
ought diligently waie two pointes. First to know
which is the lawfull chaire of Moyses,Hovve to discerne true doctrine frō the false. and which is
not. then how the laye and common sort of people
ought to beare them selues towardes the euill life of
the clergy. Let vs then first speake of the first point.
            Sithen the time that these newe doctrines of Luther
hath ben putin the peoples heads, and so many,
diuers and contrary opinions hathe ben taught, that
the simple and vnlerned, know not all most which

waie to turne them selues, many are brouht to that
point, that they reiect all religion at ones: and think
oure Christen faith to be but prety policies of mens
inuention or rather olde wyues tales to feare childrē,
and with this imagination are become worldly Epicures,
terming their felicite in present pleasure, as a
great number do nowe in Germany. Whereof truly
we haue great cause to feare (vnles these cursed heresies
be spedely extinguished) that almightie God of
his dreadfull iustice, will sturre vp the Turke or some
cruell tirā, to rippe vp the belies of these fleshely swine
and gredy gloutons, destroying also with the wicked
(whiche God of his tender mercie forbid) the
good and vertuous. But to thentent that all good
and vertuous people may beware of such infidelite
and wi
                  •
               ked cogitations, despering vtterly of all religion,
S. Paule hathe forewarned his scholer Timothe,
and in him vs all:2. Tim. 3. writing, All scripture inspired frō
God, is profitable to teach, to improue, to amend, and to instruct
in righteousnes, that the man of God may be perfit and
prepared vnto all good workes. These are not mens imaginations,
but the very wordes of God, pronounced
by the holy ghoste in the mouthe of the Apostle.
And this is an expres commaundement of God,
that we beleue vndoubtedly in holy scripture, that
we seke our saluation therein, walking and continuing
vprightly in the pathes of that holy write,It is not 
                     •
                  ough to reade scripture with o
                     •
                  t the true vnderstādīg of the same. 2. C
                     •
                  r. 3. not
swaruing either on the right hande, either on the
left. But that we maye so do, it behoueth vs not only
to reade the bare and literall text of holy scripture,

but to enquire also for the true and right vnderstanding
of the same. For the letter killeth but the Spirit geueth
life. Wherefore our Lorde speaking to the Iewes,
saieth, Searche the scriptures: for in them ye thinke to haue
eternall life.
               Ioan. 5. But it is one thinge to reade, another to
serche.
            They are therefore much deceaued, which crie
now a daies that nothing must be receiued but holy
scripture, that all other interpretations, being
but the imaginations of man, are not to be beleued.
If the protestants speake herein as they thinke, I wō
               der
why the Lutherans, and the Zuinglians haue
writen so many and so large interpretations vpon
the olde and newe testament, and caused them to be
printed abrode, yea why make they suche continuall
sermons to the people, wherein they recite not allwaies
expresse scripture, but talke much beside the
text, adding their interpretations and expositions vnto
it? commaunding also and charging the people to
take those their interpretations for the very worde
of God. And is not this a maruailous impudent and
proude presumption of these protestant preachers?
            When we on our part alleage the expositions of
the holy fathers vpon holy scripture, they as if it were
in a rage, crie out incontinently.A dāgerous deceite of the protestants. 
               The holy fathers
were but men, the church hath erred in many
pointes, the expositions of those fathers are but
their imaginations and deuises, not the worde off
God. And therefore we nede not geue any credit

vnto them. But when they them selues preache vnto
the people, the commaūde and persuade the people,
that if they tender their soule health, they must
vndoubtedly beleue, that which is there preached
vnto them and the interpretation of holy scripture
which they bring, is the pure and sincere worde
of God, the ghospell it selfe. Is not this as I saied, a
a maruailous impudent and proude presumption of
these protestant preachers? Is it not an horrible arrogancie
to terme their owne fantasies holy scripture,
their imaginations the ghospell, the meaning and
sens of their owne inuention,Note. the very worde off
God: condemning withall and reiecting the vniforme,
true and receaued interpretations of all olde holy
fathers and writers approued hitherto in the Church
of Christ, by whom the same church hath ben from
time to time gouuerned, directed, and instructed in
all truthe sens the time of the Apostles, this thowsand
fiue hundred yeares and more: vnder whose doctrine
and godly instructions, so many blessed martirs,
holy confessours and infinit thousands of other
Christen soules haue attained to euerlasting life?
Whereas contrary wise by the expositions and interpretations
of these newe preachers, horrible schismes,
diuers and hainous heresies, dissolute and licentious
liuing, strifes, contentions, and rebellions, haue
spronge vp and all most ouergrowen the garden off
Christes church, well planted before and tended by
the holy fathers, rulers thereof? what can be more impudently

and arrogantly presumed?
            Yet these newe preachers to wrappe and entrappe
the people more and more in their former snare, they
patche on an other dangerous deceit, vsing this guile
with them.An other dāgerous deceite of the protestants. 
               You must good people in dede beleue the
only writen worde of god, but to the expositions of
the preachers ye ought so farre to beleue, as their
expositions agreeth with the writen worde, that
is, that the simple and vnlerned people must iudg of
their owne faith, and be able to trie whether their
preachers teache false or no, whether their expositions
agre so iust with the worde of God, that they
may be bolde to beleue them euen as the very worde
of God. Yf this be true that the poeple must nowe
iudge their preachers and teachers, then was S. Paule
to blame, describing the prouidence of Christ toward
his church to saie these wordes.Ephes. 4. 
               Christ ascending
on high, lead captiuite captiue, and gaue giftes vnto men.
These giftes were vndoubtedly his holy worde. and
to make it out of doubt what maner of giftes he meaneth,
it foloweth strait vppon And he hath geuen some
Apostles, some prophets, and some Euangelistes. For by these
thre sortes of men, by the prophets, the Apostles,
the Euangelistes inspired of the holy ghost, holy scripture
was writen. but bicause in the writen worde
many mysteries lye hidden, therefore Christ left not
to his church only Prophets Apostles and Euangelistes,
but (as it foloweth in S. Paule) He gaue pastours and doctours,
               
               shepeards and teachers which should fede the people
with the true intelligence of the holy write, and
teache them the true vnderstāding of the same. Now
then either the Shepeardes and teachers must instructe
the people, and interpret holy scripture vnto thē
as S. Paule prescribeth, or els the people him self must
take vppon him the person of a iudge ouer his shepeards
and teachers, as the protestants will haue it.
Chose here good reader whom thou list to folow.
Surely I must nedes obey and beleue the blessed
Apostle whatsoeuer these men bable. Therefore I
saie againe, the people ought to lerne not to teache
They ought to obey those that haue charge off their soules,
               Heb. 13.
their sheaperdes and teachers, not to iudge or instruct
them in matters of religion. Contrary wise the pastours
and teachers ougth diligently to instruct their
flocke, and expounde vnto them the right meaning
of holy scripture, that they may with the kaye off
truthe binde and loose the sinnes of the people accordingly.
            Nowe whereas in cytes Mayres and scholemasters,The straunge order of seruing the churche in germany.
in villages the gentlemen, and in the courtes of princes
the Chauncellers prescribe and appoint vnto their
parish prestes and vicars, the maner of interpreting
holy scripture, the order of ministring the sacramēts,
the forme of common prayer at the pleasure of euery
laie magistrat and Temporall Lorde, what will become
of this straunge fashions, the time will ones declare.
For nothing is so preuy,
               Matth. 10. 
               but that it will ones come to light.
Euery wise man may easely cast what is likely to folowe,

when euery magistrat or secular ruler vtterly
vnlerned, and but of meane abilite, yet do at their pleasure
appoint ministres and put downe, prescribing
what docrine they liste to the poore people, or what
secte liketh them best. hereof it happeneth that if the
Mayre, scholemaster or gentleman be a Suenckseldian,
then the preacher of that parish must folow onely
the doctrine of Suenck feldius, or if he be a Zuinglian,
an Osiandrin, an Anabaptiste, an Illyrican, a Wittenberger,
a Maiorist or of any other secte, the poore simple
people must lerne the newe faith of the Maire, scholemaster,
or gentleman: and vtterly renounce his olde:
nor may not be so bolde as to hush to the cōtrary.
            When this newe straunge order was first taken in
hande, that all spirituall Magistrates, constitutions,
and ordonaunces should be disannulled,Lutherus lib. de Christiana libertate some there
were that thought it not reason that men should
be forced to embrace this opinion, or that, but it
shoulde be left free to euery man, to beleue whatsoeuer
the sprit moued him vnto, without any let to
the cōtrary.The frutes of Luthers libertie. So wrote Luther in his booke De Christiana
libertate and in an other De capti uitate Babilonica
in the which bookes he so embrued the hartes of
men with the loue of licentious libertie, that al Christen
constitutions, lawes aud decrees of the church
were vtterly abolished and trode vnder foote. Out of
these bookes also Thomas Munzer toke occasion tolib. Contra. 2. māda. a Caesaris. & in literis ad ducem Sax
                     •
                  uiae.
make the insurrection of the commons in Germany
wherein perished more then a hundred thousand off
our dere countremen, as Sleidan noteth in the fifte booke

of his story. Of this licentious doctrine off Luther
also one Bernard Rotmā begā the heresy of the
Anabaptistes, and that by these wordes of Luther.
that no man could be compelled to any faith: that al
Christen men are free, and taught of God him selfe
immediatly: that there nedeth no interpretation
of scripture, but it is al plaine and perspicuous. that
a simple man of the countre can more readily expounde
and vnderstande holy scripture, then any
Doctour in diuinite.
            
            But after that Luther espied this vntoward course
of his doctrine, and that now his owne scholers Mūtzer,
Rotman, Carolstadius, Zuinglius, and diuers other
bette him with his owne rodde: he inuented strait a
new shift, or rather succoured him selfe with the olde
practise of the Catholike churche,Vide scriptū Philippi ad Com. Palatinum aeditum an no. 1560. Heidelbergae. as the folowers of
Melanchthon and Brentius do now a daies, who seing
the people caryed away daily in to newe sectes by other
ghospellers leauing their former new masters,
do call their felowes renagates and apostatas, compelling
them by ecclesiasticall censure and force off
pretended excommunication to returne home again.
When Luther first began to write and set forthe bookes,
his scholers murmured and saied,The incō stancy of the Lutherans. 
               it was against
the Christian liberte, that Christen men might
not frely reade what bookes they listed. But nowe
when the Lutherās them selues do swarue from their
master, and write one against an other, they runne

to the refuge of the Catholike churche, and make inhibitions
forbidding all such bookes, as their felowes
write against them to be read or solde: banishing
out of their townes and countres with all the power
they can, all such ministres and preachers as dissent
from them. so it is now true amonge these heretikes
that Athanasius and Tertullian wrote of the olde heretikes
of their time,In decret. Synodi Nicenae. Lib. praescrip. that is, what they approue to
daie they reproue tomorowe. What they preache as
the worde of God this yeare, they condemne as hereticall
nexte yeare: wauering like the rede with the
winde, and framing their faith as occasion serueth.
            
               Melanchthon seing that the licentious liberte planted
by Luther gaue occasiō of much suaruing and departing
of one from an other amonge them selues,
he put a newe cote vpon his religion: and whereas before
he acknowledged but two Sacraments, Baptim,
and the Supper of our Lorde,Melanchthon acknovvled geth iiij. sacramēts Philipp. in annot in epist. Pauli & in postrema edi
                     
                        ••
                     one Loc. Com.
                nowe he addeth two
more. Penaunce and holy Ordre. Penaunce he added
to bring againe in order the dissolut consciences off
his brethern, to set vp excommunication, and to erect
in Wittenberg, the newe Lutheran Papacye. Holy
order he added to the entent that the Masters of Wittenberg
sending abrode their preachers, might binde
them with an othe, to preache and teache no otherwise
then they had lerned of their masters, as the tenour
of the othe (set forthe in the Ordonnaunce of the
vniuersite of Wittenberg) declareth.Lege scholae VVitten bergensis ordinationem. Although therefore
the Lutheran protestants raile and inueigh without
measure against the Pope, bicause vnder him doctours

and other be sworne to the obedience of the
Catholike church, and vniforme consent of doctrine
in the same, yet they them selues swere and charge
by othe against all reason their scholers for the mainteaunce
and vpholding of their heresies, and abhominable
doctrine.
            Notwithstanding these Masters of Wittenberge
could not obtaine their purpose. Amsdorfius and Illyricus,
               Illyricus li. contra lustū meniū.
two great masters of Luthers schole woulde neuer
agree vnto them. but prouoked to the former
writings of Melanchthon and Luther, wherein they
plainely teache that all laye people, men and women
are priestes, may minister the sacraments, may baptise,
expounde holy scripture, teache and preache.
This Illyricus lately wrote against Menius who had
obiected him the saying of the prophet,Ierem. 18. 
               that he ranne
being not sent, that is, that he toke vppō him the highe
vocation of a bishop, that he interpreted scripture after
his owne pleasure, corrected his brethen, cōdemned
them of heresie, ruled the churche not in one place
only, but through out the whole state of Lutherans,
(whereas yet Melanchthon and the masters off
Wittenberg neuer permitted him, but had decreed against
him) finally that he was neuer called to the ministery
like a Lutheran, nor neuer ordained priest as a
Catholike: but from teaching of a grammer schole,
had taken vppon him the authorite of a bishop.
            Thus in this bely fest kingdome of Lutherans, you
may see howe soone visards be chaunged, and howe

easie a matter it is to come a lofte. For when Menius
and Maior two great masters of the Lutheran ghospellers
obiect vnto Illyricus, that he was neuer called
to the ministery, neuer appointed to the worde, nor
sent to preache, and therefore he should be ashamed
to plaie the bishop in the churche of Luther, and to
cōdemne all other Superintendts, and Ministers that
would not agree to his propre and seuerall doctrines,
he awnswereth them againe, that according to the
doctrine of our father Luther, Euery man was a
priest, as cacthepolles, millers, barbers, Phisicians,
vshers and scholemasters: especially such as professed
the Hebrewe grammer. But consider here I beseche
the gentle reader, how soone this wether is ouercast.
Now faire, now fowle, now clere now darke.
For here as you see, while Illyricus hath to do with
the masters of Wittenberg, the Scripture saieth that
Euery man is a priest and fit to teache in the cōgregation.
But a litle after, the same Illyricus hauing to
do with Osiāder and his cōpaniōs in Prussia, curseth
and banneth them crying and writing, that to dogged
Phisicians (naming so the Phisicians of the prince,
who then were preachers of Osianders doctrine)
Matters of religion and ruling of churches ought
not to be committed.
               Illyricus li. cōtra Oūan drina iustiluta. 
               for that Phisicians were not
called nor appointed to any such function. Be not
these trim preachers and masters of the newe ghospell?
is there not a ioly vniformite in their doctrine?

               Maior and Melanchthon when they fight against the
Catholikes,Note the disorder of these Archeprotestants. if then you aske them what authorite
they haue with their newe reformation to comptroll
the whole corps of Christendom, and the church of
Christ, being neuer called nor ordained of the churche
to any such office, by and by they will awnswer
you out of Luthers bookes, De Christiana libertate &
de Captiuitate Babilonica that euery man is a priest,
euery man hath authoritie to reade the Bible, to
discerne true and false interpretation of holy scripture.
But euen in the same moment before they moue
a foote furder, you maye see them accuse and crie
out at Illyricus that he being nother priest nor called
to the ministerie, behaueth him selfe very seditiousely
in Germanie taking vppon him to comptroll the
masters of Wittenberge and of Lipsia by his owne priuat
and proper authorite.
            Notwithstanding all these enormites and aburdities
ensuing of the bare text of scripture, the Lutherans
seing them selues on euery side entrapped and
coūicted, yet euer they plaie fox to the hole, and rū
               ne
to this impudent shift to saie that. The next of holy
scripture is sufficient for all instruction and doctrine,
that it may be vnderstanded of all men, and
nede no gloses nor expositions. Is not this I beseche
the good reader, a captious and suttle shift to thrust
only the writen text to the people defrauding thē off
the true meaning and interpretation of the text? Euē
so did the Sadduces heretikes of the olde lawe before

Christes time, as Iosephus in his Chronicles witnesseth.
So did after Christ,To cleane vnto the vvriten text only is an olde heresie the Arrians, Dimeritae, Apostolici,
and many such other heretikes as it is to be
senein S. Basill, Epiphanius and S. Augustin. If the text
of holy write nedeth no expositiō, what meaned oure
Sauiour,Scripture nedeth exposition. when after his resurrection, He expounded
to his disciples all such scriptures as were writen of him, beginning
with Moyses and so all the prophets?
               Luc. 24. What meaned
Philippus to aske the Eunuche of the Quene of
Candace sitting vppon his chariot, whether he vnderstoode
that whiche he reade in Esaie the prophetAct
                     •
                  . 8.
and (after the Eunuches awnswer, saying, howe can
I, if some expounde it not vnto me) to expounde him the
text declaring the right interpretation and meaninge
thereof? Againe what will they saie to that which
the Apostle writeth That the holy ghost diuideth and distributeth
to euery one his giftes, as it pleaseth him? so that all
men haue not all giftes but euery man certaine and seuerall.
               1. Cor. 12.
               as some the gifte of healing, other the gifte of diuers tonges
and other the interpretation of tonges. Euery man is not a
Phisician, diuine, or lawier, as S. Paule to the Corinthians
largely declareth, taking a comparison of the
body of mā, where are many mēbres, and euery membre
hathe his propre and seuerall function. for what
could be more absurde then if the feete would playe
the handes, or the hādes do that which belongeth to
the head? The like reason is to be cōsidered of functions,
offices and giftes in the gouuernement of Christen
religion. to the setting vp whereof God hath appointed
diuers and sundry ministeries, especially

for the instructing and teaching the right vnderstanding
of holy scripture, that we might thereby knowe
his will and pleasure in all thinges without doubt or
controuersie. Whiche if euery priuat and meane man
without a teacher and interpreter were able to vnderstande,
to what purpose hathe the holy ghoste
geuen in his churche vnto some the gifte of interpretation?
            But what nede we spend herein many wordes? let
vs reade the bookes of Moyses, the psalmes and the
Prophets. see we not there a number of highe and secret
misteries which before the coming of Christ none
allmost vnderstode? And what meaned our Sauiour
when he sayde vnto his disciples,Lucae. 8. 
               It is geuen vnto
you to knowe the misteries of the kingdome of God, but to the
other in parables, that seing they see not and hearing they
vnderstande not? What meaned our Lorde in these wordes?
Truly this, that it is a speciall gifte of God to
vnderstande well holy scripture: and that this gifte
was especially geuen vnto the Apostles and to their
disciples and successours, which should after thē beare
their roume in Christes church. Againe that it was
inough for the people, that (as much as is necessary
for saluation) they might lerne of their pastours, preachers,
and curates the exposition of holy scripture, by
similitudes and parables agreable to their capacite.
which may farther be proued by diuers places of holy
scripture.
            But I would here gladly aske of our newe Masters
when they saye that the texte of scripture is sufficient, that

there nedeth no expositiō nor glose, why write they so many
cōmentaries, such longe gloses vppon scripture, so
many bookes and that without all measure? if we nede
no exposition, then surely all the Lutherans bookes
and writings be vtterly superfluous, vaine and to
no purpose, but only crafty snares to catche the simple
and vnlerned withall.
            But to tell you plainely what the protestāts meane
by this sutle shifte to cleaue to the only writen worde,VVhy the protestāts crie vpon only Scripture.
surely this it is: they would not haue the scripture
vtterly not expoūded, they meane nothing so (for
that in dede nothing serueth their turne) but they
would haue their expositions, their maner of expounding
to be receaued and beleued as the very worde
of god. But contrary wise, when they haue to
do with vs, reiecting all interpretation of scripture
they ring their olde songe in our eare, The worde of
god is cleare, perspicuous aud plaine, it nedeth no
exposition, it requireth no interpretatiō of the olde
fathers or of the Churche. wherein you see what
is their impudencie and contrariete: And this much
haue we saide to showe that Scripture ought to be expounded,
that the bare text suffiseth not.
            But here riseth now agreat question and worthy
to be waighed.A questiō vvhat interpretation of scripture is to be so lovved. Seing that holy scripture must be interpreted,
and that we see abrode many and diuers
interpretations thereof, and yet in one thing there can
be but one truthe, and as scripture it selfe is vndoubtedly
true, so the interpretation thereof must be vndoubted

and certain, whether of all these interpretations
or what maner is to be accompted the right,
proper and vndoubted. As for example. No Christen
man denieth but that these wordes of the last supper,
Take eate,
               Lucae. 22. 
               this is my body be the very wordes of God
Christ him self. And what coulde be sayde more plainely,
more distinctly, more directly then these wordes
of Christ are?Vide Luthe ri Confessi onem. de Coena. yet what happened? Al the sectes and
heresies that raign nowe adaies acknowlegde them
for the wordes of God. No secte denieth thē. Whereupon
then riseth these greate and horrible dissensions?
surely not whether secte hathe the worde of
god, but whether of them well expoundeth it. And
see howe diuersly these fewe wordes are expounded.
Zwinglius saith these wordes. This is my body
                are as much to saie, This significeth and betokeneth
my body. Oecolāpadius thus expoundeth them.

               This is the signe or token of my body. Carolstadius
                after this sorte. Herein sitteth my body. Swenck feldius
                yet after an other sorte. This is my spiritual body.
                Luther thus. This is my naturall body in naturall
breade. The Catholikes haue allwaies thus expounded
it.VVhat the vnlerned shall do in perplexite and variete of interpretations of scripture. 
               Vnder the forme of bread, it is the true boly
of oure Lorde. Nowe what shall here a simple and vnlerned
man of the countre do, hearing so diuers and
contrary interpretations of so fewe wordes? Truly if
he will here of his owne head confer scriptures together
and serch the true meaning of these wordes in
scripture and the writen text, he shall be as wise herein

as these men aboue mentioned: who all by conference
of scripture you see howe swetely they agreed
vpon the truthe. But if there were any certainte in
conference (as sometimes it helpeth much) yet the
simple vnlerned man, by common order of witt shal
neuer finde it out. For how can the vnlerned and ignorant
iudge of that, which he neuer lerned? no more
truly then the showemaker is able to iudge of the goldesmithes
worke, which he was neuer practised in.
And were not that showemaker to be accōpted very
impudēt and vndiscret, who seing two goldesmithes
contending of the fines of some piece of gold or siluer,
would steppe in, and take vpō him to determinat
the matter betwene them? much lesse ought the vnlerned
medle with or determinat matters of Diuinite,
or take vpon them to expounde the meaning of the
holy ghoste, seing that in worldly affaires there can
no waightier matter, of more difficultie, or of greater
importaunce be taken in hande. what then shal the
vnlerned man do in this case? If he may cleaue to no
part at all, then must he be of no church, but make
him selfe a newe secte, forge him selfe a newe faith,
and so at length lese all faith, and become a very painim:
whiche god forbid that euer any man should persuade
the vnlerned. If he cleaue to any part, yet is he
in greate daūger. For almightie god cōmaūdeth straitly
by his Apostle,Tit. 3. 
               that we auoide the heretike. Here truly
the laye man ought to take good aduise.Matth. 7. & 16. For he is bounde
him selfe to take hede of false prophets, lest being
blinde him selfe and not able to vnderstande holy

scripture, he suffer him selfe to be lead of a blinde
guide, such as the heretike is. But howe can the blinde
man see whether is guide be blinde or no? Truly
of him felfe he cā not see it, vnlesse he hath lerned of
suche as see wel, some certain token howe to knowe
it. Is there then any such tokē or signe, or where may
a man seke it? verely the mercifull prouidence of almighte
God hath not failed in this point, but hath
left vnto the laie, simple, and vnlerned man a certain
and vnfallible token, whereby he may (if he regarde
his owne saluation) beware of all false and heretical
corruption in interpreting scripture.
            There is no Christē man so rude or ignorant that
knoweth not perfitly his Crede,
               A tokē to knovve the false interpretion of scripture from the true. and can reherse it frō
the beginning to the ending. In the which though
euery article ought diligētly to be marked and borne
awaye, yet in this time none more, then the article
where we saye Credo sanctā Catholicā Ecclesiam. I beleue
the holy Catholike church. For in this worde Catholike,
is the very true token and marke to knowe the right
interpretatiō of scripture by, for that is called Catholike
(as S. Austin teacheth)VVhat is Catholike. Cotra Gau den
                        •
                     iū Donat. lib. 3. which euery where and at
al times is and hath ben. Thē this worde Chatolike attributed
to the church, is that which hath continued
frō the Apostles time to our daies without any breache,
diuision, or intermission. For such a church did
God the Father promis to his onely begotten Son,
speaking by the prophet Dauid in this wise. Thou arte
my Son;
               Psal. 2. 
               this daie haue I begotten the: aske of me and I shall
geue the nations for thine inheritaunce, and the vtmost partes

of the earthe for thy possession. which place all holy fathers
haue so expounded, that God the father hathe
geuen to Christ such a church, as should be spred
through out the whole worlde, not only in Suethelande,
Denmarke or Germanie. So the Son of god
taking vpon him the nature of man, after he had here
in earthe purchased our saluatiō, sente abrode the holy
Apostles as Embassadours through out the whole
world to take possession of the foresaide inheritaunce,
charging them in this wise.Matth. 28 
               All power is geuen vnto
me in heauen and in earthe. Go ye and teache all nations,
baptising them in the name of the Father, and the Sō and the
Holy ghoste: teaching them to kepe al those thinges, whatsoeuer
I haue commaunded vnto you: And beholde I am
with you all waies euen to the ende of the worlde.
            
            In this highe and waightie embassage of our Sauiour
Iesus Christ two thinges are especially notised.
First that his Apostles should go and preache trough
out the whole worlde. Secondarely that he will tary
with them vntell the end of the worlde. In whiche
two pointesLib. de vni late ecclesi. (as S. Augustin at large disputeth against
the heretikes of his time) this artikle of our Crede is
comprised. I beleue the Catholike churche. In the which
wordes we confesse that the church of Christ must
be vniuersall, and spred through out the whole worlde,
and that from the time of the Apostles forwarde
it should continewe by the continuall assistaunce and
presence of Christ. And in this consideration the Apostle
calleth the church,1. Tim. 3. 
               the Piller and groūd of truthe.
signifieng by the worde ground the largenes of Christendome:

by the worde Piller the continuall, smothe,
and not interrupted succession of the Apostles and
their scholers, vpon whom al truthe is builded. And
this interpretatiō of the worde Catholike S. Augustin
teacheth in many places against the Donatistes, especially
in his booke de vnitate ecclesiae. Therefore to denie
it were to become a Donatiste and to take the parte
of those detestable heretikes. And this much of
this question.
            But to returne nowe to the true exposition of holy
scripture, euery Christen man ought not only beleue
this article of the Catholike church, but be also
one of the same, and beleue what so euer it beleueth,
expounde and interpret the scriptures, as it expoundeth
and interpreteth them: condemne and reproue
all such thinges as it condemneth and reproueth.
And what surer token or more certain marke could
God geue to discerne false expositions of scripture
from the true, then this article of our Crede, I beleue
the holy Catholike Church? For when thre cōtrary opinions,
thre diuers interpretations of holy scripture
are brought forthe, whereof two are fresh and newe,
neuer taught nor heard of before our time, the third
is auncient, accustomed, and receaued of our forefathers,
deriued euen from the Apostles time and continued
hitherto, what laye or vnlerned man is in
this case so rude or ignorant, but (if he liste, as he professeth
in his Crede, to beleue the Catholike church
which is allwaies and in all places) maye easely iudge
this thirde interpretation to be the right meaning

off the holy ghoste, the other two to be false and hereticall?
            For the more declaration of this matter I will recite
here a storie,A prety storie of false interpretation whiche I lerned being a boye, and
happened at Lubek. In Lubek there dwelled a riche
man, whose familie and kinred was of Turing. This
man being in Lubeck at point of death and hauing
no child to be his heire, bequeued his goods to certaine
of his kinsfolkes at Turing. They shortly after this
mans decease coming to Lubek bring with them a
Proctour, open the will, and founde there that the
widowe of the departed man beside other goods bequeued,
should deliuer them a thousand and two
hundred shipbordes, commonly called there Wagenschoff.
But the Proctour and heyres of Turing
cauilling vppon the worde Wagenschoff required
a thousand and two hundred greate pieces of artillerie:
saying that in their countre the worde so signified.
Neither would these men of Turing be brought
from their chalenge, vntell at the length the matter
must be tried by iudgement. Wherein their processe
being longe debated, and bothe partes heard, it was
founde that the interpretation of the worde Wagenschoff
alleaged by those of Turing was a newe
and straunge interpretation neuer heard of before in
that countre: whereas the widowe by the consent of
all the people and the whole countre proued, that of
olde time the worde Wagenschoff signified nothing
els thē shipbordes which are cōmonly brought
thither out of Lifland and Pole. Whereuppon the

interpretation of the proctour of Turing was reiected
and laughed to scorne as newe, curious, superstitious,
and straunge. Much more ought we that are
Christians do the like in these newe and straunge
expositions of Gods worde inuented by proude and
presumptuous heretikes, detesting and auoidinge
them as present poison. For surely such newe forged
interpretatiōs ones spread abrode,2. Tim. 2. do crepe like a cancre
and infect daily more and more, as we see nowe
by experience in sundry places.
            Euery man nowe a daies calleth vpon scripture: euery
man demaundeth the expres worde of God. And
what I praie you can be more expresse then that the
Apostle S. Peter saieth So that ye first knowe this that no
prophecie in the scripture hath any pri
                     ••
                  t interpretation?
               2. Petri. 1. In
the which wordes it is to be noted that S. Peter will
haue vs first and before al other thinges knowe this, that no
prophecie in the scripture hathe any priuat interpretation.
Therefore it must nedes be very perilous to
beleue straight this or that interpretation, whatsoeuer
we here. For it is a common saying, it is euill
toying with the eye, with maydenhood, and with
our faith.
            But many there are nowe a daies,Avvicked persuasiō of vvorldly careler men. which when
they heare contrarietes in doctrine, and diuers interpretations
of scripture, they comforte them selues carelesly
in this sort. What nede we passe for the contentions
of preachers, and controuersies of Diuines?
Although they misse in certain pointes, and disagree
in some certain articles, yet our faith and belefe is not

brokē or empaired. We in the meane season will saie
oure Pater noster, beare awaye oure Crede, and the ten
commaundements, and peraduenture the catechisme
of children. As for other matters, let the lerned contend
amonge thē selues as longe as they list, we passe
not vppon it. But alas, o mercifull God, what a vaine
comforte and pernicious persuasion is this? For
what saythe S. Iames the Apostle? Whosoeuer, saythe
he shall kepe the whole lawe,
               Iaco. 2. 
               and yet faile in one point, he is
giltie of all. So is it in our faith, who denieth one article,
denieth the whole. This vayne comfort teached
first the Zwinglians.Vide Ious. Lascy cōtra episcopum Hosium, et Lutherum in vltima Cōfessione suade Coena Deu
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  . against the which Luther in his
laste confession writen against the Sacramentaries, saieth,
that faith is like to a bell, which as longe as it is whole
kepeth his true sounde, but when it is anything crased or
cleft, it iarreth and leseth cleane his proper tune, like as an
ear then vessel as longe as it is whole and sounde is called a pot
a crocke, or some like thing, but ones broken or cleft it leseth
his name and is called a potsheard. Let no man therefore
comforte him selfe with this vaine hope, that although
their preachers and ministres erre in some
pointes, yet are good Christians in other pointes, for
that auaileth nothing. You must be saued within the
arke of Noe or be drowned with out it. There is herein
no middle waye. Therefore you must take very
good hede that you be not deceaued: lest that while
wantōly and negligently you harken to euery newe
doctrine and forged interpretation of scripture that
one or two newe preachers teache, you lese youre
soules in good earnest. Remembre rather what the

prophet saieth. Euery man is a lyar.
               Psalm. 115 He meaneth not al
men together. For I for my part, and you for youre
part, and euery man a part, may lie, erre, and be deceaued.
But all good men together, that is, the whole
Catholike churche of Christ can not erre in any article
of faith.Matth. 16. 1, Timo. 3. For it is builded vpon the rocke of truthe,
and vpon that consideration is called the piller and
grounde of al truthe. Therefore when the simple and
vnlerned man heareth sundry and cōtrary expositions
of holy Scripture, let him haue recours to his faith
and fully determinat with him selfe (for that he is
not lerned in holy scripture) not to take any other
waie or folow any other guide then the article of his
Crede, I beleue the holy Catholike church, persuading him
selfe vndoubtedly that to be the only true interpretation
of scripture, which is Catholike. That is, which
together with the writen text, hath by the Apostles
and their successours ben spred trough the whole
worlde, and continued vniforme and vncorrupted
euen to our time.
            And this only rule may serue as a buckler for the
vnlerned mā,A buckler for the vnlerned against nevve preachers. that as ofte as newe preachers set a broche
any newe doctrine and straunge, then to thinke
this with him selfe. I am a man vnlerned, I can not
perceiue the drift of their disputing, I can not iudge
of their cōtrouersie: But seing that my Crede teacheth
me to beleue nothing, but that which is Catholike and
hath allwaies ben kept and receaued in Christēdom,
what shall I do to knowe whether these newe preachers
doctrine be Catholike or no? Here this vnlerned

man must remembre the counsell of Moyses, saying.
Aske of the daies that are past, which were before the,
sence the daie that God created man vpon the earthe,
               Den. 4: 
               and aske
frō one side of the heauē vnto the other, and in an other
place.Deut. 32. 
               Remēbre the daies of the worlde that is past. Consider
the yeares from time to time, aske thy father and he will
showe the: thy elders and they well tell the. For this is the
true guide of a blinde man, and ignorant, to aske and
enquire, what his forefathers, what his neighbours,
what the townes and countres about haue allwaies
obserued and beleued, sence the time they were first
traded in Christen religion, and haue so many yeares
continued in. This is the faith of that cooliar: which
being at point of deathe,A very good faith of a Coolyar. and tempted of the deuill
what his faith was, awnswered. I beleue and die in
the faith of Christes church. Being againe demaunded
what the faith of Christ his church was, that
faith, saied he, that I beleue in. Thus the deuil getting
no other awnswer of the simple man, was ouercomed
and put to flight. By this faith of the cooliar euery
vnlerned man may trie the spirits of men whether
they be of god or no, by this faith he may resist
the deuill, iudge the true interpretation of scripture
from the false, and discerne the Catholike preacher
from the hereticall Minister, the true doctrine from
the forged.
            But to set this whole matter before your eies as it
were in a glasse,A readie vvaie to trie out an heretike. take this example. Suppose there came
to some greate cyte fiue different and contrary
preachers, as by name, Caluin a Zwinglian, Longinusa

Swencfeldiā, Functius an Osiandrin, Illyricus a Lutherā,
and some Catholike doctour: suppose the magistrates
of the cite graunted these fiue euery one to preache
and defend openly his owne priuat doctrine.
what shal the vnlerned laie mā do here, that he folowe
not a blind guide and so fall bothe in to the dike?
               Matth. 13. surely as
we haue saied before, so must he do. he shall aske first
of Master Caluin whether his doctrine be the pure
and very worde of god when he writeth that in the
Supper of the Lorde not the true body of Christ,
               Caluin
                     •
                  s libr. contra Ioachimū VVestphalum.
               but only the figure of his body is there, and is geuē.
Againe that originall sinne is but a naturall infirmitie
of the minde,
               Zuinglius lib. de baptismo cōtra Vrbanum Regium. Caluinus li. de praedestinatione. 
               not giltie of eternall dānation.
Or els that God is the cause of the sinne of man,
that god compelleth and forceth men to wickednes,
blasphemies, horedome, theft, lyeng, deceites
and such other. Here of Caluin awnswer that al this
is the pure and cleare worde of god, let him aske him
againe in what place of the Bible he readeth expresly
these wordes: In the Supper is not the true body
of Christ but the figure only: Originall sinne is but
an infirmitie not giltie of eternall damnation, laste
of all that men are constrained of God to sinne.
To this Caluin will surely awnswer that although
this his doctrine be not founde in scripture expresly
in these wordes or termes,
               Theodorus Beza in defensione Caluini. 
               yet that this sentence
and meaning is there. Marke here then that the doctrine

of Caluin is not the expresse worde of God,
but the meaning and interpretation of it. And this lo
is their first deceite. Let the laye man go yet farder
with Caluin, and aske whether this his interpretation
be Catholike, whether that Christen religion began
with this doctrine, in Germany, Fraunce, Italy, England
or any other where, whether this his doctrine
was preached of the Apostles and their successours,
receaued and vsed in the Catholike churche, and deriued
from our forefathers to vs, through out al these
countres. For I (maye the laye man saie) haue asked
here of my elders, which denie they euer heard any
such thing. I haue enquired of the cytes and countres
here about, they knowe it not, but saie it is newe and
very straunge vnto them. And here Caluin can not
denie but that it is so (and our men are not ashamed to sai
                     •
                  
that these thousand yeares all truthe hath ben loste) therefore
the vnlerned man may here boldly saye vnto him
Well Sir if it be so, fare you well. I entend not to medle
with you nor your doctrine any more.Epiph anius lib. 2. cō
                  tra hereses. Tit. 3. So Athanasius
writeth to Epictetus the bisshop, that it is inough
to awnswere an heretike after this sort. The Catholike
Church neuer taught this: the holy fathers neuer receaued
this. VVherefore it is writen. Auoide the heretike
man.
            
            In the like maner shall the vnlerned and laie man
behaue himselfe with the Suenck feldian, demaunding
of him, whether this be the pure worde of God,
when he teacheth. That Christ as touching his humain
nature is not a creature, but a begotten thing

conceiued and borne of the holy ghoste,
               Suentfeldius lib. de dup. statu Christi & mulnis alijs tractat. 
               and that afther
the ascension of Christ in to heauen, his humanite
was made God or rather was chaunged in to
God. Againe that, the same power and operation
which is in the worde of God preached, is the only
begotten euerlasting Son of God. Laste of all, that
all the giftes and graces of God be parcels of the diuine
nature. For when Longinus the Swenckfeldian
shall saie that these doctrines are the very sincere worde
of God, the laye man maye aske of him againe
where holy scripture doth clerely expresse this doctrine.
To this Lōginus cā make no other awnswer,
then that although it be not there expressed, yet it is
there mente and vnderstanded. here if to the laye mā
asking whether this meaning and vnderstandinge be
Catholike, and planted by the Apostles or their scholers
in Swethen and Silesia, and from thence deriued
vnto our time, Longinus do awnswer ye: then must
he proue in what place of Silesia and vnder what bisshop
that happened. Which being not able to do, he
proueth him selfe a vaine folowe and a lyar. But if he
saie, that this doctrine vntell this time was not receaued
in Silesia, bicause our forefathers were not of capacite
to conceaue these high misteries, the laye man
may roundely saie vnto him. Auaunt heretike, and
take this f
                  •
               r a finall awnswer. The Catholike church
neuer taught this: the holy fathers neuer receaued this: Wherefore
it is writen, Auoide the heretike man.
            
            
               
After the same order also maye the laye man aske
of Functius the Osiandrin,
               Osiāder lib de Confessi one doctrinae suae. Hiorem. 23. & 33. when he teacheth vpon
these wordes of Hieremie, God is our righteousnes,
that man ought to be iust by the essentiall iustice
of God: againe that Christ doth iustifie vs with his
only diuinite, the humanite being excluded, and
such like doctrine, which he calleth the very expresse
worde of God, in what place of scripture it is read.
When he awnswereth, that worde for worde it is not
in scripture, but it agreeth well with the meaning of
scripture, let him be asked againe, whether this his
meaning agree with the Catholike expositiō of scripture
deriued from the holy fathers and successours
of the Apostles, and obserued hitherto continually in
the church of Christ without contradiction. Here if
Functius (his conscience forcing him) do confesse
that this doctrine was of late planted in Prussia by
Andreas Osiander, and although it was not vntell nowe
reueled, yet according to his iudgement it agreeth
very well with the worde of God and the ghospell,
the laie man may geue him the finall awnswer of Athanasius,
The Catholike churche neuer taught this, the holy
fathers neuer receaued this.
               Tit. 3. Vide Amsdorsium de ha
                     •
                   propos
                     ••
                  one. Luther. in 3. cap. ad Gal. 
               Wherefore it is writen. Auoide
the heretike man. The like awnswer also may be made
to the straunge doctrine of Illyricus the Lutheran
writing, That good workes are pernicious to saluation:
that God doth iustifie men by wordes and
not by dedes. And truly this awnswer is of such force,
and so mete for a Christen man, that vnto all heretikall

interpretations, to all erroneous doctrine, yea
though an Angel frō heauē, if it were possible, should
bring any newe ghospell, it might with these wordes
be awnswered. A waye false prophet, the third Elias,
the fifte Euangelist. For The catholike church neuer
taught this, the holy fathers neuer receaued this. Wherefore it
is writen. Auoide the heretike man. Last of all the vnlerned
laye man may well also demaunde of the Catholike
doctour or preacher, howe he liketh the opinions
of these newe ghospellers. whereunto he will
awnswer, that he hathe perceaued these newe and
straunge interpretations of holy scripture, and after
longe waighing and cōsidering thē, hath founde that
they are all auncient condemned heresies:See out discourse. which
nowe certain braynsicke men by the instinct of the
deuill raised vp againe, to the vtter destruction of the
Romane empire and our dere countre of Germanie.
Therefore he is readie to showe by good groundes
of holy scripture, by the right and Catholike vnderstanding
of Scripture, that the olde religion hitherto
receaued, is grounded vppon those two pillers, and vpon
them hath ben sustained from the Apostles time
vntel our daies through out the whole corps of Christendom,
and maintained sounde and perfit, against al
busy barking of heretikes and cruell bytes of pagan
princes. And is not this most agreable bothe with religion
and with reason, that we should embrace and
accept that interpretation of the holy Bible for
the true and sincere, which in all churches, of all people
and countres hath ben receaued, confessed, preached,

maintained, and sence the Apostles time hitherto
continued? as by the testimonies of auncient doctours
we are able in all pointes euidently to declare?
Contrary wise may we not worthely esteme these
newe doctrines broched so lately, proceding of olde
condemned heresies, and renued by wild worldely
men, to be hainous heresies and detestable deceites of
the deuill?
            Surely this was the chefe and principall cause why
I accompted the diuers doctrine of Luther and his felowes
to be hereticall,VVhy the author forsoke the Lutherant. and for such do v
                  •
               terly forsake
it and detest it: this againe is the cause why I esteme
the doctrine in all Christendom (which they call
the Papacy) receaued, to be the only true and wholesom
doctrine, bicause this doctrine is the Catholike
and vniuersally receaued interpretation of scripture,
but their doctrine is only their priuat opiniō and their
priuat deprauatiō off holy scripture. I cōfesse I haue
emploied the studie off Diuinite, and laboured matters
of controuersie, about these two and twenty yeares,
not medling with any other worldely or ciuill
matter in all that time: nor I can not denie but I haue
ben a scholer of the Lutherans, and haue so farre
lerned their misteries, that within these fourten or
fiften yeares the diuines of Wittēberg would allmost
haue cōstrained me to be a doctour of their vniuersitie.
Againe I haue bestowed much time that I might
thoroughely and substantially be lerned in the Catholike
doctrine, conferring allwaies the sayings and
writings of bothe partes. And allthough that I had

much a do to shift my selfe out of their crafty, captious,
and contentious controuersies, yet as sone as by
the helpe of God I attained thereunto, espieng the
erroneous and hereticall doctrine of the Lutherans,
and perceauing the true and sounde doctrine of the
Catholikes,The duty of a conuerted Catholike. I laboured not only vtterly to ridde my
stomacke of that poisonned doctrine of Luther, but
also to auoide all company and familiarite of heretikes,
that I might neither see them, nor heare of them.
Which lacke of my olde acquaintaunce and maner of
liuing, bothe empaired much the helthe of my body,
and procured also great losse of my substaunce. And
is like to do daily more and more, vnlesse God of his
mercie stretch forthe his helping hande. Howbeit
whatsoeuer befall of me, I am ready to lese body and
life, honour and goods for the furderaunce of the
auncient Catholike religion. And I wish to my dere
countre of Germanie that minde also. For sure I am,
whosoeuer is no Catholike, he must nedes be an heretike.
Seing therefore that holy write aduertiseth vs
to flie from heresies euen as from present poison, I be
seche all good men to marke wel this example which
I knowe to be true, and wil here recite, to showe what
it is to be ones fallen in to heresie.
            A certain young man of my acquayntaunce,A notable example of the sun dry sectes in Germany. very
well lerned and sometime preacher in Misnia, being
according to the doctrine of Melanchthon and Maior
an Adiaphoriste, that is, of that secte of Lutherans
which take good workes and constitutions of the
church to be thinges indifferent, &c. departed in to

Saxony vppon hope of some ecclesiastical liuing there.
Being then demaunded of what religion he was,
he awnswered that he was of the opinion of Philip
Melanchthon and Georgius Maior. Then saieth vnto
him the Illyrican Superintendent, it semeth thou arte
an apostat heretike. And withall asked him whether
he thought good workes to be pernicious vnto saluation,
Whereunto this poore preacher awnswering,
he beleued that they helped rather then hindered
saluation, the Superintendent strait saith vnto him,
Seing you are an heretike of the ghospell, you maye
not abide in this cite nor countre: and therefore get
you hence. With this awnswer he departed and went
in to Prussia, where meting with an Osiandr in Superintendent,
and desiring some ecclesiasticall seruice,
he was demaunded, whether he beleued That
man ought to be made iuste by the essentiall iustice
of God, and whether he iudged those for heretikes
which thought or taught the contrary. Whereunto
awnswering that he could not so thinke, seing that
Melanchthō
                and Illyricus interpreted the scripture otherwise,
incontinently he was thrust backe like an
heretike, and commaunded to depart out of all the
dominions of that countre. After this he came in to
Pole, and meting with certain Caluinistes, being of thē
examined, and founde that he agreed not with the
Zuinglians, he was repelled also of them for an heretike.
Seing then he could not spede there, passing on
furder by the waye he came to the Picardi, hoping

that he might be receaued in to their secte. But when
he refused to abiure all other sectes and religions and
beleue onely them, he was faine to departe thence
also. After which he came to a Noble man of Silesia
requiring seruice, of whom being required howe he
liked the doctrine of Swenck feldius, whether he beleued,
That the externall ministerie or preaching
was but superfluous, and that the internall worde
or rather the power and operacion off the worde
being preached were the Son of God him selfe, he
awnswered that this doctrine semed vnto him an olde
heresie confuted thouroughly of Illyricus, Melanchthō,
Caluin and diuers other writers. Which awnswer
nothing pleasing that Noble mā, our poore Minister
was forced to get him packing. Seing therefore
that he loste his labour and spent his time in vaine,
he stroke ouer to Morauia where the Anabaptistes
beare rule. Not that he minded to tary and abide with
them, but to trie and knowe their religion. But they
craftely preuēting him, asking him first of what religion
he was, though he went about the bush with
them, thinking to coulour the matter, yet they perceauing
that he liked not their rebaptising, he was also
chased from thence as an heretike.
            At the last after longe and wery trauail and trouble,
this poore Minister came vnto Vienna, where he
happened vpon a Catholike lerned man, vnto whom
he declared his trauaill, aduersites, and diuersites off
heresies that he chaunced vpon, beseching him for

the loue of God to helpe him and instruct him, howe
he might attaine to some sure and certaine doctrine,
and interpretatiō off holy scripture.A necessary lesson for deceiued protestants. Then was
it tolde him, that he should folowe such doctrine and
embrace such interpretation of Gods worde, as was
Catholike and vniuersally receiued in all places, and
at al times, casting awaie all priuat opinions and propre
interpretations of this secte or that secte. For it
was impossible that any priuat secte could admit the
Catholike exposition of scripture whiche is commō
to all, or that the sectes could euer agree among them
selues, eche one setting forthe his owne opinion and
condemning all the rest. As it is writen in the prophet
Ezechiel,Ezech. 13. 
               Wo be vnto these foolish prophetes which
folowe their owne sprit and see nothing. Therefore if he
would be a Christen man, and in all places be taken
for such, he should embrace and folowe the Catholike
vnderstanding of scripture, such as in Catholike
doctours and writers we find. From the which Catholike
and vniforme expositiō of scripture although
many in diuers countres haue failed, and departed, yet
before our time, it was in all places without contradictiō
or gainesaieng receiued and beleued, and many
thousands of soules haue in that belefe ben saued.
Beside that there are also yet diuers Christen Countres
and kingdomes, diuers natiōs and people, which
acknowledg no other doctrine or interpreation of
holy scripture, then the Catholike and olde accustomed:
which they haue receaued of the Apostles and
their first founders of religion. Wherein if any doubt

nowe a daies ariseth, or any cōtrary interpretation be
brought, it is most expedient to seke of the first and
most auncient teachers of Christen religion the truthe
thereof. For so Scripture willeth vs to do, and all
auncient and approued doctours, as in S. Irenee a writer
very nie vnto the Apostles, you may see, whose
wordes are these. These thinges then being so euident, we
ought not to seke the truthe at other mens handes,
               Lib. 3. cap. 4. cōtra hereses. 
               which we
maye easely haue of the Church.
               A Godly instruction of Ireneus. 
               For the Apostles left vnto
the church and layde vp in her as in a riche aumerie all truthe,
that whosoeuer listeth, may drawe of her the drinke of life.
For the Church is the gate of life, all other are theues. therefore
we must auoide them, but loue all that the Church teacheth
vs and embrace the traditiō of truthe. For what if there
were but a small matter called in controuersie, ought we not
to haue recourse to the most aūciēt Churches, in the which the
Apostles haue liued, and enquire of them the truthe and certainte
of our doubt? And what if the Apostles had not left vnto
vs scripture at all? ought we not to haue folowed the order
of tradition which they deliuered vntothē, whom they left to
gouuerne the Churche after them? the which order many nations
of Barbarous people such as beleue in Christ, do folowe:
hauing their saluation without paper and ynke, by the holy
ghoste writen in their harte, and keping diligently their olde
traditions. Thus farre S. Irenee. With this good lesson
and information the Lutheran Minister being
somewhat amended, afterward in shorte time vtterly
detesting all sectes and heresies, becometh a right good
Catholike. And surely so it happeneth, that who
so ones departeth from the church, if he entre but a

litle with other heresies, he is accompted an heretike
of the heretikes them selues. From the which
our Lorde of his tender mercy preserue vs alwaies. Amen.
            Our forefathers the auncient Germans were euer
accompted men of grauite, constancie, and of a setled
iudgement: not light brayned, inconstant or wauering
with euery wind as peraduenture some other
countres were noted for. For lightnes in dede in
men of wisedome is a greate blotte. But what can
be more light or more vaine, then to beleue euery light
person without any sure grounde of his doctrine?Eccle. 19. 
               He
that beleueth quickely, saith the wise man, is light of hart.
These preachers and newe ghospellers that nowe a
daies runne from countre to countre, be vile vagabondes,
light and wilde persones, men of no grauite,
nor whorthy of any authorite.The outvvarde be hauiour of the Lutheran in Germany. And that their outewarde
behauiour declareth. Their bearde they let
growe only vppon the vpper lippe, like the Turkes,
their cotes be cut shorte at the buttokes, with large
wide sleues, as the sergents or catchepolles in times
past were wont to haue, and thus like frogges they
leape in to the pulpit, crieng and creking there. Our
Confession of Auspurg is grounded vppon the writings
of the Apostles and Prophets,
               A vaine crake of protestants. 
               and hathe endured
these thirty yeares. Beholde good Catholike
reader a wonderous matter. The Confession of Augspurg
is thirty yeares olde. Is not this a maruailous lō
               ge
continaunce? and yet these felowes will not be a

knowen that our Catholike religion hath continued
these thousand fyue hundred yeares and aboue
twise their thirty, without breache or interruption.
            Nowe where they bable that their Confession is
grounded vppon the writings of the Apostles and
Prophets, doth not euery secte and euery heretike
crake the same? Do not the Anabaptistes crie, it is writen,
in the xxvj. of Marke. He that will not beleue, shall be
condemned.
               Euery heretike all ageth the scripture. 
               But children haue no faith and can not
beleue, ergo they can not be saued nor ought not be
baptised 
               
                  •
               Like wise the Zuingliās crie they not that
it is writē in the vj. of Ihon. The flesh profiteth nothing?
and therefore they will haue it but bread in the Sacrament?
Againe the scholers of Osiander alleage they not the
saying of the prophet the 23. of Ieremie. Iehouah is our
iustice? Who can denie but all these allegations be the
writinges of the Apostles and prophets? why thē do
the Lutherās abhorre the Anabaptistes? why condē
               ne
they Osiander and his felowes? why doth Luther
call Zuinglius an heretike? Do not they crie that
their doctrine, as well as the other crie that their Confession
is grounded vpon the writings of the Apostles
and prophets? yes they crie truly so, euen as lowde
and as truly as the Lutherans. What thē lacketh in
this matter? Truly not who alleageth Scripture, for
that euery heretike doth, but who can proue his doctrine
in dede not only in wordes by Scripture. For
who cā abide the preacher, be he neuer so Catholike,

that crieth only that his doctrine is grounded vppon
the writings of the Apostles and Prophets. It is not
sufficient to alleage and hudle vp many places of scripture,
which the heretikes do, as roundely as the Catholikes,
but you must by good reason and sure groū
               de
proue that those your places be well and duly alleaged
and expounded. But by what groūde and reason
may this be proued?
            By thre maners of waies. First the teacher of any
doctrine or preacher ought to proue and euidently
declare,Hovv interpretation of Scripture is tried true that his doctrine or interpretation of holy
Sripture is Catholike, deriued from the Apostles, receaued
through out whole Christendom, and continued
vnto our time. Secondarely that all the ordre,
maner, and disposition of the church of Christ in the
newe lawe was figured and shadowed by other obseruaunces
and doings in the olde lawe. Thirdly that euery
principall article of our Catholike religion hath
bē confirmed with some miracle, whereby the verite
of it hathe vnuincibly ben warranted. As for example.
            Amonge vs Catholikes it is a sure and vndoubtedThe body of Christ vn der one kinde per fit and vvhole.
point in our religion that in the blessed Sacrament of
the aultar, vnder one kinde the whole and perfit body
of Christe is contained as well as vnder bothe. This
point we first proue by the expresse worde of God,
vttered by the Apostle saying, that Christ can not be diuided.
               1. Cor. 1.
Nowe that this saying of the Apostle is well
applied to the one kinde of bread in the Sacrament,
the common practise of Christes Catholike churche

these many hundred yeares dothe abundantly
witnesse. Againe it is proued by an euident figure of
the olde lawe. For we reade in Moyses,Exodi. 16. that although
some gathered more, some lesse of Manna (which vndoubtedly
as S.2. Cor. 10. Paule witnesseth was the figure of our
Lordes supper) yet he that gathered lesse, had as much
as he that gathered more. So Hilarius pope of Rome
decreeth,De Cōsecr. dict. 2. cap. vbi pars. saying. Where parte of the body is, there is the
whole, for the like is in the body of our Lorde that was in
Manna, that figured it. For not the visible quantite is to
be considered in this misterie, but the spirituall efficacie and
vertu of the Sacrament. Last of all this hath ben confirmed
by so sundry and straūge miracles wrought from
God, that who so hath any sparckle of Christen faith
remaining in him, can neuer doubt, but that the body
of Christ is as well vnder one kinde, as vnder bothe.
The stories of the Iewes may testifie clerely this
matter, which happened in diuers places, as at Passau,
Breslau,
               Bedurum. Vratisluia Ratispona. 
               Regenspurg and Tekendorph in Bauaria, in the
yeare of our Lorde 1337. and afterward at Berlin in the
Marchise of Brandeburg in the yere 1512.In the yeare. 1556. Vide Pontanum li. 5 fol. 432. and now lately
in Pole in the dyocese of the Archebishop of
Gnesna. In whiche all places it hathe ben seen, that
out of the Hoste of our Lordes body, foined in with
daggers by the Iewes, bloud hath gushed out, and many
other miracles haue befallen. The which all surely,
almightie God of his mercie hath wrought for
the confirmation of his churche in this article, that
vnder the forme of bread is fully contained his precious
body and bloud, and for the conuicting also of

the damnable heresie of the Maniches, who aboue a
thousand yeares agone, affirmed that vnder the forme
of bread was the body without bloud.
            This I haue brought in for an example, to show howe
the Catholike doctours are able to proue euery article
of Catholike religiō: That is, by the Catholike,
vniuersal, and receaued expositiō of holy scripture, by
the figures and shadowes of the olde lawe, by the operation
of miracles Surely who can thus proue his doctrine,
he may boldely saie that it is grounded vppon
the writings of the Apostles and prophets.
            Nowe if the Confessionistes speake as they think,
when they saie their doctrine is grounded vppon the
Apostles and prophets, and that they will proue it to
be so in dede, let them trie their Confession and Apologie
also by these waightes. Let them from the first
article vnto the last, showe first that their doctrine is
the right and Catholike exposition of Gods worde,
then whether they can confirme it by any one miracle,
last of all let them showe the maner and order
of their Lutheran church to haue ben prefigured and
shadowed in the olde lawe. If they can so do, I
will warrant them, that all Christē people wil gladly
subscribe to their articles and beleue accordinge to
their doctrine. But if they are not able to perfourme
this, then let them not obiect to vs their Confession or
Apologie. let them suffer vs quietly and frely perseuere
in our Catholike and auncient religion, and we will
not let them to crie, to sweare and forsweare that their
Confession is grounded vpon the writings of the

Apostles and prophets.
            And thus much hitherto haue we spoken as touching
that which our Lorde saide. Vppon the chaire of
Moyses sit the scribes and pharises,
               Matth. 13. 
               do all thinges that they
shall bidde you to do. For hitherto haue we talked howe
to trie true doctrine, and howe to knowe such as sit in
dede vpon the chaire of Moyses. It remaineth nowe
to speake of the later part of Christes saying. But do
not as they do.
               VVhy the protestāts bark at the euil life of the clergy. Which we must also no lesse discusse
then the former. For in this our miserable and vnhappy
time bicause heretikes can not ouerthrowe by
any good reason the very chaire of Moyses, the doctrine
of the church, they take holde of the euill life
of the clergy, and barke at the dissolute liuing of those
that sit in the chaire, making the people beleue
that their doctrine is no other then their life and behauiour
is: inferring very absurdely, that the doctrine
and the life is all one and can not be diuers: which
wicked opiniō hath bred much strife and caused muche
trouble in the Christen common welth: as in the
writings of the fathers we may reade treating of the
heresies of the Donatistae, Encratitae, Cathari, and Apostolici:
But we haue in holy scripture markes inoughe
and that euident, to discern heresies which procede of
euill doctrine,Mat. 18. Tit. 3. from the euill life, which procedeth of
men. For heresie being a very plage and poison of
Christen religion, S. Paule biddeth vs auoide and flie
from the heretike after the first or second admonition. Bicause
he is subuerted that is such a one, and offendeth being condemned
by his owne proper iudgemēt. And our Lorde biddeth

vs to accompt him for an hethen and publicane that heareth
not the church. And publicanes were a sorte of mē
with whom it was not lawfull for the Iewe to kepe
cōpany withall. S. Antony also that holy and famous
ermite in his last wordes spoken before his death vnto
his scholers, left thē these two godly and wholesome
lessons, and most necessary for our time,Tvvo good and godly lessons of S. Antony. as that
notable bishop Athanasius writing his life reporteth.
the first was. Auoide ye the venim of al schismatikes and he
retikes. and folowe hardly the hatred that I bore alwaies against
thē: for they are the enemies of Christ, and you knowe
I neuer had softe or paisible cōmunication with them. The
second lesson is this, Kepe aboue al thinges your vpright
faith in Christ: and the religious traditiō of your forefathers,
which you haue lerned by the reading of holy scripture and
by my poore aduertismēt frō time to time. This cōmaundemēt
of auoiding and shunning heretikes is not made
for the lerned only,Math. 7. but also for the simple and vnlerned.Matth. 15.
Which is readely proued by the sayings of our Sauiour.
Take ye hede of false prophets. and againe. If the blinde
leade the blinde, bothe fal into the ditche. and such other.The churche muste not beforsaken for the euill life of mē in the church. But to forsake the church and the Catholike doctrine
of the same by reason of the disordinat life of priestes
and other prelats, Christ not only neuer cōmaū
               ded
it, but also very straitely forbad it: declaring the parable
of the husband man which forbad his seruaūtes to
wede out the darnell from the corne. Lest peraduenture saythe
he, gathering the darnell ye plucke vp also the corne. let
them therefore growe bothe together vntell the haruest time,
               Mat. 13.
               and then I will saie vnot the ripers, gather first together all

the darnell and binde it vp in bundles that it may be burned,
but the good corne gather in to my barne. For as it becometh
not the seruaunte to take vppon him the correction
of such matters in the familie, as the master
vpon some waightie consideration would haue reserued
to him selfe, so much lesse in the church of Christ
maye the laye men (whose parte it is to obey and folowe,
not to prescribe lawes and orders) take vppon
thē the rule and dominion which appertaineth only
to bishops and rulers in the church. Farder that this
is the true meaning of our Sauiour in the place aboue
alleaged, he declareth by an other similitude of the
shrowde seruaunte, which saide in his harte. My Master
will not come of a longe season,
               Mat. 24. 
               and thereupon beginneth
to strike his felowe seruauntes, eating and drinking and making
good chere. But the Master of that seruaunt will come
(sayth Christ) in the daye that he loketh not for, and in the
howre that he knoweth not, and shall cutte him of, and put
his portiō with the hypocrites. there shall be weping and gnashing
of tethe: Our Sauiour hath here plainly and roundely
(I trowe) warned the laie people, not only not to
medle with, chasten, or correct their bishops, pastours
and Curates whom Christ (as the Apostle saythe) hathe
appointed and set ouer them,
               Ephes. 4. but also not to trouble
instructe, rule or reprehend their felowe laye folke.
though nowe a daies (alas) nothing is more common
then clouters, coblers, sadlers, taylers, cytezens, and
men of the countre, gentlemen and noble men to take
vpon them in the church of Christ the parte of
Masters and rulers to interpret holy scripture, to prescribe

their Curates howe and what to preache, howe
to administrat sacramēts, setting them vp and downe
at their pleasure, whereas they ought by the expresse
commaundement of S. Paule obey and submitt them
selues vnto their curates, vicars and bishops. For thus
he writeth vnto the Hebrewes. Obey them that haue the
ouersight of you, and submit your selues vnto them,
               Hebre. 13. 
               for they
watche for your soules, euen as they that muste geue accompte.
that they may do it with ioye and not with grief. For that
is not expedient for you.
            
            But you will saie. These papiste bishops and priestes
be men vnlerned, incontinent, dissolute, geuen to
ryot, ambition, to couetousnes, to pompe, and to all
vice. If you saie this of some certain amonge the clergy
it may be true. But if you speake of the whole clergy,
it is very false and vntrue. For not only amōge the
laye people, but amonge the clergy also (praised be
God) there be right vertuous, sober, and godly men, vpon
whom the fautes of the rest can not be fathered.
Yet if perhaps all these vices and abominations were
found in the whole clergy and rulers of Christes flocke,
notwithstanding the commaundement of Christ
must remaine in his full force and effect,Matth. 13. 
               That the darnell
be suffred to growe.
               Mat. 23. 
               that the scribes and pharises sitt in
the chaire of Moyses: do as they commaunde you to do, but do
not as they do thēselues. Againe.Heb. 13. 
               Obey thē that haue the ouersight
of you for they watche as those that must geue accompte
for your soules.
               Matth. 7. And euery man must plucke first the beame
out of his owne eye, and then take the mote out of the priestes
eye, Let vs therefore, good Christian reader, suffer the

church to stande and continewe in his former and
most receaued course. For without doubt she is so surely
grounded vpon the Rocke, that hell gates shall neuer
be able to ouerthrowe her or preuaile against her.
               Math. 16. As for the
life of the clergy God is their iudge. For as of virginite
so of priesthode man can not iudge. Yet we discharge
not here the clergy of the Ecclesiasticall censures
and punishements. For as it is sayde to the laye
men,Mat. 13. touching the euill life of the clergy, Let the darnell
growe on, so is it saide to the bishops, (as S. Augustin
declareth against the Donatistes)1. Cor. 5. 
               Take awaye the
euill from amonge you. Wherefore we reade of that notable
Emperour Constantinus the great, at what time
certain bishops offered vp certain cōplaintes to be determined
by him, to haue awnswered in this sorte.
God hath ordained you priestes in his church:
               Eccl. histor li. 10. ca. 2 
               and hath geuen
you authorite to iudge vs: and therefore we are well iudged
of you: but you cānot be iudged of any men. It were surely
very expedient that some reformation were had, to
correct and chasten the corrupted clergy according to
the prescription of their owne Canons, to thentent
that such offences as rise in mens hartes against
the clergy and the church throughe their inordinat
life, might be remedied and taken awaie. But this is not
in the hands of the laite or temporall rulers, whose part it is
to suffer and obey.
            
         
         
            
            OF TRANSLATING
THE BIBLE
IN TO THE VVLGAR
TONGVE.
            
               ANother thing that the Lutherās obiect
vnto me, is, that they saie, it hathe
ben by my meanes and counsell procured
that the Bible is no more reade
in the vulgar tongue: especially as Luther
translated it. Nowe although I remembre not
that I euer saide or wrote that the laye men ought
not to haue the Bible in their vulgar tongue, yet iff
I had so done,Laye men are not cō
                  maunded to reade Scripture it had ben no greate trespas. For surely
I could neuer yet finde in holy scripture, that the
common people ought of necessite to reade scripture.
But that of the reading thereof much schisme and
the destruction of many soules hath proceded, daily
experience teacheth vs. And holy write warneth vs,
where our Sauiour thus speaketh. It is geuen to you to
knowe the misterie of the kingdome of God,
               Luc. 8. 
               but to the rest in
parables, that seing yet they see not, and hearing they vnderstande
not. Who are these vnto whom our Lorde
saith, To you it is geuen, &c? Surely the Apostles and
their successours the rulers of Christes flocke.Vide Theo philactū 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Luc. cap. 8 And
who are they that should lerne by parables? surely
such men, as were better not to knowe the misteries,
lest misusing them they procure them selues a greater

damnation.Math. 7. For precious stones ought not to be cast before
hogges, and such of all likelihod are the laye ignorant
people. Beside our Lord in that his former sayeng
may seme very well to haue alluded to the .xij.
tribes of Israel: whiche figured the twelue Apostles,Exod. 24. Num. 11.
and to the threscore and ten elders chosen out of
those twelue tribes, which also did represente the
threscore and twelue disciples that were beside the
Apostles. These threscore and ten elders of the Iewes
had only the power (as stories declare) to reade and
and vnderstand the misteries of the Scripture.The hebrevv text could not be readen of the cō
                  mon Ievves. For at
that time the hebrewe text vsed of the Iewes, had no
vowels in all the text but only consonants. And this
maner of reading without vowels was knowen only
to the threscore and .x. elders: the other Iewes knewe
it not, lest peraduenture the precious misteries of
that olde lawe should be cast before hogges, the rude
and curious people.Vide Iosephum, Iusti num mart. in suo paraenetico. I renaeum lib 3. cap. 25. Clemē. Alex. lib. 1. Stromatū. Hilariū in 2. psal. August. de ciuit. dei. lib. 18. cap. 42 & 43. These threscore and ten elders also
very miraculousely translated the Hebrew Bible
in to Graeke, before the coming of Christ, they only
hauing the knowledge of the text. So in like wise
bicause the threscore and twelue disciples were chosen
to reade and vnderstande the misteries of holy
write, vnto whom priestes haue succeded (as in the
principall seas and Bishopriks in Christendom by
stories we are able to showe) therof it is euident, that
vnto Priestes, Pastours and Bishops (whō God hath
placed to ouersee his church) the grace of the holy
ghost allwaies assisteth to interpret and expounde
the misteries of holy scripture by parables vnto the

people, as farre as for them is requisit. Wherefore the
vnlerned laie men maye well be admonished to refrain
from all curious and gredy reading of holy scripture.
First, lest rashely and vnaduisedly they take vppon
them the office cōmitted by God to the elders,
to priestes, and bishops: wich presumptiō we see hath
ben greuousely punished in the examples of King Ozias
of Core,
               2. Par. 26. 
               Dathan and Abiron.
               Num. 16. Thē also because experience
of our time hath taught, howe dangerous it
is that euery laie man, craftes man, labourer, or otherwise,
all without discretion, should reade and examine
scripture at their pleasure.
            The sectes of the Picardi of the Anabaptistes of the
Swenckfeldians and diuers other heresies proceded off
no other cause,The dangers proceding of the laities reading Scripture then that certain vnlerned laie people
toke vpon them to reade, interpret, and expounde
scripture. And what text do these vnlerned men reade?
surely such as Luther him selfe or some other archeretike
hathe translated in to the vulgar tongue,
and corrupted partly with false additions and preuy
foisting, partly with hereticall gloses put in the margin.
Againe they come all to reading of it with a certain
preiudice that Luther hath appointed them, teaching
that he which will reade holy scripture,
ought not to bringe with him any iudgement, but
seke it in the text. Which is as much to saie, that the
vnlerned laie man nothing informed before in the
faith of the church, nothing prepared with deuotion
and humilite, nothing instructed by what meanes to

vnderstande holy scripture may rashly and roundely
set vpon it, as if it were Beuis of Hampton or a tale of
Robin hoode.The vvel spring of heresies novv a daies. In this case if the vnlerned mā sodenly
imagin an exposition of some place, that liketh
his braine, and serueth well his humour, be it neuer
so contrary and repugnant to the true vnderstanding
of holy scripture, yet he will not be brought from it,
but cleauing vnto it tothe and naile forgeth him selfe
a newe religion, frameth a faith of his owne, and setteth
vp in his hart a newe idoll, in the defence whereof
he will spend his body, his goods, his life, and his
soule. And this is lo the well spring of sondry heresies
nowe a daies.
            Wherein me thinketh it fareth,A similitude vvorthy to be noted. as if the common
craftes men of a cite, vpon a stomach of priuat presumption
would sodenly displace all phisicians and
remoue poticaries from their shops, persuading themselues
to knowe as wel as they the vertu of their medicines,
balmes, drogges, waters, ointmēts, rootes, herbes
and other such ware: and hereuppon would take
vpon them to minister bothe to them selues and vnto
other, potions, purgations, and all kinde of medicine.
Were not these men thinke you, likely to do
much good in shorte time? especially if other would
be so madde as to beleue them? would not experience
quickely teache them to call home againe their olde
Masters, Phisicians and poticaries, and set these men
to their craftes againe? Surely so it is of the holy scripture
translated in to the vulgar tongue and so made
common for all men. For the laye man may so reade

them, and picke out metsons mete for his appetit: but
for lacke of skill (as experience hath tried) he will cast
him selfe downe being whole before, and so (as they
saie) shall paie for touching. For in very dede the vnlerned
man is not acquainted with the phrase of scripture,
he knoweth not the language of the holy ghoste,
and although he heare the sounde, yet he seeth
nothing, nor vnderstādeth not to what ende or purpose
this or that be spokē. For it fareth in scripture as in
medicines, which although they are ordained of God
for the helthe of mans body, and are the giftes of
God, yet if they be not vsed in time and place as the
desease requireth, and as the lerned physician appointeth,
they may be mischef in stede of a remedy: and
serue to kill man being made to heale man. By this similitude
the vnlerned maie gather, howe dangerous
it is for him to reade the scripture in his mother tongue:
especially with the entēt to interpret it as he shal
thinke best him selfe.
            Nowe whereas I haue in dede founde faute with
the translation of Luther, and haue withdrawen men
frō reading of it,Hovv and vvhere Luther hath corrupted the text of the Bible. I haue don it vpon good reason and
waightie considerations. For it is euident that Luther
in his translatiō hath bothe corrupted the text omitting
and altering the very wordes, and also hath depraued
the sence of the text by false and hereticall gloses
partly added in the margin, partly foisted in the text it
selfe. So by clipping awaie the termes of the text, and
patching on the suttle shiftes of his owne braine, he
hath gaily coloured his pernicious doctrine with the

painted shethe of pretended scripture. I wil here bringe
you for a taste some fewe examples of his liegerdemain,
geuing you to vnderstāde, what conscience he
is likely to haue in other doctrine, that feareth not
to iugle, to cogge, and to foist in holy scripture it selfe.
            S. Paule writeth thus vnto the Ephesians according
to the Latin translation.Ephes. 6. Which also worde for
worde agreeth with the graeke text.S. Paule corrupted by Luther. 
               Wherefore take vnto
you the whole armour of God that ye maye be able to resist
in the euill daie, and stande perfite in all thinges. These
wordes of S. Paule the honourable and lerned man
George Gienger one of the preuie counsell vnto the
Emperoures Maiestie, translated after this sorte. Darum
ergreift den harnisch Gottes / auf daffir
andem boesen tag widersteē kundt / vnd in al
len dingē / als die volkommen / vesteen mijghr:
that is Therefore take on the barnis of God to the entent,
that in the euill daie you maie resist, and in all thinges stande
as the perfite But Luther clipping the text translated
it thus. Omb des wegen so ergreifft den
hamisch Gottes auff daf ir widersteen kundt
an dem bosen tag / vnd in allen ewren thun besteen
mijgt. which soundeth thus. Therefore so take
on the barnis of God to the entent that you may
resiste in the euill daie and stande in all workes,
In the which sentence Luther omitteth the worde
perfecti in laten, als die volkommen in dutche, perfyte
in englishe. which deprauation of the text in this

place, and cutting awaie the worde perfyte, serued his
turne very well to raise vp againe the stinking heresie
of the Maniches. For he writeth that. Sinne is
parte of man, and a thing giltie it selfe. which cleaueth
also so fast vnto man, that it can in this life, be
taken a waie by no vertu of the grace of God or of
the Sacraments, and therefore that man remaineth
allwaies in sinne: nor is not able to attaine to any
point of righteousnes in this life.
               The maner of he retikes. And herein Luther
as the maner and custome of heretikes is, fighteth against
scripture with scripture it selfe. For S. Paule
saieth: Not bicause I am alreadye perfyte, but I folowe iff
that I may comprehend.
               Philip. 3. and a litle after. Let vs therefore
as many as be perfyte be thus wise minded. Here he maketh
mencion of two sortes of perfectiō. One which
cōsisteth in hope and is looked for in the life to come
of the wich the Apostle in an other place speaketh By
hope we are saued.
               Rom. 8. an other, which Christ speaketh of
saying. Be ye perfyte as your father of heauē is perfyte,
               Matth. 5. and
again. Be merciful as your father of heauē is merciful which
perfectiō is,Luc. 6. as for exāple, that oure glory be the witnes of
our owne conscience,
               2. Cor. 1. which we are boūde to haue in this
life, and therefore ought to labour, as S. Paule before
exhorted vs,Ephes. 6. Lib. de seruo Arbitrio. Caluiaus de prae destruat. that taking vpon vs the armour of God, we
may stāde perfyte in all thinges. Now Luther admitteth
no perfectiō in this life, but teacheth, that man is so
farre from being perfyte in this life, that God doth
compell him to sinne. S. Paule vseth often times the

worde perfection: but so that he confoundeth not the
perfectiō of the life to come, with the present: which
in this life as procliue and subiect to sinne, maye and
ought be kept of vs as farre as our infirmitie beareth.
Yet this perfection as litle as it is, Luther to the entent
he might vtterly take awaie, he sticketh not as
you see, to clippe the coyne of Gods worde, and bereue
the text of the worde perfite, lest any man perhaps
woulde labour to be honest and vertuous.
            The like slight vsed he in an other place of the Apostle,
for the like purpose and intent. For whereas
the Latin and Greke text bothe do reade, By the lawe
we haue knowleadge of sinne.
               Rom. 2. Luther corrupteth it, translating
after this sorte. Durchs Gesetz ist nur erkantuus
dee Sijnden. that is, By the lawe is nothing
but knowledg of sinne. For as before he clipped
awaie the worde perfyte,
               Lib. Saxonice ecclesiae contra Geor. Maiorē. Amsdorffius in libello, Bona opera saluti obesse. so here he foisteth in the
worde Nur (nothinge but) to buylde againe the former
heresie vpon this text. But although Luther (as
by his writinges it is manifest, and as the Illyricans
and Antinomi his scholers do yet teache) professed at
the first, that the lawe nor before nor after iustification
is necessary: and that good workes were pernicious
to saluatiō, yet afterward writing against the
Antinomi his scholers, he corrected his former doctrine
after this sort. That the lawe before iustification is in
dede necessary for the knowleadg of sinne, but afterward is
vtterly vnprofitable. For the maintenaunce therefore
of this Pelagiā and Manichean heresie, the shifting in

of the worde Nur (nothinge but) fitted his purpose
maruailous well. For by this only worde he hath
planted againe two notable and auncient heresies.Vide Nileuitanum et Arausicanū Cōciliae
The one of the Pelagians, whiche saide that the lawe
auailed nothing, but for the knowleadg of sinne, teaching
what we ought to do and not to do, and that
by the ghospell we haue no grace geuen vs to perfourme
that which by the lawe we learne to be good
and godly. An other of the Maniches which teache
(as Luther doth) that the lawe is made for wicked
men not for Christen men: which can be helde in
by no lawe, nor are not bounde to any good workes.
            In an other place where the Apostle according to
the Latin and Greke text,1. Cor. 9. hath thus. Haue we not power
to leade about a sister a womā? Luther thus trāslateth
it.This place is also corrupted in our English trāslations printed in the yeares 1549. and 1551. 
               Haben wir nicht macht ein Schwester zum
Weib mit vmbher zu fijrn, that is, Haue we not
power to leade about a sister for a wife? Here againe
like a false foister he shifteth in counterfaited droges
amonge the swete spice of holy scripture: adding
thereunto of his owne these wordes zum Weib.
that is for a wife. which is farre different from the
meaning of the holy ghoste: and was neuer writen
by the Apostle, nor reade in holy scripture from the
beginning of the church by any Christen Catholike
man. But what intended Luther by this his addition?
surely to roote out of mens hartes all loue off
chastite and virginite. (lest perhaps if S. Paule and the
rest of the Apostles had caried no wiues aboute with

them, some woulde be content also by their example
to lacke them) yea he maketh the blessed Apostle a
lyar, whereby he might remoue him cleane out of
the Bible. For the Apostle say the in an other place. I
would haue allen
                     •
                  n be as my selfe.
               1. Cor. 7. That is (as he expoundeth
himselfe) that all priestes and preachers off the
worde of God should abstaine from matrimonie and
all pleasure of the flesh, to the entent that they might
studie rather to please God then their wife. As also
againe when he saythe.Ibidem. 
               He that marieth his virgin doth
wel, and he that marieth her not doth better. meaning thereby
that bothe are right good, bothe to mary and
to liue single. Yet whem one of the twaine and the
better must be chosen, certain it is that the Apostle
preferreth single life before mariage. But Luther by
iumbling in only these wordes,Luther addeth to the text. 
               Lum Weib, that is,
for a wife hath taken awaie the meaning and godly
intēt of the Apostle not only out of the scripture, but
also out of thousandes of mens hartes,Luther enemy to Varginite and vvedlock. not without
great losse of many a soule. He hath beside hereby
not only disgraced the excellent vertu of chastite and
virginite, but also brought so in contempt the holy sacramēt
of wedlock (as if it were in inuention of mā)
that nothing is now more common then (as Luther
him self teacheth in the sixt tome of his workes)
If the wife will not let the maide come. And there
be yet extant certaine epistles of Luther and Melanchthon,
and aduises geuen by their letters wherein
they do openly permit and pronounce it to be lawefull,

               that one husband may haue two lawfull wiues.
               Luther and Melanchthō teache pluralite of vviues.
I could also alleage and note with my finger diuers
examples hereof agreable to the doctrine of these
blessed ghospellers.
            
               Neither may any man here thinck that this false
and deceitefull translation of Luther is any newe inuented
tricke of him selfe: it was practised also in the
time of S. Augustin, who cōfuteth it with these wordes.
For vpon this respect (sayth he speaking of relief made
to the Apostles)Lib. de opere Monachorum. cap. 4. godly and faithefull wemen hauing
wordly substaunce, went about with the Apostles and ministred
vnto thē of their substance, that they lacked nothing necessary
for this present life. Which S. Paule showeth he might
lawfully haue done, as the other Apostles did: but he saieth
afterward he woulde not vse his power and authorite herein.
And this point certain men not perceauing, expounded not
asister woman, where the Apostle saith, haue we not power
to leade aboute a sister woman, but a wife. These men seme to
be deceaued by the ambiguite of the graeke worde.
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . For that in
graeke one worde signifieth bothe a woman and a wife. Allthouh
the Apostle so placed that greke worde, that they
might not be deceaued. For neither he sayde a woman only,
but a sister woman: nor to mary, but to leade aboute. but other
interpretours were nothing deceaued with this ambiguite,
translating it a woman not a wife. Thus farre S.
Augustin, very plainely and roundely confuting the
fonde interpretation or translation of Luther.
               Of the Canonicall hovv resvsed in the churche.
            
            There is in the church a laudable custome, and
godly institution of the Apostles to applie holy scripture
to the passion of Christ. So that Lessons and

other praiers in the church, especially of priestes and
other in holy orders, be so deuided and distributed in
to certain howres, that bothe the storie of Christ his
passion and the rest of holy scripture may by that orderly
distribution more cōueniently be vnderstāded.
Hereof (as we haue before touched) were instituted
the Canonical houres of Matins, of Prime, of the iij.vj.
and ix. howres, of Euēsong and Cōplin. And that
al this is not by mans cōstitutions or traditiōs, it may
by diuers places of holy scripture euidently be confirmed.
Dauid in a certain psalme writeth.Psal. 118. 
               Seuē times in
the daye haue I saide laudes vnto the vpon the iudgemēts of
thy righteousnes. And that this was done at certain houres
and prescribed times it appereth by an other place
of the same psalme. I arose at midnight to confesse vnto the
vpon the iudgements of thy righteousnes. And in an other
psalme he writeth.Psal. 54. 
               At euening: at morning and at none
daie I wil praie and he shall heare my voice. Morning praier
in the church is coūted the Prime. None daie, the
ix. howre after Masse. At euening the Euēsong. In the
Actes we reade of the Sixte howre. Where it is writen
that Peter ascended in the vpper partes to praie about the
Sixte howre.
               Acto. 10. The iij. also the vj. and the ix. howre aremēcioned
in Daniel. at the which howres he praied
with teares ouer against Hierusalē.Da
                     •
                  . 6. Complin time of
praier appeareth by that which S. Luke writeth of our
Sauiour. It happened in those daies he wēt vp in to the Moū
                  te
to praie alone,
               Lut. 6. 
               and continued all night in, praier to God.
These howres also by Gods institutiō are so distributed
for the remēbraūce of Christes passiō, that euery

howre cōtaineth the remēbraunce of some speciall
acte of the passiō. For at Matins time which is in the
night Christ was borne, takē, beatē, mocked and scorned.
At the prime which is in the morning, he was
presented to Pilate and falsely accused. At the same time
he appeared after his resurrectiō vnto Mary Maudelen.
At the third howre he was whipped,Actor. 2. crowned
with thornes, mocked, cōdēned, and bearing his crosse,
was lead to the place where he should be crucified.
At the same time also the holy ghost was geuē to the
Apostles. At the vj. howre he was crucified, geuen to
drinke with gall and vineger, and reputed amonge
theues. At the ninth howre he rendred vp his Spirit
in to the handes of the Father. At Euensong he was
takē downe from the Crosse: at last in the Complin
time he was anoynted and buried.
            This laudable, godly, and deuoute custome of daily
setting forthe the passion of Christ by seuen distincted
howres of praier, the Apostles and their successours
haue allwaies from time to time reuerently obserued.
But Luther to the greate reproche of Christes
church, and inestimable dōmage of Christen soules,
hath in many places vtterly extinguished and abolished
it: placing for it the olde cursed heresie of Vigilantius.
Which his purpose lest it should in any point be
staied, such expresse scripture as declareth this maner
of praier, he thought good by his false translation to
depraue. In the actes of the Apostles according to the
graeke and latin text, thus we reade.Actor. 3. 
               Peter and Ihon
went vp in to the temple at the ninth howre of praier. In

all languages these wordes (at the ninth howre of praier)
be so translated, that they signifie some certain determinat
and appointed time of praier: which Luther
being desirous to abolise, interpreteth that place
thus. Petrus vnd Johannes gieugen hmauff
in den Tempel vmb die neund stund zu veten.
that is. Peter and Ihon wente vp in to the temple
about nyne of the clocke to praie. as though that the
Apostles had by chaunce, and not of a set and prefixed
order praied at nine of the clocke. And as though
it were all one to reade in scripture,Great cō fusion in the churche by small alteration of the scripture the howre of praier,
or in some howre to praie. But if a man list to see
what greate desolation and confusion hath ensued
of so litle an alteration of the text in churches and
other place of godly foūdatiō, let him remēbre with
him self the nūber of religious houses, Monasteries,
Nunneries, Chappels, Hospitals, Almes houses, yea
and cathedral churches, where God hath in times
past ben honoured and serued at distinct and sundry
times for the continuall remembraunce of his blessed
passion, bothe daie and night: and nowe no seruice
there at all: but are become either prophane dwelling
places, or schismaticall conuenticles. And all this
vnder pretence of abuses, which though they had
crepte in and blemished that most godly institution
and order of Christes church, the abuse should haue
ben corrected: the good vse should haue remained.
            In the same chapter of the Actes of the Apostles,
S. Peter when he had healed the same man, he spake
thus vnto the people.Acto. 3. 
               Ye men of Israel why maruaile

you at this, or why looke ye so on vs, as though by our owne
power or vertu we had made this man goe? that which
the Latin text hathe pietatem the Greke hathe 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
and is well translated vertu or godlynes, Luther hath
translated it merit, as though the Apostles had denied
merit. But there is great difference betwene vertu or
godlynes, and merit or desert. Yet Luther to take away
all loue of vertu and good workes, laboured all
that he could to persuade men, That good workes
haue no merit, dejert or rewarde before God, and
that they procure nothing but goddes wrath. Wherefore
all merites seming to Luther vaine and superfluous,
for the maintenaunce of this his heresie,
scripture must be corrupted: seing directly it would
not serue him.
            In like maner behaued he him selfe in the Sacrament
of holy Orders, to the entent he might take awaie
all priesthood out of the church, and set in their
places rennagat prentices, and vnthrifty seruaunts,
such as had spent their owne and robbed their masters,
to gouuerne the newe church by him erected.
For this his purpose scripture must be wrethed and
peruerted: lest the holy ghospeller might perhaps seme
to saie somewhat without scripture. Therefore
whereas S. Pause admonisheth his disciple Timothe
whom he had then ordained bishop of Ephesus, to
vse well those giftes and graces of God, as had ben
geuen him with laying on of the handes of the priest
hood, that is, in taking his holy Orders, vising to him
these wordes,1. Tim. 4. 
               Despise not the gift which is in the, which

was geuen the thourough prophesy with the laieng on of hā
                  des
by the authorite of priesthood, for the worde priesthood,
Luther hath translated,Oure English trāslations printed in the yeares 1549. and 1551. haue corrupted this place also. 
               Der altisten, that is.
of the elders. Persuading thereby the people that holy
orders is no Sacrament, and that it is not necessary
that those which must minister the Sacraments,
preache, and gouuerne churches, be ordained of bisshops
which haue the authorite of priesthood, but
that it suffiseth to be called to the ministery by
the elders of the people as of the mayre, the shrifes,
and other temporal rulers.
               The Lnther ns Ministres Whereof we see it hath
happened that in Cites, townes, and Villages, where
the Lutherā ghospel taketh place, showe makers and
sadlers, poticaries and pedlers, taylers and tinkards,
butlers aud bakers, and such other rif raf, neuer admitted
to holy orders, men of no lerning nor sobriete
take vpō them the holy office of priesthood, preache
their pleasure to the people to the vtter destruction
of many a soule, and ministre the Sacraments
without authorite thereunto.
            But Luther and Melanchthon perceauing at the last
this cōfusion, proceding by reason of this false interpretation
to growe on so farre, that euery light and
seditious knaue, as for example Thomas Muntzer in
Turinge, Bernard Rotman in Westphalia, Matthias Illyricus
in Saxony and diuers other in other places toke
vppon them (not being called nor ordained, nor
admitted by the masters of Wittenberg) to preache
and gouuerne the people, sowing newe heresies and

sondry schismes in the congregation:Luher and Melanchthō chaung
                     •
                   their language. sodenly they
chaunged their tune. For Luther to refraine a litle
his euill translation that it may serue for the Sacrament
of order, in his last edition of the Bible, vppon
the worde Altisten of the elders, he made this glose in
the margin.So do also the later English translations printed in the yeares. 1
                     •
                  52. and. 
                     •
                  502. 
               That is, of the priestes or of the
priesthood. Melanchthon for the like consideration,
though at the first he counted all the Sacraments to
be but the inuention of man, and forged deceites, yet
in his booke of common places, he reakeneth holy
Order amonge the Sacraments, charging expresly
that it should be taken and vsed for a holy Sacrament.
            But this recantation of Luther and Melanchthon
neither serued then to any purpose,The sch
                     •
                  
                  clers of Luther disobey their Master. nor is nowe off
any force. For the brethern stande stoute
                  •
                in that
which Luther and Melanchthon taught first, that holy
order and priesthood was no sacrament at all, that euery
mā and womā were priestes. Although this be an
olde condemned heresie of the Aerians of Aetius andVide lib. 2. Epiphā. de haeresibus & Bernardum.
               Pepusius raised vp now againe of Martin Luther by
chaunging the worde Priesthoode in the worde Elders
cōtrary the meaning of S. Paule and the common
receaued interpretation of all Christendom hitherto.
Yet hath it pleased Master Luther to renew
and preache to the worlde and olde detestable heresie
vnder pretence of S. Paules doctrine, and the expresse
worde of God.
            Nowe although these fewe examples might suffise
to declare the honesty of Luther and vpright dealing

in translation of the holy scripture, yet for the
more declaration thereof, I will adde yet one place
notably misused and willfully corrupted of Luther.
The Apostle writeth thus to the Colossians.Coloss. 2. 
               Beware
lest any man deceiue you by philosophie or vaine deceites after
the tradition of men, after the elements of the worlde and
not after Christ. Thus readeth the greke and the latin
text. But Luther drawing after his fashion the scripture
for his purpose, where it is in the text, After the
elements of the worlde, he turneth it, Nach der welt
satzungen.
               So hathe our englishe trāslatiō, anno 1552. & 62. Vide Lutheri prefaetionem in annotat. Philippi in Pa
                        •
                     um.
                that is, after the lawes and ordinaunces
of the worlde. It is surely a straunge case to see howe
variabel and braynsicke these ghospellers are. At the
first broching of this newe ghospel, while Luther (as
the rumor was) lyued yet in his Patmus, Philip Melanchthon,
taught that sithen Christen men were all

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , taught immediatly of God him self, no man
should study philosophie. For al the writings of Plato,
Aristotle, Cicero, and such other were but friuolous
tales and daungerous deceites, and to be burned and
destroied (as in dede in many places so they were) but
onely the Bible ought to be read and studied. For by
these the holy ghoste would minister all knowledge
bothe to serue God, and to liue in this worlde, bothe
for euerlasting saluation and for this temporal estate.
That a Christē man should not liue a studious quyet
life,Genes. 2. for that it was writē, In the sweate of thy brow thou
shalt eate thy bread, that is (as they expounde it) thou
must be a plowemā, a showemaker, a bucher, a tayler,
or some such handy craftes man: and so with thy owne

labour get thy liuinge.
            
               This fowle errour, beside other occasions ministred
thereunto, was of Luther in sundry places of
his workes stoutely maintained and defended. One
of such places I will here at large alleage. Writing
vnto the Nobilite of Germany he hath these wordes.
The vniuersites also haue nede of an earnest and
sharp reformation.Tom. 6. fol. 589. Truly I must speake as I think.
let him be angry that listeth. VVhatsoeuer was instituted
or ordained vnder the pope, tended only to
the furderance of vice and encrease of errours. for
the vniuersites if they be not otherwise ordered
then they haue ben hitherto, what other thing are
they then (as it is noted in the Machabees) scholes
of children and of the greke glorie, where is all licentious
dissolutnes? holy Scripture and Christen
faith is not taught. but that blind ethnick philosopher
Aristotle ruleth aboue Christ him selfe. VVhe
refore by my aduise the Phisicks, the Methaphisiks,Luther condemneth good lerning.
the bookes de Anima, the Ethikes should vtterly
be abolished with all the rest of his workes
which professe to teache the naturall causes of thinges.
Although therein nether natural nor spirituall
knowledg is to be gotte. Beside that they are of
such obscurite, that fewe haue hitherto vnderstode
them, good wittes lesing bothe labour and time about

them. I dare well saie that euery coblar hath as
much knowleadg of natural thinges as is to be gotte
in those bookes. It greueth me euen to the hart
that this cursed, and crafty proude ethnike could so
longe a time abuse and deceaue the lerned men of
Christendō. VVith this scorge haue we ben whipped
for our sinnes.
            This much wrote Luther in the yere of our Lorde
1520. out of these and such other writings of Luther,
Carolostadius and Melanchthon first sucked out the
contempt of philosophie, and all good lerning being
so moued by the authorite of this german prophet,
Luther. And by the yeare 152
                  •
               . they furdered the matter
so farre that in many famous vniuersites and cites
all study of philosophie vtterly decaied. And although
this doctrine of Luther and Melanchthon taking
awaie from Christen men (as Iulian the apostat
               Nicephorus li. 10. cap. 26. histor. eccles.
               Emperour did) all honest discipline, liberall sciences
and good lerning, whereby the estat of Christēdom
hathe alwaies ben in knowleadg and vertu directed,
and to driue all men to handycraft workes and husbandry
only, by a rude and bestly doctrine, yet it so
serued that time, and was so wel liked, that at Wittē
               berg
many scholers burned all their bookes, and became
craftes men, sheaperdes, husband men and so
forth.And Melanchthō becometh a baker. See the Table folovving. Vratislauis.
                
               Carolostadius him selfe (being before Archedeacon
of Wittenberg) getting him to a village thereby became
sodenly a ploweman, tilled and sowed the grounde
him self, and brought wodde to the market of Wittenberg

to be solde. Beside, many other cites, especially
Breslau did shet vp cleane all scholes, and for the
space of certain yeares suffred their youth to roue abrode
without any education or instruction. Which
if a man had asked them why they did so, the text of
S. Paule serued them for a cloke of their foly where
it was writen. Beware ye that no man deceiue you by philosophie
and vaine suttelties after the tradition of men.
               Coloss. 2. But
now Luther perceauing afterward that this serued
nothing his purpose, retourning from his Patmus to
Wittenberg he corrected Melanchthon and draue Carolostadius
out of the dominiō of Wittenberg, professing
then openly and declaring, that without grammer,
logick, and philosophie, his ghospell could not be
spread abrode conueniently.
            Therefore in the yeare. 1524.Luther chaūgeth his hoode. writing to the Magistrates
and cites of Germanie of setting vp and main
taining scholes, he laboureth very ernestly to haue
restored againe, such as had decaied or were neglected:
making yet no mention of Carolostadius or Melanchthon
by whom that enormite was committed.
To quenche therefore and appaise the tumultes stirred
vp by his former doctrine and by Melanchthon,
letting passe the foresaied text of S. Paule, he teacheth,
that philosophie is good in it selfe, if it be wel vsed and
not abused to deceiue mē. Which in dede had ben of him
well saide, if he him selfe had not much abused philosophie
to sett forthe his fleshely ghospell, and to
persuade his wily and suttle opinons. But seing that
he could not without philosophie and helpe of scholes

vtter the wicked wares of his fresh and newe lerning,
letting passe (as I saide) the former text of the
Apostle, he toke holde of the wordes that folowed.
The elements of the worlde, turning it, the lawes and ordonaunces
of the worlde. For philosophie hindered
not so much his purpose, as the Magistrates and
and lawes of the countre did. Whose authorite onlesse
he first ouerthrew, drawing men from due obedience
vnto their superiours, he perceaued right wel,
that his purpose could not be brought about, being
to abolish olde and auncient religion, and to plant a
newe of his owne inuention. To coulour therefore
this his intent and fetch, he forceth me the Apostle
to speake for him, and to vtter his doctrine in the
vulgar tongue, putting in for the wordes of the Apostle
after the elements of the worlde his owne wordes,
after the lawes and ordonaunces of the worlde.
As though the Apostle had commaunded, that bicause
the ciuill lawes and decrees be not worde for worde
expressed in the prophets or the Apostles, but instituted
for a policy and worldy gouuernement, therefore
that no man was bounde to obey them. And
this pageant so pretely entred of Luther proued not
amisse: especially for the trim tricked translation, or
rather transposing and altering of S. Paules wordes.
            In an other booke entituled Of the secular power he
writeth that amonge Christen men there ought to
be no superiorite, no power, nor no Magistrat.
In the very same booke, and in an Epistle againste

the two edictes of the Emperour he writeth.Luther vvriteth against obedience to magistrats. 
               That
our princes of Germany be lyars, obstinat, men without
reason, very bestes, and to vse his owne wordes
wild pret in himel, that is, like wilde dere in
the element, that we ought to praie to God that the
subiectes obey not their magistrats, nor go not to
warre being pressed, nor geue any thing towarde
battaill against the Turke: for that the Turke him
selfe, is ten times better then our Princes. In the
booke of his assertions against Leo the pope, he affirmeth
that. To fight against the Turkes is to resiste
God, punishing vs by the Turkes tyranny.
In his booke de Captiuitate Babylonica he saieth.Note the liberty of Luthers ghospell.
               There is no remedy to be hoped for onles the libertie
of the ghospell (he meaneth his owne) being restored,
and all mens lawes vtterly extinguished,
we iudge and rule our selues. For no Magistrat
(saythe he) no nor angell of heauen hath the authorite
to prescribe any lawe ouer Christen men, other
then they will be content them selues to folowe.
For Christen men are fre from al subiection. Again
in a litle booke againste the Collectours of wormes,
he writeth, that no common welth is well ruled by
lawes Last of all in his awnswer against Ambrosius
Catharinus, he stormeth like a madde man and crieth
out, that the Church of Christ and the ghospell,

cā in no wise acknowleadg or suffer any Magistrat
or iurisdiction. For al these thinges be but torments
and cruell inuentions of men against Christians.
Luther then hauing by this false and foisted
interpretation of S. Paule, founde the meanes to burne
the Canon lawe, to bring in contempt the Ciuill
lawe, to raise vp the commons against their princes,
beside many other seditions and rebellions hereby
procured, I trust men will take hede and beware off
such false, forged, and foisted interpretations. For
who seeth not that there is great difference betwene
The elements of the worlde and the ordonnaūces of the worlde?
Chrisostom, Theophilact, Theodoret, and other
holy fathers interpreting this place of the Apostle, teache
vs that the worde Elemen
                     •
                  s do meane that we
should auoide the Astronomicall predictions, which
are seldome without enchantemēts and coungering.
And this is not only forbiddē by scripture, but also by
Canons of the church, and by the ciuill lawes (as in
Codice de Iudaeis & Mathematicis a man may se) is greuousely
punished. yet Luther wil haue no other thing
ment by those wordes of the Apostle (whatsoeuer
the holy fathers saie) then politick and ciuill ordonnaunces,
whiche he lowdely and lewdely curseth.
And Melanchthon in despite of the fathers and Canons
maintaineth at Wittenberg most aboue other sciences
Astrologie, so that in no place it is so much folowed
and practised as there.
            I could bring here diuers other false and corrupted

trāslations of Luther, but that I feare me I should
wery the reader with ouer long and superfluous recitall
thereof. Notwithstanding who so loueth the
truthe and will not willfully be abused, he may iudge
of these fewe examples, what trust is to be geuen to
the rest of Luthers translation, an such other heretikes,
especially if he consider that he that is ones ouer
the showes will not sticke yet to wade furder.
            But here peraduenture a man will demaunde. Sir
if it be so that the reading of the Bible in the vulgar
tongue be so perilous a matter, howe shall the vnlerned
laye man prouide that he be not abused in this
case? For many there are amonge the laite that cā not
refraine from reading holy scripture, taking it for a
greate comfort, and instruction as well to bridle their
passions, as to moue them to vertu. What part then of
holy scripture might well be permitted them to reade?
For the whole corps of the Bible were it neuer so
wel translated, yet I doubt whether it were expedient
for the laye to reade it. For it might be an occasion of
idle and light thoughtes, if euery girle or yonge womā
should reade the stories of Lot,Gen. 19. Gene. 38. Num. 5. and his doughters
of Lia, and Rachel the wiues of Iacob, of Iudas, and
Thamar, and howe aduoutrie may be tried in wemen.
Whiche all in the olde testament is to be reade.
            Amonge the Iewes it was a lawe that before the
age of taking priesthood,Vide Hieron. praefat in Ezechielem. which was of thirty yeares
no man should be suffred to reade the beginning of
the Genesis, the Canticles, the ende and beginning
of Echechiels prophecy. And that bicause although

all this were the worde of God, yet it was not
thought expediēt that euery one indifferently should
lightely come to these secret and high misteries, whiche
God would not haue reueled to all, lest being
cōmō (as it happeneth) they should the lesse be estemed.
Nor it hath not ben without the singular disposition
and maruailous prouidēce of God, that throughe
all the west churche, the wordes of his holy Sacraments
haue amonge so many barbarous nations
ben kept so longe time in the Latin tonge vnknowē
and straunge to the common sorte of men.
            Yet that the laite be not vtterly excluded from the
misteries of holy Scripture,VVhat partes of Scripture may be read of the laite. but that they may as farre
as is expedient for them reade and knowe them,
this our counsell were not paraduenture amisse. Bicause
in holy scripture there are many stories, and other
thinges which are not necessary to be knowen
not only of the laite but also of the inferiour sorte of
the clergy, certain bishops of Rome many yeares past
haue piked out of the whole corps of the Bible, certain
most necessary parcels thereof, and set it forthe
together in the forme of a Breuiary or portise, to be
read of the clergy by dutie, and of the laite such as listeth.
This is so distributed in to the seuen howres
of Christes passion, that who so listeth applie him
selfe to praier and deuociō, can surely imagin no better
order then that is. The right Noble and excellent
lerned man George Gienger one of the preuy counsell
to the Emperours Maiestie, well perceauing the great
commodite thereof hathe translated the Roman

               Breuiary in to the German tongue in so handsome
and pure stile that the Psalter, the lessons and the
ghospels be as pleasauntely to be reade in the German
tongue as they are in the Latin. It were therefore
peraduenture more expedient for the common
and vnlerned laye men to haue with them some such
to praie and reade in, then rashely trust to euery translation:
or confusely reade euery thinge they list. Especially
being so perilous a matter to swarue from
the right vnderstanding of holy scripture, that the
danger ensuing is no lesse then heresie.
            It were also very profitable that certain Homelies
and Sermons were gathered out of S. Chrisostome, S.
Ambrose, S. Augustin, S. Gregory, S. Bernarde, S. Bede
and such other holy fathers, whiche being distributed
in to the Sondayes and holy dayes of the yeare,
and well and truly translated in to the vulgar tongue,
might safely and with great profit be reade off
the common people. Beside where as many godly
praiers for diuers necessites are to be founde in the
doctours, they might serue also for common praier
for the people being truly translated in to the vulgar
tonge. Surely any laie man that desireth to reade scripture
not of curiosite, but to strengthen his faith, to
encrease his hope, and to kindle his charite, may in
such bookes as we haue saide satisfie fully his desire
and appetit.
         
         
            
            OF DISAGREMENT
IN DOCTRINE
AMONGE THE
PROTESTANTS.
            
               THe third matter wherewith the Lutherans
charge me, is that I haue alleaged
falsely certain of their articles,
whereby their enormous dissension
appeareth, partly haue fathered some
vppon them which they neuer taught. As touching
the first point, doctour Smidelin preacher of Gopping
sturreth vp heauē and earth against me, sweareth and
affirmeth that the Lutheran preachers vary in no one
point or groūde of their doctrine. But if there be any
controuersie amonge them, the same is (saith he) not
of any article of their faith, or of their Confession,
made at Augspurg.Confessio Augustana A man may verely in many places
finde light and impudent persons; which wil not
sticke to call chauke chese, and saie white is black.
But such an impudent preacher as this Iames Smidelin
of Gopping is, not this fourty yeares hath ben
seen in Germany: which is not ashamed to write and
set forthe in printe, yea that in bookes dedicated to
men of worship, that amonge the Lutherans is no one
iote of variaunce in all their doctrine, nor no dissension
in any article of their Confession. In dede
this argument troubleth much the mā, that where diuision

and dissension is in the chefe pointes of Christen
religion,Note the grounde of this booke. there must nedes heresies be. But the
Lutherans can not denie their enormous dissension
and open variaūce in sondry pointes, yea in these articles
of their Confession made at Augspurg, Ergo
there be heretikes amonge thē and heresies great store.
For whereas to the first proposition of this argument
no man can gainsaie, but if he be extreme impudent
or very foolish, M. Smidelin shifteth him selfe
to the other part and denieth stoutely that there is
any one iote of variaunce or controuersie betwene
them. Nowe then to proue the contrary and to stoppe
the impudent felowes mouthe (who being oftentimes
frendely warned perseuereth yet in his folie) I
will bringe here certain of his felowe Ministers and
such as him selfe is, which may a litle remoue his bonet
from his eyes, and showe him the glasse, where
he may see his owne impudēt face, and shameles looke
that blusheth not at so lowde a lie.The first testimony of the Lutherās disagreing. 
               Nicolaus Amsdorfius
in his booke entituled Publica Confessio purae doctrinae
Euangelij & confutatio praesentium Swermerorum
vel factiosorum, writeth thus:
            The matter amendeth neuer a whit, but
wexeth daily worse and worse: It is no other
wise likely but that we shall vtterly lese the ghospell
and in stede of it haue nothing but mere
lies and hainous errours: and that for no other
cause then that euery man foloweth his owne witte:
and desireth not after the truthe. In the diet

and conference had lately at wormes.In the yeare. 1557. Brentius and
the Adiaphoristes would not condemne Zuinglius
and Osiander, bicause they were men lerned in
the tongues and liberall sciences. But hissed vs out
of the cōpany and laughed vs to scorne bicause we
refused to agree vnto the conference and diet onles
those men were condemned. Some of our felowes
(the Lutherans) pretend that they cōdemne the
Zwinglians, but Brentius his praeface vpon Master
Iames Smidelins booke testifieth the contrary.
For here they go about to reconcile godly Luther
and Zuinglius, which is impossible. For who euer
heard that two contradictories could agree? Such
childish and impossible matters they be not ashamed
to affirme, which wil be counted teachers and
Masters of Christen religion, as though we and all
other were stockes and blockes. But surely we can
not embrace with quiet conscience the heresies of
Zuinglius and Osiander. Neither can we subscribe
and yelde to such as haue departed and seuered
them selues from Luther.The definition of a zelous Lutherā. Truly if they had constātly
cleaued vnto the worde of God and Luther
and had not geuē them selues to alteratious, or yelded
to them whiche first altered from Luther,
there should haue ben no dissension nor variaunce

amongest vs, and al these mischefs which we see nowe
hang ouer our heades had ben escaped. Farder
although the Ministers which after our departure
remained in the conference at wormes, wrote after
and published it abrode that they woulde not departe
from the Cōfession of Augspurg, yet in dede
they do cleane cōtrary. For while they wil not condemne
the Zwinglians and the Osiandrines, they
can by no meanes agree with our Confession off
Augspurg: but in so doing, they be all ready departed
from it. So haue they caused dissēsion and remoued
all meanes of agreement.Our protestants haue vvell marked this. For if they would cō
               demne
with vs the foresaide errours of Zwinglius
and Osiander, then might we agree together against
the papistes. But no we whereas the Confession
of Augspurg teacheth that the Bloud and passion
of Christ is our righteousnes, and that the bread in
the Lordes supper is the body of Christ, this can
not possibly agree with the madnes of Zwinglius
and Osiander. Therefore these two repugne, to saie,
they remaine in the Confession off Augspurg,
and yet go aboute to defend Zwinglius and Osiander.
            VVe therefore first and formest do condemne
for heretikes Caspar Swenckfeldius and the Anabaptistes

which do contemne and refuse the externall
 preaching of Gods worde. Secondarely we condemne
the Secte of Osiander which holdeth no lesse
grosse and impudent heresies.Our protestants a-recondemned by the Lutherās. Thirdly we condemne
the Sacramentaries, Zwinglius and his felowes,
 Fourthely we condemne the Indifferents
 bicause in their churches beside the ghospell they
will haue mens traditions to be obserued. For the
ghospell admitteth no commaundements of men
to be kept in their churches. But these indifferents
coulour and counterfaite all thinges. to please the
Emperour they embrace the papisticall Masse and
religion, which yet they loue not in dede, and with
all this will seme to remaine in Luthers doctrine.
Is not this to denie God and his holy worde? Is
not this to begyle and mocke the Emperour? Is not
this to faine the papisticall religion and counter faite
the Lutheran? This is if any thing be, to halte on
bothe sides, to serue God and Baal, to please God
 and men. Fiftely we condemne this proposition: good
workes are necessary to saluation.The master Lutherans of Lipsia be Pelagians Beside these
fiue some there are (as D. Pfeffinger bishop of Lipsia
and his felowes) that teache man to be able and
sufficient to dispose him selfe to grace, and make
him selfe meete to receaue the holy ghost by the naturall

power of his owne fre will, as the same Sophistes
Thomas and Scote taught.The schole doctours neuer taugh so. For this Pfeffinger
in a disputation made about two yeares past
of free will rashely and boldely concludeth with
these wordes. A man maye by his owne naturall
power assent to the ghospell, apprehend the promis
of Christe, not withstande the holy ghoste, &c.
Thus farre Amsdorfius. Here we see this Lutheran
Master condemneth six diuers sectes and schismes,
which all (except only the Swenckfeldians) do yet depend
of the Confession of Augspurg, and defende,
and embrace euen to this daie their doctrine. For
though some peraduenture doe wene that the Swinglians
be excluded frō the Confession of Augspurg,
yet I finde the cōtrary in Ihō of lasky writing to the
King of Pole,
               Caluinus in vltima admonitione sua ad Ioach. VVestphalum. 
               and in Ihon Caluin. in the which places
bothe of them affirme directly, that the Confession
of Augspurg teacheth the very same touching
the Sacramēt of the aultar, that Zwinglius and the
Sacramentaries do. Seing then these foresaide sectes
so bitterly varie one with an other in the chefe
pointes of our religion, that eche pronounceth the
other heretike, truly right it is, they be taken for such
as they pronoūce them selues to be. In the meane yese
by this proces of Amsdorffius howe well and truly
M. Doctour Smidelin affimeth and maketh him selfe
sure that amonge the Lutherans is no dissension
touching the articles of the Cōfession of Augspurg.

               Yet to make this matter more clere, I wil adde hereū
                  to
some other testimonies of their owne felowe ministers,
if peraduēture their owne cōsciēce may touch
them to acknowledg the truthe. Nicolaus gallus in Thesibus
& Hipotiposibus. in the laste leafe writeth thus.
            
            The altercations and contentions betwene vs
(Luth
                     •
                  ran preachers) are not light nor of light matters,The second testimony.
but of the principall articles of Christian religion,
of the lawe and the ghospel,Special articles of contradictions among tho Protestants. of iustificatiō and
good workes, of the Sacraments and vse of Ceremonies,
so greate that they seme impossible to be
brought at one. For some are plaine contradictions
that cā not be reconciled. as. That the lawe must be
 preached in Christ his church and must not be preached.
That our righteousnes is the very substance
 of God in vs, or his operatiō, actiō, and omissiō, within
vs, or the imputing of his obedience without vs.
 That the Bloud of Christ doth iustifie no mā, and
that (which the Apostle saieth) we are iustified in his
bloud.Rom. 6. That no man hath ben saued without
 good workes: that good workes are necessary to
saluation. And cōtrairely that good workes are not
necessary to saluation, or as the psalme saythe,
happy are they whose sinnes are forgeuen, happy is
the man to whom God hath not imputed sinne,
whiche seketh not after good workes nor can haue

none to be saued by. That Christ is in the Supper
and is receaued there corporally vnder bread and
wine bothe of the beleuers and of those whiche beleue
not, and againe that he is there only spiritually
and is receaued only of them whiche beleue.
Thus farre Nicolaus Gallus. who although he rehearse
with no lesse stomach the contrary and repugnant
heresies of the Lutherans his felowes, then
Amsdorffius doth, yet beside he confesseth there are
many more a coining and readye to come to light.
And no doubt but it is so: for not longe sens the princes
of Saxony and Countes of Mansfeld,
               The third testimony 
               eche off
them hathe sett forthe seuerally greate volumes touching
this matter, where they reaken vp vnleuen sundry
sectes lately sprong vp, condemning them all for
heresies to witt.
            
            
               The Anabaptistes.
               The Seruetians.
               The Antinomi.
               
                  Although in very dede the Iesuites are no more to be counted amonge these he retikes, then pigeons amonge crowes. The Iesuites,
               The Osiandrins,
               The Melanchthonistes,
               The Maioristes.
               The Adiaphoristes or Indifferents.
               The Swenckfeldians,
               The Sacramentaries.
            
            
               
Nowe where Smidelin denieth that amonge the
ghospellers is no heresie, no dissension in religion,
no variaunce in the Confession of Augspurg, I woulde
he tolde vs what is it that those Superintendents,
Amsdorfius and Nicolaus Gallus, condemne in their
former sentences? What meaned the princes of Saxony
and the Countes of Mansfeld? Do not all these
fore named sectes acknowledge the Confession of Augspurg
and belonge thereunto? The Anabaptistes in
dede do not, and much lesse the Iesuites. But all the
rest walke vnder the winge of the newe ghospel and
vpholde them selues vnder the pretence of the Confessiō
of Augspurg. For Lasky in Pole, and Caluin in Sauoye
labour continually to persuade men,The Sacramentaries desire to be vnder the vving of the Lutherans. thrt their
sacramentary doctrine is expresse in the Confession off
Augspurg. Here I would demaunde of Master Smidelin
whether the articles cōdemned here and recited
of the princes of Saxony, the Countes of Mansfeld,
of Amsdorfius and Gallus, and defended of those ten
sectes aboue mencioned, do properly appertaine to
the Confession of Augspurg or no. Surely I see not what
awnswer this doctour of Gopping is able to make
vs: for if he saie these articles touche not the doctrine
of tbe Confession of Augspurg. then would I desire him
to take the paines for his estimation sake only to affirme
the same in one printed leafe of paper, against
those Superintendents Amsdorffius and Gallus and
against the princes and Countes aforesaide. Whiche
if he dare not for his life to do, then must he nedes be
an impudent felowe and past all shame and honesty,

to affirme openly that the Lutherans do all agree in
the grounde and chiefe pointes of their Confession off
Augspurg. Here I holde this wily foxe, and be he neuer
so ssipper yet shall he not escape here my fingers.
And therefore yet we will laye hande on him more
surely.
            In the booke of the Countes of Mansfeld against
the vnleuen sectes,fo. 179. the Ministers saie in this wise
The reader nede not to maruaile that Osiander to
auouche his matter alleageth plenty of scripture,
but rather ought diligētly to marke howe wickedly
he wretheth and corrupteth the right meaning
and vnderstanding of holy Scripture. Thus much
saie they.In lib. contra longiorē Catalogū. But what nowe saith Master Smidelin hereunto?
In the booke he made this yeare against the
longe table, where he goeth about to reconcile together
the Masters of Wittenberg and Osiander thus he
writeth. Then bothe partes proue their opinions by
holy Scripture, and truly with the very same sentences,
but not the very same interpretations, allthough
yet not contrary. Let vs harken I praie yow
howe swetely these bells agree. The Ministres off
Māsfeld saie that Osiander wickedly wretheth and
corrupteth holy scripture: this man saith, that the
interpretations of them bothe are not contrary.
Againe in the same booke of the Countes of Mansfeld
thus we reade.sol. 166. 
               Neither is this errour of Osiander

sightely to be passed ouer, by the which he bindeth
the benefits of Christ to certain circunstaunces,
to bring men thereby to desperation, while the
minde of man hangeth in doubt whether he be fit
to receaue the benefits of Christ or no.
               Fol. 1. & 2. But cleane
contrarely writeth Smidelin in the booke aboue named.
If that Osiander saithe he or his aduersaries
bicause of this contention inschole pointes only are
to be counted heretikes what shall we saie, I praie
you, of the olde fathers? But howe swetely agree the
semen? The Ministers of Mansfeld saie. that the doctrine
of Osiander hath such a notable errour annexed
vnto it, that it forceth men to desperation. Smidelin
saieth, it is but a light contention in schole pointes.
But this felowe perceauing that such manifeste
and diuers heresies can in dede by no meanes be reconciled
together, he bringeth in the olde fathers for
example, as thoughe they had vsed to confute heretikes
by false interpretation of holy scripture, which
cā neuer be proued of them. Yea it is impossible that
heresies may be ouerthrowen by false doctrine.Li. 8. Top. For as
Aristotle teacheth, it is impossible that of a false grounde
any truthe may be cōcluded.Fol. 152. Farder in this booke
of Mansfeld the Ministres saie. VVe ought to suspect
the doctrine of Osiander,
               Novv Lutherans can abide no nevve doctrine. 
               bicause it is new and
not heard of before in the church and we finde nothing
in holy scripture that is anything like to the

doctrine of Osiander. Let vs nowe here what saithe
Master Smidelin in his booke alleaged. A childe of
seuen yeares olde, which had lerned but his cathechisme
maye euidently perceaue that bothe these
doctrines,
               Fol. 1. 2. 
               of Osiander and of the VVitenbergers,
disagree neuer a whit. If there were in oure
Germain tongue any one worde, that might thouroughely
expresse an impudent and shameles felowe,
surely it would nowe serue well the turne to tricke
this doctour in his termes. So impudently and so past
al shame in the face of al the worlde, he lieth so lowdely,
and boasteth so bestly, that amonge them all, is
no difference in doctrine, no variaunce in opinions,
but all smothe, all quiet, all vniforme and agreable.
yea and that so euidently so swetely so like pigeons
they agree and coll together, that a very childe of seuen
yeare olde woulde be the better to see it.
            But seing this good man slepeth so soundely in
the swete concent and vniforme harmonie of his
brethern, that it semeth he hathe forgot all the worlde,
and remembreth not the prety pageants they haue
plaied of late, and what notes of discorde hathe
fallen amoge, I wil be so bolde as a litle to wake him:
and call him to remembraunce of the fourten Lutheran
churches,The fourthe testimony. which all of late wrote and set forthe
in print their writinges against the Confession
of Andreas Osiander, amonge the which the chefe are,
The Ministers or diuines of Wittenberge, the Ministres
of the younger Lordes of Vinaria, the Ministres

of Magdenburg. The ministers of Franckford
on this side of Viader. The ministers of Ihon of Costrin
the Marquis, of the dukes of Pomerain, and of the
cites on the seacost of Saxony as of Lubek, of Hamburg,
of Breme, of Luneburg, and diuers other. Vnto
all the which churches and Ministres Osiander in his
booke entituled Schmeckbier awnswered,Vide Ioannis Functij scriptum de rebus Osiandri. paieng
them home with such coine as they laide out, so that
nowe they are bothe on fire one against an other
cursing and charging eche other with hainous and
abhominable heresies. He that listeth not to beleue
me, let him proue and trie the truthe in their bookes
that are abiode in all mens handes, let him serche the
printers shops of Germany, and he shall finde bitter
contentions and greuous controuersies betwene the
Lutherans and the Osiandrins. Yet Smidelin winketh
and noddeth still and will not see all this. But if he
be an vpright and plaine dealing man let him come
forthe, and proue in open writing that any thinge
here saide in false or fained.
            
               Well Smidelin goeth forthe after his fashion, and
laboureth against al reason to make the worlde wene
That amonge the Lutherans and the Zwinglians
there is no variaunce of any waight or force touching
any articles of our faith of Christian religiō.
But against this saieng of Smidelin,The fift testimony Luther him selfe. 
               Luther him self
directly pronounceth, codemning the Swinglians in
these wordes.
               Tom. 2. I
                     •
                  o. 260. I must nedes eschew and auoide them
as men condemned by their owne iudgemēt: nether

may I ioyne with them in any meanes, nor by letters
nor by writinges,Math. 18. nor by worde nor by dede,
as the Lorde hathe commaunded, whether he be
Swenckfeldius, Zwinglius, or what soeuer he be
called. For I accompte them all a lyke (as in dede
they are) whosoeuer beleue not, that in the Supper
of the Lorde, the bread is his true and naturall body,
which as well Iudas and the wicked man doth
receaue as S. Peter and all the Saintes. VVhosoeuer
will not beleue this,Luther excludeth Suinglius and Svvēcfeldius frō his grace. let him not medle with me,
or in writing or in talke, nor let him not looke for
any communion with me. For he shall but lese his
labour. And a litle after. It shall nothing helpe the
Swermers or Sacramentaries that they trifle aboute
the Sacrament of the spirituall eating and drinking
of the body and bloud of Christ: and of the
charite and vnite of Christians,Fo. 263. &c. It is in vaine
that they beleue in the father, the Son, and the holy
ghoste, and in Christ our Sauyour. All this I saye
nothing auaileth them, howe truly and sincerely so
euer they pronounce this faith with their false and
blasphemous tongue, as longe as they denie this one
article, or reproue it as false where Christ saith
of the Sacrament.Note. Take (breade) and eate This
is my body. For this is the maner of all heretikes,

first to beginne but with one article and then after
to denie all the rest,Luther did vvhich he reproued in his scholers. Note hovve heretikes maye be used. euen as a ringe if it be ones broken
or cleft, it is vnprofitable and vnfite, and as a
bell, if he be crackt, or crased in any part, he leseth
his so wnde and is worth nought. Thus farre Luther
Let vs nowe on the other side here the awnswer of
the Swinglians of Zuri
                     •
                  h In the third treatise of their booke made against the last Confession of Luther
thus they write.
               The protestants of Zurich against Luther. Luther craketh him selfe to be
the prophet and Apostle of the Germans: which neuer
lerned of any man but all other of him, that no
man did any thing but Luther hath done all: and
whatsoeuer he hath not done, hath remained vndone.
VVhatsoeuer he hath saide it must stand,
and no man so hardy to gainsaie it. Iff men speake
not iust as Luther doth, then they are cursed and
persecuted as heretikes. And a litle before. Luther
hath forsaken god and all his honour calling vs a
condemned and cursed secte. But let him take hede
lest with this teasty and wicked talke, he condemne
not him selfe, and proue him selfe an archeheretike
seing that he nether will nor can haue the societe
of such as sincerely teache and confesse Christ
our Lorde. And howe wonderfully doth Luther
here betray himself with all his felow sprets, and

deuills? VVhat foule wordes vseth he mete only for
the deuill? For he saith that there dwelleth in the
Zwinglians a malicious deuill,Ani
                     ••
                  um in sa
                     •
                  hanasiatum, super satha
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  atum persathana, a
                     •
                  ū. bothe nowe and
euer, that their hart and mynde hath the deuill
dwelling in them, raining ouer them, and percing
thourough them. that their mouth is full of all lies,
and the deuill him selfe is poored in them, poored
ouer them, and poored thourough them. Did euer
any man heare such talke of any sobre or reasonable
mans mouth, yea or of any furiou
                  •
               e deuill or raging
sprit? Againe in the same place. Luther seketh
onely after his owne, he is obstinat, prowde and
high minded condemning boldely and deliuering
vp to the deuill, all which will not agree vnto his
minde. He raileth and curseth like a deuill. There
is no token of mekenes or beneuolence in him.
Here would I wish M. Smidelin to come forthe, and
tell vs what Luther meaneth by such wordes of his,
as we haue here alleaged. I am very sure, he is neuer
able to make accorde betwene the opinions of Luther
and Zwinglius touching the Sacrament, although
he laboureth much about it. As when he
writeth in an other place. VV
                  •
               ē the one part (saithe
he) teacheth bread in the holy Supper to signifie the
body of Christ, to be the figur
                  •
                of the body of Christe,
to be the value of the body of Christ, to be the

pleadge of the body of Christ, yet all these teache,
beleue and professe one doctrine and one opinion,
the difference is only in the interpretation as Luther
VVitnesseth, and in the phrase or maner of
speaking, not in the thing it selfe. This saithe Smidelin.
and Amsdorffius in his confession obiecteth it
vnto him with these wordes. There be (Lutherans)
which saie they condemne the Zwinglians, but the
preface of Brentius vpon Master Iames Smidelins
booke testifieth the contrary. For here they go about
on gods name to reconcile godly Luther and
Zwinglius together, which is vtterly impossible.
For who euer heard that contradictories could be
made one? Such childish matters and impossible
thinges they are not ashamed to warrant which beare
themselues for Masters of Christian religion,
as though al we were stockes and blockes.
            Let here the Christiā reader confer together these
debates a
                  •
               d contentiōs of the two prophets of god,
Luther and Swinglius, and set Smidelin as a pacifier
and arbiter to bring them at one. surely I doubt not,
but he shall soone per
                  •
               eaue that Smidelin in this enterprise,
other hath lost some peace of his brayne, or
hath vtterly cast awaie al honesty and shame. Luther
saieth directly and plainly that the Swingliās doctrine
is not only contrary bothe in worde and in dede to
his doctrine, but also that their opinion is so pestiferous

and execrable, that he doubteth not to pronounce
thē al starke heretikes that subscribe and agree vnto
it. yea and this with such a vehemēcie he vttereth
that he affirmeth: who so euer swarueth in this artikle
of the sacrament, he is an heretike in all other
artikles and pointes of the faith. Now cometh Smidelin
and saith, that the opinion of Luther and Swinglius
touching the Supper is all one, and that all the
controuersie remaineth only in wordes. And in his
latin booke, set forthe against me, he saith of them.
It is most certain that their opinion and minde is
all one, therefore they agree in doctrine.
            
            And where as I noted that amonge the Suinglians
were eight sectes that Smidelin denieth also. and saith
Although Zwinglius varied and swarued some
what from Luther yet of their schisme there were
but two partes. Therefore in his booke against my
table he raileth in this sort.Fol, 3. libri contra catalogum. 
               Of these two partes
this nightrauen (so terming me) hath made eight sectes.
The first part whom he calleth Adessenarii,
which beleue the praesence of the true body and
bloud of Christ in the Supper, he diuideth in to foure
sectes as the Significatiui the Tropistae, the Energici,
and the Arabonarij. wherein who loketh nere
to the matter shall see he hath plaied the wicked
and naughtie mans parte. I knowe very well that
the vnlerned man reading these his wordes, must nedes

suppose that I haue iniuriousely slaundered the
Swinglians, and done like a false felowe, to charge
honest men with eight diuers heresies, whereas the
Lutherans and the Swinglians, are diuided only in
two partes, and those two partes also (as Smidelin saith)
consist only in the phrase, or maner of speaking
not in the thinge or dede. What thē haue we here to
awnswer? Luther shal take the paines to do it for me.
whiche in his brief Confession writeth after this
sorte. At the very first these men
               Luther against the Sacramentaries. (meaning the Sacramentaries)
were well warned of the holy ghost,
when vpon that one text, they diuided them selues
in to seuen sprits, eche one differing alwaies frō the
 other. First Carolstadius would haue the text so,
that This is my body should signifie, Here sitteth
 my body. Then Zwinglius saith, that could not be
well saide though the father of heauen had reueled
it therefore being moued with another holy sprit
 of his owne, thus he turned the text. Take, eate,
This signifieth my body. The third Oecolampadius,
 brought forthe his third holy sprit, which turned
that text in to another hewe: as this. Take eate,
this is the token of my body.
               Luther calleth Svvēcfeldius by the name of Stencfeldius in mockerie, as one that stinketh. 
               The fourth Stencfeldius
thinking to make his stenche to smell as
muske, brought vs forthe out of his holy sprit
this rule. These wordes (This is my body) must be

remoued from our sight: for they do let vs of the
spirituall vnderstanding, &c. The fifte holy sprit 
being but the excremēts of that other do thus reade
that text. Take and eate. That which is deliuered
for you is this my body. The sixt holy sprit saith:
Take and eate. This is my body in remembraunce.
as though Christ had saide, Take and eate: this is
the monument of my body. The seuenth holy sprit
Ioannes Campanus bringeth this exposition. Take 
and eate
                     •
                  
               
               Corpus pancum. Of this mide vvas Melanchthon at his later daies. In iudicio Heidelbergensi. 
               This is my bready body or body of bread.
Beside all these an other sprit flieth about (for the
deuill is an holy and a greate sprit) which persuadeth
men, that herein is no article of our faith,
and therefore we ougth not to contend of this matter,
but leaue it fre to euery man to beleue herein
what he list. Thus farre be the wordes of Luther. Is
not here Smidelin an honest and an vpright man? is
he not a kinde scholer towarde his Master, Luther?
The master saith, There are amonge the Swinglians
eight diuers factiōs or sectes. The scholer saieth.
That the Zwinglians amonge them selues do perfitly
agree: and from Luther, they differ only in
wordes and maner of speaking. Is not thinke you
Master Smidelin a trim pacifier? doth he not by good
reason reconcile these protestants together? In
the booke against my table he raileth, and saith, he

must nedes be a wicked person which woulde saye,
that amonge the Swinglians were eight diuers and
seuerall opinions:Doctor Smidelin proueth Luther to be a vviched man. and who is so blinde that seeth
not Luther him selfe in his wordes aboue alleaged
to recite eight contrary opinions of the Swinglians?
It foloweth then by the iudgement and sentence of
Doctor Smidelinus, that Luther is a wicked and pernicious
felowe. Surely very well and as it should be. for
such honour vse kinde scholers to geue to their masters.
But truly they are bothe vsed according to their
deserts: while the Master proueth his scholer a liar,
and the scholer proueth his Master a knaue. and nowe
it happeneth as we commonly see of a frowarde
curre a peuish whelp.
            
            
               But what will Smidelin saie, if that amonge the
Lutherans them selues,
               Sacramentary sectes and diuisions amō
                  ge the Lutheraus. The sixt testimony Melanchthon. 
               be sacramentary sectes and
schismes, and that not a fewe? This present yeare
1560. in the seconde of Octobre was printed at Heidelberg
the iudgement of Philip Melanchthon, touching
the Supper of our Lorde, dedicated to the honourable
prince Electour Coūte palatin of the Rhene.
where he writeth thus. It is not hard but somewhat
dangerous to awnswer, yet I will declare that
debate and controuersie which happened at Heidelberg,
and admonish men as much as I may at
this time. I will also praie vnto Christ our Lorde
that it will please him prosperously to directe these
our aduises and their doinges. Greate and greuous

cōtentions shal vndoubtedly arise in the worlde,
vpon the Controuersie of our Lordes supper for
the worlde must nedes be punished for their idolatry
and other hainous offenses Let vs then praie
that the Son of God teache vs and direct vs. But
seing that many are yet in many places feble in the
faith and not well instructed in this doctrine off
the church, but rather nouseled in many errours, it
is mete that first we take order for such. I like ther
fore very well the aduise of the most honourable
prince Electour that all such as contend of the
Supper of the Lorde be put to silēce,So in the Alcoran of Mahomet all disputing of religion is forbed. lest dissensiō
and variaunce arise in the church yet tendre and
weake, whereby the febleī faith might perhaps be
seduced and disquieted. And I would wish also, that
the contentious persons on bothe sides were some other
where. VVhich being sēt awaie, the rest might
agree into some forme of wordes.Melanchthō vvoulde haue vs chaunge th
                     •
                   institutiō of Christ in the Supper, and saie this is the participation of my body, vvhereas Christ saide, this is my body vvhich is vp and d
                     •
                  vvne Suinglians heresie. And in this controuersie
me thinketh it were best to kepe the wordes
of S. Paule. The bread which we breake is the
participation of Christ his body much also must be
saide of the frute of the Supper to stirre vp men more
to loue this pleadge, and the oftener to vse it. Againe
the worde Participation, is to be declared
and expounded. For S. Paule saith not (as the papistes

do) that the nature of bread is chaunged.
nor that the bread is the substātiall body of Christ
as the ministers of Bremesaie. Nor as Heshusious
saith, that bread is the true body of Christ:
but that it is a participation or communion, that
is, by the which we are coupled and made one
with the body off Christ. VVhich copulation and
making of one consisteth in the vse: not without it.
imagining that mise could knawe that bread. The
papistes and such as are like them to earnestly contend
that the body of Christ is vnder the forme of
bread, or included in the bread beside the vse, and
when it is not receaued. they wil haue it adored also
as Doctor Morlin of Bruns wicke saith. Thou must
not saie. Mum. Mum: But what is that which the
priest hath in his handes. Sarcerius would haue all
the parcels that sal doune, to be gathered vp, and to
be burned together with the earth on which it fell.
Two yeres past whē we were at wormes, a quaestiō
was asked vs out of the Courte whether the body
of Christ passed downe in to the bely and so forthe.
Such absurde questions ought not to be moued better
it is that the forme of S.A questiō of the ghospellers disproued 
                     •
                  y Melanchthon. Paules wordes be kept
and that men be well instructed of the vse and frute
of this Sacrament. The forme of wordes of the

Supper ye may see in the ordinatiō of the church of
the Megapolians, where also aduertisement is geuē
of the frute thereoff. The Son off God in the ministery
of the ghospell is present, and worketh also in
those that beleue. But he is present not for cause
of the bread but for mans sake, as he saith him selfe.
Tary in me and I in you,Ioan. 15. Ioan. 14. I in my father and you
in me and I in you. And with this true Comfortes
he maketh vs his membres, and testifieth that
he wil raise vp and quicken our bodies. Thus do olde
writers expounde the Supper of the Lorde. but
some terme this true and plaine doctrine, buskins
or showes mete for euery foote. and will haue that
the body is in the bread or in the forme of bread: as
though the Sacrament were made for the breads
sake or to be adored papistically. Then other imagin
that the body should be enclosed in the breade.
some will haue it euery where and in all places.
Melanchthon dalieth here at his pleasure:
               The vvordes of Staphylus. 
               but all holy
fathers and olde writers, haue continually hitherto
taught the conuersion, transmutatiō, and chaunging
of the creature of bread in to the body of oure
Lorde, that we may truly say with Christ, This is my
body. Heshusius saith, he can not agree with Origen
terming the bread and wine the signes of the
the body and bloud. So he reiecteth Clemens Alexandrinus,

ready to do the like to Augustin, Ambrose,
Prosper,O the impudency of Melāchthon. for these fathers do al teache the contrary. Dyonisius, Tertullian, Bede, Basill,
and Gregory, Nazianzen (which calleth the body

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ) to Theodoret which writeth that the
nature of bread remaineth.No nor your authorite Mclāchthon. Is thē the authorite of
Heshusius so great, that we will rather b
                  •
               leue him
thē the olde writersThis is a lovvd lie. which testifie clerely that the
church in their time had no adoration nor no such
doctrine as the papistes no we teache? For seing these
areIs not the doctrine of Melanchthon nevve? the felovve raueth. newe and straunge in the church, we doubt
whether it be conuenient to bring in newe doctrine
in the church. And I am not ignorāt, that many alleage
forged bookes vnder the name of olde writers:
but let the lerned iudge hereof. I will not make any
longe debate of this matter presently. nor entre to
dispute with contentious men defending the idolatry
and robberies of their forefathers. VVhose tyranny
and cruell persecutions I feele also. I thought
good only to declare my minde herein what were
best to be done in respect of our weake and tender
church.Ergo it is nevve. Therefore I am still of that minde that bothe
partes be put to silence, and that one forme of
wordes be vsed. VVhich if some like not,Hoc videlicet est Syn
                  
                     •
                  retisare. and will
not therefore come vnto the Sacrament, they may
be permitted to do as they see good, so that yet

they styrre vp no dissension amonge the people.
This much Melanchthon.
               Melanchthon a dissembling ghospeller. 
               who although he would
neuer before this time openly in writing professe his
minde of the Sacrament, yet he allwaies tolde his familiar
frendes and men of worship, that in this point
he condemned Luther, and claue vnto Swinglius,
correcting yet a litle his opinion. For where as Swinglius
saide, This signifieth my body, he will haue it saied
This is the participation of my body, which newe interpretation
is plainely a newe Sacramentary heresie,
and neuer heard of amonge the rest of the Swinglians.
And to maintaine this his proper and newe heresie,
he vseth two pointes of sutteltie and falshood.
first when he saith the holy fathers taught no conuersion
or transsubstantiation of the bread, which is
a very impudent and lowde lie.
               Se the x. article of D. Hardinges avvnsvver to Master Iuells chalenge fol. 124. Fiue sectes among the Lutherans of the Sacrament. 
               For the conuersion of
the bread and reall presence of Christ his true body
and bloud in the Sacrament may euidently be proued
out of all the fathers aboue named and many
mo: and the contrary opinion clerely condemned.
Secondarely whē he rebuketh his owne scholers, and
chargeth them with fiue other Sacramentarie heresies.
For he saith some be of Heshusius minde, some of
Sarcerius, some other folowe the ministers of Breme,
and some Ioachimus Morlinus, then he alleageth
other whose opinion is that Christ his body may be
in euery place. These fiue heresies, which (as Melāchthon
testifieth) are amonge the Lutherans, and the other
eight which Luther showeth to be amonge the

Swingliās, make all together thirten heresies. which
al noweadaies vpon the Sacramēt only are folowed,Thirten heresies among the protestāts touching the blessed Sacramēt.
professed, and defended amonge the protestants.
            
            Here againe we may consider the honesty and
truthe of M. Doctor Smidelin, which is not ashamed
to terme such open schismes, manifest to al the worlde,
a sure and certain agremēt of Catholike religion,
who beside all this knoweth well inough, what
agreate and vehement altercation there was this present
yeare 1560, at Heidelberg amonge the diuines
and ministres there, touching only this point of the
blessed Sacramēt. of the which matter Guilelmus Klebicius
of Brandeburg hath writen very bitterly and
sharpely. And this much hitherto of the dissension
amonge the protestants touching only the point of
the blessed Sacrament.
            The dissension and variaunce of the Lutherans
touching the doctrine of Penaunce,Nicolaus Gallus libr. cui titulum fecit, Fundamenta Nic. Galli etiā
                  numperstāt & in Thematibussuis I haue noted
before in a litle booke. For some of them put two,
some thre partes of penaunce. But doctor Smidelin
will accorde all this discorde with a worde: saing, it
is all one to put two or thre partes of penaunce. As
though that al other Superintendents and ministres
of Luthers secte ought to couche, and obey the pontificall
authorite of Doctor Smidelin taking vppon
him like a pope of protestants. But Illyricus will not
abide that, persuading him selfe that he is of as good
mettall to make a Lutheran pope,The seuēth testimony Illyricus. as any other is. and
therefore he will not graunte to the Masters of Wittenberg,
no nor to his owne Master, Luther, to define,

diuide and determinat the ghospell at their pleasur.
For in the booke, which he intituled,Fol. D. 3. 
               An information
vpon certain articles of Christen religion,
he writeth in this sort. But not so much he (meaning
Melanchthon) as his proctours do exasperat this
matter: although they agree not amōg them selues:
for one interpreteth the matter after one sorte, and
the other after an other, as it happeneth in euill
causes. One saieh that the worde Penaunce signifieth
only sorowe or contrition an other, that it signifieth
contrition and faithe with al. One saith that
the ghospell preacheth repentaunce of one sinne
               The ghospellers doubt vvhat the ghospell preacheth
only, as of infidelite: an other saith, of all sinnes. Some
imagin this glose, that the ghospell preacheth
repentaunce vnproperly, vndirectly and by occasion
only: some saie that consequently it preacheth
repentaunce. An other saithe by a figure of contrariete:
the fourth saith, after a sorte and in some
point. The fift saith, it doth but argue mens incredulite
or slacknes of belefe. The sixt saieth that it
reiecteth the small faithe. The seuenth saith that it
preacheth repentaunce not principally. Thus they
disagree amonge thē selues no lesse then the Sacramentaries
or Babylonians, or those builders of idols
that Esaie speaketh of: where one thinketh to

holde vp the idoll with glue, another with nailes,
               Esaiae. 41.
               and the third with chaines. But all these gloses bothe
destroy them selues one another, and the definition
also. Thus farre Illyricus. Doth not Illyricus affirme
here that Melanchthons diuines varie one from
an other, and sett vp seuen sondry opinions, neuer a
true: and all repugnant one with an other, no lesse
then the sectes of the Sacramentaries? and that they
agree as the builders of the towre of Babilon in olde
time? Saithe not directly all this Illyricus? And what
saieth Smidelinus? VVe in the principall articles and
grounde of our doctrine do not vary. Which if it be
true, then must we saie, that the doctrine of penaunce
and of the Sacrament of the aultar appertaine
not to the grounde of Christen religion, nor are
not necessary articles of the same. For Smidelin in his
litle booke, whiche he set forth against me, standeth
stiffe in this minde.Libello contra trimem brem Theologiam. fol. 80. 
               That it forceth not whether
two or thre partes of penaunce be taught: nor skilleth
any whit, whether you beleue vprightly, or embrace
that seuenfolde heresie contrary in it selfe, in
the matter of penaunce. Againe in his booke against
my table writing of the altercations betwene the
Illyricans and the Adiaphoristes, he saith. Although
one write bitterly against the other, yet in their
churches there is no alteration of doctrine, but they
professe and teache the pure doctrine of the ghospell

in perfit agrement with vs and them selues, euen
as before this altercation beganne. Howe soū
               deth,
thinke you, these wordes of Smidelin with the
saieng of Illyricus? In like maner doth he defend Andreas
Musculus. For where I write, that he teacheth,
the Godhead of Christ to haue as well died in the
Crosse as the māhood, Smidelin goeth about to purge
him in these wordes.Fol. o. 3. 
               I haue vnderstode nowe
that Staphylus dothe iniuriously slaunder Andreas
Musculus. For Musculus in open writing published
and printed hathe purged him self against Staphylus.
Thus saithe Smidelin. It is the nature and custome
of all heretikes not to continew longe in one
minde. But to denie to morowe which they saide to
daie. So dothe Musculus. And although Smidelin, as
he confesseth him selfe, be vtterly ignorant of the debate
betwene Musculus and Stācarus (wherein those
wordes be vttered) yet he sticketh not to write
that I slaunder Musculus. Truly bicause he would be
counted a common pacifier of all contentions, a physician
for all sores, and a reconciler of all vnruly heresies.
But what will bothe Musculus and Smidelin saie
vnto me, if I bring their owne brethern and felowe
heretikes, witnesses against them?The eight testimony. The Lutheran
churches of Pole sent to the vniuersite of Lausana
for the determination of this matter betwene
Musculus and Stancarus, and the doctours of Lausana
sent them this awnswer. Although well beloued

brethern,
               In epistolis Petri Statorij Galli Pinc
                     ••
                  uiae aeli
                     •
                  is anno 1560. 
               we can neuer saie inough against the
opinion of Islebius and Andreas Musculus teaching
that Christ suffred in bothe natures of God
and of man, and yet bringing no argument against
the contrary. Neuertheles seing you desire to know
our iudgement and minde of this opinion, we can
not conceale it from you, &c. Thus therefore you
shall vnderstande. VVe denie vtterly that God can
suffer any mutation, & cae. Here thou maiest perceaue,
gentle reader, what kinde of men these Lutherans
are. Sometime whot, sometime colde: sometime
white sometime blacke. And yet not withstanding
Smidelin writeth, It is a greate lie to saie there is any difference
amonge our diuines, touching the articles of our Confession
of Augspurg.
               In praefatione libelli contra Staphylum. It is a worlde to see howe this
felowe hath hardened his face against all shame, and
howe proudely he persuadeth him selfe to blinde all
the worlde, seing and feling that the Lutherans disagree
in the articles and grounde of their Confession of
Augspurg.
            
            For the better Declaration whereof, let vs yet a
litle more diligently waighe and expend the articles
of their Confession of Augspurg. Clere it is that their
chefe and principall articles are, of the Blessed Trinite,
of free will, of Iustification, of the lawe and the
gospel, of good and euill workes, of faith, of Christe
Iesus our Mediator, of the numbre of Sacraments,
of Baptim, of the Supper of our Lorde, of Penaunce

and such other. These are the principall and chefe
articles of the Confession of Augspurg. Which if Smidelin
denie, I appeale to the printed copie of their confession:
being very sure that all these articles are there.
But if he graunte me they are all there, then I demaunde
of him as I haue often times done before,
whether he wil confesse or denie that the Ministers
and Preachers of this newe ghospell agree in al these
articles or no.
                  A brief recapitulation of the schisines and dissensions amō
                     ge the protestants. Epistola Illyrici ad M. VVernerū Barben. Caluinus de pre destinatione et Illyricus in articulis ineundae cō cordiae, etalij pleri
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   omnets. Illyricus in libro suae informationis. Gallus in exceptionum libro & cae. Anisdorfius lib. opera bona esse perniciosa. Illyricus contra Mentum et ali
                     •
                  i. If (as he hath done hitherto) he denie
it, I must nedes rest vppon my former sentence,
and pronounce that surely his wittes be not his owne,
he is braynesicke and beside him selfe.
            For he knoweth very well (as anon in the Genealogie
of Luther or table of the heretikes we shall at
large declare) that first as concerning the blessed Trinite,
diuers heresies haue in a short space sprong vp.
As the heresies of Seruetus, of Illyricus and of diuers
other in Bohem, and in the vpper Silesia. Againe euident
it is that the Caluinistes and the Illyricās can
not abide to heare of fre will, whereas the Melanchthonistes
and the Adiaphoristes contend hereof
bitterly against them. Nor it is not vnknowen what
greuous altercations be amonge the ghospellers about
Iustification. In so much that there haue risen
fourten contrary opinions against Osiander, onely vpon
this worde of Iustification. And howe terribly
fighte Illyricus, Gallus, and such as take their partes,
against the Melanchthonistes and the Adiaphoristes
about the name of the lawe and the ghospell, howe
one differeth from the other, and what eche one is?

Nowe howe the ghospellers like the brethern of
Cadmus, raile and brawle aboute good workes, some
saieng they are profitable to saluation, and some that
they are pernicious, all the worlde seeth and feleth.
As touching faith, howe many yeares haue the ghospellers
had as thongh it were open warre thereupon?
while some crie that Only faith iustifieth, some that
faith for the more parte iustifieth, and good workes
for the lesse parte, or as some other write, faith
principally and good workes partly. What shal I tell
howe they storme and rage in contradiction about
Christ,Caluinus in institutione Christiana. Melanchthō in vltimis locis commūnibus. Lutherus libro de capt. Babylonica Zuingliuscō
                  tra Vrbanū Regium de Baptismo. Lutherus in postrema cō fessione. Illyricus in suae informationis libro. Gallus in exceptionibus 
                     •
                  ontra acta VVittē bergensium Professorū. howe he is our mediatour and howe he doth
iustifie vs? For some teache that Christe iustifieth
man only by his manhood, some only by his godhead,
some againe teache that the godhead of Christ
died in the Crosse. About the numbre of the Sacraments
there hath ben a longe time and is yet amonge
them cruell variaunce and dissension. For some
saie, there are but two Sacraments, some thre, some
foure, some none at all. The Caluinistes thinke otherwise
of Baptim and the vertu thereof, then the
Lutherans do: but the Anabaptistes differ from them
bothe. As touching the Supper of our lorde, Luther
hath noted eight diuers sectes amonge the Swinglians,
and Melanchthon of late fiue amonge the Lutherans.
Aboute penaunce Illyricus reakoneth vp seuen
contrary heresies amonge the Adiaphoristes. But
what should I recite all that may be saide? Here againe

I demaunde of Smidelin, let him tell me, whether
those articles, by reason of which the princes of Saxony
and Countes of Mansfeld condemned the ten
sectes of heresie, be of the Confession of Augspurg or
no. Againe whereas Amsdorffius, Illyricus and Gallus
in open and printed bookes do testifie that the Melanchthonistes
and Adiaphoristes haue swarued in
six or seuen principall articles from the Confession off
Augspurg, whether that altercation and contention
be not of the articles of this Confession or no. Howsoeuer
Smidelin here awnswereth, he can not escape,
but he must buckle with the Illyricans. Yea Gallus
hath of late set forthe a greate commentary, wherein
he doth not only accuse the Melanchthonistes and
Adiaphoristes, but proueth plainly that they haue departed like Apostatas from the Confession off Augspurg
in the most principall and waightiest articles
thereof. By these articles therefore aboue rehearsed,
and by diuers other which you maye see in my table
of heretikes, it is euident and can not be denied that
very fewe articles of the Confession of Augspurg remaine,
which are not distracted and torne in to sondry
and diuers heresies.
            Surely any common laye or vnlerned man if he
desire to knowe the truthe hereof, he nedeth not
much lerning of skill to espie the contrarietes of the
protestants: only he maye diligently reade, waighe,
and think vpon the places that I haue alleaged out of
their owne bookes and writings, and he shall finde

to be (alas) to true, all that I haue noted of the diuers,
contrary, and repugnant sectes of the Lutherans. I
aske then of Smidelin whether euer he read in the
Confession of Augspurg the articles aboue reakoned.
Againe whether they belong to the ground of the
same Confession. Or if these articles were cleane taken
out of the Confession, what would be lefte? if he awnswer
that the aboue rehearsed articles be not of the
Confession of Augspurg, euery man that hath sene the
bookes, can proue him a lyar. For I appeale to the
booke of that Confession: and I am very sure that the
whole ground of that Confession lyeth in those articles.
If he graunte that those articles are the chefe
pointes and grounde of that Confession, he must be
driuen to saie, that the Lutherans in those articles agtee
very well and vary in no point, or that they varie
not so, that for that variaunce they may be charged
of heresies. Nowe then let Smidelin come forthe
and tell vs, if he stand stiffe in his opinon, howe he
estemeth the Princes off Saxony and Countes off
Mansfeld:Lib. contra 9. sectas. Li. cōtra
                     •
                  . sectas. whether he think that Illyricus, Gallus,
Amsdorffius, Morlinus, Ioachimus westphalus, be all lyars,
when they write and cōdemne their owne schismaticall
brethern and felowe heretikes, and all professing
the Confession of Augspurg, of more then fiften
sundry heresies: yea and that about the principall articles
of their Confession of Augspurg. And whereas
Smidelin laboureth to colour the matter, and like a pacifier
to recōcile al that is a misse, surely he doth but
vtter his foly: and varieth from other him selfe. For

               Amsdorffius, Gallus and Illyricus (pretended bishops
of the Lutherans) write and crie out that these debates
and variaunces, are mere contradictories, not able
to be iustified vntell the one part be cast. If Amsdorffius
with his felowes saie truly, then doctor Smidelin
lyeth. If they lie and saie all vntruly, let them trie it
amonge them selues: and kepe their estimation as
well as they can.
            We saide in the beginning of this laste parte,The seconde part off this booke. that
the Lutherans laie to my charge, as though I fathered
vpon them certain articles whiche they neuer
wrote nor taught. I haue in dede gathered out (as
they maie knowe, whiche haue reade my other treatises)
aboue a hundred articles of the Lutherans,De materia Lutheranae Theologiae. partly
directly false: partly mingled with falshood: and
haue quoted the places of their writings, where euery
article might be founde. Nowe the Masters off
Wittenberge haue picked out of the whole summe
thre or four fragments only, and denie that these pertaine
any thinge to their doctrine. Hoping thereby
that if vnder pretence of innocency, they could shake
of those fewe, then their other heresies and absurdites
would the lesse be espied, or molested.Theologiae Lutheranae trimembris epitome. But this
goeth the matter. In my booke offered vp at the diet
of wormes, in the which I gathered certain principall
pointes wherein the Lutherans differ and vary
not only from vs Catholikes, but also striue bitterly
amonge them selues,Lib. de capt Babyl. titulo de matrimonio. among other thinges I noted
Luthers doctrine aboute Matrimony out of his owne
booke, where it is writen, Let then Mariage be

the figure of Christ and his church, and a Sacrament
not instituted of God, but inuented of men in
the church, being lead with ignoraunce as well of
the worde as of the thing. This the Masters of Wittenberg
vtterly denie, and therefore inueigh furiousely
and beyonde all reason against me,Note here the modesty of protestants. after this
sorte. Tell vs thou wicked hipocrite, where euer it
was saide or writen of any man in our churches,
that matrimony was inuented of men by the ignoraunce
as well off the worde as off the thinge.
Surely I think sobre and wise men will not like this
malapert and ouer hotte talke of the Masters of Wit
tenberg, although I had iniured them in very dede.
But howe maye they nowe like it, where as in this
sentēce I haue nether added, nether taken awaie any
one sillable or iote, but haue euen so recited it, worde
for worde, as it lyeth in the seconde Latin tome off
Luthers workes printed at Wittenberg with the preface
of Melanchthon?
            
               But a man peraduenture may here obiect, that of
these only wordes the doctrine or minde of Luther
can not certainely be gathered, for that in other places
he hath otherwise writen of Matrimony. Vnto
whom I awnswer thus. Howe constant and sure Lu
ther and his scholers haue allwaies ben, and are yet
in their doctrine, I haue declared to the whole worlde
in my litle booke entituled, Trimembris Theologia.
But what was the sure and settled opinion of Luther
touching matrimony, he hath declared him selfe in a

certain sermon of matrimony printed at Wittenberg
in the yeare 1522. And that no man maye thinke that
Luther euer chaunged or recanted that doctrine (as
he did diuers) the very same sermon, euen worde for
worde was printed againe at Wittenberg in the yeare
1553. and is extant in the sixt Germain to me off
Luthers workes. Where thus he writeth worde for
worde.
               Sexto Tomo germanico. Fol. 172. Truly this I saide, if a woman fitte for the
acte of mariage haue a husband vnfitte thereunto
nor can not openly mary any other, and yet would
be lothe to cōmitte any dishonesty,A holesome lesson for the Lutheran dames. bicause the bishop
of Rome requireth about it many witnesses
and muche busines to no purpose, she ought with
these wordes talke vnto her husband. You se good
husband that you can not do your dutie vnto me,
and you haue disappointed my youthely body, and
brought me beside in daunger of my good name
with greate hinderaunce of my helth: you se there
is before God no mariage betwene vs two. Let me
therefore by your good leaue mary priuely with
your brother or next Kinsman, so that alwaies yet
you beare the name of my husbād, lest your goods come
into other mens handes, and suffer your selfe of
your owne accorde to be deceaued of me, as you haue
deceaued me against my will. I saide also that
the husband ought to graunt hereunto, and prouide

her the duty of mariage and children.The mariages of nevve ghospellers. whiche
if he refuse to do, she ought priuely to departe from
her husband in to some other countre, a
                  •
               d there mary
an other. Such counsell I gaue then, when I was
yet fearefull. But nowe I would geue freer counsell:
and that husband that beguiled his wife, I
would handle more roughely: and likewise the woman
that beguiled her husband: although this happened
seldomer in wemen then in men. In such waightie
matters that toucheth our body, our goods,
estimation, and helth, it is not inough to compasse
slightely by crafte our neighbour:Note the iustice of Luther. a iuste and aequal
recompense must be required of him. That is,
the woman lustely ought to plaie the hoore and
committe aduoutry.Tom. 9. f
                     •
                  . 177. 
               And a litle after. There be wemen
so frowarde and so obstinatly sette, that allthough
her husband fall ten times into incontinencie,
A spiritual lesson for the protestant husband. she passeth not vpon it. Here it is time that her
husband speake thus vnto her. If thou wilt not, an
other will▪ if the wife will not, let the maide come.
so that yet the husband warden her twise or thrise
before, and open the matter to other, that her frowardnes
be knowen and punished before all the cō
               gregation.
if she wil not,Ester. 1. then dimisse her from the.
put a waie Vasthi and take Hester, as king Assuerus

did. Thus farre Luther. I knowe very well the
Lutherans be angry hereat, and would that there were
no more talke of these matters. for that being discouered
and brought to light, they worke them muche
shame and dishonesty. Vnto whom I awnswere
that I am not the first that haue discouered this their
shamefull doctrine of matrimony. Diuers haue done
the like before me: and especially the vertuous and
Catholike Prince, of most worthy memory George
Duke of Saxony, in his aunsuer against Luther. Which
if Melanchthon haue forgotten, yet I truste he remembreth
what he wrote him selfe generally of all
the sacraments, in his annotations vpon the firste epistle
to the Corinthians the seconde chapter. where
he writeth thus. There be in all two sacramentall
signes, baptim and the Supper of the Lord, the other
which are called sacraments are but mens imaginations.
Nowe what difference is there betwene
the wordes of Luther saieng, that Matrimony is
but the inuention of man, and these wordes of Melanchthon
saieng, That the rest of the Sacraments
(amonge the whiche matrimony is counted) be but
mens imaginations? And see the wicked doctrine off
these ghospellers, calling the blessed Sacraments, but
mens imaginations.
               Matth. 19. Marci. 10. 
               for what saith our Sauiour of
holy matrimony? VVhat God hath coupled, let not man
separat. Is this nowe the inuentiō or imagination of
mē, and not rather the institution and ordonnaunce

of God him selfe?
            
            When the ghospell of Luther first sprange vp,The incō
                  stancy of the Lutherans. 
               Melanchthon
wrote that only faith iustified, the Sacraments
indued men with no grace, baptim and
the Supper were only Sacramentall signes.
               In locis communibus medijs & vltimis. A litle
after he wrote they were true Sacraments and of
two he made thre, and at length foure, so that in the
espace of fewe yeares that which he first laughed to
scorne and called imaginatiōs of men, sodenly they
proued holy Sacramēts, and weighty ordonnaunces
of the liuinge Lorde. I entend not here to dispute
of the number of Sacraments, what is the Catholike
doctrine and what is the heretical, it is not nowe
oure purpose.
            Farder the Lutherans will not be a knowen,The Lutherans haue corrupted the Crede that
they haue corrupted our Crede, scraping out the worde
Catholike in the article, I beleue the holy Catholike churche.
Thus I saide before of them, and saie it yet againe,
reporting my self herein to their Confession of Augspurg,
where they describing their church, omitte cleane
the worde, Catholike. In the Apologie Melanchthon
being accused thereof maketh a litle mencion, but so
that he calleth Catholike. that which heretikes in corners
do imagin. In his common places and in his booke
Examen examinandorum he bableth and pratleth
to no purpose very muche of the churche, but the
worde Catholike, he can finde in no churche. In the
greate and in the litle Cathechisme of Luther, and in
his litle booke of praiers where he reciteth the Crede

and expoundeth it,Children are taught a corrupted Crede. in euery place for the Catholike
church, he writeth the Christian churche. And hereof it
cometh that through oute all Germany where the
ghospell of Luther is receaued, children allwaies lerne
their Crede and saie it at table, euen as it is corrupted
of Luther and Melanchthon. Who like crafty heretikes
laboured by all meanes possible that the worde
Catholike might by litle and litle vtterly be forgotten.
And all heretikes haue euer shunned and auoided
this article of our Crede I beleue the Catholike churche.
and that not without good cause: for certayn they
are if their doctrine come to examination to be bulted
out by lerning, that this only worde Catholike wil
cutte their throtes.
            Sithen then we see clerely and euidently by this
which we haue saide,Protestants are proued to be heretike
                     •
                  . that amonge the Lutherans are
not only diuers and variable, but pernicious and hainous
hereticall schismes, diuisions and opinions, as
out of their owne saings, doings, and writings we haue
before declared, surely it must of necessite folowe,
that the Lutherans be and remaine pernicious and
detestable heretikes.Smidelinus extrema parte libri contra S
                     •
                  a phylum. For doctour Smidelin him selfe
and all heretikes do confesse this that whereas in the doctrine
of faith, that is, in the principall articles of faithe are
hereticall dissensions and schismes, that then the teachers and
setters forthe of such haereti
                     •
                  all schismes, must nedes be heretikes
them selues. But no man can nowe denie that the
Lutheran preachers do sette forthe, vpholde and defende
hereticall schismes. Wherefore it foloweth that
these Lutherans, ghospellers, protestants, or howsoeuer

they call them selues, be pernicious heretikes, and
for such are to be taken, and auoided of al Christendom.
            And truly there is no better meanes, to reduce heretikes
to the right and common highe waye of the
Catholike church, then to put before their eyes their
hainous and hereticall dissensions, wherein they
haue runne a straie: one this waie, an other that way,
but all out of the waie of the Catholike and Christē
belefe. Or if heretikes will be obstinat allwaies, and
continewe wilfully in their errour and presumed opiniōs,
the readiest waie to bring them to nought, is to
beseche god to suffer them to continew in the sprit
of dissension, that being seuered into diuers parcels,
and scattered into sundry schismes, they maie the sooner
perish and vanish awaie,Dissension destroieth heresies. euen as the builders of
the tower of Babell, and all heretikes yet hitherto.
For the only destruction of all heresies hath ben their
mutuall dissension and schismes. This Luther him
selfe testifieth, writing thus vppon the fift psalme.
Euery kingdome diuided within it selfe shall be desolated:
               Lutherus in 5. psal.
               for heretikes were neuer ouercomed by force or by art, but
only by their owne altercatiōs and dissensiōs.
               Iudic. 9. Genes. 11. 
               Nether Christ
by any other meanes ouerthroweth heresies, then by suffering
them to fall in to the sprit of dissension and variaunce
as the Sichimites and buylders of Babell in the olde lawe,
and the Arrians, Pelagians, and Donatistes in the newe lawe.
The Iewes also were destroied only by discorde amonge
them selues. For as Hilarius writeth, The warre of heretikes
is the peace of the church. Bicause by their contentions,

they perish euen bodyly, not only in their soules. Thus farre
Luther.Dissension allvvaies accompaneth heresy. And truly so it fareth, when one heresie is ones
spronge vp, and that diuers Masters professe it,
straite vpō many schismes and factiōs arise. Marcion
that archeheretike brought forth many absurde opinions,
which ones being scattered in to the wild braines
of his scholers, his heresie incontinently began
to breake in to sondry partes: so that of him proceded
Appelliani, Seueriani, and Manichei, Again of the
Manichei grewe the Priscillianistae, Encratitae, and diuers
other, all horrible heretikes, and yet allmost in
all countres suffred. Epiphanius in the third booke
confuting the Hemiarite and Arrians, writeth of the
Arrians thus. For we saie the armie of the Arrians is diuided
into thre bandes, so that Eudoxius, Germanus, George
of Alexandria, Euzoius of Antioche be departed in to
the first bande, cutting them selues of from their felowes. In
to the seconde bande Basill (not the doctour of the churche)
Eleusius, Eustachius, Georgius of Laodicea, Syluanus of
Tarsus, and Macedonius of Constantinople haue straied. In
the third companye (as I sayde before) is Acacius, Meletius
and Eutychius. All their doings be vaine and wicked. For
that as ony one taught, the other would not receaue, but
with mutuall hatred and malice they dissent and disagree
eche from the other. Thus farre Epiphanius.
               Vide historiam tripar titam. lib. 9 cap. 40. & Nicephorun lib. 12. cap. 29. & li. 13 cap. 1. & lib 18. cap. 45 & 50. Who listeth
more at large to see the schismes and diuisiōs of these
and of other heretikes, he maye reade Eusebius and
other ecclesiasticall stories. S. Augustin maketh mencion
off dissension of the Donatistes, obiecting vnto
them that Donatus his secte was distracted into son

dry schismes. For thus he writeth in his first booke▪
               De Baptismo contra Donatistas, Cap. 6. This part of Donatus
is cutte in to many smal pieces, al which parcels reprehēd
very much this great portion where Primianus ruleth, for
approuing the baptim of the Maximinianiste▪ and eche of all
those parcels do stoutely affirme that the right and true baptim
is only among them and no where els. Thus much S.
Augustin.
            
            But what nede we be longe in these olde and auncient
heresies, whereas (alas) euen nowe presently in
our dere countre of Germany such a plentyfull broode
of heresies groweth and increaseth? for howe sondry
and howe diuers sectes hath that only braine of
Ihon Hus begotte? Some of them are called Fratres
VValdenses, some Thaborite, some Picardi and some
Grubenheimeri, with diuers other names which were
here tedious to recite. For amonge those wiche nowe
call them selues ghospellers, spronge vp of the
sede off Luther, there are (alas) so many factions,
so diuers sectes, so soundry heresies, that they can
scant be numbred. Yea and many more (as Gallus
writeth) hange yet in the penne: but I wil somewhat
shake the pen to see whether any will fall out. Truly
this is most euident. Suche an archeheretike, as in
our daies Martin Luther hath ben, neuer yet was seene
in the churche: and therefore God neuer so declared
his wrath in this our miserable time. Yet God of
his mercie hathe geuen vs clere tokens and sure arguments
to knowe and espie out this heresie, suffring
such straunge dissensions and horrible schismes to

come to light: and that so clerely and manifestly that
euery man may easely perceaue, and surely pronounce,
that euen as God is the author of peace and vnite,
so the deuill hath ben the father, inuenter, and setter
forthe of all this Lutheran discorde and contentious
doctrine. If therefore any good Christen man
desirous to saue one, coueteth euidently to see and
behold what, and howe greate the schismes and factions
of these Lutherans are, all chalenging to them
selues the truthe and light of the ghospel, let him reade
and peruse this table of sectes that foloweth,
which I sett forthe before in latin, but
nowe haue augmented it in my
mother tongue for my dere
countremens
sake.
         
         
            THE GENEALOGIE,
POSTERITE AND
SVCCESSION OF MARTIN
LVTHER THE FIFte
Euangeliste.
            
               NOthing is more naturall, saithe the
philosopher Aristotle, then that euery
thing bring forthe his like, and
that not only bicause the nature of
thinges should not be confounded,
(wherefore the lyon bringeth forth a lyon, and the

man engendreth man, and as the Poet saithe, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
The rocke Scylla bringeth forthe no
rose) but also to the entent that euery kinde by it selfe
should be like in maners and disposition: wherefore
of the valiaunt father cometh not lightely a cowardly
sonne nor as the poet Euripedes saythe, Of an
vnthrifty father cometh a wise childe. This then being
a constant and perpetuall lawe of nature, it hath
pleased God by cōsideratiō of the natural course and
issue of temporall thinges, as if it were by a similitude,
to leade vs to the knowleadge of spirituall matters:
as for example, to knowe and discerne the true
prophets of God, which are the right and naturall
broode of the church, frō the false prophets and preachers,
which are as monstres or euill begotten children
in the churche. therefore he saithe. By their frutes
you shall knowe them.
               Mat. 7. and why by their frutes? Bicause
of thornes no man gathereth grapes nor figges of brambles.
And this it is, which is commonly saied, euery
thing foloweth his kinde.
            What a prophet Luther was, his broode and issue
hath well declared. For as soone as Luther pricked
first with desire of promotion and praise, was strait
enflamed with the firy lustes of the flesh, and that
to accomplishe this matter,Apoca. 16. Luther the false prophet
and that seuenheaded beste (whereof the Apocalipse
speaketh) were ioyned together, the olde Dragō (the
deuill) geuing her to wife, incontinently these three
vncleane sprits, of the Confessionistes, of the Sacramentaries,
and of the Anabaptistes, creped out of their

mouth like frogges. And although these thre vncleane
sprits, like the foxes of the Philistians beare their
heades farre a sonder and distant, yet they are so tied
together by the tayles, to burne vpp the corne of
Christes churche, that nowe in all Europe no heresie
can be founde, which hath not the marke either
of the Confessionistes, or of the Sacramentaries, or of the
Anabaptistes. That you maie if ye liste, euidently knowe
to which of these sprits euery heresie is bounde.
            And to the entent you maie espie of out euery and
singular markes of these vncleane sprits, note what
foloweth. God punisheth the worlde for sinne with
seuen principall plages. But those especially he vttereth
in thre elements, in water,Apocal. 16. in ayre and in fyre.
For as it is writen,Sap. 11. 
               Loke wherewithall a man sinneth, by
the same he shall be punished. This also in an other place
is notised. For there are three that beare recorde in heauen,
the father,
               1. Ioan. 5. 
               the worde and the holy ghost, and these
thre are one. And there are three which beare recorde in earth.
The Spirit and water and bloud, and these three are
one. This latter kinde of bearing recorde Christ him
selfe instituted and confirmed in earth, especially hā
               ging
for vs on the Crosse, where he shed water and
bloud out of his side, and yelded vp his Spirit into
the handes of the father. And as Eue was made oute
of the ribbe and side of Adam,Ioan. 19. so vndoubtedly the
church toke his roote and beginning of the side of
Christ, as the Councell of Vienna lernedly expoundeth
it. For the church by thre Sacramēts is specially

holden by baptim, the Sacrament of the aultar, and
by Penaunce. The seale of baptim is water. The mistery
of the blessed Sacrament is bloude off wine,
which is of the ayre. The holy Spirit, which Christ
inspired to his Apostles, gaue the kayes of the church
in penaunce. And the token of it appeared, fire in the
mouthe of the Apostles. Nowe these three maner of
bearing recorde in earth which Christ hath instituted,
and by the which the churche is vpholden, are
al at this present profaned, brokē and corrupted. The
Anabaptistes haue corrupted the water of baptim.
The Sacramētaries, haue profaned the bloud of our
Lorde. The Confessionistes haue broken the kaies
of the churche. And these hainous crimes haue partly
already ben punished: but the ende is not yet come:
bicause the profanation, corruption, and breache
of these holy institutions cease not yet. Let
him beware, that vnderstandeth. Let him
flie that can escape. Let him shake
of the duste of these heresies
that feareth the
wrath of God: But
nowe to the
table.
         
         
            
            THE TABLE
OF LVTHERS
OFSPRING.
            
               THe Dragon,Apo. 16. the Beste, the false prophet
(mencioned in the Apocalypse)
Martin Luther, the fifte euangelist,
out of whom proceded principally
thre vncleane sprits, In the yeare of
our Lorde. 1517. vpon S. Martins eue, to wit, the Anabaptistes,
the Sacramentaries, and the Confessionistes,
whiche are commonly called protestant preachers.
            The first vncleane sprit or tode Muntzerus and
Bernard Rotman, son of Luther and father of the Anabaptistes
began in the yeare of our Lorde. 1514. out of
these proceded.
            
               Muntzerans,
               The late rebells in Fraunce are of this secte. whiche are named of Thomas Muntzer.
for when that mā read in the bookes of Luther
De captiuitate Babylonica and contra duo mandata Caesaris,
that, There was no hope of remedy vnlesse all
mens lawes being extinguished the people did rule,
and that we ought to praie to God, that subiects
obey not their magistrats, He sturred vp the commons
through out al Germany against the nobilite.
whereby after sondry battailles had, there perished

more then a hundred thousand of the commons. Reade
the storie of Sleidan.
            
               Anabaptistes who first sprang vp by reading in an
epistle of Luther to the Waldenses or Picardi, That it
is better, baptim were omitted in children thē that
they should be baptised without their owne faith.
Of these arose diuers sectes, amonge the which these
are accompted the cheafest
            
               Adamitae,
               The sectes of Anabaptistes. the Adamites, whiche professe to folowe
the innocency of Adam. they wander in woddes,
and sometime naked, as Adam and Eue did.
            
               Stebleri, which teache that scripture forbiddeth to
cary sworde or wallet. item that it is not lawfull for
Christen men to accuse in iudgement, that it is not
the part of a Christen man to repell violence by force,
but to him that striketh on the one cheke he oughte
to turne the other. This Luther taught in his
articles condemned of the Sorbon in paris.
            
               Sabbataries, which obserue the Sabbaoth daye like
Iewes. despise the Sonday, and do inuocat the father
only, and seme to contemne the Son and the holy
ghoste. See Luther in his booke againste the Sabbataries.
            
               Clancularij, Close Anabaptistes, whiche being asked
whether they be Anabaptistes, thinke they may lawfully
denie them selues to be such, supposing it inoug
to knowe priuely what they ought to beleue,
and that it is not nedefull to confesse openly. And
these be commonly in greate cytes: they enter in to

no churches, they learne and teache at home in their
houses, or els mete in gardens. Such are commonly
called 
                  
                     •
                  arrenbrijder, that is, garden brethern.
            
               Manifestarij. Open Anabaptistes, which being asked
whether they be Anabaptistes, think it a wicked
thinge to denie it. In Prussia this secte is common.
            
               Daemoniaci, which beleue (as the Origenistes in times
paste) that the deuills shall be saued after the enof
the worlde.
            
               Communia habentes, Commonholders, which are of the
opinion, that wiues, children, and all other thinges
in the common welthe ought to be common, as Plato
in his Common wealthe taught, and in olde time the
Nicolaite, and off late the ghospelling prophets off
Moūster.
               The Sprit They saie one to an other. My sprit lusteth
after thy fleshe: come therefore, and let vs do maruailous
thinges. See Sleidan in the battaill of Mounster.
            
            
               Condormientes, Byslepers, which commaunde that
for the vehement loue of the newe ghospel, men and
wemen; younge men and maydens, ought to lyue in
one place and parler, and slepe in one chamber. So
did other heretikes of olde time in Burgūdy, and afterward
in Bohem the Grubenheymeri. which putting
out the candles, cried one to an other, Encrease
and multiplie.
            
            
               Eiulātes, Howling Anabaptistes, whiche thinke no deuotion
pleaseth God so muche as to wepe and howle
continually. greate store of this secte are in the vpper
Belgia.
            
            
               
               Georogianidauidici, Dauigeorgians, whiche began in
Friselande in the yeare of our Lorde. 1525. They saie
there is no deuil, they denie the resurrectiō of the fleshe.
See Sleidā. The Author and Master of this secte saied
him selfe, he was the third Dauid, as Luther that
he was the third Elias, and Osiāder the secōd Enoch.
            
               Memnonitae, which denie that Christe toke fleshe
of the Blessed Virgin.
            
               Polygamistae
               Bernardin Ochin Peter Martirs scholer defendeth this secte by scriptures Tom. 6. fo. 177. an. 53. Many wiuers, which teache that one
man maye lawfully haue two wiues at one time. Itē
               
that the brother maye mary his brothers wife, he yet
liuing. So practised Ihon Leiden kinge off Mounster
(Se Sleidan) and so taught Luther in his sermon
set forthe of mariage. Where he saithe. If the wife
will not, let the maide come. There be many other
sectes of Anabaptistes, which here to auoide prolixite
we let passe.
            
               The Second vncleane sprit, and tode, son of Luther
and father of the Sacramentaries, Carolstadius, began
the yeare of our Lorde 1521.
            
               Carolstadius and Zwinglius toke occasion to raise
vp againe the olde heresie of Berengarius by these
wordes of Luther in his assertions against pope Leo,
and in formula Missae. Nether kinde (of the sacrament)
is necessary to saluation. And againe in his Resolutions.
Only faith of the Sacrament doth iustifie,
not the Sacrament. These and other saiengs of Luther
moued Carolstadius and Swinglius to beleue that
the Sacraments were but bare signes, as Melanchthon
               
vppō the epistle to the Romans teacheth. These
Sacramentaries are many and diuers. First there are
eight Sacramentary factions, which Luther, him selfe
in parua Confessione attributeth to the Swinglians,
as we haue noted and recited before. Thē 
               Philip Melanchthon
declareth six other Sacramentarie sectes
amonge the Lutherans, in his determination writen
a litle before his death vnto the Counte palatin
of the Rhene, and printed at Heidelberg in the yeare
1560. whiche we haue also before touched. But
these which folowe, are the most famous and most
renouned sacramentarie sectes.
            
               Significatiui, Signifiers, whiche affirme that in the
Supper of our Lorde (for so they call the Sacrament
of the anltar) is not the true body, but only the signe
of the body. So Swinglius writeth in many and son
dry bookes sett forthe De Caena Domini.
            
            
               Tropistae, Figurers, which saie that in the supper of
our Lorde is the figure of the body not the true body.
So taught Oecolampadius in many places.
            
               Energici, Valuers, which teache, that in the Supper
of our Lorde, is not the body it selfe, but the vertu
and value of the body. so Caluin teacheth in many
bookes: and lately in his last admonition against 
                  •
               oachimus
Westphalus. Melanchthon also (as Caluin
laieth to his charge, and as it may appeare in his determination
printed at Heidelberg) affirmeth the same.
            
               Arrhabonarij, Pleadgers, which are of the opinion,
that the Supper of our Lorde when it is geuen, is geuen

as a pleadge of the body, as though it were like
the inuesting, or taking possession of a farme or any
other thinge whiche is geuen. So Franciscus Stancarus
teacheth in Pole and inTranssiluania. Sybenburgen.
            
               Adessenarij, Presentaries, of whom there are sondry
sectes. For some write that the body of our Lorde
is in the breade. Some aboute the breade: some
with the breade, some vnder the breade. see the assertions
of VVilhelmus Klebitius of Brandebourg against
the disputation lately had at Heidelberg, in the
yeare. 1560.
            
               Metamorphistae, which affirme that the body off
Christ after it ascended in to heauen, was made god
it selfe. And that it ought properly de saied. The body
of Christ is God. Therefore if ye aske howe
the body of our Lorde is in the Supper, they awnswer.
That the true body is there, but suche
a body, as is the very substaunce of God and God
himselfe: not fleshe, whiche is of the same substaunce
that mans nature is of. So writeth Swenck feldi
us in many bookes: but chefely in his booke De dupli
cista'u Christi.
            
            
               Iscariotistae, Iudaistes, whiche denie that in the
Supper of our lorde Iudas Iscariot receaued the true
body of Christ. So writeth Swenck feldius in a litle
booke entituled of this very matter, and Caluin in
his laste admonition against VVestphalus and other
where.
            The Neutres Sacramentaries, which teache that

nether one kinde, nor bothe kindes are necessary, but
that only faithe suffiseth. Againe that if the Councell
should determinat, that all should communicat
vnder bothe kindes, then contrairely the laye men
ought other communicat vnder one kinde, or vtterly
refuse bothe. they are the wordes off Luther in
his booke de formula Missae,
               O hotte communi cants. ant it is the common
practise of all Lutherans: where by it happeneth that
some not in ten yeares come to the communion, some
neuer at all.
            
               Iconoclastae, Imagebreakers, which caste out of the
church the images of Christ and all sainctes, putting
vp in their places their owne pictures and their wiues
maruailous finely and amorousely painted, as in
times paste Simon Magus and his bawde Helena did
as Nicephorus witnesseth. Our ghospelling protestāts
practise it daily. The examples testifie.
            The third vncleane sprit or tode, son of the false
prophet Luther, is Melanchthon: father of the Confessionistes
in the yeare. 1530. off these there are
thre contrary sectes and factions.Zelous. Some are roughe
and zelous Lutherās which without choise or exception
defend all the doctrine of Luther, be it neuer so
absurde: taking all that Luther hath writen filthy or
carren as it is, for the holy and pure ghospell of God.
Nexte are the softe,
               Ciuill. 
               gentle, Ciuill and moderat Lutherans,
which haue departed in many pointes from the
doctrine of Luther. And faining as if they woulde
ioyne nearer to the Catholikes, by making their

               Interim (that is a delaye vntel a Councel come) haue
yet fallē frō errour to errour the later contrary to the
first, as sometime of Maniches becoming Pelagians.
The third sorte of these Confessionistes, we may cal
Extrauagāts, and vnruly Lutherans, which although
they pretend to be Confessionistes, for bicause off
the authorite of 
                  •
               uch Princes as haue subscribed to
the Confession, yet in dede they runne and roue farder
from the doctrine of Luther, then the common
sorte of Lutherans do. But nowe first of the zelous
and rough Lutherans.
            
               Antinomi,
               The zelous Lutherans. lawles Lutherans, which so extoll the
ghospell, that they affirme the lawe of god to be vtterly
vnprofitable, and nether before iustification,
nor after necessary. That men of the ghospell are
not boūde to the good workes of Gods lawe. So Luther
taught in the beginning, and of him lerned Ioannes
Agricola as he writeth in his annotations vpon
S. Ihon. And Luther in his Antinomicall disputations.
            
            
               Samo satenici or newe Arrians which denie that
this terme 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               the worde, in S. Ihon signifieth a person
of the blessed Trinite. The vniuersite of Wittenberg
witnesseth that Mathias Illyricus is of that opinion.
In a litle towne or village of Silesia, called Zary
there is an other Mathias Minister off that village,
which vtterly denieth that there is any Trinite. In
Czeshau a towne of Boheman other Minister with
like madnes inueighed against the blessed Trinite,
preaching in the hilles called Guttni, and diuers
other in other places.O blessed frutes of the nevve ghospell. Yea they are come to this fury

and madnes, that they call the Blessed Trinite, the
thre headed Helhounde Cerberus, some other denie
there is one God: and affirme there are three Gods.
So a certayn Minister preached openly in Prussia.
            
            
               Infernales,
               Certain Lutherās denie an article off our crede. Hellmasters, which denie hell, and that
Christ descended in to hell, affirming that euery
mās graue is called in hebrew hell. Therefore where
our Crede saith that Christ descēded in to hell, they
saie it must be ment of his graue. This is a common
doctrine in the seacost townes of Germany, as at Breme,
at Hamburg, at Lubek and such other places. It
semeth also to be the opinion of Brentius. Reade
his greate Catechisme.
            
               Infernales of an other sorte (helltormenters) are,
which affirme that Christ not onely descēded in to
hell, but also suffred the eternall torments and paines
of hell. So teacheth Nicolaus Gallus atRatisp
                     •
                  
                  na. Regenspurg
in his printed Catechisme: and Iames Smidelin
preacher of Gopping, and Caluin in his Institutions.
            
               Antidaemoniaci, which denie there is any deuil or
euill sprits, or any witchecrafte, or enchauntments
wrought by the deuills. So teache the Dauigeorgians
and Andreas Osiander.
            
               Amsdorffiani which teache that good workes are
pernicious for man to saluation. So writeth Nicolaus
Amsdorffius in his litle booke entituled, That this
proposition is true. Good workes are pernicious to saluatiō.
So the scholers of Flaccius and many preachers of
Saxony do teache and write.
            
               
               Antadiaphoristae which admitte no auncient cerinonies
in the church, nor no iurisdiction of bishops.
so write the Illyricans and the Flaccians in many bookes
sette forthe against the Adiaphoristes off wittenberg.
            
            
               Antosiandrini or Osiandromastiges, which denie that
man is iustified with that iustice, whereby God is essentially
iuste: teaching that he is iustified by imputing
of righteousnes, that is (as Illyricus doth glose)
he is called iuste in worde onely: he is not so in dede.
Fourten Lutheran churches haue writen against Osiander:
but eche of them bringeth a peculiar definition
of iustice and contrary to his felowes. Sethe writing
of Ioannes Functius de origine Osiandrinae litis contra
Staphylum.
            
            
               Antiswenck feldiani, which teache that by the externall
preaching only or vocall ministery we attayne
to the Christen faith. Illyricus in diuers writings
set forthe against Swenck feldius.
            
               Anticaluiniani which although they do well affirme
the reall presence of Christes body in the Sacrament,
yet they do falsely and wickedly denie trāssubstantiation
and adoratiō. Again they falsely holde
that the Sacrament consisteth onely in the vse off it.
Ioachimus VVestphalus in his awnswer against Caluin,
and diuers other.
            
               Manus impositorij, which will haue that the layeng
on of handes of laye men is a Sacrament. This secte
swarmeth in Saxony, in Pomerania, and in the seacost
townes. Se Illyricus against Iustus Menius.
            
            
               
               Bisacramentales, which admitte only two Sacramentes.
so teache Caluin and the Flaccians.
            
            
               Sacerdotales, which teache that men and women
and all laie persons may preache the worde of God,
in the churche, maie minister the Sacraments, maye
binde and lose. For all men are equally priestes. that
holy order is but a tale and imaginatiō of men. This
is the doctrine of Luther in his booke De captitutate
Babylonica. and of Illyricus in his Apologie againste
Iustus Mentus.
            
            
               Inuisibiles, which teache that no churche is visible
bicause onely God knoweth who are his. So Luther
and Melanchthon taught in the beginninge, as it appeareth
in the Apology off the Confession of Augspurg.
but allthough they afterwarde secretly recanted
this errour, yet neuertheles the Illyricans, the
Swenck feldians, the Osiandrins, and the Anabaptistes
kepe it still.
            The Seconde Secte of the Confessionistes, in the
which are (as we saide before) the softe Philosophers
and Masters of Wittenberg: which will be counted
moderat,ciuill Lutherans. meke and more ciuil then the reste (for the
moste parte of these protestants are hotte and seditious)
and after a sorte kepe vnite and peace with all
other sectes: as in times paste the heretikes Meletiani
(amonge the Arrians) and Rhetorij.
            
            
               Biblijstae, Scripturians, whiche affirme that nothing
is to be admitted, read, or sette forthe to the people
in the church, or to the youthe in scholes, but onely
the bare text, and holy scripture of the Bible▪ and that

there nedeth no interpretation, for that we be all instructed
frō God. So writeth Melanchthō
                to Georgius
Spalatinus in his preface vppon the Canons off the
Apostles. Againe that no parte off Philosophie, is to
be lerned,Colloss. 2. bicause S. Paule forbiddeth vs to folowe
vaine philosophie. And againe bicause it is writen of
Moyses that men ought to eate their bread in the
sweate of their browe.Ge
                     •
                  e. 3. Therefore while Luther remained
in his Pathmus, Carolostadius and Melanchthon
persuaded the scholers of Wittenberg, that burning
their humanite bookes, euery man should gette him
to some hādry crafte worke. Many did as they were
counselled. Carolostadius in a certain Village by, in
the grounde of VVittenberg (being before Archedeacon
of the cyte)Melanchthon is a baker. became a labouring husband man.
and Melanchthon getting him to a bakehouse, lerned
to bake. This decree of so great diuines was dispersed
abrode in to many cytes of Germany. And to omitte
the rest, it is wel knowē, that in Silesia at Breslau and
Suidnicia, grāmer scholes were for the espace of two
yeares shet vp and abolished. al which time the scholers
of the Master ghospellers did reade nothing but
the very text of scripture. There be at this daye liuing
which can well testifie all this. The same allso
appeareth well in two bookes of Luther set forthe
in the yeare. 1522. writen to the Magistrates and
cytes off Germany for the setting vpp agayne off
scholes.
            
               Adiaphoristae, Indifferents, which teache that the lawefull
constitutions of the churche and of Councels,

also the cerimonies are thinges indifferent: which
to obserue or to breake is no sinne. So teache the
Masters or diuines of Wittenberge and of Lipsia, in
their Interim made at Lipsia.
            
               Trisacramentales, which admitt onely thre Sacraments,
Baptim, the Supper of our Lorde, and Absolution
or penaunce. such is the practise in the Ordynaunce
of Lipsia.
            
            
               Quadrisacramentales, which alowe foure sacramēts
Baptim, the Supper of our Lorde, Penaunce and holy
Order. so is it obserued in the Ordinaunce of Wittē
               berg
out of Melanchthons common places.
            
               Lutherocaluiniani, which counterfaite that the Lutherans
and the Zwinglians accorde smothely in
the matter of the Sacrament, and would make men
wene that the contention is in wordes not in the
thinge. See Iames Smidelins booke of the Supper
of the Lorde. See also Nicolaus Amsdorffius in his
Cōfe
                  •
               sion: who vehemently reprehendeth this guile
and deceite of Smidelin.
            
            
               Semiosiandrini, which against Osiander, taking the
parte of the Antosiandrini teache that man in this life
is accompted iuste and righteous by imputation
onely▪ and againe taking Osianders part against the
Antosiandrins teache, that in the life to come, man
must in dede be iustified with that very iustice where
with God him selfe is essentially iuste. of this opinion
are the diuines and Masters of Tubing. Reade
the duke of Prussia his booke set forthe vpon this

controuersie of Osiander, and the epistle of Brentius
writen vnto his prince of the very same controuersie,
and printed at Wittenberg in the yeare .1552.
            
               Maioristae, which denie that any man (yea infants
them selues) can be iustified, or euer haue ben saued
without good workes going before. Georgius Maior
in many writinges against Illyricus.
            
            
               Poenitentiarij, which haue corrupted the doctrine
of penaunce with seuen grosse errours. Illyricus accuseth
hereof the diuines of Wittenberg and of Lipsia
in a writing set forthe against the corruption of the
ghospell, printed in Iene in the yeare .1559. and thus
intituled. Beriche M. F. Illyrici von ethliken artikelen.
            
            
               Nouipelagiani, newe pelagians which write that a
man may dispose him selfe by his owne naturall power
to receiue the grace of God: so Illyricus accuseth
Melanchthon in the writing aboue named and Amsdorfius
in his Confession.
            
               Syncretisantes, politik Lutherans, whiche persuade
and counsell al other sectes, that they pretend at leaste
vnite amonge them selues, seing they can not come
to any true agremēt: that like the people of Creta
they may with more yoined force sett vpon their
common aduersaries the papistes and ouercome thē
the sooner. This writeth Melanchthon in his booke
against Staphylus.
            
            The third secte of the confessionistes, wherein are
the disorderly and vnruly Lutherans, althoughe they
manifestly oppugne and resist the doctrine of the

               Confession of Augspurg, yet vnder pretext of the same
Confession the mayne flocke of these shepe of Melanchthon
beare them selues for Lutherans.
            
               Swenck feldians, haue hetherto ben all moste all of
one opinion, but nowe they begin to scatter and
swarue amonge them selues. For of the selfe same points
in doctrine those of Breslau haue one opinion
(approuing one point and reprouing an other in
Swenckfeldius) those of Suidnicia haue an other, finding
faute with those Swenck feldians, whiche call
baptim ein Sewbad / that is,Certain protestāts call bapti abathe for svvine. a bathe for swine: and
those of Glogouia haue yet an other, measuring by
their proper sprit the writings of Swenckfeldius.
But the peculiar and speciall doctrines, of that man
are these. That the manhood of Christ is the begetting
of the holy ghoste, not the creature of God (as
other men are) but a middle thinge betwene God
the Creator, and man the creature, but yet in suche
wise, that the same manhood of Christ after his ascension
in to heauen was made very God. This testifieth
manifestly his legat at Augspurg and his bookes
offred off late to a certain frend off his there.
Againe that euery man is endued with the same righteousnes,
the same wisedome, the same charite,
and all the same vertus with the which God is essentially
endued, of like worthines and in like maner,
and by this very diuine nature is God: Beside
that the same vertu or operation which is in the

worde of God preached, is the very son of God,
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                that is, the worde, as scripture termeth it. Thus
he writeth in his booke de duplici statu Christi, de vero
euangelij vsu, and in many other writings, whiche he
presented to a certayn frende. Truly this man wrote
many thinges not amisse, but these and many other
very euill: a man not so malitious as vnlerned in true
diuinite.
            
               Osiandrini, which saie that Christe iustifieth man
by his diuine nature onely, vtterly excluding his humanite,
againe that a Christen man ought to be iuste
with that very iustice where with god him selfe
is essentially iuste. farder that Christe the onely begotten
son of god according to bothe natures (off
god and man) as he was in his mothers wombe, is
the very same image after the which the firste man
was created. therefore when man in the sacrament
of baptim putteth on Christe according to bothe
natures (of god and man) that he is made the very
same image generally, not particularly as the lerned
vse to speake. And this is the meaning (sayth he)
of the wordes of S. Ihon,1, Ioan. 4. 
               that Christe is come in to sleshe.
Martin Luther in the yeare 1539 at Smalcaldiū, where
the Leage (or rather conspiracye) was then made,
preaching vnto the estats and orders of protestants,
interpreted these wordes of S. Ihon that Christe is come

in to fleshe, after this sorte. That Christe came not
therefore in to flesh, that he might communicat vnto
vs his owne iustice or righteousnes, but that he
might accepte vs for iuste and righteous outwardly:
so that our inwarde man should not in dede be iustified
or made righteous from vniuste and vnrighteous,
but we should onely be accounted for suche
before God after the maner of acceptation: as in times
paste the Lacedaemonians made and decreed Alexander
a God with these wordes. Alexander wil
be a God. let him he a God, and let Alexander be
coūted and accepted for a god, though he be no god.
And Luther saith that this doctrine was the sure
foundation vpon the which the Leage of Smalcaldiū
               
for the defence of the ghospell might and ought
right worthely be builded, erected and absolued. But
anon after when it came to Osianders course to preache,
he toke the very same theme of S. Ihon that Luther
did. But leauing the interpretation of Luther,
he interpreted it after his owne minde: in suche sorte
that it directly repugned Luther: as, that the very
essentiall iustice or righteousnes off God, proceding
and flowing out of the foresaide image off God
(which he calleth Christe) is planted in man. and at
the last, though preuely, he gaue them to vnderstāde
that this his doctrine was the very iewell and treasure
of the ghospell: farre better then that of Luther:

in consideration whereof bothe the Leage and the
warre of Smalcaldium should be entred, made, and finished.
And this sermon of Osiander was allmoste
the laste that was made at that meting: as I am able to
showe by the hande of Melanchthon. Thus Luther
for the grounde of his iustification would haue (as
in his owne printed disputation it is euident) a kinde
of relation and imputing, which is the lest of all thinges
that are, and in dede nothing. But Osiander putteth
for his grounde the diuine essence, God him
selfe, whiche is all thinges. See howe iumpe these
two ghospellers and Archeprotestants mete in the very
highest point of our religion. Vpon this faint and
frickle foundation of two false and contrary opinions
was that leage of Smalcaldium stroken: whereof
ensued that lamentable and cruell warre, to the
greate waste and destruction of Germany, with the
murder of infinit thousands of men. Then experience
it selfe declared, howe true that prophecye of Luther
was, when in the yeare .1545. in a certayn litle
booke writē to two noble princes of the sight of a certayne
coyne brought oute of base Germany, (whereof
we shall speake more anon) he warranted vpon
his othe and faith all the confederats, that by
this his doctrine of imputed righteousnes, they might
boldely and hardely assure them selues of the victory
at Brunswicke,
               Vide Micha elis Rotlingis ludimagistri Norē bergensis li bellū cōtra Osiandrū. and off euerlasting saluation at the
hande of God. But as touching Osiander, and his doctrine,
it may be sene in a litle booke printed in the ye
are of our lorde .1550. with this title. De imagine dei.
               
There be many other articles of the Osiandrins: whiche
to be short I omitte. See the disputation of Osiā
               der
had atRegiemons. Coiningsberg, in the yeare 1459. and his
open confession sett forthe there also, in the yeare
1550.
            Stancarians, which against Osiander vrge and affirme
vehemently, that Christ iustifieth vs by his
manhood onely, not by his godhead at all. So Stancarus
bothe taught openly, and wrote against Andreas
Musculus at Francford by Odera.
            
               Antistancarians, whiche to refute the opinion of
Stācarus do so farre affirme that Christ iustifieth mā
and worketh oure righteousnes bothe by his manhood,
and by his godheade, that they doubte not to
teache, the very godhead of Christ to haue suffered
on the Crosse with his manhood. that Musculus is of
this opinion, his extemporall treatise (
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ) off
Luthers doctrine witnesseth: and the condemnation
of the Swiceran ptotestants for this opinion: as it is
notised in the writing of Petrus Statorius the frenche
man, printed this yeare 1560. at Pinczouia in Pole.
            
            
               Noui Pelagiani, New Pelagians, which saie thereis
no originall sinne in children, but that it is onely an
infirmite not worthy of death.Suinglius is a Pelagian. So teacheth Swinglius
in his litle booke of baptim against Vrbanus Regius.
Againe that Numa, Cato, Scipio, and such other notable
men of the ethnikes, although they lacked the
true faith in Christ to come, yet that they are saued

by the vertu of the lawe of nature. It is the doctrine
of Swinglius in the booke aboue alleaged: and Luther
entwiteth the Swinglians with it in his laste cō
               fession
of the supper of our Lorde.
            
               Noui Manichei,
               Our nevv protestāts are nevve Manichees. New Manichees be and haue ben
diuers protestants in our daies. First Luther: then Melanchthon,
Caluin and many other, as Amsdorffius, Illyricus,
Gallus, Beza, VVestphalus. Luther and Melanchthō
               
teache, that all thinges bothe good and bad, come
to passe by absolute necessite. that God is not only
the cause of sinne by permission, but also by operation:
as the worker of it. It is the doctrine of Luther
in his Assertions against pope Leo, and in his Resolutions:
of Melāchthon in his annotations vpon the epistle
to the Romans. Againe that. The aduoutrie of
Dauid, the crueltie of Mālius, the betraieng of Iudas,
be as well and as much the worke and operatiō
of god as the very Conuersion of S. Paule. Melāchthon
in his annotations vpon the epistle to the Romans.
But he recāted this heresie afterwarde, as it maye
appeare in his common places of the laste edition.
Luther continued still obstinat in his errour: whom
also al the obstinat and zelous Lutherans folowe yet
as Illyricus, Amsdorfius, Gallus, and other.
            Manichaei & Marcionitae Caluiniani, which as scholers
of Ihon Caluin do professe, and spreade abrode
these detestable and blasphemous doctrines against
God and man, as folowe. That god chefely created

mankinde for to be perpetually damned, that god
created Adam not onely that he should die,Detestable doctrines off Caluin but allso
from the beginning predestinated him to mischefe,
and therefore he coulde not choose but sinne.
That the sinnes committed by men are not onely
done by gods permission, but by his will and compulsion.
That all sinnes committed of men are absolutely
the workes of god. That god worketh in
men theft, horedome, aduoutrie, and all suche sinne
as man doth. That the lawe of god and the will off
god be oftentimes contrary, one to an other. That
the deuill by gods commaundement and will lieth
in mens hartes. That not onely God is the cause of
euil, but also doth inspire in mēs hartes euil thoughtes
to worke euill: so that men sinne not, but God
is the willer and efficient cause of sinne. This is the
doctrine of Ihon Caluin in his booke of predestination,
and of Theodore Beza (the archeheretike of Fraū
                  ce)
in his defence for Caluin.
            
            This yeare 1561. one Lucas Sternberger in Omoluke
a towne of Morauia being cast in to preson, preaching
amonge the Sternbergers, and in diuers other
places, bearing him selfe for a Minister of the ghospel
and scholer of Luther and Melanchthon, preached
and persuaded the people this doctrine that foloweth
for the true and expresse worde of God.
            
               First he openly taught and confessed, That al suche

as worship the name of the Blessed Trinite
do imagin falsely the Gods. That the name of the
Trinite is vaine and superfluous, bicause that worde
is no where expressed in holy scripture, beinge
also but one God in heauen. Therefore he forbad
that the same songe O veneranda Trinitas, O blessed Trinite
should be songe, and commaunded in his place
to singe O blessed goodnes of God.Horrible blasphemies of a ghospelling Minister. 
               He wisheth also that
all the deuills of hell woulde come and cary awaye
this Trinite: saieng he can not tell whether it
be a man or a woman: yet that he is sure that the same
Trinite was ones a woman, which had thre husbands.
            
            
               Secondarely he confessed and taught, that Christe
was not true god but mā only like other mē, For
if he had bē god he should haue descended out of he
auen in to earthe and committed the gouuernemēt
of the worlde here to Angels. That he was borne
only of Mary and Ioseph the carpenter and that he
exercised that crafte with Ioseph vntel the thirtyth
yeare of his aage. Beside he teacheth, That Christ
rose frō death not by his owne power but by the power
of god almightie: and that he worked no miracle,
but by the power and operatiō of almightie god,
which had endued him with more excellent giftes
and graces then al the other prophets: adopting him

for his son at the leghth for his vertuous and honeste
life, when he was baptised of Ihon in the Iordayn,
and the voyce from heauen came downe saieng
This is my welbeloued son in whom I am delited,
so that Christ is not the son of god but touching his
soule onely, bicause in the crosse he commended and
gaue vp but his soule to god.
            
               Thirdly he mocketh at the holy ghoste, saieng,
that it is nothing els but a pigeon. affirming beside
that nothinge is writen of his diuinite in all scripture
nether of the olde testamēt nether of the newe
and that it is not knowen what is this holy ghost.
Finally he had rather returne to the cloyster, and
be a papiste, then to beleue in the holy ghoste.
            
               Fourthely. he will not the blessed virgin Mary
mother of god to be a perpetuall virgin, but that
she had before two or thre sonnes, and that she nothing
differeth frō the rest of wemen: and therefore
nether she nor any other saints ought to be worshipped,
or haue their holy daies kepte. Againe that
men ought to worke the Sonday. and reste the Saterday,Note the grounde of nevve heresies novveadaies.
bicause in holy scripture the Saterday is cō
               maunded
to be kept holy. But of the Sōday nothing
is prescribed nor appointed. for (as Luther taught)
nothinge ought to be admitted or obserued, which

               god hath not in expres wordes commaunded or
forbyd in holy scripture.
            
            Fiftely he reiecteth holy baptim, calling it a diuelish
institution: affirming also that it procureth
nought els, but hell and eternall damnation, for circumcision
was instituted of god, not baptim.
            Sixtely as touching the blessed Sacrament of the
aultar he can neuer satisfie himselfe with mocking,
iesting, and scorning at it. for he saith the Iewes haue
longe ago eaten vp the paschall lambe. and if any
thing were lefte they burned it. Finally he confesseth
he is of that opinion in this Sacrament, as Melanchthon
is. For at a certain time hauing some communicating
with him, but fewer then he thought, he inuited
all other by speaking to them in these wordes.
Come hether: for 
                     •
                  am not able to deuoure him vpp
alone. as for other sacraments he foloweth Luther
in all points as his schole master, of whom he receaued
this doctrine.
            Now that these heresies here reakoned vp, be rife in
Morauia, and that many a soule is miserably in ueigled
and seduced with them, the experience showeth.
They also which are sene in the Alcoran of Mahomet,
and in Luthers doctrine, may well consider and
perceaue,The Issue of Luthers 
                     •
                  hospell. that this fifte ghospell of Luther prepareth
and fostifieth the waie for Mahomets Alcoran to come
in to Germany.
            And though the Lutherans to excuse them selues
and their ghospell will here obiect, that Luther neuer
inuented, neuer thought, nor taught these detestable

heresies published by Lucas Sternberg, it maye
and ought well be awnswered vnto them, that
though Luther neuer tought these matters expresly,
(which yet is to be doubted of) yet he gaue abundant
and sufficient occasion for these and all other heresies
and schismes,Luthers doctrine (to haue naught but expres scripture) cause off all heresies. onely in that he writeth and bableth
all waies, that nothing ought to be receaued, approued
or obserued in the church, which was not manifest,
euident and expresse in holy scripture. And what
other grounde hath this Lucas Sternberg to abolish al
truthe of our Christen religion, and to plante his deuelish
doctrines, then this lesson of Luther? For euer
he crieth. VVhere is it writen, where is it in holy
scripture that there be thre persons? VVhere is it
read that Christ in the vnion of his godhead and
manhood, should be the Second person in Trinite?
or that Christ is the true and naturall son of God,
and not a creature according to his euerlasting and
diuine generation? VVhere is it expressed in scripture
that the holy ghoste it selfe is any other then
the euerlasting father? VVhere is it noted in holy
scripture that Mary the mother of Christe was a
Virgin before and after the byrthe, and that shee
continued a Virgin allwaies? In what place of the
Bible can we reade that the Sabbaoth daie should
be abrogated, and the Sonday instituted? And what
heretike I pray you maye not saie the like of all the

articles of our catholike faithe? For what scripture
hath saie the Anabaptistes that infants shoulde be
baptised? And the Swinglians. VVhat Scripture,
saie they, affirmeth that the true body and not the
figure off Christ his body is in the Supper of the
Lorde? Againe the Lutherans. VVhat place of scripture,
saie they, dothe testifie that Christ instituted
the Masse in his Supper? Therefore if Luther had
raised vp no other particular heresie, yet this was detestable
and cursed inoughe, that he taught nothing
to be obserued, or receaued in the church, but whiche
god had expresly, directly, and in plaine wordes
commaunded or forbed in the Bible.
            To this heresie of Lucas Sternberg an other secte
directly repugnant and contrary rose vp very lately
at Pinczouia in Pole. in the which place two new ghospellers
Petrus Statorius and Georgius Brandata teach
that there is not one God, but thre gods, and they
so diuers one from an other as thre men. yet that
the son is somewhat lesse then the father and the
holy ghoste. Againe that the Crede which the churche
vseth to singe, is not to be called the Crede of
Athanasius but of Sathanasius. as you woulde saie
of the deuill. Certain noble men of Pole demaunding
of Petrus Statorius and Georgius Brandata where
they had lerned this doctrine being newe and neuer
heard off before in Pole, they awnswered,

               It was the pure ghospell and very worde off god,
and the very same doctrine which they had lerned
of their masters, Caluin, Bullinger, Peter Martir,
and VVolfgangus Musculus. But the cause why it
was not before heard of in Pole nor abrode in the
worlde was that it pleased god to reuele to the
worlde this highe misterie and greate treasure nowe
in these later daies by his faithefull Ministres.
The Lorde Stanislaus Baron, Mathias Stadnitzky, and
Franciscus Stancarus by their patent letters writen to
to the Swinglian doctours aboue mencioned,
in the yeare 1561. and sent by their owne
Messenger, do testifie and write
these thinges of Petrus Statorius
and Brandata.
            
         
         
            
            IN VVHAT ARTICLES
THE CONFESSIONISTES,
SVCCESSOVRS
OF LVTHER, DO YET Agree
and accorde.
            
               HEtherto by the sondry and diuers factions
of heretikes of vs rehearsed, it may appeare
howe and in what matters they swarue
and disagree amonge them selues. For who
readeth nowe all the articles of the Confession off
Augspurg, he shall see that swaruing and scattering in
all the reste, they haue remained onely in these fewe
of one accorde and agrement. And of those articles
this is the firste.
            
               Firste they agree all in this, that all sectes wil be called
ghospellers, all boaste them selues to folowe the worde
of God, the ghospell, the Crede of the Apostles,
and of Athanasius. they all saie, that the worde off
God is cleare and opē: and nedeth no interpretation,
that women and men, laie and priestes, maye al a like
handle and treate off the worde off God. And whatsoeuer
sence of holy scripture shall like any man, that
he maye folowe and defend it for the worde of God
it selfe.
            
               The Second Article, wherein they do all agree is,
that they do all with like endeuour and malice, striue
against the Catholike church. that none of them

all admitteth any Catholike or vniuersally receaued
exposition of holy scripture, that they all accompte
the bishop of Rome for Antichriste, all bishops,
Prelats, Priestes, for the mēbres of the deuil. that they
do all abhorre constitutions and ceremonies of the
Catholike churche. That all hate and detest a like
the blessed sacrifice of the Masse. that all go aboute
to take oute of the churche all priesthood and clergy.
            
               The third article, wherein all the protestants agree
is, that for the moste parte al leaders and Masters off
sectes forge some notable lies vppon the Catholike
writers, and then persuade the people they are the
doctrine of the papistes. As for example. They make
the people wene that the papistes taught man to be
able to merit the grace of God, and the benefit off
iustificatiō with his only good workes. This and suche
other lies they haue already so persuaded the people,
that although neuer Catholike man taught so,
yet they put this absurdite as the foundation and
grounde of papisticall doctrine.
            
               The fourth article wherein all protestants agree, is that
to confesse and reaken vp our sinnes, to do any satisfaction
whereby the temporall paine due for sinne
may be released, to labour and endeuoure to purchase
euerlasting life by good workes proceding of the grace
of God, and depending of the merites of Christe,
is naught els but a papisticall buchery, and torment
of cōsciences. that Cōfirmatiō, Matrimony, and extreme
vnction be mans inuentions, not Sacraments

of the church. They agree also al in this, that no man
can liue chaste,Aboue in the leafe. 16. no more then he can liue withoute
spetting, as Luther writeth: and that to faste certain
appointed daies, is the worshipping of deuils. In these
articles off the Confession off Augspurg, in
these articles of the fifte ghospell, all sectes of
our time agree wonderfully. But in al
other pointes they braule and
snarle one at an other
like cats and
dogges.
         
         
            
            
               
                  A SHOVVE OF THE PROTESTANTS PETIGREVV
as ye haue it before at large deducted.
                  An ougly Monster brought forth of a
cowe, in the yeare 1523. in Waltersdorff one
myle from Friberg, in one Steckers farme,
much resembling the cowle of a Fryer.
Whereby Luthers Monstrous life and doctrine
was boded.
                  
                     Bicause no coulours might expresse Luther the friers grace,
                     As also that such Champions might be knowen by their race,
                     Nature therefore in his chefe time of wedding and of preaching
                     Did blase his armes in this Monster to geue the a warning.
                  
                  
                     Such faire figures, such like truthes, such foule rootes, such ofspring.
                     Such holy fathers, such good sonnes, such ghospell, such blessing.
                     Yet thou which maiest reade, vpon this Monster do not mus
                           •
                        
                     
                     But to haue more deformites, his broode in this booke peruse.
                  
                  A.
Martin Luther of an Austin Fryer, an ambitious
Apostata. A wicked deuiser of damnable doctrines. Father
of all the sectes of protestants: The Archeheretike of our time.
                  
                     Katerin Bore, a Nonne, by Luthers procurement,
ranne out of the Nonnery of Nymick in Saxony,
Easter eue at night, in the yeare of our Lorde 1523. Came
to Wittenberg, liued twoo yeares a lewd life with the
scholers there. Then coupled her selfe in pretensed wedlock
with Martin Luther, a Nonne with a Fryer, Apostatesse
with Apostata. B.
                  C.
Bernard Rotman
an vnlerned laye man:
by reading of Luthers
epistle ad Waldenses. 
                        〈…〉
                     
Lutheran

                        〈…〉
                     meth 
                        〈…〉
                     . Of
him spronge vp
the buddes off
this branche.


                        Adamites
                        Sabbataries
                        Anabaptistes
                        Holders in common
                        Howling Anabaptistes
                        Mennonites
                        Manywiuers
                        Dauidgeorgians
                        Byslepers
                        Daemoniacalls
                        Close Anabaptistes
                        Steblers
                     
                  
                  D.
Zwinglius, of a spiritual
pastour a secular souldiar. Reading
the Assertions, the Resolutions
of Luther, and his
booke de formula Missa. Becometh
Father of the Sacramentaries,
multiplieng in to
the sectes aboue named.

                        Signifiers
                        Valuers
                        Presentaries
                        Iudaistes
                        Imagebreakers
                        Neutersacramentaries
                        Metamorphistes
                        Pleadgers
                        Figurers
                     
                  
                  E.
Philip Melanchthon,
first the slaue of
Luther: allwaies a variable
and inconstant felowe.
Euer lerning, as S.
Paul saieth, but neuer
attaining to the truthe.
Father and founder off
the Cōfessionistes spredding
them selues in to
thre famous factions:
eche faction breding a
plentifull issue.

                        Zealous Lutherans diuided in to
   
                              Lawles Lutherans
                              Hellmasters
                              Antidaemoniacalls
                              Antidiapherists
                              Antisuenckfeldians
                              Handlayers
                              Priesters
                              Inuisiblers
                              Twosacramenters
                              Anticaluinistes
                              Autofiandrins
                              Ams
                                    ••
                                 rsians
                              Helltormenters
                              Samosatenicalls
                           
                        
                        Disordrely and vnruly Lutherans parted in to
   
                              Suenckfeldians
                              Stancarians
                              Newpelagians
                              Manichees and Marcionite alumisles
                              Newmanichees
                              Antistanckarians
                              Osiandrins
                           
                        
                        Ciuil Lutherans scattered in to
   
                              Scripturians
                              Thresacramenters
                              Lutherancalicinistes
                              Maiouristes
                              Newpelagians
                              Politick Lutherans
                              Penitentiaries
                              Halfosiandrins
                              Foursacramenters
                              Adiaphoristes
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
            THE PLACES
AND COVNTRES VVHEREIN
THE FORESAIDE
PROTESTANTS AND HEREtikes,
either dwell openly or
be conuersaunt secretly.
            
               
                  THe Anabaptistes dwell frely and opē
               ly
in easte and weste Friselande: and
especially about Geddan, Dantsch, Elbing
and Coiningsberg, also in Morauia
abundantly, in Bohem not so com
mon. Yet vnder pretext of Lutherans they liue here
and there priuely vppon the Rhene: in Flandres and
Henaut, in Holland, in VVestphalia, and nowe vppon
Danubius, and in Silesia they are common.
            
               The Swinglians, rule allmost euery where, and aboue
all other sectes are moste dispersed. In Schueytzerlandt
they haue possessed fyue of the better Cantōs.Basill, Zu rich, Berna, Schafusa, Clarona
And a good parte of Sauoye, and the lake of Geneua.
In Englande also and Scotlande they are thicke. Yea
and of late they haue priuely inuaded the Counte
Palatins Dominion of Rhene, and the dukedom of
Wirtenberg. At Augspurg Luther beareth the name,
but in dede Swinglius and Caluin beare the stroke.
Yea Caluin is of so great power, that he hath his garde

in Fraunce,It appeared vvel of late in Fraunce. and diuers places of Hungary. The
Swinglians doctrine is not vtterly banished at Witten
berg nor at Lipsia.
            
            
               The Zelous Lutherās and Confessionistes, haue possessed
the territory of Vinarium, and the moste parte
of Saxony, Magdeburg, Brunswicke, Luneburg, Lubeck
Hamburg, Breme, and all moste all Denmarke, and Holste,
               Holsatia, Ratispona.
and the greatest parte of the dukedome of Megaloburg,
and in Byerlande the cite of Regenspurg.
            
            
               The Ciuill Lutherans, and Melanchthonistes beare all
the rule in Misnia, in the greater parte of Franconia,
and at Norimberg. In the vpper and lower parte off
the Palatins Dominion. and in some parte of Swethelande.
At V
                     •
                  mes, in the dukedom of Wittenberge
and the Marchie. But here they are somewhat diuers:
for some will be Flaccians, some Melanchthonistes and
Adiaphoristes,
               Vratislauia But in Silesia especially at Breslau, and
Brige, the masters of Wittenberg beare the greater
stroke.
            
               The Swenck feldians in Swethelande and at Augspurg,
lyue priuely,A
                     •
                  gusta vindelicorum. but yet are many and common.
In Silesia among the Nobilite they florishe. at Suidnicia
also and at Glogouia they be not obscure.
            
               The Osiandrins haue shewed them selues openly in
that parte of Prussia which is vnder Albertus the Marquise:
but at Norimberg they kepe close.
            
               Stancarians, in the lesser Pole and in Sibemburgē:Transsilua
                  
                     •
                  ia.
for these disorderly Confessionistes are yet but grene,
and dare not showe their heads, expecting a time,
when the blaste of their heresie shall ones infecte the

people.
            But howe longe o lorde shalt thou be angry? for
euer? howe longe shall thy zele and wrathe be kindled
lyke fire? Poore oute thy wrathe vpon the nations whiche
haue defiled thy holy temple. Nether remembre, o lorde, oure
olde iniquites, let thy mercies praeuente vs. Make vs all of
one minde, of mutuall charite, of one faithe, doing nothing
contentiousely or for vaine glorie, but in all humilite to acknowledge
the one God and whom thon sendest, Christ Iesus.
AMEN.
            This table of Heresies hath alreadye diuers times
ben printed in the Latin tongue, solde abrode, and
read of many: and although all protestants haue maruailousely
ben offended therewith, yet it hath displeased
none more then Smidelin and his companyons
the politike protestants. For these consider the
matter depelyer then the other cōmon sectes do: and
perceaue very well, that this foule dissension of the
Lutherans being knowen will bringe at the length
their fifte ghospell to naught. But howesouer Smidelin
turne and winde him selfe herein, wil he nill he,
he must of force confesse, that the Lutheran protestants,
which call them selues ghospellers, be at hainous
dissension one with an other, and do brede and
foster vp, detestable and heretical schismes, so diuers,
so repugnant, so plaine cōtradictory one to an other,
that sooner you shall make fire and water, hotte and
colde agre, then their doctrines, and opinions. Where
of vndoubtedly it must ensue, that the euill thinge
consuming allwaie it selfe, and nothing being worse

then these cursed and dissensious schismes, they wil
in time spende them selues, consume, and come to
naught.
            But howe miserably comforteth Smidelin him selfe
with this slight and slender argument when he
crieth out, Beholde, the doctrine of the ghospel doth
not onely not decaie, nor go to wracke, as the papistes
hope, but encreaseth dayly in many places, and
is spread through out Christendom euen in those
places where the ghospell before was neuer heard
of? First howe true and worthy a comforte this is, I
reporte me to Smidelins owne conscience. For, but if
he be a very block, or els beside him selfe and starke
madde, he must nedes confesse, that these newe and
freshe doctrines which daily arise and springe vp to
destroie the olde and awncient religion, can in no
wise be called the pure and expresse ghospel. Smidelin
and his felowe Lutherans, which cleaue yet onely to
Luthers doctrine, are not so betle blind or ignorant,
but that they knowe and see very wel, what euāgelical
doctrine hathe sprōge vp of late in Fraunce, in Englāde,
in Scotlande and in Pole. If they knowe it not, I
wil tell thē. The doctrine preached in those countres
is partely of the Suinglians, partely of the Caluinistes,
some Laskonicall and some Anabaptisticall, but
all together deuelish and heretical.In libello contra Staphylum. And although the
doctrine of Smidelin be not much better then these,
yet in his printed writings he openly cōfesseth, that
he accompteth none of the foresaide doctrines for

Christian or euangelicall. And in dede if he be of the
opinion that the Brentians are (as he pretendeth) he
must accurse and condemne as Brentius dothe, the
doctrine of the Swinglians, the Caluinistes, the Anabaptistes
and of the Stancarians, not onely for their doctrine
of the Sacramēts, but for many other articles
also,The ghospel of Luther decayeth daily especially the article of Iustification and faith.
Here let Smidelin beholde the iudgment of his owne
conscience, laye his hande to his owne brest, and
aske of him selfe, whether he thinke in dede that the
ghospell whiche Luther planted, do encrease and
multiplie, or rather be plucked, and rent daily in to
sundry parcels and peces, cleane hewed frō the first
shape, and so hared of this secte and that secte, that
of that poore ghospel nowe (as Luther left it) nether
head nor heare, nor taile nor foote dothe appeare.
Or if he can not espie this by examining and enquiring
of him selfe, let him counsell his brethern the diuines
and masters of Vinaria, which can well instructe
him hereof, and thoughe it be to their greate
grefe, yet they will assuredly tell him (for these are
their wordes) that the ghospell and doctrine off
Luther remaineth no where (alas) so pure and
incorrupted as in the dominion of the princes of
Vinaria. And where is thē the worthy and waightie
comforte of Smidelin, where is the triumphe and ioye
he maketh, that the ghospell of Luther (for that
is the ghospell he meaneth) groweth on dayly more
and more through Christendome?
            
               
But now Smidelin findeth an other sory shifte to cō
               forte
his poore brethern withal.This sory shift oure Apologie of Englā
                  de alleageth also in defence of their dissensiō. Libro cōtra Catalogum
                Bicause in dede he cā
not denie the heretical schismes that are amōge thē,
he turneth the blow vppō the Catholikes and chargeth
thē with the like sayeng. that amōge the papistes also
are sectes and schismes: for some mōkes were blacke cooles,
some grey some white, some eate fleshe some fishe, some wil take
mony, some take none. some vse longe portises. some shorter.
Is not this think you, a horrible and perilous dissē
               sion
amonge the papistes? If our doctours and diuines
should vse suche arguments against them, howe
woulde they scoffe and scorne at it? But these ghospelling
preachers vsing such, must not onely not be
founde faute withall, but must be highely praised
and commended therefore, as men of excellent vertu
and knowleadge. Whiche allthough it be very
iniurious, and may well be complained of, yet sence
that it liketh them so to vse vs, we must take it
in good parte and beare it. But as touching the
matter, euen as in our Christen religion we haue lerned
of S. Paule to acknowleadge and beleue in one
God, euen so we must professe one faith, and one baptim.
Although therefore among religious men and
womē there be diuers orders, and sundry rules, likewise
betwene the clergy and the laite diuers professions
and vocatiōs, and that by the sure and certain prouidēce
of almightie God, yet among these al, there is
but one God, one faith, one Christ, one church, one
and the selfe same interpretation of holy scripture.
We by the true vnderstanding of Gods worde, haue

lerned in the churche the difference betwene the
Catholike faythe of all men,Faithe in one in all but trade of life ciuers. and the priuate hope
of eueryman. First in the articles of oure belefe, we
beleue al one thinge and al after one sort. But to euery
man priuately it is permitted, that vpō right cōscience,
and due consideration, for the encrease and cō
               firmation
of his hope (which lacketh not his sure rewarde)Heb. 2.
he maye take and chose vnto him some such
honest trade of life and cōuersation, as is agreable to
his nature, though he differ hereby from the common
life and vocation of other men. Therefore as
concerning the agreement of our faithe, we reade in
the Apostle.Philip. 2. 
               If there be therefore any consolation in Christ
if there be any comforte of loue, if there be any feloweship of
the spirit, if there be any compassion and mercie, fullfill ye
my ioye, that ye be like minded, hauing one loue, being of one
accorde, that no thing be done through strife or of vaine glory.
And againe. Neuertheles vnto that whiche we haue
attained vnto,
               Philip. 3. 
               let vs procede by one rule that we may be off
one accorde. Many such sentences are in holy Scripture,
whereby we are admonished, that the doctrine of
our faithe and belefe ought not to be referred to any
one state or person, but to the whole communite off
Christ his churche. Wherefore S. Iames commaundeth,
That we esteme not the faith of our Lorde Iesus Christe
in respect of personnes.
               Iacob, 12. Whereof it appeareth euidently
that the vnite, consent, and agreement of our faith
is builded and grounded vppon the communite off
Christes Catholike churche. Whereby all schismes
and particular heresies are excluded. But that the diuersite

of grace, of giftes, and vocatiō is to be referred
to the condition of euery man. And what is the reason
hereof? Bicause as we haue many membres in one
body,
               Rom. 12. 
               but all membres haue not one office, so all Christen
men are one body in Christ: but euery one hath his
singular and peculiar giftes, grace, and vocation. And
this blessed Apostle saithe also in an other place.Galat. 6. Ro. 2. & 14.
               Let euery man trie his owne doing, and so he shall haue glorie
in him selfe onely, and not in an other. For we shall all
stande before the iudgment of Christe, that euery man maye
receaue the workes of his body according to that he hath done
whether it be good or bad.
               2. Cor. 5. Seing thē these two pointes,
the agreement of faithe and diuersite of vocations, are
in the Catholike churche by due reason to be waighed
and eche in his place to be osberued, I can not
sufficiently maruaill at the sutle shifte and wily deceit
off these Lutherans,A vvily deceit of the Lutherās. forcing the Catholikes
to suffer amonge them heretikes beleuing as they
list, and sowing schismes at their pleasure, bidding
them withall dissemble and winke at the matter,
whereas yet them selues will not suffer the like liberty
in diuersite of vocations amonge the Catholikes,
but will persuade Princes and Magistrates to
force their subiects, bothe temporall and Spirituall
and Religious of all sorte, to forsake their godly vocatiō
and perfit professiō, and to take such a frame of
faith as it shall please the Prince or Magistrat to prescribe
them.The protestants cōfounde vniformite and diuersite. What other thinge is this, then to make
that diuers, and different in the Catholike faith, whiche
should be one and vniforme, and that one and vniforme

in persons and vocations, whiche should be
diuers and different? O horrible confusion. If there
were not beside this point, manifest and outragious
impietes of the Lutherans, repugning bothe to right
reason and to the worde of God, whereby we might
iudge howe pestiferous, abominable, and wicked the
doctrines and doings of these Lutheran preachers
and protestant Ministres are, yet of this only matter
it might appeare euident, while they confunde Vniformite
and Diuersite. Teaching that which ought
to be in our belefe consonant and agreable, that it
maye varie and be diuers: and cōtrairely those things
whiche in euery mans peculiar vocation shoulde be
proper and distinct, maie in no wise varie or differ.
            Whereof spronge the insurrection of the commōs
in Germany, the sedition of the Anabaptistes in West
phalia,The frutes of this confusiō. The late rebellion also in Fraunce. and the rebellion against their highe rulers
and magistrats? Surely of no other roote, then that
Luther and all protestant preachers haue taught, and
do yet teache, and write to, that seing, There is no respect
of personnes before God,
               Ephes. 6. therefore there ougth to be
no difference of persons, no magistrat in the church,
but that all Christen men are fre, and therefore all other
distinct estats, dignites, and qualites as well greate
as small ought to be all one, and all a like. And
whereof arise these greate and enormous dissensions
in religiō, but only of this occasiō, that the Lutherās
take awaie from the Catholike faithe all vnite and
agreement, and teache that euery man may be saued
by his owne priuat faith, which he forgeth him selfe,

and that he maye for his owne person frely beleue
what he listeth? Thus they would force the Catholikes
to a certain dissembling deceit, such as neuer
was heard of. As that they should suffer euery man
to beleue as he list, and set vp newe factiōs and schismes
against the vnite and agrement of our faith: But
the difference of vocations, qualites and degrees, as is
betwene lowe and high, tēporall and spirituall, priuat
and publike, they should no more suffer, but make all
estates cōmon, all vocatiōs aequall, al trade of life one
and vniforme. If this be not to confounde heauen
and earthe, surely I knowe not what heauen and earthe
meaneth. Colde which procedeth of water, is
of this nature that it knitteth and fastneth together
diuers thinges in to one masse and substaunce, and
cōserueth them also in the same, as golde, siluer, bras,
tinne, leade, claie also, durte and wodde. But heate
contrairely resolueth and seuereth all these substaunces.
So likewise the property of faithe is to knitte
ioyne and fasten together in one belefe, and in one
vniforme vnderstanding of Gods worde all nations
and all kinde of mē, noble and base, princes and subiects,
men and women, riche and power, younge and
olde. But the workes of charite, the perfitnes of liuing,
the choise of our vocation is lefte fre to euery
man, according to the qualite of his person, and condition
of his power and abilite. Wherein euery man
bestoweth his talent that God hath lente him, and
beareth the yoke laide on his shoulders gladly, going
all waies forthe, and pricking him selfe forwarde

with a sure and certain hope in God,2. Cor. 6. who shal rewarde
euery man according to his good dedes and measure
of his charite working seuerally with the common
faith of Christes church.
            Nowe then if Smidelin be, I will not saie lerned, but
at the lest of any reason or iudgement he maye well
thinke with him selfe, that there is greate and euident
difference betwene the common nature (whiche
is one in all men) and euery particular man, whiche
hath his proper and peculiar qualites and giftes
from God as it pleaseth his goodnes, some of more
price and value thē other: euē as we see in coūtes and
waightes. And therefore the olde holy fathers haue
so taught, that the grace of God is due neither to the
nature, nor to the person: and that, bicause god oweth
nothinge to any creature. It is therefore a very cursed
doctrine of the Lutherans, and abhominable before
God to chaunge the faith of Christendome whiche
oughte to be commō,Lutherans do chaunge faith in to hope and confidence. one, and vniforme in all, in to
hope which euery man hath differently according to
his vocation. And contrary wise to make that euery
mans particular hope, cōfidence, and truste is the cō
               mon
faith of the Catholike church.
            Greate is the misery and greater the shame off vs
Germans that haue thus ben deluded. We persuade
our selues we are wiser, and see more. then all Christendome
beside, yea then all our swete forefathers
euer sawe. But I thinke, and not without reason, that
it were greate wisedome for vs, if we coulde but see
and perceaue howe wise, graue, and circumspecte our

forefathers were.
            As for doctor Smidelin, I would earnestly counsel
him that geuing vp his Lutheran doctourship in some
Smithes shop,
                  Smid. soundeth in the germain tongue Smith. he begin again his diuinite, and learne
of some parishclarke, why when he ringeth to
sermon he ringeth but one bel and that the greatest:
but when he ringeth to euen song or other seruice, he
ringeth many belles at ones,A prety similitude. bothe greate and small.
For here Master Smidelin maie lerne that the ringing
of one bel to sermō representeth the vnite of the Catholike
faith taught at sermons, which ought to be
but one and vnifor-me in all men. But the iangling
of many diuers belles to commō praier signifieth the
diuersite of mē, some praieng feruently some coldely,
some seruing god one waie, some an other▪ yet so
that euery waie cometh to one ende.
            But nowe M. Smidelin practising his smothered
smithish diuinite, runneth in rudely with his hammers,
and tonges, and will nedes persuade men, that
the variete of vocations must be reduced to the vnite
of faith, and contrary wise that by their scattered and
ragged faithe (whiche they define to be euery mans
truste and confidence in Christe) all men maye frely
beleue as they liste, and frame them a faythe after
their fonde fantasie. Suche is forsothe the wisedome
and policie of our time passing our forefathers simplicite:
and yet this blindnes they will haue vs to
winke at, and runne hedlong with the reste. Not
withstanding we, grounded vpon the authorite off
gods worde comforte our selues herein, that the vnite

and agreement of our Catholike faithe is the
grounde of all truthe. But the variete amonge vs off
diuers vocations in the Catholike church, serueth as
a guide and meanes to trade euery man: that he so direct
his course in perfit hope and godly workes off
Christen charite,Ro. 13. 1. Cor. 15. that at length for his deserts (auailable
onely through the merites of Christ our
Redemer) he may be counted for a starre or parte in
heauen litle or greate.
            To awnswer therefore directly to Smidelins accusation,
charging vs of schismes and dissensions (by
reason of diuers religions and vocations) we do plainely
confesse, that in the doctrine of the Christen
faith, according to S. Paules commaundement, we be
of one minde and of one accord. And againe euery man
for his qualite and vocation endeuoureth to beare
his owne yoke, and cary his owne burden, some more
carefully and diligently then some: some this
waie, some that waie: according to the grace and giftes
of god, and as eche man vseth the same. And off
this diuersite of the giftes of god,
                  Philip. 2. The cause of diuers professiōs of religiō in the catholike churche. and of mans infirmite
or abilite it cometh to passe, that among vs some
for example of their conuersation, and to sette
before them as though it were a glasse of perfection,
do folowe and embrace the rules and steppes of olde
holy fathers: some of S. Augustin, some of S. Bernard,
other of S. Benedict, of S. Dominicke, and of S.
Frauncis, euery man as his deuotion serueth.
            But let vs nowe see and consider the agremēt and
variete of the Lutheran churches. In this point first

they do all agree, that according to their Christen liberte
planted first of Luther,Luther reacheth this in his booke de saeculari potestate in the 6. German tome fol. 602. and in many other places. and nowe receaued off
his scholers, there be no Emperour, no kinge, no
Magistrat, no prince. Againe that where such are, yet
they ought not be obeyed, but al must be aequal. that
the countre man ought to be as highe as the Noble
man: the Noble man as the Prince: the Prince as the
Emperour: that the parishe clarke oughte to be as
good, as the vicar, and the bishop no better then the
vycar. And this wilde and vnruly doctrine of Luther
hath so farre proceded, that not onely many notable
foundations, as Monasteries, bishoprickes, and
other churches erected for gods seruice are wasted
and destroied, but also in many places the commons
against the Nobles, the Nobles against their princes,
yea and against the Emperour him selfe, haue of late
yeares diuers times rebelled, labouring to suppresse
Nobilite, to ouerthrowe all superiorite, and to confounde
all princely souuerainte. Not consideringin
the meane season, howe daily experience showeth
vs, that heretikes against Catholikes or subiects against
their princes neuer preuaileth,Hereticall rebellion neuer proueth. In the yeare 1325. as Athanasius
writeth. For what successe had the commōs in Germany
rising against the Nobilite? more then a hunred
thousand of them perished. What got the people
of Denmarke, making insurrection against the Nobles?
what auailed the nobilite of Swethland and
Fraunce rebelling against their Souueraines?VVe haue late examples of oure ovvne countre. they
wrought all their owne destruction. And if ye list
to knowe, what triumphes the heretikes haue had

ouer Catholikes in ciuill rebellion,The triū
                  phes of late heretikes ouer the Catholikes. see howe the
Swinglians sped in Switzerland, the Anabaptistes in
Mounster, and amonge the Saxons, the Lutherans
in Liflāde, the Caluinistes in Fraūce. Euery one was
rewarded according to his desert: missed of their purpose,
and lost their liues. And although the Moscouites
in certayn cerimonies varie from the church
of Rome,Vide prodr
                     •
                   mū Staphyli. yet their faith and belefe touching such articles,
as the Lutherans haue swarued in from the
Catholike churche, is in moste pointes agreable to
the Catholike doctrine.
            If therefore, o true and vertuous Germans,A good lesson for oure countre also. we liste
to put out this greate blotte of our good name, to
auoide the vtter destruction and desolation of our
dere countre, and purchase the eternall saluation of
our soules, this is the onely waie for it, to seke after
againe the steppes and pathes off our dere forefathers,
to ioyne our selues with the whole corps off
Christendome, and to call backe againe and restore
that doctrine, that faith, that church, and that ghospell,
by the which we were first made Christen men
and haue continewed so many a hundred yeare. For
what so euer the Lutherans bable of their newe forged
religion, howe so euer the protestants pratle in
pulpits of the primitiue church, yet they can not denie,
but that this their doctrine, their trade of ecclesiasticall
gouuernement,Euen so it is vvith vs. their maner of common prayer,
and all other ordinaunces was neuer yet sene nor
heard of in Germany, sence it was first Christned,
vntell Luther.
            
               
Charlemain the first Germain Emperour with
his successours brought the Saxons to Christen religion:
                  Vide Carionem. So did S. Augustin the first Apostle of English men Vide Bedā.
               
founded amonge them their chefe bishoprickes,
churches and Colledges, planted in Germany
the very same doctrine, the very same religion, the
very same cerimonies, the selfe same Masse and seruice
of god as it is at this daye vsed amonge all Catholikes:
and so left it to all Emperours after him. Likewise
those holy bishops and Martirs, the Apostles of
higher Germany, which first brought Christendome
in to it, instructed it not with that doctrine or
ecclesiasticall gouuernement as the Lutherans vse,
but with the very same vnderstanding of holy scripture,
with the same religion and gouuernement of the
church, whiche the Catholikes euen to this daye do
practise.
            
               S. Seuerin Archebishop of Rauenna conuerted Austriche
to Christendome.The first Apostles of the highe Allemans. 
               S. Eleutherius and Quirinus
the countre aboute Anisus. S. Maximinus and Rupertus
the bishoprick off Salispurg. S. Valentin and
VVolfgang the cyte off Passau.Bedurum, Ratispona. 
               S. Paulinus and after
him S. Emeranus Regenspurg. S. Corbinianus Frising.
S. Richard and Vilibaldus the cyte of Eystat. S. Narcissus
and Viricus Augspurg and Algouia. S. Kiliaenus
and Burchaerdus Virtzbourg. S. Columbinus and Gallus
Suethelande.Herbipolis. S. Maternus and Valerius the inhabitants
of Rhene.Constantia. S. Paternus and Laudo Costnitz. S.
Amandus and Argobastus Strasbourg. S. Victor and
Seruatius Wormes.Argentina VVormatia Moguntia. S. Crescens the disciple of. S. Paule
and Maximus Ments. Whiche all beside many other

blessed Martirs and lerned bishops, in other countres
where they planted Christes religion, and instituted
gods seruice, taught no other doctrine, preached
no other ghospell, practised no other religion, saide
no other Masse, vsed no other clergy then suche as
from the Apostles time through out all Christendome
hath ben hetherto kept and vsed. In this religion
we germans were traded first to Christendome.
With this religion our godly and vertuous forefathers
attained to euerlasting life. By this religion the
Romain Empire hath ben translated to the Nobilite
of Germany. Through this religion the aūcient germans
haue had greate victories, haue dilated their dominion,
hath brought infidels to the Christen faythe:
as Hungary, Bohem, Pole, Vandale, Slavony,
Prussia, Liflāde, Denmarke, and Swetheland: which
partly by force of armes they haue constrained, partly
by instruction of holy bishops they haue persuaded
to receaue Christendome. All this maye be sene
in our Chronicles and awncient foundations. But
now we see to our greate grefe and shame, that within
the space of fourty yeares all these countres are
all moste come to destruction. The hainous heresies,
the sundry schismes, and the horrible blasphemies
euery where practised proue it to clerely. Farder the
greate decaie of the German Empire, the contempt
off our nation (being nowe in obloquy with all the
worlde, whom before all nations other loued or feared)
testifie this abundantly.
            Where is nowe become Thiethmarsh, whiche

belonged before to the diosece of the Archebishop
of Breme?Countres loste in Germany by heresy. The Danes haue taken it. Where is Lifelā
               de
the olde soiourne and retire of the Saxon Nobilite?
The Moscouite by maine force hathe wronged it
out of our handes Prussia what is come of it, whiche
was wonte to be the receite and soiourne of higher
germany? The Polonians haue chalenged it and enioye
it. And these two countres of Liflande and Prussia
be no smal territories, but two riche and large Realmes.
especially Prussia which hathe in length aboue
Aboue thre hundred of oures. threscore miles, and in bredthTvvo hū
                  dred of our miles. fourtye: and containeth
diuers cytes, portes, and villages greate and
small, so riche and full of commodites as no place of
Germany beside. And although Lif
                     •
                  lande be not comparable
to Prussia either in riches or in power, yet is
it a goodly, beawtifull, and large countre, from
whence not onely the Nobles of Saxony and townes
of the seacoste, drawe sundry commodites, but
all the state of the Empire also, and many foren
countres. And these two countres, Prussia and Liflande
are as two sure feete of the Germain Empire:
which nowe by our dissension being bothe cut from
the Empire, it is easye to coniecture, howe hansomly
and surely it is like to stande. And howe haue we loste
these noble countres and prouinces?Prussia loste by Luthers heresy. by the force
and power of oure enemies? No truly. For the
knightes of the Order in Alemaigne, forced the
Prussians being yet heathē to receaue the olde Christen
religion whiche they had lerned off their
Apostles and forefathers, and vntell oure daies haue

stoutely kept them in the same. And as longe as that
worshipfull Order continued in this godly purpose,H. Muti
                     •
                  s Cuspinianus in vita Henri
                     •
                  i. V. & alij.
that countre flourished and encreased in all wealth.
But as soone as that Order receaued the newe ghospell
of Luther abandoning the true ghospell off
Christ, and forsoke the spirituall Crosse of that Order,
folowing the fleshly doctrine of Luthers crosse,
incontinently that whole countre being gotte and
kept so many yeares vnder the olde ghospell, was sodenly
loste through the newe ghospell of Luther:
the Nobilite of Germany thereof berefted, and yelded
to the prince of Pole. so that nowe they rule ouer
the germans, whiche in times paste paied tribut
to the Emperours of germany.
            The like happened of Liflande. for as longe as the
knightes of the Order in Lifelande kepte and maintained
the Catholike faith (whereby they first subduedLiflande lost by Luthers heresy.
that countre) ten thousand of them coulde in
open filde put to flighte fourescore thousand of the
Moscouites: but sens that the same worshipfull Order
put downe the awncient religion, whereby they
obtained such victories, planting in the place of it
heresie, all the victory hathe enclined to our aduersaries,
and the Moscouites haue obtained the countre.
For so it is.Gala. 5. Colloss. 3. The frute of only faithe. Lutherus in epist. ad Gallum Amsdorfium. 
               By agrement small thinges encrease. by discord
greate thinges fall awaye. The olde Catholike faith
worketh by charite, which is the bonde of perfection
and all prosperite. The Lutheran fayth abideth
not charite with it, but will iustifie man alone.
               
And therefore all charite, agrement, and vnite is
broken amonge them. And no maruail. For God is the
authour off peace,
               1. Cor. 4. as the Apostle say the, and the deuill
of dissension.
            The Turke hath possessed Hungary,Hungary loste by Luthers heresy. onely by
dissension of religion. For as soone as these Lutherā
preachers had spread abrode their cursed heresies,
and stirred vp thereby among the estats of the Empire,
much variaunce, hatred, and malice, neighbours
began so to mistruste one an other, that all honesty
fidelite and frēdly feloweship vtterly decaied. Whereby
euery man sowghte after his owne profit, nothinge
regarding the common welthe and good estate
of the Empire. In the meane season they that
bordered on the Turkes were destituted of all comforte
and succour of vs. Yea and the enemies of the
Empire hath diuers times had of the Empire it selfe
succour and ayde. Beside that we haue many waies
hindred and kept backe our owne countremen and
Princes whiche bothe ought and desired gladly to
withstande the enemies of our countre, getting and
winning grounde daily vppō vs. And to make shorte
herein, it is muche to be feared that we Germans haue
ministred sufficient occasion to the accomplishement
of that olde prophecie,Lactan. lib. 7. cap. 16. Rupertus Taitien. super 20. cap Apocal. which Lactantius mencioneth
and diuers other writers. That the Northe
shall rule ouer the Southe, and the Easte ouer the
Weste. And so Magog from the Easte and Gog from
the Northe shal come and destroie the Romain Empire:
whiche yet thoughe weake and al most spent,

hāgeth by a weake threde in the hāde of vs Germās.
            We haue the examples of two greate nations, whiche
geue vs good occasion to feare the fall of the
Empire in Germany▪
               The destruction of grece through heresy. to witte, of the Grekes, and off
the Liflandmen. For what other thinge did Grece in
times paste, then that we do presently in Germany?
The Grekes resisted the bishop of Rome: would not
acknowledg the sea of S. Peter to be head of the
churche. They made them selues at home bishops
and prelats (against all canons and rules of the churche)
whom they made al of equal and of like authorite.
And what I praie you folowed of the gouuernemēt
of this headles church? First in the clergy spronge
vpp many heresies and schismes. Then the Emperour
of Constantinople and other princes of Grece
fell at warre together, and vtter deffiaunce one withe
an other. Thirdly euery bishop and Minister being
of like authorite, hauing no head or chief bishop
whom they might folowe and obey, as their spirituall
Magistrat, euery man expounded Scripture as it
pleased him. brief newe sectes and schismes were so
plenty in all Grece, that by reason of partes taking
in religion, the Emperour rose against the other
Princes, and they against him: spoiling, wasting, ransacking
one an other, countre against countre, Prince
against Prince, vntell all came to nought. For the Venetians
in this confusiō and dissensiō gotte from the
Grekes Peloponnesus, Epirus, Cor
                     •
                  yra, and other countres.
The Hungariens wonne in to their handes Croatia,
Dalmatia, and other prouinces: Vntell at the

length the Turke entring in to Grece vnder pretence
of reconciling the Princes and the Emperour,Note and bevvare in time. slewe,
murdred, and extinguished miserably all the remnant
of the grekes, bothe Spirituall and temporall,
the Emperour, and all other princes and Rulers: ouerthrewe
and toke in to his owne hādes the whole
Empire of grece, spoiled also the Hungarians and
the Venetians of that whiche they had gotte, and so
at the laste vtterly abolished and destroied all the Sectes
and heresies: making his slaues all the remnaunt
of the catholike Christiās. as they remaine yet to this
daie presently. Nowe the state of Germany to be as
Grece was before the cominge of the Turke,Oure state in Englād touchinge religion is the same. euery
man seeth. And that we may feare the like ende as
the grekes had: the like inuasion of the Turke, or
Moscouite, or some other tiran, I leaue it to euery
wise man to be waighed and considered.
            An other example of the calamite hanging ouer
our heades whiche nowe we see in Liflande, maketh
me remember the miserable destruction of the cite of
Ierusalem, and the Iewes. For what is more like then
the ouerthrowe of these two people,The cyto of Hierusalem destroied by schismes. the Iewes and
the Liflandmen? There were among the Iewes thre
sectes repugnant to the right doctrine of Moyses and
the Prophets. As the Pharises, the Saduces, and the Esseni.
The ground of the Pharises doctrine (as Iosephus
writeth) was this. That men did all thinges by forced
necessite from God, not by liberte of fre will.
               Lib. 2. cap, 7. de bello. Iudaico.
And this is the very grounde of the zelous Lutherans

doctrine,Matth. 21. Luc. 20. as Illyricus witnesseth. The Sadduces
affirmed (as the ghospell witnesseth) that there
should be no resurrection of the dead. And althoughe
the Suinglians professe not openly this doctrine
of the Sadduces,
               Reade Vil legaignon aga
                     •
                  nst Caluin and oure discourse. yet it foloweth necessarely of their
doctrine, that our bodies shall not arise, if (as they
saie) we receaue not the true body of Christe really
present in the Blessed Sacrament. For this most holy
Sacrament through the naturall and corporall
coniunction of Christ his body with our bodies,1. Cor. 15. In 
                     〈◊〉
                  . li. 4. ca. 14. et seque
                     ••
                  . is a
most assured warrant of our resurrection as Cyrillus
and other doctours of the churche do teache. The
thirde secte of the Iewes, the Esseni, accorde maruailousely
with our Anabaptistes, as in the place of Iosephus
aboue noted it maie appeare. These thre factions
and sectes of the Iewes, at what time Vespasian
beseaged Hierusalem, caused the horrible dissension
and strife whiche was then within the cyte amonge
the Iewes them selues.Iosephus de bello Iudaico. li. 6. c. 1. For notwithstanding the
straite beseaging of the Romans, and the greate daunger
they stode in, yet diuiding them selues in to
thre partes, some folowed Zelotas, some Simon Gerasenus,
and some other Iohannes Giscalenus, the Masters
and ringleaders of these sectes. Yea they destroied
and mangled one an other in the cyte, no lesse
then Vespasian did abrode. Nowe let vs conferre the
state of Liflande with this.The miserable estat of Lifland through heresy. I doubte not, but we shall
finde them like in euery point. The Moscouite hath
thre greate armies and well appointed in Liflande:

laieth sore seage to the Archebishop of Runebourg,
and hath all readie gotte his cheafest forts in to his
hāde: Riga and Reualia. And what doth the worshipful
Order in this perturbatiō and tumulte? what helpeth
the Priour and Master of the Order? What sucker
bringe the foren protectours of the countre? Let
me nowe with good leaue speake that all the worlde
seeth and crieth out at. It fareth amōge them nowe,
euen as it did in Hierusalem amonge the sectes of Ze
lotas, Simon and Iohn. For amonge them some are Lutherans,
some Zwinglians and some Anabaptistes▪
and while euery secte vnder pretence of his ghospell
hopeth to gett some parte of the countre from the
Moscouite to him selfe, the Moscouite marcheth
on, winneth grounde daily as Vespasian did in Palestine,
and the Turkes in grece: and this he dothe vnder
a plausible pretence of recōciling the dissensions,
and extinguishing the sectes in Liflande: and of restoring
the countre in to that mightie princes handes.
It is muche to be feared, that all this is to vs a
warning piece, and but a preamble of a terrible tragedie
whiche we see already plaied in Hungary these
many yeares, and is nowe of late begonne in
Liflande: the ende whereof (as we maie coniecture)
is staied onely by two eyes: which being putt oute,
the Iewes and the grekes maye reade the storie off
their owne fal in our bloud, and singe vs that songe
that the Romans ones songe vnto them.Iosephus lib 6. ca. 7. de bello Iudaico. DISSENSION
HATH DESTROIED GERMANY.
THE TVRKE AND THE MOSCOVITE

HATH DESTROIED DISSENSION. God
graunte that I deme herein amisse. For if that calamite
should happen (which our Lorde of his tender
mercie forbid) I, all mine, and al such as I am, shall haue
our parte therein: and perish with the reste. God is
my witnes, I haue brought in all this vppon a good
intent and purpose. And that I haue here touched
the state of our present time, I did it not (God is my
Iudge) to offend any man of whatsoeuer condition
or qualite he be, but by this charitable admonishement
of my moste dere countre, to declare my good
will, and desire to serue, helpe, and succour her at all
times. For vndoubtedly the axe is nowe put to the
roote of the tre: and if we bring forthe no better frute
then we haue done, we shall surely all be hewed
downe. And as S. Austin saieth.De fide & operibus & serm. 181. de tempore. 
               It is an vnfrutefull repentaunce,
which purposeth not to amende. And certain it
is we haue highely offended the wrathe of God,
as well by abhominable heresies and schismes yelding
vnto them, and suffring them amonge vs, as by
our wicked and dissolut life.
            As touching our liuing, it is not inough to heare
sermons, haue the ghospell allwaies in our mouthe,
and liue not after the ghospell. But we must folowe
the lesson of the prophet saieng.Ezech. 18. 
               Be conuerted and
turne you cleane from all your wickednes, and your iniquite
shall not destroye you. and an other lesson of the Apostle,
He that stole let him now no more stele.
               Ephes. 4, Epist. 54. And the
saieng of S. Augustin is worthy to be remembred:
That the sinne is not forgeuen onles restitution be made.
               
Which in al other sinnes is likewise to be vnderstanded.
            But as touching the horrible errours,Luther calleth him selfe an euāgelist in the sixtetome of his vvorkes. wherewith
Luther the fifte Euangelist, and other newe ghospellers
in Germany haue plucked and remoued
from the Catholike churche bothe them selues, and
many a thousand more, working this lamentable estate,
variaunce, and dissension in Christ his church,
this surely is of all sinnes the greatest and most greuous
that may be. And hereof our Lorde saith,Luc. 17. 
               Wo
vnto that man by whom offense riseth. And although this
worde Wo spokē of Gods owne mouth be a dreadful
significatiō of his wrath and high displesure, yet his
mercie farre passeth, ready to receaue vs againe in his
fauour, and embrace his loste childrē, if vtterly forsaking
the straie pathes of errour and heresie, we come
again to the high waie of Christ his church, and casting
awaie al wicked thought out of our hartes and
fāsie of grosse heresies (as the feding of the prodigal
son vpon beane coddes with the hogges) we returne
home to our fathers house which is the churche of
God. Vnto the which the prophet exhorteth vs, saieng.
                  
                     •
                  ere. 25.
               Turne againe euery man from his euil waye and from
your wicked imaginations: and so shall ye dwell for euer in
the lande that our Lorde gaue you and your forefathers.
            
            The onely meanes therefore to auoide this greate
calamite hanging ouer vs, is vtterly to forsake this
newe forged and dissensious ghospell, and retire home
again to the Catholike church, embracing the
right and auncient doctrine thereof, wherein we

were borne and brought vp, and ioyning our selues
to the whole corps of Christendome, letting go by,
these scattering schismes and seditious factions.
            Which counsel of mine I trust is more sincere and
godly, and will haue better succes, then the cruel and
vnmercifull aduise of Martin Luther in a litle booke
whiche he made laste of all, shortly before his soden
deathe at Wittenberg in the yeare. 1545. dedicating it
vnto two honourable Princes the Duke of Saxony,
and the Lantgraue of Hesse, that they should not dismisse
their presonner the Lorde Harry of Brunswicke.
The title of that litle booke is this. Ad Electorem
Saxoniae & Lantgrauium Hassiae D. Martinus Lutherus
decaptiuo D. Brunsuicensi. And to the entent that
in these countres and euery where the worlde maye
knowe, howe Martin Luther tooke vppon him in
his papacie, and howe proudely he behaued him selfe,
I will out of his owne booke declare you worde
for worde the whole matter. These then are the wordes
of Luther.
            For my parte I would not passe,An example of the pride and presumption of Luther. if that captiue
of Brunswicke were kinge of Fraunce and his son
Kinge of Englande. For what coulde that hurte
me? But to counsell you to let him go fre and at libertie,
that I can in no wise do. He hath lost that
hope and confidence. For seing God dothe punish
him, who dare be so bolde as to absolue him from
Gods punishement, onles he first do penaunce, and

make due satisfaction, so that we maie boldely truste,
that God is appeased and reconciled? otherwise
it shoulde be no other thinge but to tempt God:
whiche in no wise must be counselled.
            Luther would forsothe that the Duke of Brunswicke
were kinge of Fraunce. A likely matter truly.
But why suffred they him not to remaine Duke stil?
who gaue Luther authorite to punish the Duke?
Is not this against all lawes Canon, ciuile, and lawe
of nature, that a man in his owne cause may be a party
and the Iudge? The ciuill lawe hath hetherto so
prescribed, that iff any debate fall oute betwene man
and man for iniury taken or geuen, that the ordinary
Iudge and lawfull magistrat should determinat the
matter: what? is the authorite of this lawe wiped awaie
also with the ghospell? or was not the Emperour
the highe and ordinary Iudge of all Dukes and
Princes here in Germany? what hath Luther to do
herein? Is it against the doctrine of the ghospell that
the Apostle commaundeth vs to obey the higher powres?
There is no power
               Rom. 13. (saieth he) but from God. and he
that resisteth the power, resisteth the ordynaunce off god.
whiche who do, purchase them selues damnation. But we
muste not obey, saie they, an euill magistrat. but
what euil magistrat meane they? forsothe the Emperour.
And who saithe he is an euill ruler? Luther and
his felowes. But he should well and substantially haue
proued it, before he saide it. And would god we

had mo such Emperours. The daye will come that
we would be glad to scrape such Emperours oute
of their graues with our nailes, if we might so come
by them. But graunte they were tiraunts: whiche yet
who affirmeth, lowdely belieth them. Doth not S.
Peter saie,1. Pet. 3. 
               Be ye subiect in all feare to your rulers not onely
good and gentle but also suche as are froward? It was
not then Luthers part, but the Emperours bearing
the sworde as an higher power and minister of god,
to reuenge and punish malefactours. Nor Luther
hath no cause nowe so proudely to demaunde,
VVho dare be so bolde as to restore to libertie the
presonner prince?
               Rom. 13. For he whose parte it was to do it,
was not onely bolde and able to do it, but did it in
dede princely: and scourged worthely those whiche
had offended. But nowe let vs see what punishment
and satisfaction this pope of Germany enioyneth
the Duke.
            
               VVhereas this captiue, saithe he, is depriued of
his estat and dominion, he ought not to thinke that
this is a worthy punishment for his deserts, but
that, being touched onely gently, as with the flappe
of a foxe taile, he is but prouoked and inuited to
penaunce:
               Luthers penaunce. 
               and thus he must saie. O most mercifull
god, whereas I haue deserued a greate deale worse,
and thou yet dost but whip me with small roddes,
verely I will gladly beare this punishment all daies
of my life: and I will vtterly renounce my dominion

and estate: as of the which thou hast moste iustely,
na rather most mercifully depriued me, and from
the which I am rightly and worthely thrust out.
for I am not as I perceaue nowe, fit to gouuerne the
same. Thou art iuste o lorde, and thou hast dealed
iustely with me, yet not according to my desert.
for as I saide before, we muste entreate with god
from the bottom of our harte, and obediently yelde
to his punishment if we do not so, he as the trier
and sercher of mens hartes, from whom nothing
is preuy and whom no man can deceiue, will easely
espie it: and if any man go aboute to deceiue or
delude him, he maketh his cause be it neuer so god,
starke naught: which all we Christen men knowe
well inoughe, or ought at leste to knowe. Marke here
nowe diligently good Christen Reader. Nowe
Luther will haue this poore prince beinge prisonner
not to make his confession after the Lutheran order,
that is, that he confesse his fautes onely to god
in his harte, but euen after the papisticall maner (as
touching the confessing of his sinnes by mouthe)Luther is become a papist for a vauntage.
will that he kepe nothing preuy from him or them
that shall be his confessours, nor be not so bolde as
to denie any thinge. what then must this penitent of
Luther confesse? Forsothe all those thinges, whiche
his open and notorious enemies do falsely accuse
him of: to the entent that, if being forced by cruell

emprisonment he happe to yelde vp his owne right,
then all the worlde might thinke that his voluntary
confession was the cause of such satisfaction: for
they will haue him confesse, that he suffreth such
emprisonment worthely, and that for his deserts he
is thrust out of his estate and dominion: and that he
will neuer require it againe, but will of his owne accorde
yelde vp all his right, and the right of his heires
for euer to his aduersaries and mortall enemies here
in earthe, abiding for and expecting an other estate
in heauen. Is not this thinke you a swete and pleasaunt
satisfaction, and merely inuented of Luther, and
very ghospell like? when the Lutherans offend against
the Catholikes then in the whole penaunce
there can be founde no satisfaction. contrition suffiseth.
But nowe in this case, we must haue all thre
degres of penaunce, Contrition, confession, and satisfaction.
            
               But nowe Luther to showe that he is not only
the holy Father, the highe bishop, and pope in Germany,
but also that he is a prophet and the third
Elias, he comforteth the princes vnderneth him,
and dothe prophecy of thinges to come: taking occasion
of a certayne coyne brought vnto him oute of
base germany, vnto Wittenberg in the yeare. 1545.
whereof in this his litle booke thus he writeth.
This yeare there goeth a talke that certain straunge
coynes are brought hether out of base Germany:
which bothe declare the greate knowleadg off

the Papistes, and threaten wonderfull perills to
the two princes the Electour Duke of Saxony and
the Lantgraue of Hesse. These coynes of one side
haue two pillers Crowned: the one with the Emperours,
the other with a kinges Crowne. betwene
the two pillers are fetters and giues and two
chaines prepared for two men.O cleanly spirit of Luther. I thinke this shitten
prophet, would bynde the Prince Electour off
Saxony and the Lantgraue there with. for in the
circle of the coyne, thus it is grauen. Ad alligandos
reges eorum in compedibus. that is, to binde their princes
in fetters.
               Psal. 143. The other side of the coyne hathe a
spread egle climping in his clawes the two swordes
which are painted in the Duke of Saxony his armes.
Beside, the pointes of these swordes strike
through a virgin lieng on her side vnderneathe.
and fire droppeth on her like raine. the virgin is
tituled,Psal. 143. Infidelite: the writing aboute is, Ad faciendam
vindictam in nationibus. that is, to worke
vengeaunce in nations. whereby they declare what
they wrought againste vs, and howe they would
haue interpreted the leage of defence, if those thinges
that they saide, had come to effect.At Smal
                  
                     ••
                  ldium. 
               We nede
not here to aske whether of these two in this foresaide
prophecye was the true, or (that I may by your
good leaue vse Luthers ciuilite) the shitten prophet.
            
            
               
               This day the Duke of Saxony vvas taken The foure and twentith daie off Aprill in the yeare,
1547. in Locher filde: andThe 
                     •
                  āt graue submitted him selfe. the, xix. daye
off Iune off the same yeare at Halles in Saxony
hath manifestly declared it. I can not without
greate grefe remembre howe our Noble countre of
Germany hath suffred a rennagat monke thus to
blinde them, and delude them to our perpetuall
shame and ignominy in the face off all other countres,
to the vtter destruction of thousands off soules,
murder of our bodies, and spoiling off our
goods. Truly I fully persuade my selfe, that this foresaide
coyne was sente vnto vs out of the lowe
countres not without the instinct of the holy ghoste,
either mercifully to admonishe vs to looke better
to our matters, or that the vaine prediction off
this false prophet Luther might by so euident and
true a prophecy be conuicted. For he that can not see
maye yet sensibly feele that this whole matter had
the very same euent that the coyne foreshowed, cleane
contrary and repugnant to Luthers dreame. Luther
persuaded the simple germans that this prophecy
was fulfilled in Duke Harry then presonner: and
that thereby the popes dominion was vtterly destroied.
and therefore pricked forwarde the Duke
and the Lantgraue to fight and rebell against their
liege Souuerain. For thus he addeth yet farder in the
same booke.
            But nowe for whom they haue painted these
giues and fetters we see, thanked be god,

which hath iudged according to the saieng of the
psalme. They haue opened the pitte, and digged
it vp and haue fallen in to it them selues. their
sorowe shall be turned vpon their owne heades,
and their iniquites shall fall vpon their owne
crownes: therefore we thanke the iuste and allmightie
god and praise the name of the highest.
Amen.
            Se howe this proude prophet boasteth and triumpheth
as thoughe all the element ronge of trompetts
and musike, and as thoughe this article, I beleue
the Catholike Churche vere scraped out of the Crede.Math. 16. Ephes. 3.
or as thoughe that were no more true, that Christ
hath saide, that the Churche is builded vpon a sure rocke
not able to be shaken. or as though it were false that the
Apostle writeth, calling the Churche the piller and
grounde of truthe. Who thē fell in to the ditche? was it
not he that first threwe his neighbour in, and afterThe Duke of Saxony and the Lantgraue by Charles the Emperour
was constrained to plucke him out again, and fall in
him selfe? all the worlde knoweth and seeth it. This
then lo is the first prophecy of Martin Luther in this
foresaide booke. Nowe let vs here an other straite
folowing hereupon.
            
               To the entent, saithe he, that our conscience
be not burdned with the sinnes of an other, and we
be counted afore God as wicked Achab. For if he
be deliuered out of preson, the papistes withoute

doute will blaspheme
               Note the Luthe rans God 
               our God, and will crake after
this sorte. Lo be not our praiers hearde of God?
VVe haue praied for the Duke Harry of Brunsuicke,
and God hathe tried oure patience, but he
hath heard vs at the lēgth. For although he suffred
the Duke Harry to fall in to the heretikes handes
for our temporall punishment, yet they haue not
ben able to kepe him still, but were compelled off
God to dismiss him.
               The praiers of the Carholikes. 
               Thankes be to our God, whiche
hathe not forsaken the churche and awncient
religiō. And in dede true it is that this argumēt hathe
most moued me. For we knowe the pope and
his parasites be incurable therefore they can do
nought els, but euen in their moste miseries, and
wicked dedes comforte, coulour and tricke vp them
selues. His other prophecy whereby he woulde be
counted a thirde Elias, he confirmeth by this reason.
That the same must nedes be the right church off
Christ, whiche was able by their good praiers to restore
their princes in to liberte. Therefore if the Duke
Harry through the earnest and continuall praiers
of the papistes were dismissed of his enemies, thē
euery man will thinke verely that the papistes are
the true and right church of Christ. And this is true
in dede. For this reason therefore Luther (as he writeth)
was most moued, in no case to suffer the Duke
to be sette at liberty, lest perhaps the papistes shoulde

be taken for the true churche of God, and he and
his felowes for the maligne churche. Here let euery
man that lacketh not common iudgement, consider
whether Luther be not suche a prophet as Caiphas
was:Ioan. 11. For he prophecieth nowe the truthe, but as Caiphas
did against him selfe and for the contrary parte.
The Catholikes in dede praied continually and
earnestly for the emprisonned prince, that he might
escape out of his enemies handes. Luther wroughte
by force and by crafte all that he coulde to kepe
him continually in preson, and in his enemies handes.
Whiche parte then did God heare? vndoubtedly
the righter and more iuste. For God is no vniuste
iudge, but paieth euery man according to his paines.
Therefore he succoured the presonner, deliuered
him, and so dealed with hym that he might saye,
Iudge me o Lorde according to my righteousnes.
               Psal. 7. God therefore
gaue the right and true sentence: and nowe
which parte and whose praiers were heard, the euent
declared.
            But howe laboureth Luther to ouerthrowe the
reason of the papistes (wherewith he was so muche
moued) and by that ouerthrow to set vp his prowde
and arrogant prophecye? The first parte of the reason
he letteth stāde, and graunteth that God heareth
the praiers of his churche. But he laieth at the other
parte, and denieth stoutely that the papistes are able
to obtaine any thinge of God. For so he goeth forth
in his foresaide booke.
            
               
               Their praier therefore is not to be feared,
               3. Reg. 20. Fol. E. 4, & F. 1. 
               no
more then Elias feared the praiers of the prophets
of Baal. But as he laughed to scorne their praiers
and their God, so we maye lawfully laughe to scorne
the papistes and their God. For we knowe their
praiers are execrable as their doctrine and belefe
is. According to that of the psalme, 199. Let their
praier turne in to sinne. And whomsoeuer they teache,
he can not chose but be condemned. Nether
are their praiers other, then such as the deuill ones
mocked, at what time a certain priest being wel tipled
saieng his complet in his bead, and spetting,
as he praied,
               O the ciuilite of Luthers sprit. 
               letted also a greate farte: well quôd
he, Diuell▪ such praier, such frankensence. The like
maye be saide of all their mumbling in churches
and monasterys. For they can not praie nor wil not
praie, nor know not what to praie, nor how to praie.
The hereticall doctrine of Luther is so printed in
some mens hartes by the instinct of some euill sprit,
that they passe vppon no praier, beleue no truthe
no miracle, not God him selfe: but one worde of Luthers
mouth more persuadeth them, be it neuer so
false, then God him selfe, or his worde, or the whole
Catholike church. Therefore if any man at that time
had ben so bolde as to haue saide, that the Catholike
churche shoulde throughe her deuoute praiers

obtaine the victory against her enemies, and that
this Duke thē prisonner should be deliuered, and the
other (the Duke of Saxony and the Lantgraue) caste
in preson, that man had ben mocked and scoffed to
deathe: presuming so to contemne the authorite off
the thirde Elias Luther. And I doubte whether yet
vntel this daie some simple mē are deceaued by that
his prophecy: though the ende of this tragedy being
so open to all the worlde, geueth euident testimony
that allmightie God hath heard the praiers of the
papistes, and reiected those of the Lutherans: deliuering
the Duke Harry, and bringing the other two
Princes in to the Emperours handes as presonners.
            Nowe Luther to absolue and consummat this his
laste worke (for with this holesom piece he ended
his fifte ghospell) he prouoketh mē of armes and power
to fighte courageously against their chief and
Liege Souueraines. For thus he writeth. Only God
must be honoured, only god must be praised, to him
only thankes are due to the entent that he which
maketh all thinges, may geue also the victory. For
god can abide none of these twaine, either that mā
tempt him, or that he truste to much to himselfe,
VVe must walke the high waie turning neither on
the right hāde, nether on the lefte. VVhosoeuer taketh
not weapon when he may, he vseth not the giftes
of god: he turneth on the lefte hande, and seing
a blowe coming laieth out his head. He tempteth
god. wherefore it happeneth wel and worthely that

such mēs heades beare awaie the rappes. This coū
               sell
of Luther is true and good touching Magistrats,
Kinges, Emperours, Princes, and rulers. But not for
them which are subiects and priuat men. For Luther
him self writeth and teacheth, that no Prince or Lorde
(whiche is vnder a higher power and oweth allegeaunce
vnto him) can rightely make warre againste
any other prince or Lorde:Tom. 6. fo. 612. in lib. num milisint in stat
                     •
                   salutis. muche lesse against his
owne Liege and Souuerain. Therefore it should at
that time diligently ben prouided, that men folowed
not this seditious and false high waie of Luther,
which no subiect can treade without his princes leaue.
Especially perceauing that this highe waie of Luther
hath euer an vnhappy and miserable ende, repugning
manifestly to the worde of God, all writen
lawe, and Luthers owne doctrine.
            Demosthenes the lerned and eloquent oratour
saith,Orat. 2. cō
                  tra Philip. 
               wise men deliberat before the facte and fooles after the
facte. For as Liuy writeth, the euent teacheth fooles. And
we Germans vse to saie, the Italian taketh aduise before
he begin, the french man when he is a doing,
and the German when he hath done. Which although
it hath hindered much our countre in diuers affaires,
yet this is in vs no voluntary negligence, but a
naturall infirmite. For Hesiodus the poet noteth thre
sorts of men to be on the earthe. saieng.
            VVho knoweth all him selfe, is the best man aliue.
            He is the nexte that counsell can vse.
            But he is the worste, that woteth not to thriue,
            And yet of an other doth counsell refuse.
            
               
Seing then we Germans are not so quicke of iudgement
(which peraduenture procedeth of our colde
countre) as the Italian is, to foresee what is to be
done, yet we maye nowe by this lamentable calamite
that we see hath befallen vs,A counsel good and necessary for vs also and the present greate
waste of our deare countre lerne and remembre,
howe within this fourty yeares it flourished and prospered
in al respects, before this German prophet and
fifte euangelist Luther ranne out of his cloister. And
although our dutie had ben at that time to haue remembred
that saieng of our Lorde, Beware of false prophets,
               Deute. 13. Matthae. 7. 1. Ioan. 4.
and the wordes of S. Ihon. Trie the spirits whether
they be of God, and so to deliberat before the facte:
yet seing we haue forslowen that, let vs at the leste,
after the smarte be wise, and haue recourse nowe at
laste to that cōmaundement of almighty God, where
he commaundeth the simple people to warde
them selues from false prophets and teachers. For
this question being in holy writ propounded,Deuter. 18. 
               Howe
shall I vnderstande the worde that oure Lorde hathe spoken?
God awnswereth and saithe. This token I will geue
the to vnderstāde it. That which the prophet hath foresaied
in the name of the Lorde, and cometh not to passe, that
worde the Lorde spake not, but the prophet of his owne
vaine fantasie forged it. If we drawe the line of Luthers
prophecye to this rule, we shall euidently see that he
is not onely a false prophet,Ioan. 8. but also as his greate
grande father Satan is, a cruell murderer.
            Is it not a greate pride and rashe arrogancy of Luther
to prophecye and write that the god of the Catholikes,

whō he calleth papistes, wil not heare their
praiers for the deliuraūce of the Duke? by what reuelation
had he this?Luther is a false prophet. Againe that no man liuing shoud 
be able, or so bolde as to restore him in to liberte? Againe
that those his princes (the Duke of Saxony and 
the Lantgraue) should not be bound with those fetters,
which the coyne brought from base Germany 
pretended? Farder that the warre thē ensuing should
haue a prosperous successe? Laste of all that S. Brigids 
prophecy was false, and his true, saieng that the 
See of Rome and estat of the Pope should then vtterly
perish and neuer rise vp againe? All these thinges
did Luther prophecye in the booke aboue mencioned.
And did the euent proue all this? Not one iote.
But in euery point it hathe proued cleane contrary.
Then this worde of Luther was not the worde off
the Lorde, as Moyses teacheth, but it was the worde
of the deuill in the person of Luther.
            Againe that Luther hath ben a very murderer of
men,Luther is a murderer and a stronge thefe in the church. and a stronge thefe in Gods churche, it is euident
hereby that his doctrine and vaine prophecyes
(setting together the princes by the eares) hath ben
the onely cause of all seditions, warre and bloudshed
that within this fourty yeares haue happened in Germany.
The first booke that Luther made to spoyle
and ransacke the churche, was his booke De Captiuitate
Babylonica & Christiana libertate. In the whiche
booke he so debaseth, reuileth, and bringeth in contempt
not onely the awncient true and Catholike
religion of Christ his churche, but also the lawes

bothe Canon and Ciuill, that it maye seme he lacked
but a head and capitaine to make a perfit sedition.
But whereas at that time there was yet amonge
men more feare of God and reuerence to their
magistrats, thē that they would be moued with Luthers
light talke, fewe were founde to helpe blowe
the fire which he had kindled, vntell at the length
Luther him selfe moued peraduenture more hotely
with the sprit, ronge the alarum him selfe in the yeare.
1523. setting forthe a booke entituled, De saeculari
potestate. in a parte whereoff he writeth these wordes.
            These are our Christen princes which defende
the faith and deuoure the Turke.In tomo 6. germanico. Fol. 602. In dede worthy
men, and such as you maie truste that by their greate
wisedome they are likely to do some what, as to
breake their owne neckes first,Luther proueth contempt of princes by scripture. and then leade whole
countres and peoples to breake necke after. These
blinde princes I would well aduise, to be ware onely
of one small sentence of the 166. psalme, whiche
is this. He pooreth oute contempt vppon Princes.
I swere vnto you by God, that if through your
negligence this poore sentence ones take holde on
you, you are vndone, were you as mighty and of as
greate power as the Turke himselfe. Nether will
your storming any thinge profit you. The matter is
nowe all ready well begonne. For fewe princes are

nowe that are not counted for villaines and fooles:
and that bicause they showe themselues for such:
and the people beginneth nowe to wexe wise, and
the plage of princes which god calleth contēpt, encreaseth
daily in the peoples hartes: and I feare me
it will not be staied, onles princes behaue themselues,
as it becometh them, and begin againe to rule
more modestly.Luthers counsell to princes For men ne will ne can lenger abyde
your tiranny, O wellbeloued Princes and Lordes.
Therefore prouide for yourselues: God wil not
suffre this your tiranny any more. the worlde is not
no we as it was in times paste,Thankes to the Luther. when you were wonte
to hunte and chase men like bestes. awaie therefore
with your pride, power and haugtynes, and
labour to do that is right and good: suffer the worde
of God to haue his course, which yet it must haue
and shall haue, and you shall not be able to let
it. If we teach heresie, let it be confuted by the worde
of God. If you will trie the matter with the
sworde, take hede leste some man cōmaunde you to
put vp your sworde not in Gods name. But you wil
saie peraduenture. If amonge the Christians there
ought to be no secular sworde nor Ciuill gouuernement,
howe then shall men be kepte in order,
howe shall they be gouuerned? For amonge Christen

mē must be magistrats and officers.Luther proueth there must be no magistrats amonge Christen men, by scripture. I awnswer
you. Amonge Christen men there can not be,
nor ought not to be any Magistrat. but euery mā is
subiect one to another all a like. as the Apostle
saithe. Philip. 2. Thinking euery one superiour one
to another: and S. Peter. 1. Pet, 5. Euery one showe
humilite one to another: vnto the whiche Christe
also consenteth, saieng. Luce. 14. when thou arte
called vnto a mariage, go, sit downe in the lowest
place. Amonge Christen men there is no superiour,
but onely Christ: and what superiorite or magigistrat
cā there be where al be equal, of one right,
dignite, and vocation? and where none desireth to
rule ouer the other, but euery one is glad to be vnder?
VVhere such men are, if any would make a
Magistrat, yet he can not make one that should be
superiour to the other. for it is against nature to haue
superiours, where no mā wil be, nor cā besuperiour▪
and where such men are not, there are not true
Christians. Againe in the next leafe before he writeth
thus. They be princes of the worlde. But the
worlde is enemy to God. Therefore they must nedes
do those thinges that are contrary to God,T
                     •
                  m. 6. Fol. 
                     ••
                  1. and
acceptable to the worlde, lest they lese their honour
and be no more worldy princes. Maruaile not therefore

if they storme and striue against the ghospel
and plaie like madde fooles. For their doings must
nedes corresponde to their name and title. Marke
also that from the beginning of the worlde a wise
prince hathe ben a seldom birde. but a good prince
much more dainty.The reuerence off Luther tovvard Princes. The moste of them are other
principall fooles, or the moste wicked knaues on the
earthe. And therefore we can hope for litle good
of them, but feare allwaies the worste. Especially
in matters of God and pertaining to our soule helthe.
For they are as the hangmen and tormentours
of god: &c. And anon it foloweth. Therefore
if perhaps there be any wise, good or Christian
prince, that is to be counted for a wonder and a
singular token of gods greate grace and clemency
towarde that countre.
            I beseche you al good Christen readers, of whatsoeuer
degre or qualite you are, remēbre your vocation,
and suffer not your selues to be abused of this
fonde frier, or to be lead in to his seditious errours
and cōtempt of Magistrats, from the true belefe and
awncient obedience of Christendom. For the true
ghospell of Christ commaundeth directly all subiectes
to obey their Lieges,1. Pet. 2. Princes and Souueraines in
all dread and obedience not onely good, vertuous,
and mercifull, but also frowarde, wicked and cruell.
            
               
But what effect had this fifte ghospell of Luther
and his prophecyeng of the fall of Princes? forsothe
in the yeare 1525.Sleidan in the 5. booke. (that is two yeares after the setting
forthe of that his seditious booke) it sturred vp that
notorious rebell Thomas Muntzer: whom yet Luther
(as it maye by good euidence be proued) at the firste
excused and defended before the Duke of Saxony:
hoping that Muntzer shoulde haue sped of his purpose:
But afterwarde perceauing the princes to make
greate preparation, and to gather power against the
rebells, feling that his Christen liberte was like to
fall in the donge, straite he writeth vnto the Princes
and Nobilite, to hewe downe the rusticall rebelles.
            And to declare vnto the whole worlde the greate
thought and grefe that father Luther tooke of that
his former pernicious and deadly counsell,The mariage of Luther. euē at the
very same time, he toke a Nūne out of her cloyster,
and for mere pitie of the poore commons so deluded,Vide Erafmum in epistol. ad Thomā Lupsetū. an. 1525
celebrated the solemne swete mariage of the fifte
ghospell. But to the entent the Princes and Rulers
might not espie these his preuy fetches and deuelishe
inuentions, the very same yeare. 1525, he sette
forthe an other booke quite contrary to the former.
Which he intituled. Whether souldiars be in state of saluation.
In that booke he writeth thus.
            
               Here the lawe itselfe speaketh,
               Tom. 6. germanico. fol. 612. 
               that no man
ought to take weapon against his superiour. For
vnto superiours and magistrats honour, reuerence,

obedience, and dread is due. Rom. 13. For he that
hacketh wodde ouer his heade, the chippes will fall
in his eyes:
               Ecclel. 27. 
               and as Salomon saith, he that throweth
a stone vpwarde it will fall downe vppon his head.
euen such is the lawe made of god and receaued of
men. For these two can not agre, to obey and yet to
rebell: to be a subiect, and yet to abyde no ruler.
Thus much Luther in that place. Here I beseche almightie
God to geue the light of truthe to all good
and godly readers hereof: that laieng a side al affectiō
to the person or man, they will waighe and considre
vprightly the whole cause it selfe, as it standeth.
            Luthers bookes De Captinitate Babylonica,
               Contrari ete in the doctrine of Luther and of
Secular Authorite, teache according to his ghospell.
that among Christē mē there can not be, nor ought
no to be any higher power, or power at al. And why
wrote he so then? bicause that if the Emperour or
other princes would perhaps haue persecuted the heresy
of Luther, then the commons and cytezens
might lawfully haue slaien the Catholike Prince, higher
power and magistrat. Now in his other booke,
Of the state of souldyars, the ghospell of Luther teacheth
plaine contrary, that the higher power must
be obeyed: not onely good, but also the badde: to
punishe the seditious and put to deathe rebells. Againe
in his laste litle booke writē to the Duke of Saxony
and the Lantgraue, his ghospell preacheth after
an other sorte: as that subiects may take weapon and

stād in the field against their liege Souuerain. But so
that they walke the high waie: that is, that spetting
wel in their hādes and falling to it lustely (as he was
wonte to saie) they hewe downe their princes a pase,
and if it proue prosperousely, then geue honour
vnto the Lorde. Beholde the honour of God, that
heretikes seke. They teache the subiect to murder the
Prince against the expresse commaundement of God
in holy write, teaching vs to honour God in the higher
power.
            Awake ye o Germās,A godly exhortation. stirre vp your selues, see and
acknowledg the mercifull visitation of allmighty
God. Nowe god knocketh at our hartes, and looketh
for repentaunce, and that with this fatherly lesson of
king Dauid.Psal. 94. 
               Todaie if ye haue heard his voyce, harden not
your hartes. and the wordes of the Apostle. Knowest
thou not that the mercifulnes of god and longe bearing draweth
the vnto repētaunce?
               Rom. 2. Let vs therefore aske and crie
vnto god. O Lorde conuerte vs, and showe thy face, and we
shal be saued.
               Psal. 79. Let vs also heare the worde of our Lorde
calling vpon vs by the prophet.Anchar. 1. 
               Turne ye vnto me
(saythe the Lorde of Hostes) and I will turne vnto you.
And to the entent that all the honour be geuen to
God, and yet that our good intent and purpose lacke
not, if we will do true penaunce, we muste from the
bottom of our hart lament with Ieremy the prophet,
and crye with teares vnto our lorde,Theren. 5. 
               O Lorde turne
vs vnto the, and we shall be turned. And what necessite
driueth vs to this crie and lamentation? surely euen
the very same which moued that Prophet so to bewaile

and lament, when, he saieth. VVo be vnto vs,
bicause we haue sinned. For truly I thinke we germans
haue sinned tentymes more greuousely then those
Iewes. And what was the plage of their hainous offences?
the prophet declareth. The crowne and garland
of our head is fallen of. I feare me, we germans shall heue
the selfe same plage, onles we spedely do penaunce
for our wickednes. It foloweth in the lamentatiō.
Therefore my harte is heauy and full of griefe. We, alas, are
not yet come so farre towarde penaunce, that our
harte hath ben heauy for our sinnes. For we yet contynew
in them. and why spede we not to penaunce?
Bycause our eyes are darkned. and wherefore? for the hille
of Sion, that is, the Catholike church. why? what is
befallen it? bycause it is destroyed. O Mercifull god,
this is to to true with vs Germans. For amonge vs,
one saythe Here is Christ:
               Matt. 24. an other saythe, there is
Christ. this man saythe, Amonge the Caluinistes is the
churche, an other saythe, Amonge the Illyricans. the
thirde, amonge the Indifferents. the fourthe amonge the
Osiandrins, the fifte amonge the Swenck feldians, and
so with the reste. whereas yet it is vnpossible it should
be amonge them all. why so? bicause it is destroied,
it is scattered, it is vndone. And howe cometh
it, o holy Ieremije, that the holy hill of Sion (the
Catholike churche) is so wasted and destroied?
Foxes haue walked in it. In dede foxes, that is, as S. Ambrose
and S. Augustin expounde it,Ambros. in 9. cap. Luc. Aug. in psa. 80. suttle, crafty, deceitefull,
stinking and lurking heretikes. These foxes
haue onerrunne, spoiled, and destroied the holy hil

of Sion, the Catholike church of Christ. And as soone
as the light that shineth from this hill (the Catholike
church,Esa 42. of whom it is saied, I haue set the vp
as a lighte to all nations) was ones in Germany darkned
and extinguished, mens eyes and hartes were so blinded,
that with open eyes they see nothing, and are so
sicke that they fele no paine at all, nor perceaue not
howe daily the Croune falleth awaye from their heades.
Let him therefore pray that can praye. and
who so euer feareth the smarte of gods rodde, let him
labour to escape it: and crie with the prophet.Thren. 5. 
               Turne
vs o lorde vnto the. and that he faile not also on his parte,
let him saie with mouthe, and perfourme in dede,
And we will be turned.
            
            But bicause that (as S. Augustin teacheth) repentaunce
which procedeth not of faithe is vnprofitable,August. de vera & falsa pae
                     •
                  it cap. 2.
there is no hope of true repentaunce amonge vs,
onles we embrace the true doctrine of Christen fayth.
To the entent therefore that euery common laie
man may be sure and perfit of the faith and religion
which he foloweth, I will adde hereunto to knitte
vp this our simple treatise, a litle piece out of a booke
that Vincētius lyrenēsis wrote aboue twelue hūdred
yeares past, vnder Theodosius the Emperour, for the
mayntenaūce and setting forth of Catholike religiō.
            A man peraduenture maye demaunde (saith he)
seing the Canon of holy scripture is sufficient off it selfe
for all pointes, what nedeth the interpretation off the
Church to be added thereunto? to the which question he
answereth. For bicause forsothe holy scripture being depe

and mystical, is not of all men after the like sorte expounded:
but the sentences thereof some man expoundeth one waie, some
an other: that allmoste as many men, so diuers expositions
may be drawen thereof. For the Nouatian expoundeth it
one waie. Sabellius an other waie. Donatus, Arrius, Eunomius,
Macedonius, Photinus, Apollinaris, Priscillianus,
Iouinianus, Pelagius, Celestius, and Nestorius al founders
of sundry heresies, folowe eche of them their owne proper and
peculiar waie of interpreting holy scripture. Wherefore it
behoueth that in consideration of so many crekes and by erroneous
pathes, the line of interpreting holy prophets and Apostles
be drawē and directed according to the rule of the Catholike
and ecclesiasticall exposition. In the Catholike churche
it selfe we must seriousely prouide, that we folowe onely
that which is receaued in euery place, at al times, of al mē. for
this is Catholike in dede and properly (as the worde it self emporteth)
comprehending all vniuersally. This we maie so do,Vniuersalite Antiquite Consent.
if we folowe vniuersalite, Antiquite, and Consent. Vniuersalite
we shall folowe, if we acknowledg that faith and belefe
which the whole church through out the whole worlde
acknowledgeth. Antiquite if we departe not from those expositions
which the holy awncient fathers haue lefte vnto
vs. Consent likewise, if in the antiquite we cleaue vnto the
determinations of all or allmoste all priestes, prelats, and teachers
of the church. What then shall the Catholike and Christian
man do, if any part of the churche cutte it selfe of from
the communion and societe of the generall belefe? What other
then that he muste preferre the whole body before the
deseased parte? What if some newe infection plage not onely
some parte but the whole church? Then must he diligently

cleaue vnto the Antiquite or awncient receaued faith whiche
can be seduced by no guile of nouelty. VVhat if two or
thre men, or some one cyte or countre swarue from the Antiquite,
and receaued doctrine? Then against the rashe ignorance
of a fewe he must set the awncient and vniuersall
decrees of some generall Councell. What if such doubtes arise
that no such decree can be founde? Then let him labour to
seke out and confer together the saiengs of the fathers, such as
though in diuers times and in diuers places, yet remaining in
the vnite and belefe of the Catholike church, haue bē approued
for teachers and doctours of the same: and what soeuer he shal
finde that not one or two onely of them, but that al with one
Consent haue clerely taught, oftentimes writen, and continually
helde, this without all doubte and stagger he ought to be
leue. Thus farre that holy father, Vincentius Lyren.
            It were much to be wished that this good and profitable
booke were soundely and truly trāslated in to
the vulgar tongue,The booke is in oure engl
                     •
                  sh tongue already trāslated, and is most necessary to be read in these
                     •
                  imes. and so sett in printe to be read of
all men. For this holy father aboue twelue hundred
yeares since hath so writen of this matter, that he semeth
thereby to cal to the Catholike vnite, and prouoke
to amendement off life, not only the heretikes
of his time, but also euen these of our time. To thentent
that shaking off all sinne and heresie, we might
liue here in peace, vnite, and cōcorde: and obtaine hereafter
the euerlasting life, praising with all the sainctes
our Lorde and God for euer: the which his dere
son our Sauiour Iesus Christ by his tēder mercie and
blessed merites graunte vs. AMEN.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            A DISCOVRS VPON
THE DOCTRINE OF THE
PROTESTANTS TRIED BY
THE THREE FIRST FOVNDERS
and fathers thereof, Martin Luther, Philip
Melanchthon and especially Iohn
Caluin: oute of whose workes are
gathered sundry olde heresies,
absurdites and contradictions
by him
auouched.
            
               OVr Sauiour in the ghospell forwarning
vs off false teachers and prophets,Matthe. 7.
which comīg in shepes skinnes
are inwardly rauening wolues, and
checking the proude Pharisees corrupting
the worde of god with their fonde inuentions,
making thereby a secte by them selues as Iosephus
recordeth,Lib. 2. cap. 7. de bello Iudaico. Matth. 15. pronounceth of them in this wise.
Coeci sunt & duces coecorum: Coecus autem si coeco ducatum
praestet, ambo in foueam cadunt. that is. They are blinde
and the guides of blinde men. and if the blinde leade the blinde,
bothe fall in to the ditche. Likewise the blessed Apostle
S. Peter, according to the charge geuen him off
our Sauiour aboue the rest of the Apostles,Ioan. 21. euen as
aboue the rest he loued Christ, forwarneth also his
flocke of heretikes that should springe vp amonge

them,2. Petr. 1. as in the olde lawe before some had spronge:
and writeth thus. Fuerunt & pseudoprophetae in populo
&c. There were false prophets also among the people, euen as
there shall be lying masters amonge you, which shall bringe
in damnable sectes, euen denying God that hath bought
them, and bring vpon them selues swift damnation: and many
shall folowe their damnable waies, by whom the waie off
truthe shall be blasphemed &c. In these sayengs bothe of
our Sauiour, and of S. Peter his vicar here on earthe,
we lerne bothe that false heretikes were like to arise
in Christ his church, and what a perilous thing it
is to folow the straypathes of such blinde guides▪
which is, as oure Sauiour saieth, to fall in to the ditche
with them. and as S. Peter telleth vs, to blaspheme
the waye of truthe, to witt, Christ him selfe
who is the life,
               Ioan. 14. 
               the waie, and the truthe. And truly iff
we endeuoured our selues as S. Paule biddeth vs,Philip. 3.
               to obserue and folowe those which walke after such sorte, as
we haue him for an ensample,
               Ephes. 4. if we were solliciti seruare
vnitatem Spiritus in vinculo pacis, diligent to kepe vnite of
minde in the bonde of peace, if we woulde, as he most
charely warneth Timothe saue that which is geuen vs
               1. Timo. 6.
               to kepe (the treasure of our faithe) and auoide prophane
nouelties of talke, and oppositions of false named knowleadg,
we would not so rashly haue folowed a fewe false
teachers against the common consent of Christendome,2. Petr. 2.
we had not departed from our first faith, and
after the knowleadg of truthe haue turned away from the
holy commaundement, being so (as S. Peter saieth) in
worse case, then if we had neuer knowen the truthe:

brefely we had not fallen in to so many and diuers
pittes of hereticall doctrine,1. Timo. 3. forsakinge the grounde
and piller of al truthe the Catholike church of Christ.
For verely who so earnestly and diligently would
considre with him selfe, whereby it hath happened
that in these late yeares so many haue departed from
the catholike faith and yelded to newe doctrines
not heard of before, he shall surely finde the principall
meanes thereof, to haue ben the onely light credence
geuen to newe preachers, and rashe beleuing euery
newe tale in matters of conscience and saluation.
The cause of this our rashnes I will not serche
out, though it be ready to finde, our onely sinnes
and wicked life being the very proper cause thereof,
and nothing els. But the meanes as I saied, hath principally
ben light harkening to euery such as listed to
talke newe doctrine: the doctrine it selfe being plausible
and gladly receiued of those, which burdned
with sinne and wickednes, were gredy of the liberty,
that in the doctrine was preached. according as S.
Paul prophecied saying,2. Timo. 4. 
               The time shall be, when men will
not abide holesom doctrine, but as such whose eares doth itch,
they shall gett them such teachers, as shall withdraw them
from the truthe, and turne them to fables. For hereof it
happened, that not regarding what he was that
taught, or vpon what reasons he grounded his doctrine,
onely the pleasauntnes of it, as a bayte, choked
the hearers and prisers thereof. For euen as in the olde
lawe, the children of Israel when they fell to iniquite,
woulde not harken to the prophets, but badde

them to speake pleasaunt doctrine vnto them,
               Esaiae. 30. 
               and seke them
out errours, so many these late yeares pressed with sinne,
harkned gredely to such doctrine as might deliuer
them from the discipline of the church, from due
repentaunce, confession, and satisfaction of their sinnes,
from obedience to pastours and curats, from fastings,
from praier, and all necessite of good workes,
brefely from all clogge of conscience,In libro. de capt. Bayloni
                     •
                  a. from which
Luther craked he had deliuered the hartes off men.
            Nowe as we are suffred to fall in to sinne sometime,
not onely of infirmite, or for triall of our strenghth,
but also for the plage of other sinnes, as S. Paule
in the first to the Romans declareth, so in punishment
of this lewde liberty so gredely embraced in
smaller pointes of our faithe, God hathe of his secret
and vnknowen iustice suffred vs to fall beside in to
such enormous heresies, though nothing pleasaunt
otherwise, to such detestable doctrine, to so diuers
and contrary opinions, that considering now the trade
of this tragedy, and seing to what issue it hath proceded,
(though truly I feare it be farre yet from the
issue and ende) I haue thought it a good and conuenient
meanes bothe to staie somewhat this hedlong
race, that men so blindely runne in, and to call backe
such as haue passed all bondes of right belefe already,
by the very same meanes, by the which they first began
to breake the araye of Christes church, and to
runne this madde and lamentable course. And bicause
we may worke the matter euen from the grounde,
I haue thought good to consider the very first sowers

of the schismaticall seede of oure time: which
I do finde to haue ben Luther, and his scholer Melanchthon,
and Iohn Caluin.
            The first broker of this cursed bargain, whereby
many haue lost heauen and purchased hell, was Martin
Luther. The setter forth of the bargain and greatest
Marchant of these perilous wares, was Melanchthon:
who semed partly to perfit that which Luther
began, partly to amend with ciuill conformatiō, that
which the other furiously and beyond all reason blamed.
Of these two heades are nowe two monstrous
sectes swarming in all such places, as protestants and
ghospellers preuaile. That is the zelous, roughe, and
rigorous Lutherans cleauing fast to euery iote and
parcell of Luthers doctrine, as being the very euangelist
of this fifte ghospell: and the ciuill, softe and
Philosophicall Lutherans, which after the trade off
Melanchthon plucke vp in Luther such thinges as
they mislike, and plante of their owne such as they
liste. The third chief Master of late heresies, and principall
founder of wicked doctrine hathe ben Iohn
Caluin: the head and Capitayn of the Sacramentary
secte. For though Zuinglius and Oecolampadius may
seme his auncetours of a fewe yeares, yet he beareth
nowe the name and the stroke of all that cursed secte,
both bicause he hath writen most thereof, and also
hath done most harme of any other.
            Truly who so knewe what maner of men these
were, what abhominable doctrine they haue taught,
how variable and inconstant they haue ben in their

owne sayings and doings, if he be a Christē man and
feareth God, he will neuer forsake the whole corps
of Christendom, and the Catholike faithe of so many
hundred yeares, to folowe the priuat, newe, and
variable doctrine of their braynes. But it semeth they
are of a number vnknowen, and hereuppon rashely
beleued. I will therefore adde vnto this worke of Staphylus
a short discours, touching the doctrine of these
thre Archeprotestants of our time. For euen as the
intent and purpose of that vertuous and lerned man
Fridericus Staphylus in this his Apology by vs translated,
was to reduce his deere countremen of Germany,
wandering like straie shepe, to the flocke off
Christes churche againe, partly by discouering the
falshod of their guides craking of Gods worde without
the right meaning thereof, and abusing the
vnlerned with false forged translating off the same,
which in the first and second part of his Apology he
hath done, partly also by setting before mens eyes
their greate variaunces and most clere dissensions in
doctrine (an euident argumēt of heresy) euen so our
intent and pupose is for the edifieng of such of my
dere countremē, as haue not of malice, but of ignorā
               ce
cleaued vnto the plausible and pernicious doctrine
of these thre Archeheretikes Martin Luther, Phil.
Melanchthō, and Iohn Caluin, to make an especiall discours
of their doctrine, bicause they are in our countre
aboue all other secte masters most folowed. For
not only, the common sorte of deceiued protestants
but the lerned and pretended prelats, and ministres

of our countre, are partly Lutherās, partly Sacram
                  •
               taries.
And of the Lutherās, some (though the fewer nū
               bre)
are zelous and rigorous Lutherās: that is, such as
wil in al points folow Luther, taking hym for the ver
                  •
               
prophet of God, the fifte Euangelist, and the third
Elias of our time. Some are ciuill Lutherans, gentle
and courtly protestants, which admit Luther so farre
as thē list, professing a kinde of indifferency in many
matters of religiō, as Melanchthon their first Master
taught them. The third sorte of protestāts, the most
common and allowed secte in Englande, are the Sacramentaries
of Geneua. Who are so greate in nūbre
and authorite, that the other are allmost of no accōpt
or reputatiō. To these mē Luther is a papist, and Caluin
is the right and vndoubted prophet.
            To the entent therefore that beside the generall
discours of Staphylus, the particular humours of our
countre may somewhat be serued, I haue thought it
necessary to annexe here vnto a particular discours
of these thre sectes, by examining the thre first founders
and fathers thereof. But especially and most largely
we entend to treate of the Sacramentary secte,
as being the greatest sore of the corrupted body off
our countre: And although we saie not herein al that
may be saied, (which would require a large volume,
and perhap; more tedious then profitable) yet these
fewe that we shal bring, may be sufficient arguments
to discredit the authorite of any one of them: which
in many mens eyes semeth so greate, that at the
warrant off their mouthe, they sticke not to caste

awaye all credit off all the lerned men in Christe
his churche this fiftene hundred yeares and vpwarde.
            For if I declare vnto you most manifest and clere
heresies,The argument off this discours. such as haue ben condemned aboue a thousand
yeares paste in that state and time of Christes
church, as our protestants yet acknowleadg, or 
                  •
               eme
at the lest to acknowledg for pure and vncorrupted,
to be in the doctrine of Caluin: If I showe most manifest
contradictions and brutish absurdites oute off
his writings, in the waightiest articles of our belefe
(as of the blessed Sacrament, of Baptim, and of free
will of man) if I declare vnto you such inconstancy
of Melanchthon, as woulde scarse become a meane
scholer in matters of common lerning, yf I discouer
a numbre of olde heresies condemned also in the primitiue
church, renewed by Luther (generally receaued
of all protestants) beside diuers other most certain
tokens of hereticall doctrine auouched by him,
all this I truste shall be a iuste and sufficient cause not
only to suspect, but vtterly to mislike the residew off
their doctrine and opinions, whereby they haue inueigled
the hartes of men to the vtter destruction off
thousands of soules. For truly if they be men sent especially
from God, to restore vnto vs the light of his
holy worde after the darcknes of so many hundred
yeares (as they pretend to be, and are taken for such)
it can not possibly be, but that their sayings and doings
must sauour of the Apostles, holy Martirs, and
awncient fathers of Christes church, by whom the

faith of Christ was first planted here on earth, and
spred through oute the whole worlde. That is, they
must haue Cor vnum & animam vnam.
               Actorū. 2. One harte and
one mynde as the Apostles had, they must Obedire excorde
in eam formam doctrinae in qua traditi sunt,
               Rom
                     •
                  . 6. 
               Obeyeuen
from their harte to that m
                     •
                  ner of doctrine wherein they
were brought vp, as the first Christians did, they must
haue the ensample of holesom wordes and doctrine,2. Timo. 1. which
they heard of their first fathers and teachers, as the
churche of Christ hath allwaies continued. But iff
their sayings and doings repugne directly against the
manner and vsage of these holy men, if they be at variaunce
amonge them selues, and with them selues,
(as especially you shall see in Caluin) if they forsake
the trade of olde doctrine, and renewe in their place
olde condemned heresies: if they forsake the ensample
of other, forging doctrine of their owne: no Christen
man may doubte, but that they are not off that
race nor line, but rather of the issue of the olde heretikes,
whose doctrine they renew, and behauiour they
folow. For vndoubtedly the saying of our Sauiour
can not be false:Matth. 7. 
               By their frutes you shall knowe them.
But now to the matter, and first of Luther.
            It is well knowen by all the histories of our time
as of Fontanus, Reuerus, Sleidan, and other that the
first breache of the well ordred aray of Christes churche
was by Luther attempted, not of reuelatiō, conscience,
or lerning, but only for the grief of a repulse
taken touching the publishing of that famous pardon
of the Cro
                  •
               sad. For hereuppon began he first to

open his lippes against the abuse of pardons, after against
the pardons them selues, thē against the whole
authorite of the church not only in that matter
but almost in al other necessary articles of belefe. And
bi
                  •
               ause we wil not go by cōiectures but by most
                  ••
                redemonstrations,
I will bring you the wordes of Luth
                  ••
               
him s
                  •
               lfe.
            In a disputation before the Duke George of Saxony
helde openly at Lipsia with D. E
                  •
               kius, he
doth plainly pronounce, That the quarell of religion thē
by him enter pr
                     •
                  s
                     •
                  d, was not begonn for the honour of God,
nor should not ende to his honour.
               Fonta
                     •
                  us lib. 2. Luther in all his doinges
declared well this his intent and purpose, but nowe
bicause Ex abund
                     •
                  ntia cordis os loquitur, as the harte
thinketh, the tongue speaketh, he vttereth it also
in wordes, and be wraieth his deuelish intent. rashely
perhaps and vnprouidently on his owne parte, but
not without the mercyfull prouidence of allmighty
god in our behalf. And in very dede according to his
talke the matter proued. For see howe he made his
entry to this ioly enterprise. He knew right well, that
the authorite of lerned writers stāding, he could not
plant his deuelish and wicked doctrine. Therefore at
the first he persuadeth the worlde that the ghospell
hitherto hath ben trod vnder foote, and mens constitutions
haue preuailed. Wherefore nothing ought
to be receiued, but the only clere and expresse text of
holy Scripture.L
                     ••
                  e Eras mā in 
                     •
                  y 
                     〈◊〉
                  . For these be his wordes in his booke
De s
                     •
                  ruo arbitrio against Eraesmus. Laie aside all the armour
and defence, which the olde Catholike writers, all scholes

of diuines, authorite of Councells, and popes, the consent of
all ages, and all Christendom do minister vnto you. VVe admitt
nothing but Scripture. VVhatsoeuer the olde writers
taught, the authorite of the church hath deliuered, Christen
people hath embraced, Scholes haue defended, it is all the pestilent
poison of the deuill. I will no iudgement, but I require
obedience. Nor let not any mā be any whit moued with the
miracles or holynes of the Saints off the church. They are
all damned, if they thought as they wrote. Thus farre Frier
Luther.
            Be these the wordes, thinke you, of a Christen
mā? If Porphirius, Lucian, Iulian the Apostata, or any
Turke or Pagan shoulde go about to withdraw Christen
men from the faith of Iesus Christ, and of his holy
worde, what surer grounde could he vse of his persuasion,
what suttler entry coulde he make, then to
persuade them that all Counsells, al doctours, al Popes
haue erred damnably and taught Satanicall doctrine?
            There arose in Holland about twenty yeares past
one George Dauid, first a Lutheran protestant, and
after a most detestable Apostata, affirming him selfe
to be the true Messias and Christ. He liued afterward
in Basill certain yeares vnder pretence of a Lutheran
protestant, and naming him selfe Iohn of Bruncke,
he died at Basill: and but two yeares after his deathe
was espied to be that George Dauid, whom so many
Anabaptistes folowed and beleued. At what time
his bookes and writings being serched, cōtaining the
reasons and persuasions of his doctrine, amonge many

other this was founde, and is the viij. th in number.
If,Vide historian Daui
                     •
                  s Georgij. Antuer p
                     ••
                   impressam. anno 1560. saieth he, the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles had
ben the true and perfit doctrine, truly the church which they
planted and framed by their doctrine, should necessarely haue
continued, and neuer perished. Bicause hell gates them selues,
as Iesus saied, should not preuaile against his church. but
nowe it is euident, that Antichrist hath vtterly ouerthrowen
the doctrine and building of the Apostles. For this, saieth
he, is manifest in the papacy. Whereof he will haue it necessarely
ensue, that the doctrine of the Apostles be vnperfitt
and false: but the doctrine that he bringeth for the be the perfit
and true. These are the very wordes of the history
of his life, sette forthe by the vniuersite of Basill. Beholde
the reason of Luther to plant his newe ghospell,
and the reason of George Dauid to ouerthrowe
the ghospell is all one. Luther groundeth vppon the
errour of the church: George Dauid groundeth vppon
the same. Luther maketh his entry by condemning
the churche: George Dauid maketh the same. Onely
this is the difference. Dauid goeth plainly to worke:
and openeth his diuelish intent at the first: and therefore
he prospered not. Luther craftely pretendeth
the defence of Gods worde (though he condemne
the church) and therefore it succeded ioylely with
him. For tenfolde worse is a preuy enemy then an open:
and sooner is the Turke auoided,The heretike more dangerous, thē the Turke. then the heretike:
though they bringe vs bothe to one pitte. the
Turke walketh naked: he asketh all at ones: his filthynes
appeareth at the first sight, and therefore the
Christen man at the first blushe, abhorreth him. But

the heretike is cloked with the name of a Christian:
asketh but the deniall of some part of our saith, pretendeth
the worde of God, and therefore is not off
many espied.
            Our Sauiour in that most tender and longe praiers,
that he made for mankinde after the mysticall
Supper, praieth thus.Ioan. 17. 
               O holy father kepe them in thy name
whom thou hast geuen vnto me, that they may be one as
we are. I aske not only for them, but for all such, as by their
worde shall beleue in me: that they all be one as thou father in
me and I in the, that they also be one in vs, that the worlde
may beleue that thou hast sent me. Christ here praieth for
vnite in his Church, and that to continue for euer.
For he saied before,Ioan. 14. 
               he would praie the Father, and he
should geue a comforter to tary with vs for euer, the Spirit
of truthe. And why doeth our Sauiour praie for this
vnite and truthe to continew for euer in his Churche?
forsothe he protesteth it vnto his Father, and
saieth, to the entent that the worlde may beleue that thou
hast sent me. Lo Christ would haue the continuaunce
of truthe and vnite in his Church, to be a most euident
argument to all the worlde that he was the true
Son of God, the only Sauiour and Redemer of the
worlde. Nowe Luther and George Dauid denie this
vnite and truthe to haue continewed: and our protestants
appeale to the first six hundred yeares, condemning
wickedly the whole corps of Christendom off
these last ix. hundred yeares, of errours, superstition,
and idolatry. And what other cōsequēt looke we hereof
to folowe, then that with George Dauid and his

secte, they denie Christ him selfe? In the preface off
Staphylus to the bishop of Eistat you haue sene, howe
the protestants of Bohem are allready come to
this point,In the Ieafe 18. where this heresie first began, and hath
most continued.
            But here peraduenture some ciuill Lutheran will
be offended with vs for vrging these wordes of Luther,
and charging him so farre therewith: and awnswer
with their common distinction, saying. The writinges
of Luther are of thre maner of sortes: to witt. some writen
before he thouroughly espied what popery was, some again
writen in vehemency of contention, wherein sometime
he showed him selfe to much passioned. some again that he
wrote in mekenes of spirit, and such to be taken for the very
pure kernell, and vndoubted verite of his ghospell. This distinction
and poore shift,Sleidanus lib. 3. histo. though Luther vsed it before
the Emperour at Wormes, and be a common cloke
of the ciuill protestants, to couer the filthynes off
their father, Luther: yet bothe it standeth litle with
the truthe of an Euangelist, as he termeth him selfe,
or of the third Elias,In epist. ad Argentoratenses. Melanchthon de vita & morte Lutheri. as his scholers call him, and will
neuer be graunted of the zelous Lutherans, Illyricus,
Gallus, Amssdorffius, and such other, which will not
departe from any one iote of Luthers doctrine. No
nor Luther him selfe cannot abide it. For thus he
writeth in his presumptuous booke against our late
Souuerain,Tomo 6. fo. 436. editionis. an. 1553. king Henry the eight. It repenteth me, saith
Luther, that I submitted my selfe so much before the Emperour
at VVormes, that I would suffer any man to sitt
Iudge on my doctrine, or heare if any man could conuince

me of any errour. For I should not haue declared so foolish
an humilite, being sure and certain of my doctrine. Beside
that the same submission nothing auailed me before that tyran.
A man must be so sure and certain of his doings, that although
all the worlde be sett against him, yet he departe no one
iote from them. Thus farre Luther. Where you see,
he confesseth not that he speaketh amisse sometime
by infirmite, sometime of a passion, but he maketh
him selfe to stande vpon a most sure grounde, so that
he can not saie a misse.Tomo 2. fol. 35. sac. 2. contra caelestes prophetas. Likewise at what time Carolostadius
suaruing from Luther, would so haue excused
him selfe, that at the beginning he was but weake in
the spirit, &c. Luther awnswereth him, that the spirit of
God vseth no such excuse.
            
            Well then: if the doctrine of Luther, be so sure and
constant, that it may not vary, will our protestants
and new Masters at home stande stoutely to the same?
Will they condemne all Councells, all holy Fathers,
all authorite of the Church, all that Christen
people haue hitherto beleued? for these are the very
wordes of Luther, quoted you before oute of his
workes. Truly this were a compendious waie, not
only fot their purpose, but for the Turkes to. Yea and
for Antichrist him selfe. For when he cometh, can he
deuise any more politick engin to vnderminde Christendom,
can he wish for any better harbengers to
prepare mens hartes and good wills to lodge him in?
waight the matter who listeth wisely and diligently:
he shall finde none like to this.
            Yet Luther, they will saie, leaueth vs holy Scripture,

which Antichrist will not do. Yea truly, but how
leaueth he it? I meane to be read of the vnlerned laye
man. Forsothe he translateth it in to the mother tongue.
And how? sincerely and truly? I reporte me to
the second part of this Apologie, where you haue sene,
how vprightly he hath dealed herein. As for the
common text which our protestants after their Master,
Luther, do vse, and commaunde to be read in
Churches, we haue in our preface noted you in part
the truthe and soundnes thereof. But to show to the
worlde their fidelite and sincerite yet farder, I will
here specify some other places of holy Scripture altered
and corrupted by them. And this I will do but
in part, and brefely: noting such as it hath ben my
chaunce here and there to espie, not making any speciall
discours vpon the whole translation of the english
Bible, which may with time and more diligence
hereafter be done.
            Where as S. Paule hath, Haereticum hominem deuita,
Auoide the heretike man,
               Tit. 3. our new english trāslatiōs reade,
Auoide a man that is an author of sectes,
               A numbre of places corrupted in the engl
                     •
                  sh Bible. printed in the yeares. 1549. 51. 52. and 62. as though
an heretike and an author of a secte wer all one. By
this false forged text, the doctrine of our protestants
being proued hereticall, yet Luther, Caluin, Su
                     •
                  n
                     •
                  k feldius,
Osiander, and such other were only to be auoided
(as being the authors and first beginners off these
present theresies) but our protestants being no authors
thē selues of sectes, but folowers of other, may
(notwithstanding S. Paules wodes) be embraced
and supported. But an heretike (as S. Augustin defineth)

               is he,
               In lib. de
                     •
                  
                  tilitate credendi. ca. 1. 
               which, for tempor all commodite, honour or welth, either
forgeth him selfe new doctrine, or foloweth. And all
such S. Paule biddeth vs auoide. But no maruail iff
these men did so alter this text. It is good reason a mā
fauour him self. for els perhaps the people reading
this text of S. Paul, would beginne to auoide our protestants,
whom they see to be heretikes. And therefore
in an other place, where S. Paule saieth. Oportet haereses
esse. There must be heresies,
               1. Corin. 11. they likewise turne it,
There must be s
                     •
                  ctes, auoiding allwaies the name of heresy,
bicause it touched them to nigh. And verely it
were not amisse for them, if the name of heresy and
heretikes were quite forgotten: se
                  ••
               g their whole doctrine
which they haue lerned of Luther and Caluin,
is nothingels but olde condemned heresies patched
together and newly scoured, as in this discourse
we shall euidently declare vnto you.
            For this purpose also, where S. Paule writeth to
Timothe,1. Timo. 6. 
               P
                     •
                  ophanas vocum nouitates deuita, auoyde
straunge nouelties of wordes, whereby he ment new 
                  •
               ereticall
doctrine, these men turne it, auoide vnghostely
vanities of voyces, altering quite bothe the wordes and
the sence of the Apostle. for it standeth vpon these
men to haue nouelties allowed.
            With the like vaine of euangelicall sincerite, bicause
they may not abyde to heare off aultar, (hauing
plucked them downe against the express
                  •
                practise of
the primitiue churche and all ages) where S. Paule
writeth,1 Cor. 10. 
               Are not they which eate of the sacrifice partak
                     ••
                  s
of the aultar? these men turne for the 
                     〈…〉
                  . The

latin hath altare, and the graeke 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . In the same
place they make S. Paule talke of images (as thoughe
Christen men had then worshipped images, whiche
yet they say is but a late inuention) where as he talketh
only of idols and idolaters.
            In like maner bicause traditions are a great eye sore
to all newe ghospellers, they putt out of S. Paule
the worde Traditions,
               2. Thessal. 2. & 3. and put in his place sometime
Ordinaunces sometime Institutions, as ofte as S. Paule
biddeth thē to be kept. In other places, when the traditions
of the Iewes are reprehended,1. Pet. 1. then they kepe
the worde gladly.
            All Sacramentaries that folow the banner of Caluin
make light of the Sacrament of baptim, teaching
that the children of Christen parents may withoute
daunger lacke it,In institut. cap. 17. in fine. if there be no cōtempt or negligence
on our parte. We shall haue occasion in examining
of Caluins doctrine, to speake more of this cursed heresie.
Nowe bicause the saying of oure Sauiour in S.
Iohns ghospel,Ioan. 3. 
               Onlesse a man be borne again of water and
the holy Ghoste, he shall not entre in to the kingdome of heauen,
did vtterly ouerthrowe this wicked opinion, our
protestants in their translatiōs haue founde the meanes
so to clippe the text, that it might no lenger directly
fight against them: and therefore they leaue out
the worde (againe) in S. Iohn, which of necessite imported
a second natiuite of baptim. But of this we
shal haue occasiō to speake more hereafter. In the me
ane ye see the vpright dealing of our protestāts. How
are they to be trusted in their sermōs, in their homelies,

and in a numbre of assertions and articles which
they teache without scripture, that corrupt the Scripture
it selfe?
            They wil saie,A refuge for false translations of scripture confuted. they alter sometimes the text, bicause
of the greke, which varieth from the latin. If they
did so sincerely, and in all places, it were perhaps the
lesse faute, And yet not without greate faute, the latin
text being vniforme, vniuersally receiued, and
commaunded by general Councel, whereas the graeke
lacketh such authorite,Vide Li
                     •
                  
                  danum de optimo scripturas interpretandi genere lib. 2. and is beside variable and
most vncertain, for the greate variete and discorde of
graeke copies. But nowe when the greke serueth their
purpose, and may any thinge furder their heresies,
then they grate gredely thereupon. But when it maketh
against thē, they kepe the latin, and let the greke
passe. As for example. Whereas in the Actes off the
Apostles, the greke hath 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,Cap. 13. 
               while they sacrifised,
as Erasmus also hath translated it, they folowe
the latin, Ministrātibus illis, turning it, as they ministred.
Here they forsake the greke, and Erasmus to bicause
they wil not heare that the Apostles sacrifised, as the
greke text cōuinceth, and Erasmus truly after the greke
translateth. But in an other place, where the greke
may serue their turne, see howe they snatche after it,
and yet were fouly deceaued.
            In S. Paule, where the latin hath, Iustificati ex fide pacem
habeamus apud Deum. that is, Being iustified by faith
let vs haue peace with God.
               Rom. 5. And the greke readeth, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
we haue peace with God, they folowe there the greke,
bicause they would sett vp a seconde iustification by

only faith, as if S. Paule had saied. Nowe being iustified
by faith in our first iustification, We haue peace
with God, we are safe and sure. But though the common
greke text reade so in dede, yet the graeke fathers
who hath lefte vs their lerned commentaries vppon
that place, did reade as the common latin hath, to wit
Chrisostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius and Theophilact.
            
            In their translation also of the olde Testament,
their demeanour is not vnlike. For sometime, when
the ambiguite of the hebrewe worde or phrase maye
importe any other sence, then the common translation
hath, in such places as ouerthrowe their heresies,
they alter the text at their pleasure: sometime they for
sake bothe the hebrew and the greke according with
the latin translation, without any ambiguite at all. As
in some fewe places for example of many, we wil nowe
declare vnto you.
            In the psalme 118. the common translation readeth
Inclinaui cor meum ad faceindas iustificationes tuas in aeternum
propter retributionem, that is, I haue applied myne
hart to fullfill thy statutes for euer, for the rewarde. Oure
english trāslations printed in the yeare. 1549. 1551. 1552.
1162. all with one accorde haue altered the later parte
of the sentence: and in stede of these wordes, For euer
for the rewarde, they turne it, allwaie, euen vnto the ende.
This text of holy scripture they haue corrupted for
the maintenaunce of their lewde liberty by only faithe,
and defacing of al reward for good workes. And
vpon what grounde trowe ye, haue they vttered this
false translation? forsothe vppon the ambiguite off

the hebrewe text, which readeth: 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . for here
their peufelowe Sebastian Munster hath turned 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
in finem, Euen vnto the ende. And of him they haue
lerned to correct the text of holy scripture. What
then? was the olde translation allwaies before vsed,
false and corrupted? Was it contrary and repugnant
to the hebrew originall? No truly. But here it fareth
with our protestants as oure Sauiour noted of the
blinde Pharises.Matth. 15. 
               Caecus caecū ducit, & ambo in foueam cadunt.
The blinde leadeth the blinde aud bothe fall in to the
dike. They folowe Munster, and their notes of Geneua
sett forthe by Robert Steuen, bothe blinded with
selfe will and malice against the common translation
of the church. For allthough the worde, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                do
signifie sometime Calcaneus a hele, or hinder parte off
a thinge (and thē otherwise pointed then it is in this
text of the psal.) so that metaphorically it may signifie,
the ēde, yet properly it signifieth rewarde as Pagnin
in his dictionary noteth, and as it is here pointed can
signifie no other thing. The proper significatiō hereof
in an other psalme most manifestly appeareth.
Where we reade. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,Psal. 18. 
               In custodiendis illis
retributio multa. In keping of them (the lawes and statutes
of God) is; great rewarde. And therefore the greke
of the, 72. elders haue trāslated the place of the, 118.
psalme 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                that is, for euer for rewarde:
and S. Hierom (then whom no writer in the latin
Church hath ben more skilfull and perfit in the hebrew
tongue) turneth it proper eternam retributionem
for euerlasting rewarde, keping the propriety of the

worde 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                truly expressed in the cōmon latin translation.
But our protestants haue either ignorantly
or malitiousely forsaken the propriete of the hebrew
worde, the greke interpretation of the, 72. elders, the
lerned translation of S. Hierom, and the common latin
text in all Christendom alwaie receaued, to folowe
ignorant Munster, and the corrupted notes off
Geneua. This is lo the worde of God which our protestants
pretend only to embrace. This is the pure
text which they force the vnlerned to reade. But let
vs now consider some other places, and see how ghospellike
our ghospellers haue behaued them selues.
            In the, 9. chapter of the ecclesiastes, the common
latin translation readeth thus. Sunt iusti atque sapientes:
& opera eorum in manu dei. Et tamen non scit homo vtrum
amore an odio dignus sit. that is. there are iuste and
wise men: and their workes are in the hand of god.
But man knoweth not whether he deserue to be loued or
hated. The heretikes of our times amonge other their
heresies teache an assured certainte of grace by only
faith. This place bicause (according to the saieng of
S. Paule,Philip. 2. bidding vs in metu & tremore operari salutem
nostram, to worke our saluation in feare and tremble, and
of S. Peter writing. satagite vt per bona opera certam vestram
vocationem faciatis,
               2. Pet. 1. that is, labour to make your vocation
(in Christ) sure by good workes) it declareth that
all the doings of the iust and vpright man are in the
handes of god, and that no man knoweth whether
he be in fauour with God or no, teaching vs in all
humilite and lowlines to repose our selfe vpon God

and his goodnes, not vpon our owne faith and confidēce
as the recheles protestants of our vnhappy time
do, bicause I saie this text ouerthroweth this their
heresy, they haue here, as in many other places, aduentered
to alter the text of gods worde it selfe. And
though in their alteration and departing from the receiued
text, these foxes tailes be all tyed and knitt together,
yet in the newe inuention and placing thereof
they beare their heads farre a sonder. For in the
translations printed in the yeares, 1549. and, 1551. thus
they reade. The righteous, the wise, yea and their workes also
are in the hand of God. And there is no man that knoweth
either the loue or the hate of the thinge that he hath before
him. In the translations of the yeare, 1552. and, 1562.
thus they, reade. The righteous and the wise, yea and their
seruaunts also are in the handes of god. there is no man that
knoweth either loue or hate, but all thinges are before them.
            
            As neither of these two translations agree with
the hebrew, greke, and latin, so do they bothe vary
from the iudgment of all the lerned interpretours off
this place. first whereas the former translation readeth.
There is no man that knoweth the loue or the hate of
the thinge that he hath before him: this lo varieth from
the hebrew, the graeke and the latin not only commonly
vsed, but that which we finde in S. Hierom, in
Symmachus and in Pagnin, yea and in Munster him
selfe. The hebrew readeth. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
the greke hath. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . S. Hierom
turneth after the hebrew, worde for worde. Et

quidem charitatem & quidem odium non est cognoscens homo:
omnia in facie eorum. that is. Bothe loue and hatred
man knoweth not. all thinges are before him. The
interpretation of Symmachus alleaged by S. Hierom
foloweth the same sence and meaning. Pagnin likewise
and Munster, euen as ye see the later english
translations printed in the yeare, 1552. and, 1562. doth
also folowe. well then: the former translation varieng
from all these texts and authors alleaged, is the
later nowe perfit and sounde? In this parte of the sentence
it hath well corrected the former, and folowed
metely the hebrew &c. But in the other part where
they reade, Yea and their seruauntes also are in the handes
of God: they walke wide of the truthe. and haue forsaken
therein all the lerned hebricians bothe awncient
and of these daies: to folowe their dutche doctour
Munster, who only hath so translated it. wherein
they declare their great ignoraunce, (to charge them
now no farder) especially this translation being later,
and as it should seme more corrected. for the hebrew
worde 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                hauing the point camets vnder

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                can not signifie (seruaunts) but opera, workes,
as Iōanes Mercerus the kinges Reader in Paris, a man
excelling any other of this time (being no hebrew
borne) in the knowleadg of that tongue, in his publicke
lessons noted. Whose authorite I haue not
doubted to alleage in this place, bothe bicause for his
lerning I reuerence him hauing a longe time ben his
scholer: and for that, his conscience our men can not
mistrust, being one of their owne cote touching religion.

Beside Pagnin in his dictionary hath noted out
of Rab. Abraham in his com. and out of R. dauid in
lib. rad. that the Radix 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                hauing 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                after him (as he
hath in this place 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               in manu, in the hande of god) can
neuer signifie to serue, but to worke. The greke also
hath turned that worde 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : S. Hierom, Symmachus,
and Pagnin, opera, workes. Munster therefore
and his ape our later english trāslations haue declared
here their ignoraunce, and geuen good warning to
the lerned worthely to mistrust their iudgment in
other places.
            But here perhaps you will demaunde, howe the
common latin agreeth with the hebrew and greke.
We awnswer according to the iudgement of the best
lerned and most expert in the hebrewe tongue, that
the latin translation hathe expressed the right sence
and meaning of the hebrew text, though it hathe
not folowed precisely the very wordes. One S. Hierom
in stede of many shall counterpaise the fonde
and peruerted interpretation of Mūster, and our protestants
his scholers. His interpretation vppon this
place is this, Hic sensus est, Etiam in hoc dedi cor meum,
& scire volui quos Deus diligeret, quos Deus odisset, & inueni
iustorum quidem opera in manu Dei esse: et tamen vtrum
amentur à Deo an non, nunc eos scire non posse, &c. This is
the meaning (saith S. Hierom), this also I laboured to knowe
whom God loued, and whom God hated: and I founde
that the righteous were in the hande of God. But yet that
nowe (in this life) they coulde not knowe whether they were
loued of God or no, &c. Thus farre S. Hierom. Whom

for his lerning and knowleadge in the propriete off
this tongue, for his approued vertu, and great antiquite
we may boldely preferre before these vpstert smatterers
of our daies.
            Neither is it any vnwonte thinge in the common
translation to folowe the sence of the hebrew, leauing
the wordes: as in diuers places it is not vnknowen
to the lerned. In the second psalme, where the hebrewe
readeth, Osculamini filium, Kisse ye the Son, the
common latin translation hath turned it Apprehendite
disciplinam, Receaue and embrace discipline, that is, refuse
not the visitation of the hande of God, &c: whiche
to be the right and proper vnderstanding of that
place, beside other authorites the iudgement only off
Ionathas Targū
                the Chalday interpreter or paraphrastes
writing before the coming of Christ, and reuerē
               ced
aboue all other interpretours of al the lerned hebricians,
sufficiētly cōuinceth. For that is his very interpretatiō
vpō this place. whereby the ignoraūce and
blindnes of Iohn Caluin railing vpon this place against
the cōmon trāslation, and charging it with ignoraunce
of the hebrewe, doth euidently appeare it self.
            But to returne to our english translations, as we
haue in these places alleaged, declared you their ignoraunce
and itching foly, in folowing their dutche doctor
Munster (to speake nothing of their malice in
departing from the church, and presumptuousnes in
altering at their pleasure the receiued text of Gods
worde) so nowe we intend to showe with what felicite
they haue folowed their blinde presumptuous

guide of Geneua Iohn Caluin. For of these two doctours
and worthy fathers (after Luther) haue oure
protestants lerned to corrupt the worde of God by
their false translations.
            Caluin as he hath of all other protestants vttered
most detestable and blasphemous doctrine, so farre
passing Luther and the protestants of Wittenberg,
that he accompteth thē for papistes, and calleth them
so in his writings, so was he principally enemy to the
blessed Sacrament of the aultar, the most precious iewell
and dearest treasure that Christendom hath on
earth. Such places therefore of holy Scripture as partly
prophecied, partly expressed the verite of this dread
ful Sacrifice, he hath other peruerted by heretical and
new inuēted expositiōs, or corrupted by false and wrō
ge trāslations. In the 9. chapter of the prouerbes of Salomō
               
where it is saied of Christ in the persō of Wisedō
               She hath offred vp her sacrifices, she hath mingled her wine,
and prepared her table, is contained a clere prophecy of
this blessed Sacramēt, by the iudgement of the lerned
fathers,Ibidem. 
               S. Hierō.
               Lib. 2. epist. 3. 
               S. Cypriā.
               Lib. 17. cap. 20 de cinit. Dei. 
               Augustin. andHomil. 5. in pasch
                     •
                  . 
               Eus
                     •
                  bius
Emissemus: as also the wordes of the text do necessarely
import. Now Caluin in his frēch trāslatiō printed at
Geneua and at Lyōs by the heires of Iohn Michel turneth
it thus. Ila tue ses victuailles, il a verse son vin: that is
She hath killed her victuals, powred out her wine, and prepared
her table. And this is the very trāslation also of our
english Bible printed in the yeares. 1549. 1551. 1552. and
1562. But bothe the trāslatiōs of our Bible and of Caluin
(herein their Master) are other them selues much

deceaued, or do malitiously deceaue other. For the latin,
the greke, and the hebrew all with one accorde
reade after the first english translation aleaged by vs.
The hebrew hath 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : the greke
readeth thus: 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
The latin hath,Prouer. 9. 
               Immolauit victimassuas, miscuit
vinum suum, &c. Nowe I appeale to all the lerned in
these tongues whether the wordes of these textes
aunswer not worde for worde to the first translation
brought by vs. True it is that in the greke text the
worde 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                is ambiguous, and may signifie to mingle
or to fill out. But the hebrewe text admitting no suche
ambiguite, from whence the greke was deriued,
nor the latin which folowed the greke, that worde
must nedes be takē in such sence as the greke receiued
of the hebrew, and as the latins folowed in the greke.
Therefore the french translation of Caluin, and our
english folowing the same, is not the worde of God,
nor the text of holy scripture, but the worde of Caluin
and his text. What may not heretikes do, if they
maye sette vs forthe their worde, for the worde off
God, their imaginations for holy scripture, their poisonned
heresies for sounde faith? You haue sene what
conscience our protestants make of it: and howe many
places of holy scripture they haue altered, peruerted
and corrupted for the maintenaūce of their pretē
               ded
ghospel. I will not in wordes exaggerat this wicked
presumption of our protestāts. The matter it selfe
doth, I truste, sufficiently speake it. And I do not vtterly
despeare their amendment, when they shall see,

and fele their falshood discouered and broughte to
light: seing that in the later translations they betray
sometime their former iuggling: as in certain places
here noted by Staphylus of Luther it is euident. For
although (as we saied in our preface) of all the places
corrupted by Luther, and noted here by Staphylus,
there is but one readen in the cōmon translations off
our countre, yet that is to be vnderstanded of the later
onely,See the places aboue in the leafe 71. and. 68▪
                printed in the yeares, 1552. and 1562. For in
the former translations printed in the yeares 1549.
and 1551. the place of S. Paule in the 1. to Timothe the
4. chapter, and the first to the Corinthians the 9.
chapter are corrupted, euen as Luther had first taught
them. but in their later editions they haue made the
holy ghoste to talke in an other language. Well. I beseche
God to geue thē grace farder to see and to amē
               de
their owne fautes, and other men spedely to beware
of them.
            And truly what one man, yea what one colledge
or vniuersite of lerned men, may take vpon it to sette
forthe any translation,Fontanus lib. 1. histo. eccles. Lindanus de opt. genere interpr. scrip. cap. 8▪
                other then whiche allwaies
hath ben receiued? Erasmus Roterodam a lerned man
vndoubtedly, but in this point ouer rashe, was the firste
of our time that with his newe translation in latin
of the newe Testament, comptrolled the olde.
Whereof he is worthely reprehended of diuers. And
what folowed? Soone after Sebastian Castalion sette
forthe an other translation in latin also.Vide Tiaphylum in absolu
                     •
                  ae apolog. fol. 62. Likewise
Luther in the vulgar tongue: which only was commaunded
amonge the protestants to be reade and vsed

in a publick decree made at Lipsia. But an on after
the Zwinglians of Zurich published yet an other
translation of the Bible. And in the preface of it, they
write plainely, that the congregation ought to be bounde to
no certain trāslation, but that euery man may turne the text
of holy Scripture according to his iudgement. Thus we
see by this bare text of scripture left of Luther (more
then Antichrist will leaue, as they saie) in the liberte
of so many and diuers translations, to be a very bare
and weake staye of mens consciences, and litle better,
then if with Antichrist we had no Scripture at
all.
            For when a doubte ariseth in holy Scripture (as
thousandes do) what helpe haue we? The expositions
of holy fathers, Councells, and so forthe, by the
vardit of Luther auaileth not. Translations be false,
diuers, and vncertain. What then? Forsothe there is
yet one shifte more.Smidelinus cōtra apologiam Staphyli. c. 4. fa. 1. 
               Places of scripture, they saie, must be
conferred and laied together: so one place shall geue light to
the other. Is this allwaies true? Maye this be a generall
rule? Let vs take for example some parcel of holy scripture.
Greate controuersies and sundry sectes are nowe
a daies vpon these fewe wordes of Christ, Take,
eate, this is my body.
               Matth. 36 
               Luther and Zuinglius, Brentius, and
Carolostadius, were at defiaunce one with an other vppon
the true meaning thereoff. Luther excommunicateth
all that confesse not the naturall body withe
the bread to be there.In parna Confess. de Caeua Do. 
               Zuinglius and Carolostadius will
haue the breade to be but a signe or tokē of the body
The latin text is plaine and euident for the reall presence.

The greke likewise. Will they counsell the hebrewe
ghospell of S. Matthewe? If any hebrewe text
serued their turne, were it neuer so barbarous or Rabbinicall,
they would not spare to sett it out to the vttermost.
Let vs then see what that text hath. I meane
not the barbarous text of Munster, nor the lerned exercise
of Quinquarboreus, but that text, which beinge
founde in Italy amonge the Iewes, was of late yeares
printed and sett forthe in Paris without points by
the diligence of Ioannes Mercerus. That text readeth
thus. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . That is. Take and eate
this which is my body. Here the hebrew text though it
haue some one worde more then the latin and greke
translation, yet it furdereth the meaning of the
Catholikes, and fighteth directly against the Sacramentaries.
            But let these interpretations by helpe of tongues
passe. Let vs see howe by conference of other places,
this sentēce may be lightned. Luther compareth these
wordes to the saying of S. Iohn,Ioan. 1. 
               Verbum caro factum
est. The worde is made flesh. Zuinglius compareth them
with an other place.Ioan. 6. 
               Caro non prodest quicquam. The fleshe
profiteth nothing. Caluin varying from Zuinglius
(though bothe Sacramentaries) in his commentaries
vppon S. Matthew, saieth.In Matthe. 26. 
               Corporis appellatio pani tribuitur,
ea ratione qua Spiritum Sanctum Ioannes columbam
vocat. that is. The bread is called the body of Christ, as Iohn
calleth the holy ghoste a pigeon. An other sacramentary
cometh yet,1. Cor. 10. and saieth those wordes are like to the
saying of S. Paule, The rocke was Christ. Lo these men

haue conferred these wordes of Christ, This is my body,
with other places of Scripture. But haue they nowe
founde out the truthe which is but one? are they
agreed? Truly as cattes and dogges. Luther neuer wrote
so bitterly against vs Catholikes, as he doth against
the poore Sacramentaries of Zurich. You haue the
greuous complaint of the brotherhood of Zurich in
the third parte of this booke, against Luther.In the leafe. 85. Reade
the later wordes of the place: and see howe charitably
he vseth them. Caluin likewise calleth VVestphalus
a papist,
                  In vltima admonitione. In his institutions the, 17. chapter. In libr. de vbiquitate.
                and findeth faute with Bullinger, for teaching
that to eate Christ and to beleue in Christ is all one,
And Brentius woulde proue against all the swarme
of Sacramentaries that Christ is euery where really,
not only in the Sacrament.
            What then? is there no meanes lefte vs sure and
certain to knowe and vnderstande the right meaning
of holy Scripture by? Sothely if you take the shameles
brode waie that Luther prescribeth you, none at
all. But if ye acknowleadg and reuerence the authorite
of holy fathers, of awncient Councells, off the
Catholike and vniuersall Church of Christ, during
continually from the time of the blessed Apostles
hetherto, there is a right sure and infallible waie to
obtaine your desire. In the preface of Staphylus to the
Bishop of Eystat, and the first parte of this his Apologie
you haue a very euident and sensible declaration
thereof. As you tendre your soule health, and the
inestimable treasure of life euerlasting, which without
right belefe is not to be had, reade and peruse

diligently the Authour. And you shall, I trust in God,
finde your felfe satisfied to the vttermost. For howe
thinke you? May you not worthely suspect that mās
cause that disableth so many witnesses, so lerned, so
holy, as Luther doth, condemning all holy Fathers
and Councels? Is it not a pride comparable to the loftines
of Lucifer him selfe, to saie, I will no iudgement,
but I require obedience? Is it not a most impudent arrogancy
and a detestable blasphemy, to saie that al holy
men of the Church are damned, if they thought as they
taught? Neuer sence the worlde stode, was there heretike
that vttered such horrible blasphemies, as the
cursed mouthe and penne of Luther hath done.
            But sithen that Luther condemneth the olde fathers
of the Church, is he nowe the first father thereof?
hath he no predecessours in his doctrine?In the Apology of England euery vvhere. Surely
the Lutheran protestants of our countre crie so
much vpon the fathers, that seing their Master denieth
all fathers, it may much be maruailed where the
scholers haue founde them. After longe study I haue
at the length espied, who are their fathers. And for
the instruction of my dere deceiued countremen, I
will not lett to declare them.
            S. Paule to the Corinthians saieth. Though ye haue
thousands of masters in Christ, yet not many fathers: For in
Christ Iesus by the ghospell I haue begotten you.
               1. Cor. 4. Such thē
are to be accompted the fathers of Christes Church
or of heretikes,The fathers of the Protestants. whose doctrine the church of Christ
foloweth, or heretikes. Let vs see then whose doctrine
Luther and his scholers, the protestants, do folowe.

First not the doctrine of the Fathers of Christes
Church. For they pardie by the vardit of Luther, are
all damned if they thought, as they taught. Off what fathers
then hath he and his scholers lerned their doctrine?
We shall see by the particulars.
            
               Luther in his Assertions against Pope Leo teacheth,Artic. 36.
               that fre wil after the fal of mā is but a bare title: and
that man while he doth as much as lieth in him, sinneth deadly.
yea and that the iuste man in his good worke sinneth
also deadly. And Melanchthon his scholer in his Annotations
vpon S.Super cap. 8. fol. 52. 
               Paule to the Romans saieth, that the
aduoutry of Dauid is as properly the worke of God as the
calling of Paule, blaming the glose of such, as saie that
God permitteth euill, but doth none, for fonde and
foolish.In lib. de predest. cō
                  tra Caluini sycophātas. So teacheth also Iohn Caluin, and Beza his
derling. This heresy they lerned of Simon Magus, of
Marcion, of the Manichees, of Petrus Abailhardus, all
cōdemned heretikes, as inhaer. 46 
               S. Augustin ad Quoduultdeum,
inhaer. 42 Epiphanius, inIn recognit. S. Clement of Rome, and
inIn epist. S. Bernard it is to be sene. The allegations of these
places we note only at this present, without recitall
at large, to auoide prolixite.
            Vpon this doctrine it folowed, that good workes
by the deniall of fre wil being wiped away, faith must
do the dede. Luther therefore and all his felow heretikes
teache the sufficiency of only faith to saluation.
Yea and our protestants are not ashamed to putt it in
to their Crede songe in their churches.Rom. 3. And for this
purpose where S. Paul writeth. VVe thinke man to be
iustified by faith without the workes of the lawe, Luther

translateth it thus.Staphylus in prodr
                     •
                  
                  me. 
               VVe thinke man to be iustified by only
faith. This olde dānable and most enormous heresie
they haue lerned of olde heretikes aboue a thousand
yeares ago. for ye may not thinke these mē lacke antiquite
in their doctrine. Their Fathers herein are Eunomius
and Aetius,
               August. her. 54. e
                     •
                   lib. de fide et operibus Epiphan. her. 76. who taught likewise only faith to
suffise, condemned therefore for heretikes off the
Church, as S. Augustin and Epiphanius recordeth.
            Luther and all his scholers can not abide worshipping
of Saints, calling such seruice idolatry. Their
fathers touching this doctrine,Lib. 21. ca. 21. contra Faustū & lib. 8. cap. vlt. de Cluitat. Dei. are Faustus Manicheus
the heretike, and Maximus Madaureusis the pagan,
finding faute with the Christians for such deuotion,
as S. Augustin mencioneth.
            They condemne praieng for the dead, they abhorre
the blessed Sacrifice of the Masse celebrated for the
dead. they would make men beleue it was neuer vsed
before S. Gregories time. how saie we then? if the
contrary opinion denieng praier for the dead were
condemned for an heresy longe before S. Gregories
time, was not troweye such praier allowed and practised?
S.Ad quoduultdeunt. haer. 53. Augustin reakoning vp the heresies before
his time, writeth of the Aerians thus. Aeriani ab Aerio,
qui cum esset praesbyter, dolens quôd episcopus nō potuit
ordinari in Arrianorū haeresim lapsus, propria quoque dogmata
addidit nonuulla: dicens orare vel offerre pro mortuis
oblationem non oportere. that is. The Aerians so called off
Aerius, who being priest, for grief that he could not be made
a bishop, fell in to the heresy of the Arrians, and added also
certain doctrines of his owne, saying, that men ought not to

praie nor to offer oblation for the dead. The like writeth
of him before S.
               Haer. 75. 
               Augustin, Epiphanius in his booke of
heresies.
            It was preached of late before diuers of the honourable
Nobilite of the Realme in the solemne funerall
of the late most Catholike Emperour Ferdinandus,
that praier for the dead was bothe superfluous
and superstitious. It was saied a third place such
as purgatory is, could not be iustified by Scripture.
and that the auncient fathers before the time of S.
Gregory acknowledged no suche place, nor praier
for the dead in such sence as the Catholikes now take
it and vse it. This sermon also hath ben thought
worthy to be printed and sette forthe to the vewe of
the whole world, being preached of a pretēded prelat
of the Realme before so honourable an audience, and
at such a solemne memoriall or Obsequy. I must here
craue pardon gentle Reader of the, if I diuert a litle
from my principall purpose to examin that parte off
the sermon, as defendeth this olde heresie of Aerius.
Neither may you M. Grindall be offended herewith,
when you shall vnderstand it, as I wish you maye, iff
a young scholer and puine student in diuinite aduē
               ter
to encounter with you. The cause of the Catholike
church whom wickedly with the olde heretike
Aerius you blame and reproue, the honourable Nobilite
of the realme, which in that place presumptuousely
you abused, the vnlerned audience of our
dere countremen, which shamefully you deceaued,
maketh me bothe to breake the order of my discourse,

and not to feare your person, whom authorite
hath more auaunced, then lerning or true religion
commended.2. Cor. 13. 
               Non enim possumus aliquid aduersus veritatem,
sed pro veritate. for we can not do any thinge
against the truthe, but for the truthe.
            And what is it good Sir, that moueth you to disproue
praier for the dead? First of all (saie you) in the
Scriptures we finde no commaundement to praie for the soules
of the dead, vnlesse they will cite the place of the booke off
Machabees. And then S. Hierom shall make thē awnswer,
who permitteth in dede these bookes of Machabees to be read:
but bicause they be not of the Canon of the Scriptures, they be
not (saieth S. Hierom) sufficient of them selues to establish
any doctrines in the Church of God. This is your first reason
Master Grindall, why we ought not to praie for
the dead: and it containeth two partes. First that we
haue no cōmaundement in Scripture to praie for the
soules of the dead, but the place of the Machabees: and
then that the same place is not in the Canon off the
Scriptures.Cōmaundement in Scripture to praie for the de ad, beside the bookes of the Machabees.
            
            
               As touching the first parte, I awnswer it, that we
are commaunded of S. Paul, Tenere traditiones quas accepimus
siue per sermonem siue per epistolam, To kepe suche
traditions as we haue receiued either by worde or by writing.
And S. Chrisostom telleth vs that it is a tradition
of the Apostles to pray for the dead. these are his wordes.
               2. Thess. 2. Homil. 69 ad populum Antioch.
Non temere ab Apostolis haec sancita fuerunt vt in tremendis
mysterijs defunctorum agatur commemoratio: sciunt
enim illis inde multum contingere lucrum, vtilitatem multam.
Quum enim totus constiterit populus, extensis manibus

sacerdotalis plenitudo, & tremēdū proponatur sacrificiū, quo
modo Deū nō exorabimus pro his deprecantes? that is, These
things, saieth Chrisostom, were not without cause decreed of
the Apostles that in the dreadful mysteries we should remēbre
the dead. For they do know that it shall much auaile them.
For when al the people stādeth with their hādes stretched forthe,
and the number of priestes, whē the dreadfull sacrifice is
proposed, howe maye it be but that we shall obtaine of God,
praiyng for thē? Now Sir. S. Chrisostō telleth vs it is a
decree of the Apostles to pray for the dead, which decree
being not expressed in scripture is called a tradition.
And S. Paul biddeth vs kepe such traditions. ergo
we haue cōmaundement in Scripture to praie for the
dead beside the place of the Machabees.
               Iac. 5.
            
            Againe are we not commaunded in scripture to
praie one for an other? Howe farre doth this commaundement
extende? doth it not reache to all those
whose sinnes are remissible, who are in the state to
haue their sinnes forgeuen? What then if scripture tel
vs that after this life some sinnes are forgeuen? Ought
we not then praie for our brethern departed this life,
and burdned yet with such sinnes? Let vs harken
what our Sauiour saieth in the ghospell.Matth. 12. 
               Whosoeuer,
saieth our Sauiour, shall speàke against the holy Ghoste, it
shall not be forgeuen him neither in this worlde neither in the
worlde to come. Other sinnes then of lesse offence and
importaunce, though they be not here forgeuē, yet in
the worlde to come they may be pardoned and released.Apocal. 21.
What place that is, let your wisedome instruct vs,
M. Grindall. In hel you knowe, nulla est redēptio, there

is no redemption: and in to heauen nihil coinquinatum
intrabit: no defiled or spotted thinge shall enter. How
saie we then? Scripture commaunding vs to praie one
for an other, and that praier extending to all suche
as are in the state to haue their sinnes forgeuē, such a
state also being proued by scripture to be in the world
to come, which cā not be but of such as haue departed
this world, haue we not againe foūde in scripture a cō
               maundement
to pray for the deade, and departed soules
of this worlde beside the place of the Machabees?
            What will you replie M. Grindall, or what can you
obiect against these arguments? The principle of S.
Paul, bidding vs to kepe vnwriten traditiōs, if you limit
and restraine it neuer so much, yet must you nedes
suffer it to extende to suche traditions, as the Apostles
them selues left vnto vs. You will not, I dare
saie, prescribe against the Apostles. And that the Apostles
decreed praier to be done at the Masse time, for
the dead, you heare Chrisostom saie and affirme. Will
you discredit S. Chrisostom? Will you as Brentius youre
mate saied of Epiphanius (affirming that the ApostlesIn prolegoments.
had deliuered and taught that the vowe of virginite
could not be broken) Iudico eum tam bonum tam pium
virum vt hac asseueratione non voluerit Ecclesiam Domini
scienter fallere, sed cum non fuerit admodum vicinus temporibus
Apostolorum, cogito multa ad eum publica sed incerta
fama, nomine Apostolorum relata esse, quae fortassis alijde
Apostolis vt plausibi
                     •
                  ior a essent cōfinxerunt, so saie also of
Chrisostom, that you iudge Chrisostom, in dede so good and

                     ••
                  tuous a man, that he woulde not wittingly beguile the

church of God with so stoute an asseueration, and yet bicause
he was not very nigh the Apostles, you imagin that he
might haue hearde many thinges by reporte, as frō the Apostles,
which other perhaps to make such matters more plausible,
had fained that they came euē frō the Apostles. Will you
thus, I saie, as your mate Brentius did, delude the authorite
of Chrisostom? Truly other shift you haue none.
And thē we may aske you, whether you were nerer
to the Apostles and more assured what doctrine
they lefte behind them, then Chrisostom was. There is
no lesse, you knowe, then twelue hundred yeares betwene
you and Chrisostom. And yet not only Brentius,
but your selfe, and all such as with you haue departed
from the Catholike doctrine of Christes churche,
do stoutely affirme that the Apostles neuer praied
for the dead, nor neuer decreed any such matter.In his institutions the 18. chapter.
Nowe then let the Christen Reader iudge who is herein
more to be trusted, Chrisostom or you. and iff one
Chrisostom fuffise not, let S. Augustin, a most trusty witnes
(by the verdit of Iohn Caluin, whose iudgemēt you
will not, I suppose, discredit) of antiquite in the doctrine
of the churche, come and affirme as muche. Who writing
to Paulinus of praieng for the dead. saieth.Lib. de cu
                  
                     •
                  a pro mor 
                     •
                  uisgerenda cap. 5. 
               Allbeit
it were not read in the olde scriptures, yet the authorite off
the vniuersall church is not small, which in this custome is euident.
VVhere in the praier of the priestes which are offred
to our Lorde God at his aultar, the commendation of the dead
hath his place. Io here S. Augustin calleth it a custome
of the vniuersail churche to praie for the dead at
the aultar of God.Lib. de vnita
                     •
                  e Eccles. And vninersall is that, by the meaning

of S. Augustin which euery where, and at all times
is and hath ben: which in all places euen from
the Apostles them selues hath ben obserued. Epiphanius
also coufuting Aerius affirmeth it to be a tradition
of the Apostles to pray for the dead.Her. 75. Thus much
then of the first parte of your first reason M. Grindall
that we haue no commaundement in Scripture
to praie for the dead, but the place of the Machabees.
            Nowe Sir as touching the second parte, that you
saie the same place of the Machabees is not in the
Canon of the Scriptures, I maruail not much hereat,
considering of what race youre doctrine procedeth.
For as you haue lerned of the olde heretike Aerius
condemned aboue twelue hundred yeares past,The custome of heretikes to denie partes of Scripture. to disproue
praier for the dead, so haue you lerned off a
numbre of olde heretikes, to denie for scripture suche
places as ouerthrow your heresy. For euen so did the
Marcionistes allowe but 9. of S. Paules epistles,Tertul. li. 4 contra Marcionem. Contra Fan
                  
                     ••
                  um Manich. vbi
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   & in haer 46. ad Quo auult Haeres. 76. Cap. 17. whereas
the church alloweth. 14. So did the Manichees
take awaie the first chapter of S. Mathewes ghospell,
and reiected allmost all the olde Testament, as S. Augustin
witnesseth. So the Arrians disallowed the epistle
of S. Paul to the hebrewes, as Theodoret recordeth
in the prohem of his commentary vpon that epistle.
So Aetius also denied much of the olde Testament,
as Epiphanius mencioneth of him. Briefly it was the
manner of all heretikes so to do, as Tertullian in his
prescriptiōs noteth. Therefore as I saied, I maruail the
lesse at your demeanour herein, considering that it is

no new thing for an heretike to denie scripture it self,
whē al other shiftes faile. What thē M. Grindal? Must
we proue vnto you that the bookes of the Maechabees
are in the canō of the Scriptures? O the blessed daies
of our time, wherein not only al the articles almost of
our belefe, but the Scriptures thē selues also are called
in cōtrouersy, and that of such mē, as beare the persōs
of Prelats and rulers in Christes church. What authorites
thē may be sufficient to proue that those bookes
are of the Canō? You bring against vs S. Hierō. you tel
vs he saieth that these bookes of Machabees be not sufficiēt
of them selues to establish any doctrines in the
church of God. You quote vs his preface vpō the boo
kes of Salomon. Sir if you reade the place againe, and
marke it wel. you shal finde that he saieth this of the
Prouerbes of Salomō and of the Ecclesiastes, not of the
Machabees. though in dede he saie in that place, that
they are not of the Canon. And this saying of S. Hierō
in that place, I may wel expoūd by his wordes in an other
place. In his preface vpō these bookes of the Machabees
he saieth expressely, that they are not in the Canō
of the Iewes, but of the church of Christ they are
receiued inter diuina volumina, amōg Gods bookes.
But what if S. Hierō
                do not acknowledg them for Canonicall
scripture? What if in reakoning off the Canonicall
Scripture,Vide Me
                     •
                  
                  chiorem canumia locis theolog. lib. 2. he folow the Hebrewes and Iosephus
especially, as lerned men haue noted of him?
What if in his time they were not with full authorite
receiued? The whole corps off scripture was not,
you know, at one push approued. It was longe doubted

of the epistle to the Hebrewes, off the second epistle
of S Peter, of S. Iohns Reuelation, and yet afterward
without doubte and controuersy they were
in all Christendom receiued and reuerenced for
holy Scripture Shall it nowe be lawfull for euery heretike
to condemne such parcells of holy Scripture,
as haue ben so many hundred yeares of all Christendom
vniformely receiued bicause they were ones
doubted of? It is not sitting for the wisedome of a Prelat,
it stādeth not with the Charite of a Christen mā,
to renew suche doubtes, and to make a schisme in the
church of God vpon priuat presumption and affectiō.
            But to matche the authorite of S. Hierom,
               The Machabees proued to be of the Canon. (whom
only you alleage) and to knitt vp this matter shortly,
you shall see what we can saie for the bookes of the
Machabees. The, 85. canons of the Apostles, allowed
for such by the generall Councell helde at Constantinople
in T
                     •
                  ullo,
               Cā. vltima. in reakoning vp the bookes of Canonicall
scripture, recite the thre bookes of the Machabees
amonge them. The third Councell of Carthage
helde not longe after the time that S. Hierom
liued,Can. 47. reakoneth them vp also for Canonicall Scripture.Lib. 6. E
                     •
                  y molog. c. 1.
               Isidorus declareth also that in his time they were
vndoubtedly approued for holy Scripture. S. Augustin
is most clere in this point: for not onely in his
bookes de doctrina Christiana,
               Lib. 2. c. 5, where of sette purpose
he reakoneth the whole corps of the olde and new
Testament,Lib. 18. cap. 30. he placeth these bookes of the Machabees
amonge them: but also in his bookes de ciuitate dei
he doth constantly affirme, that they are approued of

the Church for holy Scripture. And beholde a most
clere testimony of S. Augustins iudgement herein.
A sorte of Donatistes called Circuncelliones, murdered
and s
                  •
               ewe them selues commonly being persecuted
for their heresy of the Catholikes. they defended this
their diuelish fury and rage, with the example of Razias
who slew him selfe as in the Machabees it appeareth.
They builded vpon this fact of Razias, as vpon
an example of holy Scripture. What aunswered them
here S. Augustin? It had ben truly a ready answer for
him to saye, those bookes are not of the Canon off
holy Scripture, and therefore the example of him can
nothing helpe you, if he had so thought in dede off
these bookes. But S. Augustin denieth them not to be
of the Canon, as you do M. Grindall, for the maintenaunce
of your heresy, though it had ben much
then for his vauntage, and might soone so haue stopped
the heretikes mouth, if he had thought it the duty
of a Catholike bishop, to flit from scripture when
vauntage serued. His obedience to the Church off
God, his lerning and vertu taught him to cleaue vnto
the Church in determining holy Scripture, and to
seke other meanes to awnswer heretikes. Therefore
notwithstanding the facte of Razias, who semeth in
that booke to be commended for killing him selfe,
he acknowledgeth the bookes for Canonicall Scriptures,
and teacheth vs also how such examples in
holy Scripture are to be read. These are his wordes.
Landatus est itaque iste Razias amator ciuitatis, vt valde
bene audiens, &c?
               Contra 2. Gaud. epist cap. 23. 
               I stam vero eius mortem mirabiliorem quā
                  
quā prudentiorem narrauit quemadmodum facta esset,
               1. Thes. 5. 
               non
tanquam facienda esset scriptura laudauit. Nostrum est
autem sicut Apostolus admonet, omnia probare, quod bonum
est tenere. Et hanc quidem scripturam que appellatur Machabaeorum
non habent Iudaei sicut legem, & Prophetas &
psalmos: sed recepta est ab Ecclesia non inutiliter, si sobrie legatur
vel audiatur. that is. Razias therefore was praised
as one that tendred the cyte, and a man of a very good name
&c. But his deathe more straunge and wonderfull then wise
and discret is declared of the scripture howe it was done, not
commended as if it ought so to be done. But it is our parte as
the Apostle teacheth vs, to proue and trie all thinges and to
holde that good is. And this Scripture which is called the
Machabees, the Iewes in dede receiue not, as the lawe, the
prophets, and the psalmes. But it is receaued of the church not
vnprofitably, if it be read and heard with discretion. Thus
farre S. Augustin. In whose Wordes you see M. Grindall
that not only he acknowledgeth the bookes off
the Machabees for Scripture, and that receiued off the
Church, but also he telleth vs how Razias is commended
in these bookes: not (as you obiect in your
Sermon) bicause he killed him selfe, but bicause he
was amator ciuitatis &c.
            
            Howe thinke you?Cap. 16. Cap. 19. Cap. 38. shall we condemne the bookes
of the Iudges bicause we reade there of Sampson, that
he killed him selfe? or the Genesis bicause we reade
there of Lot that he laie with his daughters, and off
Iudas that he compained (as he thought) with a
hoore by the high waie? shall we not rather reuerence
the holy Scripture, and saie with S. Augustin, that

Scripture declareth these thinges howe they were done, not
commending them as if they ought to be done?
            
            As for your other sory shift, where you gesse that
the place of the Machabees commēding praier for the
dead, hath ben put to the text by some addition of late
yeares, bicause you saie certain of the oldest copies
in greke haue no mention thereof, I answer, to charge
the Church withe any such addition, hauing no
proufe thereof,August. cō
                  tra Faust. Manic
                     •
                  . as yet you bringe none, is the maner
of olde heretikes, the Manichees by name, who saied
also the genealogie in S. Matthew was added to his
ghospell by some they knew not who. And as for
greke copies that lacke that place of praieng for the
dead, if you haue sene any such M. Grindall, you may
rather thinke they are corrupted of some olde or new
Aerians, heretikes, as you haue heard, in that point,
then to doubte of the common receiued text of holy
Scripture. els what heresy is there that may not escape
by this shift, if it may be lawfull vpon variete off
copies (which may rise of sundry causes, as well the
printed as the writen) to call in doubt the authorite
of holy scripture, which ought without all doubt being
ones vniuersally authorised, assuredly and constantly
be beleued and folowed? And thus much to
the reasons and arguments brought against the bookes
of Machabees.
            You go forthe M. Grindall and you saie.Praier for the dead ought to be vsed, thoughe no Scripture commaunded it. 
               Secondarely
we haue no example in the Canonicall Scripture of any
inuocation for the dead: What then M. Grindall, if that
were true as we haue proued it already false? will you

therefore condemne the practise of the vniuersall
Church, which is clere and euident in this point?
What example in Canonicall scripture haue you off
celebrating the Sonday holy daie? Will you therefore
driue men to their craftes that daie with the Sabbataries,
a secte of the Anabaptistes of oure time?See the Apologie in the leafe. 113. what example
of Canonicall scripture haue you of inuocation
of the holy Ghost? Will you therefore (as that protestant
Minister of Morauia preached) rather be a papist,
then beleue in the holy Ghoste? What example
haue you in Canonicall Scripture of baptising infants
before the yeares of discretion? Will you therefore
with the Anabaptistes baptise no children hereafter
in the Realme, and call vs all to the fonte againe?
And did not thinke you the Anabaptiste laugh in
his sleue, when he heard you make youre reasons in
pulpit, vpon lacke of example of Canonicall scripture?
Especially when you concluded afterward so stoutely
and solemnely. For most certain it is, if praier for the
dead had ben so necessarie, as many now adaies woulde haue
it seme, it had not lacked all authorite and example of the Canonicall
Scriptures as it doth. Surely M. Grindal you can
neuer speake better worde for heretikes, then graunting
them this your proposition, that without example
and authorite of Canonicall scripture nothing is
to be admitted. And yet this one sentence is the grounde
and foundation of all your newe doctrine? For
why? May not the Anabaptiste saie vnto you, iff yow
hadde him in consistory before you? Most certain it
is my L. if baptising of infants and babes were so necessary,

as you would haue it seme, it had not lacked
all authorite and example of the Canonicall Scriptures,
as it doth? And could you then repell him for so
saying, seing you preache it in pulpit, and make it
your strongest argument to ouerthrow praier for the
dead? Againe might not Nestorius haue tolde Cyrillus
and all the fathers of the Ephesin Councell, We haue
no example in the Canonicall scripture, that Our
Lady is called the Mother of God. And certain it is, if
it were so necessary a matter to haue her so called, and
beleued for such, as you will haue it seme, pronouncing
me an heretike for denying it, and assembling
your selues so from al partes of the worlde for approuing
and defending it, it had not lacked all authorite
and example of Canonicall Scriptures, as it dothe,
might he not, I saie, thus haue tolde them, as you M.
Grindall do tell vs, if that argument had ben thought
worth the telling? Might not Arrius haue quarelled
in like maner with the fathers of the Nicen Councel
for the wordes, Consubstantiall and ingenitus, might not
Heluidius haue vsed the like againste S. Hierom for
the perpetuall virginite of our Lady, and Nouatus
with S. Cyprian for reconciling of such as had abiured
Christ? For none of al these had any authorite or
exāple in the Canonical Scriptures. And yet M. Grin
dall the Anabaptistes, the Nestorians, the Arrians, the
Nouatians, the Heluidians, be all condēned heretikes,
euen by your owne iudgement, I doubt not, though
the Catholike doctrine in confuting of al those heresies,
lacke all authorite and example of the Canonicall

Scriptures. Where is then nowe become your argument
against vs for lacke of Scripture, supposing it
were true, we did so lacke? Where is nowe that stoute
and great assertion, Most certain it is, & cae. But to ouerthrow
with one worde this forte and shooteancker
of all your pretended religion, tell vs I praie yow,
if without authorite and example of Canonicall scri
pture yow admit nothing, where finde you in all the
corps of the Canonical Scripture from the beginning
of the Genesis to the ende of S. Iohns Reuelatiō, this
very rule and sayinge of yours, that If it were a necessary
matter to praie for the dead, it had not lacked all authorite
and example of the Canonicall Scriptures? Where finde
you in Scriptures, that without Scripture nothing is
to be admitted? wil you driue vs for lacke of holy scripture
to praye no more for the dead, and binde vs to
your owne rule hauing the same lacke also? Will you
make a rule of your selfe withoute Scripture, and will
not admitt the rules and lawes of the church, except
they bring you example and authorite out of scripture?
I trust your wisedom considereth how vnreasonable
the request is. and I doubt not but the Christē reader
wil by this cōsideration, beware off such deceitful
persuasions, whereby great part of our faith in Christ
Iesus may by the guile of heretikes be deluded.
            To passe therefore to your other reasons, let vs
cōsider the remnant of your talke. Thirdly (saie you)
where in the olde Testament be Sacrifices and expiations appointed
for many and sundry thinges, whereoff some semed
small offenses, yet was there neuer any Sacrifices appointed

for any purgation or expiation of the dead. What if there
were any such sacrifices for the dead in the olde lawe,
would you thē nowe practise thē M. Grindal, in your
cōmon praier and seruice of the church?Leuit. 4. 6. & 7. If you woulde,
why vse you no sacrifice for the sinnes and trespasses
of the quicke, as you see in the olde lawe practised
abundantly?Exod. 12. & 16. Leui. 16. Why reiect you the blessed Sacrifice
of the Masse clerely figured and foreshowed in the
ceremonies of the olde lawe? Why leaue you the Realme
without any sacrifice at all, as well after the order
of Melchisedech whiche, you knowe, was proper
to Christ,Psal. 109. Heb. 7. and shoulde endure for euer amonge Christians,
as after the order of Aaron which was proper
to the olde lawe and shoulde ende, when the light off
the ghospell appeared? If you woulde not vse any Sacrifice
for the dead, though in the olde lawe you hadde
foūde example thereof (as it is moste euident you
woulde not, no more then you vse the other) why
then finde you that lacke, and refuse to offer sacrifices
for the dead, bicause you haue no example in the
olde lawe? Do not wise men see youre collusion and
false plaie herein? I will not spend time and paper in
amplifying youre guile. I leaue it to the prudent Reader
to be cōsidered. I come to your other reasons that
I may ones returne to my principall purpose againe.
You saie.
            
               Nowe if they shall alleage, that the auncient doctours
make for them, first it is to be saied that mens writinges alone
are not sufficient in matters of faith and Religion. I answer
we haue not only mens writinges, but holy scripture

euen beside the Machabees, as we haue sufficiently
proued. Againe, make you so light of mens writinges?
what are Caluin, Beza, Bale, and such other, whose writinges
you reuerence and reade? are they not men also?
why commaunde you the priestes of England to
reade the Institutions of Caluin? why in your notes
vpon the Bible referre you vs to baudy Bale for the
right vnderstanding of it?In the 16. chap. off the Apocal
                     •
                   and other vvhere. laste of all why make you
so vaunting a chalēge against al the Catholikes that
liue, and offer to yelde, if they can bringe but one
poore sentence of any one doctour or Councell against
you? As touching the writings of men, we knowe
that Animalis homo non percipit ea que dei sunt,
               The vvritings off mē in the church to befolovved. 1. Cor. 2. Deute. 32. the
fleshly mā knoweth not those thinges that appertaine
to God. Yet we are bidde in holy Scripture Interrog
are patres nostros &c, To aske our fathers and they will
declare vs, to enquire of our elders and they shall tell vs. And
S. Peter sayth, Spiritu sācto inspirato locuti sunt sancti Dei
homines: The holy men of God haue spoken as inspired with
the holy Ghost.
               2. Pet. 1. Neither can we forgett that beside the
prophets, the Euangelistes, and the Apostles, of whom
we haue receaued the holy write of Gods worde,Ephesi. 4.
Christ hath left to his Church also, Pastores & doctores,
Pastours and doctours, as mē by whom the Scripture
ought to be expounded and the church directed.
And according to these lessons of holy Scripture, heretikes
haue ben confuted by mens writinges without
holy Scripture, as in the conflictes ofIn lib. de decretis Nic. Cō. 
               Athanasius
with the Arrians, ofIn apolo gi
                     •
                   post 8 
                     ••
                  athem 
               Cirillus with the Nestorians,
ofIn 
                     •
                  uliā. libro 2. S Augustin with the Pelagians, ofIn lib. cō
                  tra valentin. 
               Tertu
                     •
                  lian, and

               lib. 4. ca. 43. 
               Irenee with the Valentinians, ofep. 60. et 69. S. Basill with Eunomius
you may reade and see M. Grindall if you haue
not yet sene. But let vs passe on and see what you saie
farder.
            
               It can not be denied but from Gregories time &. But the
eldest writers and doctours of the Church speake not at all of
praying for the dead. wel then M. Grindall att one push
you condēne all the Christē people of England that
euer hath ben, of errour and superstion. For sence the
time of S. Gregory only, you knowe, we englishmen
haue had the faith of Christ, and of that blessed Pope
we receiued it. But let that passe: your stomach is
good that cā digest so many hundred yeares without
grudge of conscience. The eldest writers saie you, speake
not at all of praying for dead. Not at all M. Grindall? will
you abide by it? Before so honourable an auditory, at
such a solemne funerall, in so open and publick a place,
blushe you not at so lowde a lie? I am sory you did
so farre forget your self. You spake then in pulpit, and
now you speake in print. These two conditions require
deliberatiō, truthe, and honesty. And how shall
I proue you the contrary? where shal I beginne? I showed
yow before out of S. Augustin and Epiphanius
that Aerius was condemned for an heretike, euen for
this cause that he disallowed praier and oblation for
the dead. Be not Augustin and Epiphanius elder then
S. Gregory? Your frēdes Cariō and Pantaleon can tell
you they are his auncetours, the one aboue a hundred,
the other allmost two hundred yeares. But
these wordes may seme to haue escaped you (though

if they had in pulpit escaped, yet in print they might
haue ben corrected) for euen in your wordes folowing,
you remembre your selfe better, and then you
runne to your distinctions, and you saie. If the aūcient
fathers when they praie for the dead, meane of the dead,
which are already in heauen and not els where, then must we
nedes by their praier vnderstande either thankes geuing, or
ells take such petitions for the dead for figures of eloquence
and exornation of their stile and oration, rather then necessary
groundes of reason of any doctrine.
            
            Howe can you suppose M. Grindall any such meaning
in the olde fathers,The meaning of the fathers praiyng for the dead, imagined by M. Grindall: vaine and foolish. as though they were either
of so litle wisedome, as to praie for those that neded
no praier, or of so smal faith as to doubt of their reste
and perfit blisse which are already in heauen? Let vs
cōsider your maner of reasoning. It is manifest saie you,
that those holy fathers ment nothing lesse then by praying
for the dead to establish purgatorie or third place. This
you suppose as manifest, without any proufe at all,
which you ought well and substātially to haue proued.
For hereupon depend your distinctions that folow.
But how better and trulyer saie we M. Grindall,
it is manifest that those holy fathers, seing they praied
for the dead, that they ment vndoubtedly there
was a purgatory or third place? You suppose they prayed
only for such as were already in heauen, and herupon
you make your distinctions. But as your supposition
is a point of sophistry called petitio principij,
and beside all reason and truthe, so are your imagined
distinctiōs vaine and foolish. Wil you haue clere and

euident proufes that the fathers praiyng for the dead
meaned nothing so, and that your suppositiō is voide
of all truthe? Or will you be contented hereafter
that praier for the dead be solemnised in your churches,
if we proue vnto you, the practise of the eldest
fathers to haue ben such? S. Denys you reiect for an
awncient writer, bicause of the iudgmēt of Erasmus.
Let vs geue you leaue to reiect him, whom the sixtgenerall
councell and second of Nice alleageth for
awncient, euen for Denys the Areopagita S. Paules
scholer. Whom thē may we alleage to testifie against
you, of such authorite, that you will be contented to
rest vpō him? Your olde frēd and Master Ihon Caluin
calleth oftentimes S. Augustin in dogmatibus ecclesiae fidelissimum
vetustatis interpretem, the faith fullest reporter
of antiquite in doctrines of the church. Let vs thē see what
S Augustin reporteth of praying for the dead and of
the meaning of the church therein.De. 8. Dulcitij quaest. quest. 2. Awnswering to
the questions of Dulcitius demaunding amōge other
thinges howe the soules departed were relieued by
the praiers of the church, after lōge debating the matter,
he concludeth in these wordes. Cum ergo sacrificia
siue altaris siue quarūcūque eleemosynarū pro baptisatis defunctis
omnibus offeruntur, pro valde bonis gratiarū actiones
sunt, pro non valde malis propitiationes sunt, pro valde
malis etiam si nulla sunt adiumenta mortuorum, qualescunque
viuorum consolationes sunt. that is, Therefore when
the sacrifices either of the aultar, or of any aulmes geuinge
are offred for all Christen folcke departed this life, for the
perfit and very good they are thankes geuinges, for meane euill,

though they are no reliefe to the dead,
               they are propitiatory: for the vvicked and very euill, though they. &c. as in the next. 
               yet they are certayn
comfortes for the frendes that liue. Thus farre S. Augustin.
In these wordes M. Grindall we lerne the meaning
of the fathers prayng and offering sacrifices for
the dead, not to be allwaies thankes geuings or figures
of eloquence, as yow woulde haue them meane,
but to be thē only thanckes geuinges, when they
are offred for such as haue departed this worlde in a
perfit estate, and vprightnes of life. For other departing
as sinners but not extreme hainous, and wicked,
they are, he saieth, Propitiationes, propitiatory sacrifices,
that is, such as purchase fauour and mercy at Gods
hande. The third sorte of men though Christned,
yet being Valde mali, that is, so euill that they die without
true repentaunce, they auaile not at al. We knowe
well M. Grindall youre doctrine beinge builded
vppon onely faith, admitteth not these distinctions
of the estates of men. But the Catholike churche
which condemned your heresy of onely faith in Eunomius
and Aerius aboue twelue hundred yeares past,
as you heard before, acknowledgeth them and teacheth
them. By the which distinctions also we lerne
the meaning of the church praying and offering sacrifices
for the dead.
            As for the figures of eloquence Master Grindall,
which you imagin the fathers vsed praying for the
dead, is a figure of your owne called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . and in
latin is called Mendacium, we english men terme it, a
lye. But you saie, yow can showe by examples that
the fathers so meaned. Let vs heare and cōsider what

they are. You saie.
            
               But I will make this matter more plaine by an example
or twaine, & caete. And then you bringe the wordes
of S. Ambrose affirming first, Theodosium frui luce perpetua,
tranquillitate diuturna, & pro ijs quae in hoc gessit
corpore muner ationis diuinae fructibus gratulari: to enoiye
perpetuall light: and continuall quietnesse, and for those thinges
that he did in this body to reioyse in the fruition of Gods
rewarde: and yet afterward praying for him in these
wordes. Domine da requiem perfecto seruo tuo Theodosio,
requiem quam parasti sanctis tuis. Lorde geue rest to thy
perfect seruaunt Theodosius, the reast, I meane, which thou
hast prepared for thy Saints. In the first wordes, say you,
he pronounceth plainly that Theodosius was vndoubtedly
saued, and in the later he praieth for him, vsing
a figure of eloquence and vehemency of affection.
Here ones again M. Grindall you turne the cat in to
the panne, and reason tout au rebours as the frenche
prouerb goeth, euen as you did before: for as then
you woulde ouerthrowe praier for the dead, bicause
you supposed there was no third place, whereas the
third place must nedes therefore be, bicause the churche
praieth for the dead, so nowe the praying off S.
Ambrose for Theodosius, you call a figure off eloquence
and vehemencie of affection, but his wordes commending
Theodosius you call a certain persuasion,
and plaine pronouncing of his vndoubted saluation:
whereas in dede the wordes of S. Ambrose commending
Theodosius procede of a vehement affection,
and loue towardes that Emperour (for how coulde

he be assured in dede of his blessed state, semed he
neuer so perfitt in his life, without some speciall reuelation
from allmighty God, which yet M. Grindall,
I dare saie, you will not saie he had) but his praier
for the Emperour was the vsuall practise of the
church, vsed at all funerals in all ages sence Christen
religion began.
            Againe these wordes of S. Ambrose pronouncing
Theodosius to enioy the perpetuall light and continual quietnesse
& cae. may well be a figure of eloquence of Amplification
and exclamation, but the praying for him, tel
vs I praye you M. Grindall, in what figure of Rhetorike
you will put it.
            Farder if that saying of S. Ambrose. Domin
                     •
                   da requiem
perfecto seruo tuo Theodosio, & cae. Lorde geue rest to
thy perfect seruaunt Theodosius, & cae. be a figure of eloquence,
vsed in that solemne funerall of that mighty,
and vertuous Emperour Theodosius, howe wel might
it haue becomed you also M. Grindal, occupying the
place of a Bishop, as that blessed Doctor S. Ambrose
then was, and preaching at the funerall solemnite of
that most highe, mighty and vertuous Emperoure
Ferdinandus: as he did of Theodosius, to haue saied also
Da requiem Domine perfecto seruo tuo Ferdinando, Lorde
geue rest to thy perfect seruaunt Ferdinandus? Feared
you, that if yow had so saied, yow shoulde haue
ben thought to haue praied for Ferdinandus, and
when S. Ambrose saieth so, wil you not haue vs thinke
that he praied for Theodosius? Might not you ha
               
                  •
               e
vsed it for a figure of eloquence and so haue folowed

the maner of the olde fathers, as you would seme
to do in all your doinges, if that maner of speaking
were but a figure of eloquēce, as you saie it was
no more.
            Againe what difference is it M. Grindall to saie.
Lorde geue reast to thy seruaunt, and to saie, Lorde
haue mercy vppon the soule of thy seruaunt? For
to the departed out of this worlde no other rest can
be geuen but to his soule: iff his be so, why are they
called papistes, which vse so to speake, and yet S. Ambrose
so speaking is no papist?
            But what stande we so longe hereuppon? I wil aske
one question, and so passe to your allegation off
Chrisostom. Faustina a vertuous woman lamented
much the death of her Sister. S. Ambrose writeth vnto
her,Epist. 8. and saieth. Non tam deplorandam quam prosequendam
orationibus reor: nec moestificandam lachrymis
tuis, sed magis oblationibus animam eius Deo commendandam
arbitror. That is. My aduise is, that you lament not
your sister, but praie for her, and commend rather her soule,
to God with oblations, then mone and morne it with teares.
I aske here. Did S. Ambrose will Faustina to leaue
her lamenting, and fall to figures of eloquence, and
so to vtter her vehement affection to her sister? doeth
your wisedome iudge so Master Grindall? Or
do not rather all wise men see, howe farre from all
witt and wisedome this shift of youres is?
            Well; though perhaps ye spake but merely here, yet
you haue a sadde testimony out of Chrisostō. For he
offreth the sacrifice of the masse euen for the Pariarches,

prophets, Apostles, yea and the blessed virgin also▪
what if he do so M. Grindall? Mary saie you, shall
we now gather hereof that these are in purgatory? It is to
greate an absurdite. I graunte it is so. What then wil you
gather hereof M. Grindall? This oblation therefore, saie
you, is only a thankes geuing to God for the Saints of God
departed. Will you gather so M. Grindall? that is to
greate an absurdite. Haue ye not heard S. Augustin saie,
that the sacrifice of the aultar is for some a thankes
geuing, for other a propitiatiō? This your cōclusiō
of only thākes geuing in the oblatiō of the church
is much like to your concluding of only faith. The
scripture saith Iustus ex fide viuit,
               Abacu
                     •
                  . 2. the iuste mā liueth
by his faith. LO say you, faith only iustifieth; and you
forget it is writē againe,Rom. 1. 
               Factores legis iustificabūtur, the
perfourmers of the lawe shall beiustified, whereby it
is clerely proued that good workes must cōcurre with
faith. Euen so nowe you forgett that although Chrisostom
here offer vp the oblation for the Saints, as in
thākes geuing to God for thē, yet that in the same liturgie
in the next petitiō after he maketh an other especiall
praier for the dead, saying. Sancti Iohannis Baptistae,
prophetae & praecursoris, sanctorū & nominatissimorū
Apostolorū & sancti huius cuius memoriā agimus, & omniū
sanctorū supplicationibus, visita nos deus, & memor esto ō
                  niū
in domino dormientiū in spe resurrectionis vitae aeternae,
a
                     •
                   requiē presta eis, &c. that is. By the supplicatiōs of S. Iohn
baptist, the prophet, and precursor of the holy and most renouned
Apostles, and of this Sainct whose memory we kepe
this daye, visit vs good Lorde, and remēbre al those that slepe

in our Lorde in the hope of resurrection to life euerlasting
and graunt them rest & cae. this lo M. Grindall you forget,
and conclude very absurdely that the oblation is
only a thankes geuing. But let vs now againe haue a
recours to S. Augustin, the faith fullest reporter of antiquite
in the doctrines of the Church, by the verdit
of Caluin him selfe, and let vs lerne of him how, and
in what sence the Church vsed the memory of saints
in the blessed sacrifice of the Masse, and whether that
sacrifice be only a thākes geuing, as you conclude M.
Grindal. These are the wordes of that lerned and holy
father.
            
               Habet ecclesiastica disciplina,
               De verbis Apost. serm 17. 
               quod fideles nouerunt, cum
martyres eo loco recitantur ad altare dei, vbi non pro ipsis oretur,
pro caeteris autem commemoratis defunctis oretur. Iniuria
est enim pro Martyre orare, cuius nos debemus orationibus
commendari, that is. The doctrine of the Church
hath, which the faithfull do knowe, when the Martyrs are
in that place reakoned vp at the aultar of God, where
they are not praied for, but the other soules departed there reakoned
vp are praied for. For it is an iniury to praie for a
Martyr by whose praiers we ought to be our selues commē
                  ded.
In these wordes of S. Augustin we lerne M. Grindall
that the martyrs are not praied for, though they
be named at the aultar, as you heard in Chrisostom
the Patriarches, Prophets and Apostles named. We lerne
that other soules departed, not Martyrs, are praied
for. Laste of al we lerne that the martyrs praie for vs,
we praie not for them. Where is now your imagined
s
                  •
               pposition M. Grindall, that the eldest fathers praiyng

for the dead meaned such dead as were already in
heauē? S. Austen denieth that the church praieth for
thē, he saieth the doctrine of the church hath otherwise
taught, and that the faithful knowe it. Yf you be
of the church M. Grindall, if you be of such a faith as
was in S. Augustins time, you knowe that Martyrs
were not praied for: you knowe that other soules
departed were praied for. Last of all you know that
the Martyrs praied for vs. But you denie al these matters,
you mocke and scoffe at it, and therefore you are
not instructed in the doctrine of the church, you are
not of such faith as was in S. Augustins time. To cō
               clude,
you holde with the heretike Aerius cōdemned
for an heretike a hūdred yeares afore S. Augustin flourished.
And yet you were not afeared to abuse the honourable
Nobilite assisting at that Funeral solēnite,
nor ashamed to preache in pulpit for the very pure
worde of God, an old cursed heresy. I beseche God to
lightē the hartes of our most gracious Souuerain and
Lady the Quenes Maiestie, and of the most honourable
Nobilite of her realme, that they may see, auoide
and exterminat this cācred vermin of heresy, corrupting
no lesse the tēporal welth and prosperous estate
of our dere coūtre, then the spirituall hope of our saluatiō,
and al right faith in Christ Iesus. I haue aūswered
al such reasons as you haue brought in your sermō
M. Grindal against praier for the dead. I haue done in
part my duty to the church of God, as my vocatiō required.
I haue declared my good will to my dere coū
               tre,
as nature and iust indignatiō moued mē. I haue

done this but slightly and shortly, and yet I trust sufficiētly,
hauing first ētred the printing of this booke,
before I vnderstode of the sermon, and yet desirous
to saie somewhat, rather then to suffer a preached and
printed heresy vncōptrolled, or the truthe vntolde.
I desire the catholike reader, to take this short digression
in good part, and I wish the protestāt rather to
marke the waight, then the copie of that I haue saied.
Let vs then now returne to the olde cōdemned here
sies, renewed by Luther, and folowed of al protestāts
of our vnhappy time.
            Luther with all his scholers contemne fasting daies
ordained by the church, abusing Christen liberte
for a cloke of their fleshly fantasie. They haue herein
right auncient Fathers, the Manichees, asEpi. 93. cap. 4. 
               Leo witnesseth.
Aerius asHaer. 75. 
               Ephiphanius, andLib. 30. cap. 3. cō
                  tra Faustū Mā. 
               S. Augustin
write, and Eustathius, as theIn praefat. Councell of Gangra aboue
thirten hundred yeares past recordeth.
            They wedde freres and Nūnes, Luther leading the
daunce of that wanton trace, with Kater. Bore,Lib. 1. c. 7. de peccat. merit
                     •
                  s & remissione. and
breake vowes of chastite without scruple of consciē
               ce,
folowing the stepps of their father Iouinian,
condemned therefore for an heretike as S. Augustin
recordeth.
            They throwe downe Martyrs towmes, scoffe at
the deuout visiting of thē, inueigh and raile against
pilgrimage, holy reliques, and places of deuotion.
Nothing truly was in the primitiue church more frequent
then going on pilgrimage:Homil. 5. in 
                     •
                  . Iob. 
                     •
                  ome. 1. in so muche that
Chrisostom crieth out in one place. Iff I were of a

stronge body and without ecclesiasticall charge, I woulde
not refuse so longe a pilgrimage, as to go see onely the chaines
wherewith, and the prison wherein Paull was bounde. Iff
I had liued then to haue sene those holy handes bounde for
our Lordes sake, I would haue put my very eyes on them,
and continually haue kissed them. Thus speaketh Chrisostom
an auncient and lerned father of the Catholike
church, and Bishopp of the greate cyte of Constantinople,
and thinketh it no superstition to preache
it to the people: for these wordes he spake in pulpit.
But what fathers haue the protestāts in their cō
               trary
opinion. Of whom lerned they to mocke, and
scoffe at suche deuotions? Of right worthy masters,
I warrant you. First (beside the Pagans of whom The
odoret maketh mencion) of Iuliā
                the Apostata, as you
may see in the workes of Cyrillus against him:Lib. 8. d
                     •
                   curat. Grae car. affectionum. lib. 10. cap. 20▪ Lib. 3. de imag. Cu
                     ••
                  . thē of
Eustathius as the Coūcel of Gangra reporteth. After
these of Vigilantius, whom S. Hierom refuteth: and aboue
seuen hundred yeares paste off one Claudius, againste
whom Ionas Bishop off Orleans in Fraunce
wrote.
            
               Luther, and all that folowe his banner, be mortall
enemies to the images of Christ and off all Saintes.
Their holy fathers be olde cursed heretikes the Marcionistes,
the Manichees, Aerius, Felicianus, and all the
wicked secte of Iconomachi, as it is at large mencioned
in the sixte generall Councell, and seconde of Nicea.
Nicephorus also recordeth off one Xenaias,
               Lib. 6. ca. 27. who
helde this heresy vnder Anastasius the Emperour about
a thousand yeares past.
            
               
               Luther taught first in our time,In li. de cap tiuitate Babylonica. that holy Orders
is no Sacrament, that euery Christen man, and woman
is a priest. And all the zelous Lutherans to this
daie beleue and teache the same, thoughe Melanchthon
and many of the Ciuill Lutherans be departed
from that fonde and absurde opinion. It is also a currant
doctrine in the pulpits in certain dyoceses of oure
countre.De haeresibus hae. 27. Epiph. hae. 79. et 49. The fathers of this heresy were Pepuziani,
as S. Augustin maketh mencion, and Collyridiani, as
Epiphanius writeth.
            It is common to all Lutherans and protestants of
oure time to abhorre the name and profession of a
Mōke. This was the maner also of the Donatistes, and
of the Circumcelliones. VVhat meaneth saied these heretikes,
this name of Monkes?
               In Psal. 132. Vnto whom S. Augustin
awnswereth, Howe much better may we saie, what meaneth
this name off Circumcelliones? Againste such writeth
Chrisostom whole treatises, entituling them,To
                     •
                  o. 5. 
               Against
the dispraisers of monastical life.
            
            The Lutherans and present protestants of our
dayes protest that they haue departed from the see of
Rome, and other Catholike Bishops for the euil and
wicked life of the Popes and prelats in Christes church.
The Apologie of England pretendeth the same
excuse.Cōtra Cres. lib. 3. ca. 6. Contra 2. epist. Caud. li. 2. ca. 9. contra Donat. li. 6. c. 4. contra Parm. lib. 2. cap. 5. But was this their owne imagination, thinke
you, and deuise? No truly. It was the very grounde of
that cursed secte of the Donatistes. And their fathers
herein are Cresconius, Gaudentius, Parmenianus, and
other. As S. Augustin writing against them eftsoones
declareth.
            
               
It is the doctrine of Luther in his booke de Christiana
libertate, and diuers other places, that faith ought
to be free, and no man constrained thereunto. In our
countre also, whē the sworde was against them, Frithe
and his felowes cried for that liberty, though nowe
they cease not continually to crie for the contrary.
It was the olde accustomed maner of al heretikes,Epi. 20 4. et cōtra Petilianū saepe.
especially of the Donatistes as S. Augustin in sundry
places witnesseth.
            Likewise before these heresies were fauoured off
Princes and authorised of higher powers, the riches
and possessions of Bishops was a great eye sore to all
Lutherans and protestants. Nowe they can like well
the pompe of Prelats, being placed them selues in suche
preferment. But their former griefe was an hereticall
grudge of the olde heretikes Vadiani as S. Augustin
writeth,Aug. haer. 50. Epiph haer. 70. or Audiani as Epiphanius calleth
them.
            What is nowe more common in the mouth of all
protestants, then that nothing ought to be added to
the commaundemēts of God? For by this short blowe
they wipe awaye all constitutions and ordinaunces
of the Churche. They lerned this argument
off Iulian the Apostata, who vsed it against the deuotions
off the Christians,Lib. 9. cō
                  tra Iulian. as in Cyrillus it appeareth.
            Protestants will be counted martirs being cutt of
by the secular sworde, that their cancred doctrine infect
not the sounde shepe of Christes flocke. Great
crakes are made, and greate workes sett forthe of their

stiff standing to the stake and glorious embrasing
of the fire. None do this more stoutely then the Anabaptistes,
whom yet the greater part of protestants
detest and abhorre for hainous heretikes. But not
only these new heretikes, but much more the old as
the Marcionistes, and especially the Circumcelliones excelled
in this pretended patience,
                  
                     •
                  d Quodu
                     •••
                  deum haer. 69. and proude persuasion
of Martyrdom. See S. Augustin, and the ecclesiasticall
history of Nicephorus libro, 4. capite 23. S. Cipriā
               
also. lib de simplicitate praelatorum.
            
            Luther at the diet helde at Augspurg in the yeare.
1521. being much intreated of diuers (tendring) him
for the authorite of Friderik duke of Saxony) to leaue
all singularites and not to reiect so rashely auncient
Councels of Christes Church,Fon
                     ••
                  nus lib. 2. he awnswered,
he disproued none except the councell of Constance,
and thereto he saied he was moued with an
vnuincible reason and most assured argument▪ that
was, bicause that councell had condemned Iohn Huss,
affirming that the church of Christ consisted only
of such as were predestined and elected. And in this
opinion he would liue and die. All the broode of that
fonde frier sing the same song. Beza and his companions
at the late Synod of Poissy in Fraūce, were stiff
in that opinion alōg time, but at the lēgth were driuen
from it. whereupō they chaunged the tenour of
their supplication, calling them selues Les esleus de
Dieu, the chosen of God. This wilde persuasion is
allmost receiued of all protestants. It is the very heresy
of the Pelagians condemned therefore in S. Augustins

time,Heres. 
                     ••
                  
                as in his booke De heresibus he reciteth at
large.
            What a great corrupter of holy Scripture Luther
hath ben, in the second part of this Apologie it is at
large declared by Fridericus Staphylus. How our protestants
also haue folowed his example therein, and
how manifoldly they haue peruerted the very text of
holy Scripture, I haue in part touched, to geue good
warning in the rest. Who list to see how this hath ben
the gui
                  •
               e and maner of olde heretikes, Let him reade
Tertullian in his praescriptions,Cap. 17. Capit. vlti. Lib. 1. c. 1. S. Ambrose vpon the
epistle of S. Paul to Titus, Iraeneus also, and S. Augustin
writing against Adimantus the manichee cap. 12.
14. & 16.
            What should I procede farder in declaring how Luther
and his scholers folowe rhe race of olde heretikes,
bothe in their doctrine and in the maner and setting
forthe thereof? The very refusall of the auncient
fathers in Christes church pronoūced (as you haue
heard) so impudently of Luther, and folowed with
no lesse impudence of his scholers, is no new point,
but euen the very shift of their forefathers cursed heretikes
of olde time. This appeareth well by the disputations
of Athanasius with Arrius,
               Coram Probo Indice. Socrates. li. 5. cap. 10. Actione 1. Epist. 28. lib. 1. cōtra Eu
                     ••
                  mitū. by the counsell
of Sisinnius to the Emperour Theodosius: by the maner
of Eutyches in the Councell of Chalcedon, by the writings
of Cirillus touching Nestorius, and of S. Basil cō
               cerning
Eunonius. For all these lerned fathers could
not drawe those vnruly heretikes to the rule of the
auncient and holy writers in the Church of Christ.

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
They appealed to only Scripture and would be tried
only by that, as Luther would, and the protestants of
our time wil, though many heretikes receiued not the
whole corps of Scripture, but such partes only as liked
them, reiecting all that made against them, euen
as now a daies also Luther and his scholers reiect the
bookes of Machabees, and the epistle of S. Iames, the
one bicause it praieth for the dead, the other bicause
it writeth directly against their only faith. Of what
heretikes they lerned this shift, we haue already declared
defending the Machabees against M. Grindall.
            Aduise your selues now (good Christen readers)
whether you thinke the surer waie to saluatiō, to for
lowe the steppes of these fathers of Luther and all
new ghospellers, all condemned heretikes aboue a
thousand yeares past, or embrace the doctrine of the
holy Fathers and lerned approued writers in Christes
church. May we not wel iudge and assuredly
persuade our selues that the very sprit of heresy spake
in Luther and speaketh in all new ghospellers, preaching
and defending olde condemned heresies? Why
haue protestants departed from the olde Catholike
religion, and embraced the new doctrine of Luther?
they saie forsothe bicause all thinges are reformed after
the paterne and practise of the primitiue Church.
What meane they trow ye herein? truly I do not
otherwise thinke, but that a great numbre, the vnlerned
and deceiued sorte, take them to meane wel, and
that all is reduced to the doctrine and religion approued
and generally receiued in the primitiue church

for the espace of fiue or six hundred yeares after
Christ. But vndoubtedly the lerned and ringleaders
of this new fangled faith, if they meane truly, must
nedes meane the renewing of such heresies, as were in
that time condemned. For thus and no otherwise do
they folow doctrine practised in that time: that is of
heretikes, as in a numbre of particular assertions you
haue sene.
            But to returne to Luther,Luther 
                     •
                   ued an he retike. what point of a right
heretike is there, that hath not in him ben verified?
He condemneth the Church and holy Fathers, appointed
of the holy Ghoste to gouuerne and direct 
his church, as you see by his owne wordes before alleaged.
He corrupteth holy scripture by false translations,
as the secōde part of this Apologie hath declared
you. He denied partes hereof at his pleasure, after 
the acustomed maner of al heretikes. He holdeth,
teacheth, and defendeth olde cursed, and lōge condē
               ned
heresies, as we haue before deducted vnto you.
He hath bredd diuers sectes by his owne doctrine repugnāt
and cōtrary one to an other: to wit, the Anabaptistes,
the Sacramētaries, the S wēck feldiās, and diuers
other, as it appeareth clerely by the Table of his Ofspring
in the thrid part of this Apologie. Finally bicause 
al heretikes are knowē by their frutes,See the
                     •
                  efe. 29. and folovving what the
frutes of this mās doctrine haue bē, it is in this Apologie
of Staphylus in diuers places expresly set forth,Also the leafe. 127. b. &c.
as wel for the great decaye of deuotion and spirituall
vertus, as for the temporall waste and misery, that
of this heresy hath ensued. Of his terrible arrogancy

and pride (the most euident token of a wilfull heretiken
 and voide of all grace and goodnes) all that haue
read his writings can testifie abundantly. None more
complaine thereof then his felowe protestants, the
Sacramentaries of Zurich,In the leafe. 84. b. and 85. as partly by their wordes
in the thirde parte of this boke alleaged it maye
well appeare. Neuer baude in bridwell, nor scolde in
the stewes so railed, as this man doth, beinge comptrolled
of his doctrine. His awnswers against all such
as wrote againste him, abundantly declare the same.
For hereupon the ciuill Lutherans do swarue in many
pointes from such doctrine, as he was wonte to
vtter in the vehemency of sprit (as they cal it) and
in his cholere. He wrote him selfe an Euangelist off
 Christ: euen as Manicheus called him selfe an Apostle
of Christ: as S. Augustin witnesseth.In epist. ad Argentoratenses. Contra epi. fundamēti. cap. 6. And off his
scholers he is called the thirde Helias, as in the story
of his deathe we reade writen by Melanchthon, Ionas
and Pomeranus. Euen as Manicheus was of his scolers
called the holy ghost,Ibidem. and Montanus of his secte also.
He writeth, that he is sure and certain he hath his doctrine
 from heauē, euē as Aetius sayde also of him selfe.Vide Rofensem contra cap. Baby. Epiphanius in haer. 76. 
               I knowe
God moste clerely and euen as perfitly as I knowe my selfe.
The cause and original of Luthers departure from
the church was ambitiō, as all the ecclesiasticall histories
 of our time, Fōtanus, Rouerus, and other do testifie.
to witt, bicause he was not preferred to the publishing
of the famous pardon of the croisad. The same
ambition made Aerius an heretike, bicause Eustathius
was preferred before him in a certain bishoprike

as Epiphanius recordeth.Haer. 75. The like writeth Tertullian
of Valētinus,
               Lib. contra Valētinianos. and Nicephorus reporteth of Montanus
lib. 4, cap. 2. of Nouatus libro 6. capite 3. of Florinus.
libro 4. capite 20.Lib. 4. cap. 7. and of Thebutes one of the firste
heretikes in the Apostles time, the very same cause
of falling in to heresy. And truly euen as the beginning
and course of Luthers doctrine hath thouroughely
resembled the maner of olde heretikes, so his
ende was not much vnlike, to witt, a soden and vnprouided
death. For being mery and makinge greate
feste ouer night, he was foūde dead in the morning.
Such soden deathe was neuer reade off any Apostle
or Euangelist of Christ. But of diuers heretikes,Sleidanns & Fontanus lib. 17.
especially of Arrius, thoughe as by that the Arrians
were nothing moued, so the Lutherans of this
make smal accompte.
            And this much of Luther the father protestant of
oure time, as touching the pointes of his doctrine:
where you see bothe what a godly ground he layde,
and howe in the course and issue there of, he hathe
showed him selfe to be but a scholer of olde heretikes,
as he hathe ben the Master of many newe. For
this man worse then any gutter or sinke, whiche receaueth
onely the filthe that is brought vnto it, bredeth
none, not onely toke olde heresies of other, but
added also thereūto some of his owne: breding of his
owne filthy brayne as foule fonde doctrine as any
foolish heretike before him. And of these his proper
inuentiōs one of the maddest is, that he teacheth the
bread remaining bread, to be the very naturall body

of Christ in the Sacrament.The pro
                     •
                   heresy off Luther touching the Sacramēt hath vvrought his confusion. Which hathe semed such
a fonde doctrine euē to the ghospellers thē selues his
scholers and brethern, that the farre greater part off
them hath in consideration of this point chefely,
not doubted to condemne him for an archeheretike▪
as you may see by the wordes of the brethern of Zurich
in the thirde parte of this booke.Fol. 68. And by reason
of this absurde doctrine not onely at the first Zuinglius,
Oecolampadius and Caluin drewe with them diuers
countres from the vnite of Luthers ghospell,
but also the Lutherans them selues hauing many yeares
serued the idoll Luther, daily faile and shrinke
from him, cleauing to the cursed Sacramentaries,
proceding allwaies in mischef, and encreasing with
time their heresies and abominations.
            About this time two yeare,Surius in epist. nuncupatoria praefixa Prodro
                     ••
                  c. 
               Brema a greate cyte of
Saxony, and one of the firste that had receaued the
light of Luthers ghospel, hauing cōtinued in the foresayde
doctrine of Luther aboute fourty yeares, as
zelous and vpright Lutherans, now after greate strife
and contention amonge them selues, hath openly
condemned the same, and are become Caluinistes.
Likewise in Augspurg where the famous Cōfession
of the Lutherans was made, 
                  ••
               fred to the Emperour,
and confirmed by all the Nobilite of the protestants,
yet nowe there are mo Caluinistes then Lutherans,
mo that disproue that Cōfessiō and doctrine of Luther,
thē that approue it. How other coūtres also haue
flitted frō Luther, hauing many yeares serued hī,
you haue in the thirde part of this booke declared.Pagi. 121.
            
            
               
Our countre also being at the firste chaunge, all
Lutheran, is nowe become for the moste parte Caluiniste,
and Lasconicall, as not onely oure doings at
home declare, but other countres abrode haue noted
of vs. Peter Martyr at his first coming to Oxforde
was a right Lutherā in the matter of the Sacrament,
as he declared him selfe not onely in priuat communication,
but also in his open lessons, where inueighing
at a time against the argumēt of the Sacramē
               taries,
Christ is in heauen, ergo he is not here in the Sacrament,
he cried oute, Profecto est nodus Diaboli, that is,
Sothely this is a shifte of the deuil him selfe. He was wonte
also at his first coming to Oxford to complaine, Anglos
nimiū vergere ad Zuinglianismum that we english
men enclined to much to the Zwinglians. Afterward
as al the worlde knoweth, he condemned Luther,
and became him self, a Zuingliā. For he had lerned
an other lesson in the Courte.
            
               Philip Melanchthon him selfe, the very darling
of Luther and father of the Confessionistes, in his
later daies became a very Sacramentary: as his familiar
letters to the Counte Palatin of Rhene printed at
Heidelberg in the yeare 1560. hathe declared to al the
worlde. Thus the proper heresy of Martin Luther,
that he him self by the spirit of the newe ghospel had
inuented in the despite of the Pope (for so he protesteth
him selfe in a letter of his to the brethern of
Strasburg) was at the first much misliked, and is nowe
allmost euerywhere vtterly abhorred.
            Ioachimus VVestphalus, the onely staye and piller

of this Lutheran doctrine cōplaineth him selfe hereof.
For thus he writeth.
               In lib. Rectafides de c
                     ••
                  a 
                     ••
                  i. No false doctrine is so farre
spredde, none with so much labour and hypocrisy defended,
non hath more beguiled the worlde, then this false doctrine
of the blessed Sacrament▪ 
               meaning the heresy of the Sacramentaries.
And Nicolaus Amsdorfsius an other zelous
Lutheran writeth thus. The Anabaptistes and the
Sacramētaries do blinde and deceaue Germany with their
pretended holines euen as the monkes before blinded the whole
worlde.
            And this verely hathe happened on Luther and
his felowes not without the iuste iudgemēt of God.
For whereas vpon dispiteous malice he laboured by
his new doctrines to ouerthrow the church of Rome,
(where it hath pleased our Sauiour to place his
vicar here on earthe) as in diuers of his writings it appeareth,
he hath wrought his oune destruction, and
shame. for though in very dede through the pernicious
persuasions of that wedded frere, certain places
and corners of Christendome haue swarned frō the
Catholike church, and authorite of that Apostolike
see in these northe partes of the worlde, yet it hathe
thousands folde more ben enlarged in the west partes,
and the newe landes founde oute by Spanyardes
and Portugalles in these late yeares, as the letters off
the Iesuites directed from those countres in to these
partes do euidently and miraculousely declare. And
truly euē so befel it, at what time Grece and the easte
churche departing from the head and vnite, of Christes
church, gaue them selues to sundry schismes and

heresies.Vide throuologiam Alexandri Sculte
                     •
                  i. For then sprange vp the faithe in Germany,
Pole, Dennemarke, Swethen, Norwaie and other northe
Countres. For thus from the east to the northe, and
from the northe to the west of the faithe of Christe
passeth, donec,
               Luc, 21. as Christe saithe, impleantur tempora gentium.
Vntell the times of the gentils be acomplished.
Oure Lorde graunte that it passe not from vs by heresy
and schisme, as it passed from the grekes, and
from Afrike the southe parte of the worlde.Grece and Afrike 
                     •
                  oste the fa
                  
                     ••
                  ithe by he resy. For bothe
these people through schismes (especially of the
Arrians and their ofspringe) lost the faith of Christe,
as the histories declare vnto vs. But to returne to
our matter, the church of Rome, the see Apostolike,
that Luther laboured by heresy to ouerthrowe, standeth
yet in his full force and interest, notwithstanding
the miserable losse of a numbre in our countre
and otherwhere. Truly Luther him selfe cometh very
short of the counte he made being reiected nowe
allmoste euery where. The Catholike also may lerne
to auoide and shunne hereby all maner of protestants
what so euer name or secte they be of, proceding
all of this heade, beinge all the corrupted
issue of this vncleane spring, and the branches of this
roote.
            Much more might be saied of other proper heresies
of this archeheretike Martin Luther. But this one of
his maie serue for a taste to the zelous Lutherans of
our coūtre, that they glory not so much of this their
Elias, and fiffte euangelist, as though all that euer he
wrote or sayed were the ghospell it self. But nowe to

the ciuill Lutherans.
            The ciuill Lutherans are those,Of the ciuil Lutherans. whiche not with
such zele and rigour as the other, force men praecisely
to euery doctrine and article of Luthers ghospell,
but are content ciuilly to conforme them selues to
better iudgement, and take so much of their Master,
Luther, as they shall thinke good and conuenient.
But these men by this their ciuilite and philosophicall
moderation haue conformed them selues to so
many frames and facions, as there be amonge them
Superintēdents and Ministres. As for example in the
administration of the Sacraments, through their ciuilite,
see in what maruailous vnite their churches be
directed. At VVittenberg where the see of these ciuill
protestants is, foure Sacraments are approued and administred:
to witt. baptim, the Supper of our Lorde,
Holy Orders, and Penaunce or absolution. At Lipsia
thre only take place, holy orders being wiped awaie.
At Magdeburg but two are allowed: euen as amonge
the Caluinistes of our countre. And hereof iesting ones
merely a lerned mā though with a heuy hart being
demaunded why in the Lutherās Churches were
not 7.Staphylus in Def. contra Melāch thon. Sacramēts, yes forso the quod he: there are 7.
and two mo. For at VVittenberg foure, at Lipsia three,
at Magdeburg are two: whiche in all make nyne. And
these thre cytes be litle distant one from the other.
            The father and head of these ciuill Lutherans is
Philip Melanchthon: who so longe dalied in this kinde
of perilous ciuilite, that at the length, as you haue heard
before, he fell to the pestilent heresy of the Sacramentaries.

And see I praye you how light, variable,
and inconstant a person this man was.
            In the yeare. 1540.Staphylus in prodromo. he wrote bitterly against the Pope
defending Luther miserably, as if he had ben his
slaue or bondmā. In the yeare. 1548.Vide Lipsē Interim & literas ad Carolvvitzium. itē
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   postremas a
                     •
                   Com. Palatinum. heenclined again
to the Pope and embraced the Interim that was made
in Germany, that is, the delaie and deliberation vntel
a generall Councell were called. But of late euen a
litle before his deathe in the yeare. 1559. writing to
the Counte Palatin he cōdemned the proper doctrine
of his M. Luther, and ioyned him selfe to Caluin
and the Sacramentaries.
            This graund Captain was the inuentour or rather
scribe and writer of that famous Confession made
at Augspurg in the yeare. 1530. But howe he altered
and corrected the same, not onely in his Apology in
the next yeare after, but at diuers other times, sometime
for better, sometime for worse, I reporte me to the
diuers editions of that booke. For who so conferreth
the first edition and certain next to the first, with the
laste, he shall clerely see what settled iudgement, and
constant or grounded knowledge was in that man.
But after the deathe of Luther, howe miserably it hathe
ben mangled, Nicolaus Gallus a zelous and rigorous
Lutherā in opē writing bitterly cōplaineth. For
thus he reporteth in generall, after the reticall of certain
particulars. Here then,
               In libell
                     •
                  . Vox Vigilū
                  
                     •
                   fol. d. 3. saieth he, all Christen men
may easely perceaue, if they wil yelde to reason, and consider
and conferre together their doctrines, howe all those positions
whiche our aduersaries in the foresaide articles after the deathe

of Luther do teache against vs blasphemousely, do in dede
in the very grounde touche Luther him selfe and his doctrine,
though we beare the name thereof: yea and beside the person
of Luther, they belonge properly to the true Confessiō of
Augspurg, which in the meane while is of them chaunged,
peruerted, and racked in to expresse contrary meaning. And
this false foisting and iuggling of the ciuill Lutherans
(though truly very vnciuill in this point) is not
only euident in the confession of Augspurg the grounde
of all their newe broched ghospell, but also in
the workes of their Master, Martin Luther, whiche
they chaunge and correct daily at their pleasure. For
Amsdorfius, Illyricus, and Georgius Rorarius, al zelous
Lutherans in open treatises and bookes entituled de
deprauatoribus librorum Lutheri,
               Vide epist. Hosis al Henri. ducē Brun
                     •
                  uicen sem. of the deprauers of
Luthers bookes, charge the masters of Wittenberg
but Melanchthō
                especially, of certain hundreds of places
chaūged, left oute and corrupted by thē, and that
(as they saie) against the ghospel,Luc. 6. 
               quia non est discipulus
super magistrum the scholer is not aboue his master.
            Againe as touching the inconstancy of Melanchthon,
those whiche haue read and sene his common
places, can not be ignorant thereof: which as ofte as
he sette forth, so ofte he altered and corrected. In the
numbre of Sacraments what diuers minde he hathe
ben of, and vpon what occasion he so chaunged his
minde,See in the I
                     •
                  a. c. 45. and 72. it is very well declared of Staphylus in the first
and in the seconde partes of this booke. In one other
pointeas touching iustification, and the workes of
man, I will showe yow howe contrary he hathe ben

to him selfe, chaunging his minde with euery wether.
At the first to gratifie Luther his master, denieng
fre wil in man, In his annotations vppon S. Paule
to the Romanes thus he writeth.In cap. 8. fol. 53. 
               VVe saie that God
dothe not onely suffre his creatures to do and worke, but
him selfe dothe and worketh all thinges properly. as we confesse
the calling of S. Paule was the proper worke of God,
so we confesse all other are the proper workes off God,
whether they be indifferent actions, as to eate, to drinke and
suche like, or euill workes, as the aduoutry of Dauid, the cruelty
of Manlius putting to deathe his owne Son. And a litle
after. VVe nede not therefore make that grosse glose commonly
vsed, to saie that God suffreth euill and doth not worke
euill & caetera. Thus farre Melanchthon: where
yow see he agreeth with the bonde fre will off Luther,
and the wicked destyne off Caluin. And in
this mynde he continewed longe and many yeares.
But at the length in a conference helde at Wormes,Staphylus in absoluta apologia. fo. 126.
he was persuaded by doctor Eckius to reiect this abhominable
doctrine. And at the next edition off his
common places he declared it to all the worlde.Cap. de humanis viri bus & lib. arbitrio. The
zelous and rigorous Lutherans coulde not abyde this
his recantation, especially Nicolaus Gallus and the
Superintendents of higher Saxony.Gallus in librosuo. Wechterhan. Theologi Saxonici in libellis supplicatorijs ad conuentū Nūburgensem. But accused him
in open writinges of apostasy. Farder when diuers vniuersites,
especially those of Lipsia had subscribed to
this later doctrine of Melanchthon directly repugning
to Luthers ghospell, Nicolaus Gallus a rigorous Lutheran
and zelous ghospeller in his booke intituled,
An awnswer to the booke of the Professours of Wittenberg,
               
examineth this their doctrine, and chargeth them
with Pelagians heresy takē out of Erasmus writings.
Also in an other litle treatise of his intituled, Vox vigilum,
by certain antitheses and conferences off Luthers
sayings, he setteth forthe to the worlde the
incostāt and chaungeable minde of this Archeprotestant.
            Who lyste to knowe more of this man, and howe
he with al his ciuil secte is misliked of the zelous Lutherans,
let him reade the bookes of Heshusius and
Hieronimus Menczelius de pastoribus (not that I wish
such bookes to be read, but that who will nedes reade
them, may note this in them) where they greuousely
complaine of the licentious liberte of these ciuil
and conformable protestants Melanchthon, and his
complices. He maye reade also the booke of Iohannes
Spangenbergius sette forthe in the yeare. 1561. whiche
beareth this litle: A true declaration of the benefits bestowed
especially vppon Germany from God, by D. Martin
Luther of holy memory, and of the greate vnkindnes of
diuers towarde so greate benefits receaued. In the which
booke he inueigheth not so much against vs Catholikes,
whiche haue allwaies worthely abhorred the
cursed heresies of that lewde fryer, as against the ciuill
Lutherans, and disordrely extrauagants, whiche
haue swarued from the holy worde of that fifte euan
geliste. Which they haue done in such sorte, that nowe
none beareth lesse rule, then he that first sturred
all this storme, and was the inuenter of this terrible
tragedy.
            
               
At what time the generall councell of Trent, by
the consent of all the estates of the Empire,Sleidam
                     •
                  s lib. 6. et 11. Histor. and other
Christen princes was gathered together, and be
gonne, the protestāts of germany, especially the Lutherans,
hauing their saufconduit, and prouision after
the largest and surest maner graunted, Melanchthon
drewe backe, and retracted the time by all meanes
possible. Whereupon first he came to the EmperourPonta
                     •
                  us Rouerus li. 5. rerū memora. pag. 410.
               Charles soiourning at that time at Inspruch fewe
daies iourney from Trent, and made greate suite bothe
for him selfe, and his felowes, that they might
not present them selues at the councell. For him selfe
he alleaged first his aage: then that he was no diuin,Non theol
                     •
                   gum sed philotheol
                     •
                   gum.
but a louer and fauourer of diuinite. And yet this is
that Master of Wittēberg, successour in the schismaticall
see of Luther, father of that famous Confession
of Augspurg, whiche not onely the Lutherans,
but the Caluinistes them selues do reuerence no
lesse then the foure ghospells. But this awnswer no
thing satisfing the Emperour, he pretended he woulde
shortely repaire to the councel, returned to VVittenberg,
and from thence toke his iourney thitherwarde.
but at Norimberg he staied,Erasmus Reinhold. i
                     •
                   epist. sua ad amicū. vntell his prince
the duke Mauritius concluded the councel with fire
and sworde.
            And this charitable deuise of Melanchthon agreeth
well with other his doings: as that he wrote, yea and
put forthe in prent a litle booke to the people of Bohem
wherein he sturreth them against their lawfull
Prince, and counselleth them to rebell against their

Souuerain:In libel. ad Bohemoset Si
                     •
                   sios. whereupon ensued ciuill warre and calamitous
seditions in that countre: as also that he and
other masters of Wittēberg in the yeare. 1548. at what
time the duke of Saxony and the Lantgraue off hesse
rebelled, wrote opēly against the Emperour Charles
and all his adherents.Illyricus in informati
                     •
                  
                  ne sua de quibusdam a
                     •
                  itulis. Whereof Mathias Illyricus
a zelous Lutheran chargeth them, and reprocheth it
vnto them bitterly, in a certain litle booke which he
made, called An Information vpon certain articles, &c.
            
            This Philip Melanchthon father of these ciuill protestants,
as in wauering and ofte chaunging his doctrine,
he was a right ciuill Lutheran, so corrupting
the general Confession of his brethern, and the workes
of his Master, he showed him selfe very vnciuill
truly, but a right heretike I assure you. For this was
the practise of awncient heretikes to flie and flitt
from their saiengs, being pressed with the lerned Catholikes.
And truly of this famous Confession of
Augspurg and of Luthers workes daily thus altered
and corrected,The ciuill Lutherās resemble olde heretikes. I would saie corrupted, of these ciuill
Lutherans, we may worthely pronoūce as Tertullian
dothe of the Marcionistes, who had made also a ghospell
of their owne, whereof he saieth, Quotidie reformant
illud,
               Lib. 4. aduersus Mar
                  
                     •
                  ionem. 
               prout a nobis quotidie reuincuntur, aut erubescunt
de magistro suo vbique traducto. They frame it a
newe daily, as they are of vs daily conuinced, or be
ashamed of their master all wheres reprouued. And
see, I praie you, if these ciuill reformers of Luthers
ghospel represent not vnto vs the face and behauiour
of olde heretikes, of whom Tertulliā
                in an other place

thus speaketh.In praescriptionibus. 
               Mentior si non etiam a regulis suis &c.
Let me be accompted a liar, if they vary not frō their owne
rules, while euery one tuneth at his pleasure the songe he lerned,
euen as he that first taught it, did sette it at his pleasure.
The Valentinians were as bolde as Valentinus their Master,
the Marcionistes made at their pleasure a newe faith, as
their Master Marcion had done before them. Brefely al heresies
well considered shall be founde to vary from their first
heades in diuers pointes. Thus farre Tertulliā. which how
true it is in the scholers of Martin Luther the archeheretike
of our time, these ciuil Melanchthonistes declare
vnto vs: and that to the greate griefe of the zelous
Lutherans, as the sundry writinges of Gallus, Amsdorfius,
Illyricus famous Superintendēts of that secte
do euidently showe.
            
               This practise of Melanchthons inconstancy flitting
from his owne doctrine, the ecclesiastical histories
witnes vnto vs to haue ben the maner of olde heretikes.
Off Thedotus, Asclepiodotus,Lib. 4. cap. 21. Hermophilus and
Apollonides thus writeth Nicephorus. Quilibet etiam illorū
castigationē propriorū scriptorū edid
                  ••
               : idque varianantium
& dissidentium inter se exemplarium discordantia
indicat, that is.
               Tho Synods of the Arriās resemble the confession of Augspurg and metinges of protestants. Nicephorus lib. 9. c. 5. Eche one of them did sette forthe their owne
writings corrected and altered, whiche the diuersite of the
sundry and contrary copies doth declare.
            The greate variaunce and inconstancy of the Arrians
no lesse then of the Lutherās, appereth wel by
the ecclesiasticall histories also. First in their priuat
Synod at Antioche, hauing concluded and agreed
vpon a certain confession of their belefe, shortly after

they put forthe an other much different from the
first. Not lōge after three of these Arrian bishops beingLi. 9. c. 7.
conuēted before Constās in the west and being demaunded
a declaration of their belefe, they vttered
it in a farre other sorte, then they had decreed at Antioche.
               Li. 9. c. 13.
In Nicephorus their diuers confessions are sett
oute at large. F
                  •
               we yeares after the Arriās meting together
at Sirmium,
               Rouer. lib. 3. pa. 172. published three sondry and diuers
confessions of their belefe al contrary to the former.
Let vs nowe see whether oure Lutherans haue not
practised in like maner.
            In the general meting of the protestants at Ausgpurg
before the Emperour Charles in the yeare 1530,
First those of Strasbourg, Costniz and Memming offred
vp a confession of their faith as farre different
from the Saxons as they were from the Catholikes.
            Then in the Confession of the Saxons deuised
by Melanchthō
                in the descriptiō of Christes church,Staphylus in absolutae Apologia.
the worde Catholike is cleane left oute. The nexte yeare
after Melanchthon writing his Apology put the
worde Catholike in: but with a straunge and false exposition
added vnto it, euen such as the Donatistes made
vnto S. Augustin,
               August. ep. 48. ad Vincentium. when they sayde, that the worde
Catholike was not ment of the societe and communiō
of the whole worlde, but in obseruing of al gods
commaundements, and all his sacraments.
            Thirdly the protestants of Lunneburg and of theRoue
                     •
                  s li. 5. pag. 439.
Lantgraues dominions were offended with the Saxons
in the publishing of their cōfession, bicause they
yelded to much to the Catholikes in the question of

ecclesiasticall iurisdiction and authorite off bishops:
whereupon Melanchthon was expresly commaunded
to yeld no farder.
            Fourthly whereas in that confession presented to
the Emperour in the yeare 1530. in the tenth article
we reade this, They teache that the true body and bloud of
Christ is truly present in the Supper vnder the formes of bread
and wine, the next yere after the same Confession
being printed at VVittenberg, they frame the same article
after an other sorte, and write. That the body and
bloud of Christ are truly present and distribued to those
which receiue in the supper: By the which addition they
exclude all reseruation of the blessed Sacrament, for
the sicke, and tie Christ to the pleasure of the receiuers.
But in the yeare 1540. wading furder in the moire
of heresy they make that same article yet fouler.
For this they saie. That with the breade and the wine the
body and bloud of Christ is truly exhibited to those whiche
receiue in the Lordes Supper. Thus lo at the length this
monster of Luther was brought to perfection, I meane
his proper heresy about the Sacramēt. But what?
Doth all the brotherhood of that Confession staye
here? Nay the zelous Lutherans denie it and complaine
of it.Vide Roue rū. lib. 5. pag. 439. For from this their Confession Brentius
and the Masters of Wittēberg in their conference helde
at Wormes in the yeare 1557. haue departed openly,In publica Confessione pure doctrine, &c.
yelding to the heresies of Zuinglius and Osiander,
directly repugning to that Confessiō, as Nicolaus Amsdorffius
a zelous Lutheran chargeth them in open
writing. His wordes you may reade in the beginning

of the thirde parte of this booke. Thus you maye see
howe the sprit of Melanchthon and his felowes agree
with the doinges and behauiour of olde heretikes.
            And although Philip Melanchthon,
               
                  Fontanus li. 11. Melanchthon malitious and cruell. at the first visitation
of the protestants in Germany was praysed
for his modesty and meakenes, yet afterwarde as he
grewe in heresy, so did he in malice and cruelty. The
thrusting in of Osiāder in to Prussia procured by him
displacing Morlinus by force, his open writing against
the visitatiō of Bauaria, his bitter and dispiteous
inuectiues againste the lerned, vertuous, and Noble
man Fridericus Staphylus, hath sufficiently declared
to all the worlde, that as good men eunt de virtute in
virtutem, encrease and go forward in vertu, so he proceded
in mischefe and malice of harte,Vide Staphylum in absoluta apologia. pagina 242. as the property
of heretikes hathe allwaies ben. Illyri
                     •
                  us and other
zelous Lutherans ceased not daily while he liued to
entwit this vnto him. And I haue here recited onely
for the intent (God is my witnes) that his credit hereafter
may be the lesse amonge suche, as by his hereticall
ciuilite haue ben deceaued and trained into heresies
from the vnite of Christes churche, where only
saluation is to be hoped for. For that is the body off
Christ as S. Paule saieth and the piller of truthe.
               Coloss. 1. and as S.
Augustin writeth.De vnita e
                  
                     •
                  cclesiae cap. 4. 
               Whosoeuer beleueth that Christe Iesus
is come in to fleshe, and in the same fleshe hathe suffred for
vs, hath risen again, and is ascended vp, and that he is the son
of God, God with God, and one with the father, by whom
al was made: and yet do so dissent from his body, which is the

church, that they do not communicat with all the whole
corps of Christendome, certain it is that they are not in the
Catholike churche. What Christen mā therefore is there
so destitut of the grace of God, and all good reason,
that will hazarde his soule to folowe that guide,
which woteth not him selfe which waie to walcke,
or to lerne a newe belefe contrary to all Christendome
beside that nowe is, and euer hathe ben, of suche
a Master as knoweth not him felfe, what he may saie,
and was euen to his deathe but a lerner and scholer?
For then onely began he to professe him selfe a
Caluiniste and a Sacramentary, hauing all his life time
before taught and deceaued a number after the
trade of Luther. And howe can his scholers be assured
that thē he founde out the truthe? We will therefore
nowe come to Caluin him selfe to whom Melanchthon
hathe yelded, and see whether he be a ghospeller
worthy to be folowed againste the vniforme
consent of Christes churche.
            Perusing diligently the doctrine of Iohn Caluin
in his Institutions,Of Caluin and his doctrine. commentaries vppon the holy
Scripture, his resolutions vppon the Sacraments, and
other his workes, touching his doctrine of the bles
               
                  •
               ed
Sacrament of the aultar, whiche he allwaies termeth
the Supper off the Lorde, and recording with
my self howe the greatest swaye of the lost flock
of our time, forsaking Christ the heauenly shepearde
and his vicar here on earthe, haue folowed more that
wolfe of Geneua Iohn Caluin, then the foxes of Germany,
Luther, Melanchthon, Osiander, and other, truly

I bothe lamented much the losse of so many Christē
soules straiyng after so perilous a guide, and maruailed
yet more at the blindnes of our wicked time,
that would be so soone lead out of the highe waie of
Christes churche (wherein onely saluation is to be
sought) and folow the trade of such a doctour or Master,
which like a madde will full man being out off
the waie, runneth vpp and downe among the bushes
and briers this waie and that waie, seking of purpose
any waye, rather then he will take the common highe
beaten waie, that all Christen people haue walked
in. I saie this good Readers, not as enemy to the
man (whom thanked be God I neuer sawe nor heard)
but as finding him such in his writings as I haue
saied, and intending by Gods helpe to sett him so
before your eyes that yow shall also saie and iudge
no lesse of him then I do. vnlesse you are (which
God forbidde) of the number of those obstinat Iewes,
who seying would not see, and hearing woulde
not heare. I trust rather in allmighty God, that no
man hath so pinned his soule to Caluins doctrine,
but that he will yelde to the expresse worde off
holy Scripture, and euident reason, when he shall
see the same doctryne to fight directly against them
bothe.
            And first we wil cōsidre how is doctrine fighteth
against euidēt reason, which by two maner of waies
we will declare you. First by certain of his propositions
importing absurde consequences and impossibilites,
nexte by clere and most euident contradictions

of his owne saiengs: wherby not onely the faithfull
Catholike, but the deceiued protestant may euidently
iudge and pronounce, that this mans doctrine can
not be of god, and his holy Spirit, which is the Spirit
of truthe and vnite, but is of the diuel and his wicked
sprit, which is the sprit of falshood and dissension.
For truthe is allwaies vniforme and agreable with
it selfe. And as the philosopher saieth of vertu, so in
truthe there is but one waie to hitt the marke: a man
may shoote aside diuers waies. Wherefote two contrary
sayings maye bothe be false and vntrue: but truthe
can neuer stand with a contrary. Who then teacheth
contradiction, as he must nedes teach some falshood,
so possibly he may teach al false, and beside the
marke: euen as it happeneth with all heretikes, that
leaue the common highe waie of their forefathers,
and seke out by pathes of their owne inuentiōs, wherein
the faster they runne, the farder they straye, and
the harder they finde the right waie againe.
            Secondarely as touching the repugnaunce that is
in Caluins doctrine against the expresse worde off
God, I will also by two maner of waies declare. First
by a number of his propositions and assertions cōtrary
to the expresse wordes of Christ and his Apostles,
next by the auouching of such doctrine as concurreth
with olde heresies condemned aboue a thousand
yeares past, in that state and time off Christ his
church, as Caluin him selfe doth in sundry places
(especially vpon the prophets, and in his epistle to Sadoletus)
allowe and reuerence. We recited you before

diuers olde carren heresies that Luther stirred vp, but
Caluin beside all those hath nouseled yet a litle farder,
and digged deper then Luther did.A similitu de. For euen as a
a bestly sowe coming in to a faire garden sett with
diuers swete flowres and pleasaunt herbes, if in some
corner thereof she espie a donghell, or heape of rotten
wedes, or other filthe cast aside, will straite nousell
there and tomble her selfe in the filth and carren
thereof, not medling with the swete floures or pleasaunt
herbes: so truly these bestly heretikes of our time,
especially Luther and Caluin liuing in the church
of Christ compared in scripture to the garden of the
bridegrom,Cant. 5. wherein are bothe swete herbes of heauenly
doctrine, and most delectable floures of vertuous
liuing, lacking not yet her spottes and wrincles
of euil life, wich she alloweth neuer, but tolerateth of
necessite and lamenteth, hauing also not in her, but
by her, and cast oute of her, a nūber of olde cōdemned
heresies, they like bestly swine nether embrace
the vertuous liuing that she vseth, but raiseth at the infirmities
whi
                  •
               h she is constrained to suffer, nether folow
the steps of her heauenly discipline and vpright
belefe, but getting them to the donghell, nou
                  •
               ell
them selues in the olde condemned heresies, and vēt
them abrode to the world.
            But nowe to come to the matter it self, let vs considre
first the absurde doctrine, that he leaueth vs in
his writings. I entend not to discourse vpon all the
pointes of his hereticall doctrine: but for a taste off
the rest, I will examin his assertions about the blessed

Sacramēt of the aultar, bicause this article doth most
nearest touche the glory and maiesty off oure Sauiour,
being the most precious iewell, that he left vnto
his church. After also we wil note diuers heresies, bothe
olde and new, in his doctrine vpon the sacrament
of baptim. Last of all a fewe notable contradictions
aboute his doctrine of the fre will of man. But now
to the first point.
            Caluin in his Institutions in his treatise of the
Lordes Supper,Cap. 18. In stitutionū impress. A
                     •
                   gentorati. an. 1545. teaching howe by his imagination
we receiue Christ in the Sacrament, after long dalying
as though he would graunte a reall receiuing off
Christ his body, at the length he concludeth in these
wordes. Corporis communionem Spiritus sui virtute
Christus in nos diffundit. that is. Christ pooreth downe vpō
vs the communion of his body by the vertu of his Spirit.
Which is as much to saie: Christ communicateth vnto
vs his body by the vertu of his Spirit. This is in
fewe wordes the communion of Caluin and all the
Sacramentarie
                  ••
                denieng that we eate in dede the body
of Christ otherwise then by faith. Nowe let vs see
what absurdites folowe thereof.
            First no scripture hath this doctrine.That vve receaue not a communiō of Christ his body poored vpon vs in the Sacramēt▪ 
                  Cap. 8. de fide.
                And how absurde
a thing it is to folowe any doctrine without
Scripture Caluin him him selfe telleth vs. In his institutions
thus he writeth. I ought not to seme to
any man cōtentious, that I staie so earnestly vpon this point
that it is not lawfull for the Churche to make any new doctrine,
that is to teache or deliuer for truthe any more then
the Lorde hath reueled by his worde. For wise men do see howe

great a danger that is, if so much authorite were graunted
to men. They see what a windowe is opened to the mockes
and scoffes of wicked men, if we sayie that to be taken for
truthe among Christians which men shall thinke good. Let
now then any scholer of Caluin showe in all Scripture
where it is writen, that Christ by the vertu of his
spirit pooreth downe vppon vs the communion off
his body. For Caluin as he writeth in his Harmony vpon
the ghospelles, thinketh it an absurde thinge to
saie that the flesh of Christ it selfe should be deriued
vnto vs. But he sayeth the communion of Christ his
flesh is deriued vnto vs (which he interpreteth to be,
a quikening vertu out of Christ his flesh) correcting Christe
promising vs his very flesh.In cōment. in. 1. Cor. 11. Now (as I saied) of the
deriuation of any such communion of Christes fleshe
no Scripture mencioneth. But it is a sophisticall
suttelty of Caluins imagination not reueled in any
place by Gods worde. This is lo then one dangerous
absurdite by the confession off Caluin him selfe:
onles perhaps he haue some priuiledge more then
the whole Churche hathe. For in the Churche he
alloweth nothing beside the expresse worde off
God.
            Againe let vs consider what is the communion of
Christ his body poored downe vpon vs. It is saieth
Caluin, vis quaedam viuifica ex Christi carne in nos diffusa,
that is,In cōment. ut. 1. Cor. 11. 
               a certain quickening power poored downe vpon
vs out of the flesh of Christ. Christ saieth in S. Iohn, that
his flesh is meat in dede, and biddeth vs eate his flesh and
drinke his bloud,Ioan. 6. and in the other thre Euangelistes

he saieth Eate: this is my body:
               Lut. 32. but Caluin saieth, we eate
the bread,Mar. 14. and haue a certain quickening power out
of the fleshe,Matth. 26. not (as in his Harmony he saieth) the
flesh it self, and that we haue a communiō of his body
poored downe vpon vs, which is not to eate the body,
as Christ badde vs. This lo is not only beside scriture
but expresly against holy Scripture.
            Thirdly where Christ biddeth vs eate his fleshe,
saying,Ioan. 6. 
               he that eateth my fleshe abydeth in me, he teacheth
an action on oure part, touching the receiuing
of Christ: But where Caluin telleth vs, that a communiō
of Christ his body is deriued vnto vs, he putteth
no action on oure part, touching the receiuing off
Christ, but only touching the eating off the bread.
For we eate not the body of Christ by Caluins doctrine:
but a cōmunion of the same body is deriued
vpon vs, and poored downe vpō vs, we suffring such
deriuation and infusion. Therefore betwene the saying
of our Sauiour and the doctrine of Caluin, there
is as much difference as betwene doing and suffring,
action and passion.
            Fourthly what meaned Caluin to imagin this
communion of Christ his body to be deriued vnto
vs, and not the body it selfe? He might haue muche
peuish meaning beside, which perhaps they onely
know, that are admitted to the secrets of his misteries,
as the Electi of the Maniches were. But this one
thing I am sure he meaned, that bicause communion
importeth a number of communicants, and one alone
cā not communicat (which is the cause, why these

sacramentaries require allwaies a number at their
table) therefore he would haue no receiuing of Christe
without a communion, nor any other receiuing
of Christ, then by hauing a communion of him deriued
vnto vs. Let vs suppose then (as it maie easely
happen) that amonge the numbre of all that communicat,
one onely be a true and vpright beleuer, and
all the rest euill and miscreants, as among so diuers
sectes of protestants none other are to be found, but
such as for feare or otherwise sitt downe amongest
them, being no protestants in dede, though in this
point no good catholikes neither. But let vs suppose
that at the table of the protestants, one onely were
faithfull and duly prepared thereunto.The communiō of Caluin destro
                     •
                  eth the neces
                  
                     •
                  ite of cō
                  municā
                  
                     •
                  s. It will folow
that bicause according to the doctrine of Caluin the
infidel and wicked receiueth only the signe and bare
bread, the faith full person remaining alone through
the infidelite of other, shall not receiue Christ neither.
For being alone he can haue no communion of
Christ his fleshe deriued vnto him, euery cōmunion
importing a number, as these men saie. Now what an
absurdite is this, that the good man shall not receiue
Christ in the Sacrament, bicause euill men receiue
with him, or bicause he can haue no cōpany of good
men?
            Fiftely if the communion of Christ his flesh be
deriued vnto vs by the Spirit of Christe, then the
Spirit of Christ serueth the fleshe as an instrument.Cap. 18.
Which Caluin in his institutions expresly saieth, calling
the Spirit of Christ, a cundyt pipe by the which the

flesh of Christ is deriued vnto vs.
               A horrible blasphemy of Caluin. Nowe beside that this is
a horrible blasphemy, to make the Spirit of Christe
which is his godhead, inferiour to the flesh of Christe
as an instrumēt of the same, it is also cōtrary to al
reason and common course of nature. For the fleshe
serueth well in thinges created, as an instrument
whereby the Spirit showeth forth his operations, as
by our eies we see, by oute handes we feele and so
forth: but the Spirit neuer serueth the fleshe, nor neuer
may be saied to be an instrument of the same.
            Last of all if the due eating of Christ, is to haue
the communion of flesh deriued vnto vs by his Spirit,
whereby we receiue life, then the vnworthy eating
of Christ is the communion of dānation. How
shall that be deriued vnto vs? by the Spirit off Christ
to? what cā be a more horrible blasphemy? by some euill
sprit? that were the doctrine of the Maniches. And
yet if it be true that the due receiuing of Christ is no
other thing, but to haue a cōmunion of him deriued
vnto vs, thē truly the vnworthy receiuing of Christ
must nedes be a communion of damnation deriued
also vnto vs. Lo in what absurdites Caluin hath entangled
him selfe by departing from the Catholike
faith. For keping the Catholike doctrine, none off al
these absurdites shal ensue. Wherefore it semeth I maie
well saie nowe to Caluin, and all suche as folowe
this his doctrine, that which S. Augustin saied to the
Arrians.Tract. 20. in Ioan. 
               Ego secundum fidem Catholicam Video quomodo
exeam (de questione) sine offensione sine scandalo, tu autem
circumclusus quaeris qua exeas, that is. I folowing the catholike

faithe▪ can easely finde a waie to ridde my selfe
oute this of question without offence or inconueniēce.
But thou being al compassed in, arte to seke
whiche waie to gett oute. And euen so fareth it with
Caluin. For leauing the sure knowen doctrine of the
catholike Churche, teaching vs according to the tenour
of Christ his owne wordes, that we eate his
fleshe and drinke his bloud in the blessed Sacrament,
and imagining a communion of Christ his fleshe to
be deriued vnto vs by the Spirit of Christ, as by a coundit
pipe, you see what hainous blasphemies and
brutish absurdites he is forced withal to cōfesse. And
this point by vs nowe examined, is the chefest Kaye
of all the Sacramentary doctrine, which being proued
nought and full of absurdites, declareth that all
the store within is of no better stuffe. And that shall
you anon see, and sensibly feale, if priuat preiudice
haue not vtterly bereued you of common sence.
            Caluin in his commentaries vpon the first to the
Corinthians,In 1. Cor. cap. 
                     •
                  1. disputing howe we receaue Christ in
the blessed Sacrament, concludeth his whole disputation
in these wordes. I conclude saith he, the body of
Christe is geuen vs in the Supper really, as they commonly
speake, that is truly, to the entent it may be holesome foode for
oure soules. I speake after the common fashion, but I meane
that oure soules are fedde with the substaunce of Christ his
body, to the entent we may be made one with him, or, which
is all one, that a certain quickening vertu is poored vpon vs
oute of the fleshe of Christ by his Spirit, though it be farre distant
from vs and be not mingled with vs. In these wordes

Caluin vttereth two straūge doctrines. First that our
soules are fedde with the body of Christ, secondarely
that we receaue the body of Christ really and
truly, though he saie after that body to be farre distant
from vs, meaning that it remaineth only in heauen:
as in the very nexte wordes folowing he declareth.
            As touching the first point, if oure soules are fedd
with the body of Christ by eating the sacrament, we
must lerne whether he meane the soule onely to be
fedde and not the body or the body also to eate the
fleshe of Christ as well as the soule. Caluin meaneth
the soule onely to eate the body of Christ. For in his
cōmentaries vpon the sixte of Iohn, he pronoūceth
our eating of the sacrament to be the worke of our
faith, and saith farder in expresse wordes. I confesse
we eate not Christ any other wise then by beleuing, which
doctrine howe absurde it is, we shall anon speake off.
Nowe let vs see what absurdites folowe, graunting
the eating of Christ his body onely to the soule.That the soule only is not fedde of Christ in the Sacrament.
            
            First if the bread of life whiche Christ geueth in
the Sacrament, be eaten onely off the soule, then
Manna the figure of this sacrament was more auailable
to the Iewes, then this blessed foode is to vs Christians.Exod. 16.
For that the Iewes did eate Manna bodely not
onely by faith,Ioan. 6. and that it was a corporal foode vnto
them, the scripture doth clerely testifie. Againe that
it was also a spirituall foode, yea and the very same
which we receaue in the Sacrament, the doctrine of
Caluin defendeth though blasphemously, as you shal

see anon in the conferences of his doctrine with holy
scripture. Hereof will it folowe by the absurde doctrine
of Caluin, that the figure shal excell the verite,
Manna shall passe the body of oure Lorde, the synagoge
of Iewes shall be off more perfection, then the
Church off Christ ransomned with his precious
bloud.
            Againe if the soule onely be fedde in this blessed
Sacrament, the paschall lambe shall also passe and excel
it.Exod. 12. The paschal lambe was eatē 
               contra spiritum percussorem
against the destroyer spirit, for a sure preseruation
of the Iewes bothe bodely and ghostely, euen
as this heauenly passeouer wardeth vs bothe body
and soule frō the assautes of the deuill. And our Sauiour
beginning with his disciples this heauenly
banquet, calleth it a passeouer, as Tertullian expoundeth
it and Origē, saying I haue inwardely desired to eate
this passeouer with you before I suffer▪
               
               Lib. 4. aduersus Marcionem Luc. 22. Homil. 35. in Matth. if the Iewes passeouer
excelled this, as the sacramētary doctrine of Ihon
Caluin importeth, why desired Christ so inwardly
to eate this passeouer with his disciples? doth the
lambe of God Christ him selfe, not so much profit
the due receauers thereof, as the paschall lambe of
the Iewes? Whereunto thinke you tendeth this doctrine,
but by litle and litle to traine vs euen to infidelite?
who tendreth his soule helthe and life euerlasting,
let him spedely beware of it.
            Thirdly I might aske Caluin and all the ranke of
sacramentaries swarming nowe so miserably in oure
dere countre to the vtter destruction off the same,

where they reade in holy scripture, that the soule onely
fedeth on Christ, and receaueth the body off
Christ. The wordes of holy scripture declaring vnto
vs the promis of this heauenly foode, be directed vnto
men consisting of body and soule, not to the soule
onely. Beside that life and resurrection (the promis
of this blessed Sacrament) are no lesse requisit to the
body▪ then to the soule, as we shall hereafter more at
large declare, when we come to the olde heresies depending
of Caluins doctrine. Where you shal see, that
this doctrine of the Sacrrmentaries graunting only
to the soule the eating of Christes his flesh, denieth
the resurrection of the body.
            As touching the seconde pointe,Real receauing can not stande vvithout reall presence. to witt, that we
receaue the body of Christ truly and really, and yet so
that the same body of Christ is as farre distant from
vs, as heauen is from the earthe, I knowe not what
can be more absurdely saide. Caluin in dede will haue
this to be a miraculous operation of the holy ghoste:
For, saith he, the vertu of the holy ghost is such,
               In Matth. Cap. 26. 
               that it is
able not onely to gather together thinges by distaunce of place
separated one from the other, but also to vnite them together
and make them one. Marke and ponder well the saing
of Caluin: for this reason is the onely ancre off
this point of his doctrine. He semeth perhaps to some
that lightly ouerrunne his wordes, to speake reason.
Let vs thē cōsidre his wordes. It is most true that the
holy ghost being god him self, can do al thinges that
can be done, and therefore can (as Caluin saith) knitte
in one those thinges that are farre distant: as, God

can by his omnipotency ioyne heauē and earthe together,
which we see are most distant. but then they
being so ioyned shall no more be distant. We graunte
that by the vertu off the holy ghoste the body off
Christ which is in heauen, may be the foode of oure
soules. But then it shall not onely be in heauen, but
here also (or els oure soules shall be there to, and then
seing oure bodyes remaine here, I see not but whosoeuer
communicateth after Caluins doctrine, he
must dye, the soule being separated from the body)
and we saie not onely he can do so, but the Catholike
churche teacheth vs, he doth so. Nowe Caluin bicause
he will denie the real presence of Christ▪ in the
Sacrament, imagineth that we eate the body of Christe
really withoute the reall presence. But this imagination
is a plaine contradictition. And contradiction
is of those thinges that can not be done. A thing can
not be present and distant to. A thing can not be hotte
and cold to in one very place and moment of time.
And therefore all lerned men haue euer saide, that
God worketh no contradiction. This then being a
plaine contradiction to haue Christ present, and not
present, to haue him in the Sacrament, and not in
the Sacrament, we saye the holy ghoste dothe not
worke it. Not bycause off any impossibilite off
God, but bycause the thinge it selfe is impossible.
And euen as we may wel say, God can not sinne, and
yet derogat no whit from the omnipotency of God,
so maye we saye, God can not worke a contradiction,
God can not make a thinge present that is in

dede absent and not present, and yet we diminishe
not the omnipotency of allmightye God. For that
consisteth in suche thinges as are semely for his diuine
Maiesty and are of them selues possible. Nowe
contradiction is of it selfe vtterly impossible. Againe
the workes of God are permanent and vniforme, the
one of them destroieth not the other. But in contradictions
one parte destroyeth the other, as a thinge
to be present, taketh awaye the absence thereoff.
And likewise the absence destroieth the presence.
To saie therefore, as all lerned men saye, that God
can worke no contradiction, argueth not an impopotency
or lacke of abylite in God: But rather the doctrine
of Caluin, making God the authour of contradiction,
argueth it.
            
               Theodore Beza and his companions at the late Synod
off Poissy in Fraunce, praesenting vpp their confession
touching this blessed Sacrament, thoughe
they were all scholers of Caluin, yet they dyd not
attribute this contradiction to the operation off
the holy ghoste, but vnto faith. The wordes of their
Confession presented the laste daye of September
vnto the councell are these.An. 1561 
               Bycause the worde off
God, vpon the which oure fayth is stayed, warranteth vs
the true and naturall body by the vertu of the holy Ghoste,
In this respect we acknowleadge that the body and bloud
of oure Lorde Iesus Christ is in the Supper. By these wordes
(Encestesgard In this respect) we meane that we apprehēd
this great and excellent mystery by faith, which is of such
vertu and efficacy, that it maketh thinges absent to be praesent.
               
Hitherto the wordes of their confession. Wherein
they attribute that to faithe, whiche Caluin their
Master attributeth to the operation of the holy
ghoste. But be their faithe neuer so stronge and
vehement, yet shall they neuer obtaine thereby that
one selfe thinge shall be bothe present and not present.
For this being a contradiction, is a thinge impossible,
and suche as God him selfe worketh not.
Faith,
               Heb. 11. saieth S. Paule, est argumentum rerum non apparentium.
Is a certainte off thinges which are not sene. By faith
we are assured of suche thinges as seme not to be,
but are in dede. But a thinge to be whiche is not,
oure faithe can not assure vs. So by faith we beleue
the present being off Christes body and bloud in the
Sacrament, which appeareth not present vnto vs. Nowe
then if Caluin shooteth much amisse to attribut
his fonde imagination to the miraculous working
off God, howe muche were his scholers beside the
marke, that seing Gods power failed, woulde flie to
their faithe, and attribute suche operation to it, as
God him selfe worketh not? And this doctrine being
so absurde, Caluin hath inuented bycause he
woulde destroye Transubstantiation. That is to saye.
Rather then with the Catholike churche he will
graunte that Christ maye be in many places at ones,
as in heauen, and in the blessed Sacrament to, whiche
is no contradiction but a worke though aboue the
commō course of nature, yet wel agreable to the omnipotēcy
of almighty God, and vniformely of al holy
fathers acknowledged, he inuenteth an imagination

of his owne, making God the authour off contradiction,
saieng we eate Christ in the Sacrament,
aud yet being as farre distant from vs, as heauen is
from the earthe, whiche bothe is a thing that God
neuer worketh, and such, as neuer man before the dayes
of Iohn Caluin, taught in Christ his churche. I haue
ben good readers some what long in debating this
one point, bicause I wish euery mā to vnderstande me.
As for the deceaued scholers of Caluin in oure dere
countre, if they will not beleue the Catholike churche,
touching the omnipotency of Christe to be in
diuers places at ones, they are confuted by the greate
worke of Brentius a Lutheran de vbiquitate sette forth
this very yeare for the proufe of that onely pointe.
though it be otherwise hereticall.
            Caluin in his commentaries vpon S. Iohn saith in
expresse wordes.In cap. 6. 
               I confesse we eate Christ by no other meanes
then by beleuing. And what beleuing he meaneth in
his Catechisme he doth expresse. In beleuing that Christe
is dead for our redemptiō,
               Dominica. 51. 
               and hath risen for our iustificatiō
our soule eateth the body of Christ spiritually. Finally
he meaneth no other eating of Christ in the sacramēt
thē by faith. For vpon the sixt of Ihon he affirmeth
eating to be the worke of faith, and in his Institutions
he calleth it the effect of faithe.
               Cap. 18. And this againe is a greate
stay of al the Sacramentary doctrine to make men
wene, that we ought to looke for no other eating of
Christ his flesh, and drinking his bloud, in the blessed
sacramēt, then by faith. For this their faith is so precious
a thing in the eye of Caluin, that he is not ashamed

to write in his cōmētaries vpō S. Matthew these
wordes.In cap. 26. 
               If we could sufficiently be mindefull of the passiō of
Christ, it were but superfluous, to haue the commō vse of Sacraments,
for they are remedies of oure infirmitie. This doctrine
bicause it is a most perilous and most blasphemous
doctrine, and yet, as I vnderstande to my greate
grief, much rooted in the hartes of many of my dere
deceaued countremen, I wil labour with such reasons
as I may, to remoue it frō their hartes. For truly this
proude confidence of faith planted by Luther, watered
by Caluin, and encreased by the pricking forthe
of the deuill in his Ministres, excludeth all meanes to
call for grace, all due preparation to the holy Sacraments,
all endeuour of vertuous liuing.
            First if by beleuing in Christ,That vve eate not the Body of Christ onely by Faithe we eate Christe, and
eate no otherwise then by faithe, then is all excommunication
vaine. Bothe the Catholike church hathe
allwaies practised, and the protestants of our countre
for the maintenaunce of their wicked doctrine
do gredely practise, that for certain hainous crimes
men are kepte from the holy table as they calle it, or
embarred the receauing of the blessed Sacrament, as
the Catholike churche termeth it. The doctrine off
the Catholike church teaching vs, as the wordes of
our Sauiour expresly importe, to eate not onely by
faith, but in dede the fleshe of our Sauiour in the blessed
Sacrament, worthely excludeth from that most
holy mistery open penitents (as the primitiue church
speaketh) that is, suche as hauing committed notorious
crimes, either wickedly perseuere in the same, or

though repenting thereof, haue not yet done due satisfactiō
therefore. But the doctrine of Caluin and al
the Sacramentaries, excluding the reall presence off
our Sauiour, and graūting this heauēly foode to faith
only, what auaileth it thē to excōmunicat or remoue
frō their table any notorious offender, keping yet not
withstanding his faithe, and beleuing allwaies in the
passiō of our Sauiour and resurrectiō also? if by faith
onely he receaue Christ, then may he eate as well at
home in his house, as if he were admitted in to the
congregation. For though he be excommunicat, he
loseth not yet his faithe, vnlesse perhaps, as they saie
(according to the doctrine of their graundfather Luther)
that who hath faith, hath withall necessarely
good workes (whereupon they builde their perilous
doctrine of only faith) so contrary wise they will saie
that a notorious offender, a bearer of malice, a disobedient
person, and so forthe, leseth with al his faith,
by the lacke whereof he can not eate Christ vnlesse
he be absolued: if they saie this, first I aske what if the
person repent before the pretended bishop or Ordinary
absolue him? In this case other he beleueth,
and so eateth Christ though he stande yet excommunicat,
as being not absolued, or he beleueth not,
and so his faith dependeth vpon the external absolution,
which were to superstitious a doctrine for the
newe ghospell. Againe though we graunted them
this suttle shift, and suffred them so to pluck their
heades oute of the coler, that their excommunication
were good, bicause their excommunicats haue

loste their faith, and are become infidels (though truly
their excōmunicatiō be nothing els but the diuels
curse)Ciprian. in serm. de lap is, & lib. 1. Epis. 2. August. in euch
                     •
                  rid. c. 65. yet by this their doctrine they condemne the
primitiue church, embarring penitents such as lacked
no faithe pardy (onles a man maie bewaile his sinnes
and haue no faithe) some three, some seuen, some
ten yeares, some euen to the houre off their death
from the receauing of the blessed Sacrament. Nowe
if they boldely condemne the primitiue church, what
maie they not be bolde to do? yet they beare men in
hande forsothe that they reduce all to the state off
the primitiue church, and will be tried by the first
six hundred yeares after Christ.Iuell. Well: this only practise
in the primitiue Church excluding penitents
from the blessed Sacrament directly destroieth oure
Sacramenaries doctrine teaching vs to eate Christ
no other wise (as Caluin saythe) then by beleuing.
            Againe the practise of the primitiue church was,Cirillus lib. 12. cap. 50. in Ioa. Basilius & Chrisostomus in liturgijs. that
the Cathechumeni that is, such as were not yet baptised,
and beleued not withstanding bothe in the passion
and in the resurrection of Christ, should not only
not be admitted to receaue the holy Sacramēt, but
were not suffred to tary in the church at the oblation
and distributiō thereof. For after the ghospel they we
re all by the deacōs excluded. And to this daie at Rome
where Turkes sometime resort, and Iewes alwaies
cōtinewe, some infidels and some Catechumeni, at the
solēne festes when most resort of people is, at the high
masse after the ghospel a staie is made and a serch,

whether any Catechumeni other of the Iewes or of the
grekes be present. Notwithstanding these Catechumeni
beleued in Christ, some off them no lesse then the
Christiās.Nicephor. lib. 11. cap. 32. 
               S Ambrose was a Catechumin and a beleuer
in Christ though not baptised, euē when he was elected
bishop of Millain. S. Augustin being yet a Catechumin
wrote diuers litle bookes,Vide Re
                  
                     •
                  ract. lib. 1. wherein he declared
him selfe not only a true beleuer in Christ,
but an excellent diuin, as it appereth especially by his
Soliloquia, which he made in that time. Nowe if Caluin
had liued in those daies, and sene S. Ambrose and S.
Augustin not yet baptised, notwithstanding the faith
and lerning they had, to be thrust out of the churches
after the ghospel, and not to haue bē suffred so much
as to be present at the sacring time, and the residew of
the Masse, he woulde of al likelihood, comforted thē
with the faith of his ghospell, and whistred them in
the eare, that they receaued and did eate the fleshe off
Christ no lesse thē the other that receaued at the aultar,
seing they beleued no lesse then the other. He
might also haue checked S. Ambrose for keping theNicephor. lib. 12. cap. 41.
Emperour Theodosius so longe out of the church for
the greate murdre he had caused to be done at
Thessaelonica. For the Emperour notwithstanding
remained in his faith, as it well appeareth by the greate
lamentations he made at home in his house,
when he sente Ruffinus one of his Nobles to S. Ambrose
to be admitted in to the churche. And in very
dede Caluin by this his doctrine not onely comptrolleth
S. Ambrose and S. Augustin, but condemneth

all the primitiue church excluding the Catechumeni
from receauing the blessed Sacrament, if, as he saie,
faith only geueth them this foode. I beseche here all
good Christen men, and such as feare God and loue
their owne soules, diligently to aduise with them selues,
howe they folowe the Sacramentary doctrine of
our preachers of Geneua, lest that in folowing them
they departe from the Catholike church, bothe that
nowe is, and euer hath ben, which in their Crede they
professe to beleue.
            Thirdly if when our Sauiour saied to his disciples,
Take, eate, this is my body, by the worde eating he badde
vs beleue, what did he bidde vs in the worde taking?
do we take by faith as we eate by faith? why then call
they men so earnestly to their table? maye I not as wel
eate and take by faith at home, as at their table? doth
not my faith serue me as well in the house, as in the
church? they are wonte to saie, we maie as well praie at
home, as in the church, and why maie we not also as
well beleue at home, as in the church? Then if bothe
taking and eating the body of Christ, be but a matter
of faith, what nede they storme and trouble such as
will not receaue at Easter or other times? maie not
good men tel them, that by their owne doctrine they
receaue at home beleuing in the passion and resurrection
of Christ? Againe when Christ bad the Apostles
take, and eate his body, did they looke vpon him
beleuing him, and receaued nothing outewardely?
yes they will saie they receaued the bread. what?
was the bread the body of Christe? the Lutherans indede

would be glad to heare that. For so should Caluin,
be a Lutheran, and agree with Westphalus which
while he liued, he would not do for his life. What wil
here the Sacramentary saye? What shift hath he yet?
He will perhaps saye, that Christ bad thē take bread,
and eate his body. This were in dede to make Christ
a very sophister: to witt, that bidding the Apostles take
and eate both together, saying withall it was his
body, he should meane they should take bread, and eate
his body. Brefely this I cōclude. Yf Christ in these
wordes, Take, eate, this is my body meaned this, Take
and eate this bread, which is my body, then Caluin agreeth
with Westphalus, and is become a Lutheran, against
his will. If he meaned this, take bread, and eate
my body, then was it a sophisticatiō. For it is a point
of sophistry to ioyne two termes together, taking one
properly and the other improperly. As here by this
laste meaning, Christ bidding them take, ment properly
they should take in dede and bidding them eate,
mēt vnproperly, that is, they should not eate in dede,
but beleue. For as al the worlde knoweth, beleuing is
a very vnproper signification of eating: and suche as
neuer was heard of before the daies of Iohn Caluin,
being ment of sacramentall eating.
            But will you see, that by the doctrine of Caluin.By the doctrine of Caluin the Apostles did not receiue Christe in the last Supper.
the Apostles did not eate Christ at all in the last supper?
I meane by faithe. For Caluin as you haue heard
by his wordes in his Catechisme, meaneth such faith
as beleueth that Christ died for our redemption, and
hath risen for our iustification. Nowe what faith the

Apostles had when Christ made is maunde, touchinge
his death, I will not nowe dispute. Althoughe it
may seme they doubted much thereof,Luc. 22 whē they wō
               dered
so muche at his wordes signifiēg his deathe, as
that Iudas should betraie him: as also S. Peter after denieng
him. But as touching the resurrection, the scripture
telleth vs plain, that diuers of the Apostles at
that time beleued it not. For first S. Ihon in his ghospell
writeth of him selfe,Cap. 20. that after he looked in to
the graue and sawe nothing but the winding shete lefte,
Vidit & credidit, he sawe and he beleued. And straight
after he writeth of S. Peter and him selfe. Nondū enim
sciebant scripturā, &c. for they knewe not yet the scripture
that he should rise frō deathe. S. Thomas also an other of
the Apostles woulde not beleue that Ghrist had risen,
vntell he put his finger in to his woundes. And
therefore our Sauiour saide after vnto him, Quia vidisti
me Thoma, credidisti. Thomas thou haste beleued bicause
thou haste sene me. Lo then S. Peter, S. Ihon, and S.
Thomas beleued not in the resurrectiō of Christ whē
they receaued the blessed Sacramēt in the laste Supper.
therefore if Caluins doctrine be true, the Apostles
did not eate Christ at all in the laste Supper. See what
godly doctrine ensueth of this ghospel of Geneua.
            But here perhaps some scoler of Caluin will obiect:
what Sir? Will you then conclude that bicause in the
laste Supper the Apostles without such especiall faith
receaued the body of Christ, therefore nowe any
man may receaue it without that faith? Truly suche
maner of reasoning of it selfe were naught. But yet

inioyning with Caluin it were not amisse. For he vseth
the like against the doctrine of the Catholike
church. In his Institutions, disputing against the reall
presence of Christ in the Sacrament,Cap. 18. and awnswering
to those which for possibilite of being in diuers
places at ones, alleage that the body of Christ is
glorious and immortall and not subiect to place and
measure, as oure corruptible bodies are, he writeth
thus. Some againe, saieth he, seke a more suttle escape, to
wit, that the body of Christ geuē in the Sacramēt is glorious
and immortall, and therefore that it is not absurde he be in
diuers places, or in no certain place, or in any certain forme
vnder the Sacrament. But I aske them. VVhat body gaue
our Lorde to his disciples the daie before he suffred? Do not
the wordes sounde that he gaue his mortall body and the same
which shoulde forthwith be deliuered? Thus farre Caluin.
If then this maner of reasoning be currant and
allowablein Caluin, Christ before he suffred, gaue his mortall
body to be eaten, ergo he geueth not nowe any other in
the Sacrament, why then maye not we also reason against
him, The Apostles before Christ suffred, beleued not
in the resurrection, and yet notwithstanding receaued the body
of Christ in the Sacrament, ergo it is not nowe requisit
and necessary for the eating of Christ his body to beleue in his
resurrection. If this maner of reasoning be naught
and vicious, then you lerne that Caluin in reasoning
against the churche speaketh not allwaies the ghospell,
but vttereth sometimes his ignoraunce. And if
this maner of reasoning be good, then Caluin misseth
much of the marke in his doctrine, where he

teacheth that to eate Christ, is to beleue in his passion
and resurrection. Againe we do not reason in
this sorte. The Apostles at the Maunde beleued not in the
resurrection, ergo such faith is not nowe necessary: as Caluin
reasoneth. The body of Christ was then mortal: ergo it
is not to be considered here as a glorious body or immortall.
But this is our reason. The Apostles in the laste supper beleued
not in the resurrection: ergo Calvin defining the eating
of Christ in the Sacramēt to be a beleuing in the deathe and
resurrection of Christ, excludeth the Apostles from eating of
Christes body in the last Supper. This is lo the effect of
our reasō. Nowe if we would infer beside that bicause
the Apostles did not then beleue, such belefe now
is not necessary, I graūte the argumēt were naught.
and yet were it such as Caluin vseth against vs, as
you haue heard. I haue troubled you here somewhat
longe. But this you haue gained: that not only the presēt
point of his doctrine, whereof we now purposely
do entreate, is proued to be absurde and detestable, as
the which excludeth the Apostles from the true receauing
of Christ in the laste Supper, but also we haue
farder declared you an other false point of his maner
of reasoning against the Catholike doctrine in
this moste blessed Sacrament.
            The fifte absurdite against this pointe of his doctrine
maie be this. If the eating of Christ his body be (as
Caluin saith vpon S. Ihon) the worke of faithe,
               In Cap. 6. or (as he
writeth in his Institutions)Cap. 18. 
               the effect of faithe, that is,
if by beleuing in Christ, we eate and receaue Crist
in to vs,1. Cor. 14 then to what purpose did S. Paule bid men

proue them selues first, and so to eate Christ? For he
that proueth, trieth, and examineth him selfe, first he
beleueth.Hebr. 11. For without faith there is no triall of our
hartes, and he that cometh to god (saieth the Apostle)
must first beleue. then if he beleue before he proue him
selfe, he eateth by Caluins saieng, the body of Christ,
before he be proued. How standeth this with S. Paul
bidding vs first to proue and so to eate? Surely S. Paule
mēt that the eating of Christ was not by faith only,
which we muste nedes haue before we can proue
and trie our owne worthines or vnworthines, but by
receauing really after due probation and trial the very
true and naturall body of our Sauiour Iesus Christ.
            Last of all, if the eating of life whiche Christ promiseth
in the Sacrament, is the effect of faith, the eating
of iudgement and deathe is the effect of infidelite.
That is, if by faith we duely receaue the blessed
Sacramēt, through infidelite and lacke of faith we receaue
our owne damnation. By this reason the Turke
shall through his infidelite eate iudgment and dā
               nation,
though he neuer eate the Sacrament, nor the
bread which S. Paule spake of. This doctrine therefore
of Caluin maie haue good rime, but surely it hathe
small reason, it may sounde well in the eares of ignorant
persons, that we eate Christ no otherwise
then by beleuing in him: but it standeth with no reason
at all, as you haue I trust sufficiently heard: and
yet when we come to the contradictions of Caluin
you shal here more, and see Caluin confute him selfe.
I will note onely more most notable absurdite in

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
this their doctrine, whereby you shall perceaue to
what point they bring this holy Sacrament, and so
come to the contradictions of Caluin, as we promised.
            
               Caluin teacheth in his Catechisme, that we receaue
the communion of Christ his body as well in baptim, and by
hearing the ghospell, as at the Lordes supper. But that in
Baptim and by the ghospell we receaue him but in parte, in
the Supper we receaue him wholy and fully. And in his resolution
of the Sacraments he teacheth that we receaue
Christ in the Supper, euen as we had him before
continually dwelling in vs.
               Art. 19. For, saieth he, Faithe being
required of vs before we come to the Sacrament, we haue
Christ also before: for oure faith is not without Christ: And
euen as the vse of the Sacraments profiteth no more the vnbeleuers,
then if they vsed them not at all, so the beleuers communicat
and haue the verite figured by the Sacraments (which
is Christ)
               Art. 20. euen without the vse of the Sacraments. Farder
the profit which we receaue at the Sacramēts, ought not to be
restrained to the very time we receaue thē, as though the signe
being geuen vs, we receaued withal incontinently the grace
of God. It maie well happen that the receit of the Sacrament
that in the acte profited nothing through our defaute
or slacknes, maie afterwarde bring forth better frute. Hetherto
Caluin. In these wordes Caluin concludeth
his doctrine touching this blessed Sacrament. Let vs
nowe examin it.
            
            What meaneth Caluin so to debace the excellent
vertu of this blessed Sacrament, as to compare
it to baptim or hearing of the ghospell? forsothe to

persuade men that it were nought els, but a morcell
of bread, a mere figure, badge or token. For see I praie
you, what his opiniō and doctrine is touchīg baptim.
            
               Baptim, saithe he in his institutions,Cap. 17. 
               is a signe
of the entring whereby we are receaued in to the felowship
of the Church, that being grafte in Christ we
maie be accompted amonge the Children of God. Here
he meaneth baptim not to make vs entre in to
Christ as a Sacrament hauing efficacy thereunto,The opinion of Caluin touching baptim refuted but
to be a signe of that entring: to the entent that being
first grafte in Christ (or being borne of Christen
parents by the vertu of Gods promise, or being borne
of infidels, by faith and repentaunce, as he teacheth
manifestly in his institutions) being (as I saie) thus
grafte in Christ before, then by baptim as by a sure
token we maie be accompted for Christians, not made
such. And this to be his very meaning I will by his
owne wordes declare you oute of his Institutions.
In his chapter of baptim not farre from the beginning,
thus he writeth. Baptim promiseth vs no other cleā
                  sing
then by the sprinckling of the bloud of Christe, whiche is
figured by the water: who then will saie that we are cleansed
with this water, which dothe assuredly testifie that oure
true and onely cleansing is the bloud of Christe? Lo here he
teacheth baptim to figure oure cleansing procured
by the sheading of Christ his bloud, whiche he calleth
oure true and onely cleansing.
            It is most true that by the precious deathe and
passion of oure Sauiour we are purged from the sinne
of our father Adam, and all other actuall sinnes.

And yet it hath pleased God to vse meanes for the
appliēg of this souuerain benefit vnto vs. Those are
amonge other, his holy sacraments. And Caluin him
selfe writing vpon S. Paule to the Corinthians, saith
plainely that by the blessed Sacrament of the aultar
Sacrificij beneficium nobis applicatur,
               In. 1. Cor. Cap. 11. 
               The benefit of the sacrifice
is applied vnto vs. And writing vppon the sixte
of Ihon, he blameth them which teache the fleshe of
Christ to profit vs onely as it was crucified, and saieth:
Quin potius comedere eam necesse est vt crucifixa profit.
that is. Na rather we must of necessite eate it, to the entent
it maye profit vs, which was crucified. And againe in
in the same place he saieth. Nihil nobis prodesset victimā
illam semel esse immolatā, nisi nūc sacro epulo vesceremur
that is. It shoulde nothing auaile vs to haue that sacrifice
ones offred, onles we did nowe also eate of this holy bāquet.
Caluin him selfe therefore acknowledgeth that not
only the passion of Christ suffiseth, but that also this
Sacrament of Christ his body and bloud must feede
vs.Ioan. 6. The like truly we saie of baptim. For as our Sauiour
saied. Onles you eate my fleshe and drinke my bloud,
you shall haue no life in you,
               Ioan. 3. so he saide, Onles a man be borne
againe of water, and of the holy ghoste, he shall not enter
in to the kingdome of heauen. And though Caluin call
here the bloud of Christe oure onely clensing, yet S.
Paule is not afeared to call baptim also, Lauacrum regenerationis,
the cleansing of our new birthe. saieng we were
saued thereby.Tit. 3. Againe Caluin him self writing vppon
S. Paule to the Romans teacheth no lesse.In cōment. in Cap. 6. For
there he saith that by baptim we are graffed in to the body

of Christe, and liue by the substance thereof, euen as the
graffe by the stocke: sauing that the graffe kepeth his naturall
taste and sape, but we kepe nothinge offour owne,
but chaunge vtterly our nature in to the nature of
Christ.
               A contradiction of Caluin aboute baptim. Howe then is baptim as he made it before, a
figure of our clensing, and a testimony onely? Yow
see he cōdemneth him selfe. And this I haue thought
good presently to declare (allbeit beside oure principall
purpose) leste that the other doctrine of Caluin
being apparently plausible, might corrupt the vnlerned,
and well meaning Reader. But now to the matter
againe.
            In the same chapter of baptim, Caluin mocketh
at the whole Catholike churche (as Pelagius the heretike
did a thousand yeares paste) teaching that originall
sinne is taken awaye by baptim.Cap. de Caena Domini. Brefely in the
next chapter folowing of his Institutions at the ende
thereof, he maketh so light of baptim in the children
of Christen parents, that if contempt and negligence
be not on our partes, oure children, saieth he,
without daunger may lacke baptim.
            Thus lo you see howe Caluin maketh baptim but
a figure,Caluin maketh the blessed Sacramēts only bare signes, tokens, and badges. and token or testimony of clensing: and euen
so much maketh he the blessed Sacrament off
the aultar, comparing it vnto baptim, to witt, a figure,
a signe, a testimony which a man may as well lacke
as haue, and withoute the which a man maye as
well receaue Christ as with it: imagining that these
two most waighty and holy Sacramēts (for of al the
rest he maketh no accompte at all) are naught els but

as certain markes and tokens, whereby Christ may
knowe his flocke lest perhaps in seking for them he
should misse. See to what point oure Christen religion
is brought by these newe ghospellers of late
yeares. Forsothe to mere signes, tokens and figures.
            As though we were yet vnder the shadowes off
Moyses lawe,Argumēts to the cō
                  trary. as though that which happened to thē
in figures were not brought nowe to a sure verite, as
though the coming of Christ procured not better,
and more present remedies for mans saluation, then
such as were betokened in the tabernacle, finally as
though the church of Christ, redemed with his most
precious bloud were fedde with figures, and traded▪
with signes and tokens, as the synagoges of the Iewes
was. Would Christ thinke we; threaten vs damnation
for lacke of signes, as he dothe for wante off
baptim,Ioan. 2 saieng vnto Nicodemus, Onles a man be borne
again of water and the holy ghoste, he shall not enter in to
the kingdom of heauen? Would he denie vs the life of resurrection
for lacke of tokens,Ioan. 6. as he doth for not receauing
his precious body and bloud saieng vnto the
Iewes, Onles you eate my flesh and drinke my bloud, you
shal haue no life in you? Would S. Paule pronounce dā
               nation
vpō vs for the vnworthy receauing of a piece
of bread,1. Cor. 11. as he doth for the vnworthy receauing
of Christ his body? Was S. Peter deceaued, when he
wrote that by baptim we were saued, as Noe was by water,
               1. Pet. 3.
or S. Paul writing that Christ cleāsed his church with
the washing of water in the word of life? or the whole

church in S. Augustins time condemning Pelagius
for an heretike,August. ad Quoduultdeum haer. 88. for that he denied (as Caluin dothe
nowe) that by Baptim originall sinne was taken awaie?
            We recited you before, in this laste conclusion of
Caluins whole doctrine touching this blessed Sacrament,
oute of his resolutions vpon the sacraments,
that we receiue Christ no lesse withoute the vse off
the Cōmuniō, thē in vsing it. You haue heard there
his reasons why. Truly he vttereth this doctrine off
his, not in one or two, but allmost in all places of his
workes, where he treateth of this matter. In his cō
               mentaries
vpon the sixte of Ihon, where Christ promiseth
life and resurrection to those whiche eate his
fleshe and drinke his bloud, Caluin saithe. Nō de Coena
habetur cōcio sed de perpetua communicatione quae extra
Caenae vsum nobis constat. that is. Christ preacheth not of the
Supper, but of that continuall communion which we surely
haue withoute the frequentation of the Supper. And this
continuall communion withoute the frequentatiō,
vse, or accesse of the Supper, he meaneth to be the
very same which we haue in the Supper, as his wordes
folowing declare, where he saithe. Simul tamē fateor
nihil hic dici quod non in Coena figuretur ac vere praestetur
fidelibus. that is. Yet I confesse withall that nothing
is here spoken which is not figured and truly exhibited to the
beleuers in the Supper. Then the doctrine of Caluin is
clere and euident in this point, that we receaue Christe
no lesse and haue him no lesse dwelling in vs cō
               tinually,
though we come not to the communiō or

Sacrament, then if we come and resorte thither.
            What nede I spēde wordes,It booteth not to come to the cōmuniō by the Doctrine of Caluin time and paper in refelling
this moste absurde doctrine? if this be so, why
scorne they of Caluins secte against suche as liste
not come to their table? Maye not good men tell thē
that by the doctrine of Caluin they cōmunicat and
receaue Christ allwaies by faithe in their hartes, no
lesse then at their table or cōmunion? and that they
take nothing there, but suche as they had before
they came thither? Caluin teacheth this most directly
as you haue heard, and as they maye more see,
whiche liste to reade his litle treatise entitul
                  •
               d. A resolution
vpon the Sacraments in the fourtenth and ninteth
articles.
            I will here aske one question of the Caluinistes
and scholers of Geneua in our countre.A question to the Geneuians of Englande If, as Caluin
saithe vpon the sixte of Ihon, we haue a perpetuall
communion of Christ no lesse withoute celebrating
the Supper of the Lorde, then in celebrating it,
what nede Christen mē celebrat that Supper? They
will perhaps awnswer, that in the Supper we receaue
Christ Sacramētally not only Spiritually as without
the Supper we do. If this be the only differēce touching
our part, and the frute that we receaue thereat,
thē the differēce onely is this: that at the communiō
we receaue a piece of bread, more then they whiche
stande by and looke on. Spiritually, saithe Caluin, al
true beleuers receaue Christ and eate his body before
they come to the Sacraments,In resolut. art. 20. for els saithe he, we
should tye Christ to his sacraments. Sacramentally

we receaue Christ by Caluins doctrine,vvhat the communion of England is. when we receaue
the signes, to witt bread and wine. Lo what
the cōmunion of oure countre is▪ a piece of bread
and nought els.
            They will perhaps saie, we celebrat in the Supper
the remembraunce of Christ his passion. I awnswer.
So do they whiche stande by no lesse then
those whiche receaue. Againe is eating your bread
and drinking your wine, a remembraunce of Christ
his deathe and passion? A likely matter truly. You
are wonte to crie on scripture, and allow no doctrine
withoute it. Tell vs then from the beginning off
the Genesins, vto the ende of S. Ihons Reuelation,
where the remembraunce of Christ his passion is
taught to be celebrated by eating a piece of bread at
a table in the churche, and drinking a drawthe off
wine at the hande of a Minister, vpon whom no
handes haue ben layed by the order of priesthood
as by S. Paule we lerne to be necessary.1. Timo. 4. Showe this
and them your communion shall be somewhat more
then a piece of bread, and a cuppe of wine. Nowe
is it nothinge elles. And this verely is the cause of so
many drie communions in oure countre: this is the
reason why in Germany as Friderikus Staphylus recordeth,Aboue i
                     •
                   the leafe. 105.
some of the Sacramentaries come not ones
in ten yeres to the communion, some neuer at all.
            As touching the hearing of the ghospell, if, as Caluin
in his wordes aboue recited, and in his resolutions
teacheth,Vide art. 5. &, 6. we receaue Christ and are made partakners
of all his benefits no lesse then by the communion,

then is it ynoughe to heare the sermon, and no
nede at all to tary oute the communion: then was the
primitiue churche mu
                  •
               he deceaued suffring the Catechumins
and open penitents to heare sermons, excluding
them afterwarde from the communion.De incomprehensibisi dei natura contra Anomaeos homil. 3. 
               S. Chrisostom
in his homelies complaineth that in the pulpit
he had as greate audience, as was possible: but at the
aultar he was lefte alone. Truly by Caluins doctrine
he was a foole so to complaine: for the people had receaued
Christ all ready at the sermon. What neded
they then to tary oute the communion? Againe what
scripture haue these men that at Sermon we receaue
Christ no lesse then at the communion? truly if men
see not these absurdites, they wil see nothing. By the
sermon we are instructed, not clensed as by baptim,
we lerne Christ, we do not communicat Christes body,
as in the blessed Sacrament. But these men, as longe
as they may saye and teache what they liste vncomptrolled,
what may we thinke they will at length
do? truly they wil haue nor communion nor baptim,
nor churche nor minister, but a faire pulpit in the fielde,
where euery man as the Spirit moueth him, maie
teache what he liste, and the other beleue as they
liste. It is all ready in some countres brought to this
point. And there is no cause but we maie feare
the like: vnlesse spedy policy refraine their vnruly liberty.
            You haue good Readers the effect of Caluins doctrine
touching the blessed Sacrament, with certain
of the absurdites depending thereof. We come nowe

to his cōtradictions aboute the same matter, whiche
when you shall see to be in him diuers and most manifest,
recorde with your selues, that as in cōmō plea
where the witnesses are taken in contrary tales, the
euidence must nedes be naught, so in the controuersy
of this most highe mistery, Caluin being the enditer
against the olde possession of oure belefe herein,
and chefe pleader, if you maie take him in cōtrary tales,
you maie not doubte, but the euidēce of his doctrine
must nedes be starke staring naught. Beside, his cō
               tradictiō
shall serue vs, as a most strōge weapō to ouerthrow
his doctrine layde in against vs: for thus he
him self shal cut is owne throte, condemne and confute
his owne sayengs. I will first drawe you out the
effect off his doctrine against the reall presence off
Christ in the Sacrament, and show you how he accō
               breth
him selfe, how he turneth and windeth seking
by some probabilite to cōfounde the doctrine of the
catholike churche, and yet after many wordes confoundeth
him selfe, by his owne contradiction. Marke
therefore his wordes we bring you nowe, and howe
the other that we shall bringe you after do agree.
            In his institutions treating of this Sacrament,Cap. 1
                     •
                  . see
howe he dothe cōtrary him selfe. First he saith: We cā
not be mēbres of Christ his body, bones of his bones, and fleshe
of his fleshe, which all S. Paul affirmeth we are, vnlesse
whole Christ bothe in Spirit and in body cleaue vnto vs.
               Eph. 1. & 4. 1. Cor. 6.
               and oure Lord, saieth Caluin, doth testifie, offer and geue
in the holy supper to all that receaue that spirituall banquet
suche a communion of his body and of his bloud. And after

he concludeth thus. I saie therefore that in the mistery
of the Supper, by the signes of bread and wine Christ is geuen
vnto vs truly, yea his body and bloud, to the entēt that first
we maie be made one body with him, then being made partakeners
of his substaunce, we maie also receaue the vertu
thereof,
               Coalescamus in vnum corpus. 
               for the enioieng of all his benefits. All this he saieth
against thē, which acknowledging a certain communiō
with Christ in this Sacramēt, make vs onely partakners
of the Spirit of Christe, as in his wordes somewhat
before he expresseth. Woulde a man desire any
more Catholike doctrine then this is? truly it semeth
no. But you shall see within fewe lines he marreth
all that he made before. For when he cometh to
declare after what maner we receaue the body and
bloud of Christ (for by euidence of scripture he was
forced to confesse that we receaue it) thē lo he stretcheth
him selfe, and calleth his wittes aboute him,
how he may defeat the real presēce of Christes body
and bloud.In 1. Cor. 11. He graunteth we do truly, and (as he writeth
vpon S. Paule) really receaue the body and bloud
of Christe. But he will not haue it as the church teacheth,
really present. Howe then shall we really receaue
Christ? We nede not saieth Caluin, imagin any presence
of place to receaue Christ by. Howe then? This benefit
(saith he) Christ geueth vs by his Spirit. By▪ the Spirit
of Christ we are coupled and ioyned to Christ. and the Spirit
of Christ is as a certaine cundite pipe, by the whiche whatsoeuer
Christ is, and hathe, is deriued vnto vs. for if we see the
Son shining on the earthe with his beames, for the engendring
and quickening of thinges, geue as thoughe it were, his substaunce

vnto the earthe, why should the Spirit of Christ be
inferiour or of lesse force then the shining downe the son
for conuaying vnto vs the communion of Christ his fleshe
and bloud? Wherefore scripture speaking of our partaking
with Christe referreth the whole power thereof vnto the spirit.
One place shal suffise for all. For S. Paule writing to the
Romanes in the eight chapter teacheth that Christ dwelleth
no otherwise in vs then by his Spirit. Whereby yet he taketh
not a waie the communiō of fleshe and bloud that we nowe
speake of, but teacheth vs that by the onely spirit we possesse
whole Christ and haue him dwelling in vs.
               According to the latin edition printed, in the ieare. 1545 These lo hetherto
are the wordes of Caluin, euen as they lie in
his Institutiōs, the 18. chapper. The effect of his whole
tale is this. That by the Spirit of Christ onely we receaue
the body and bloud of Christ.
               The first contradiction. And is not this cleane
repugnant to that he saide before blaming them whiche
taught that in this Sacrament we were partakners of Christ
in Spirit onely? For howe receaue we the body and
bloud of Christe by the Spirit of Christ onely, but
spiritually only? The fleshe and bloud of Christ are
no spirituall thinges: Valentinus and Marcion were
condemned for suche doctrine. Howe then receaue
we thinges of a corporall substaunce, not mere spirituall,
onely by the Spirit? This is a mere imagination
of Caluin, as we haue before declared you. No scripture
termeth the Spirit of Christ a cundite pipe. No
scripture telleth vs, that the Spirit of Christ cōuaieth
vs his fleshe and bloude. It is beside scripture and against
all reason: and therefore not to be admitted by
the only warrant of Caluins mouthe. We must not

leaue the doctrine of the churche (though it had no
reason to defend it) for the bare assertion of Caluin,
being against all reason. For this is against all reason
that we should really eate the body, and drinke the
bloud of Christ, being not really present, though
Caluin to sett a gaie colour on the matter, attributeth
this straunge meanes and order to the operation
of the Spirit of Christ God him selfe. For (as we haue
before proued) god him selfe worketh no contradiction:
as it is to receaue that which is not present
to be receaued. Therefore notwithstanding all the
shiftes that Caluin maketh, it is no real communion
of Christ his body and bloud that he teacheth, as he
would it should seme to be, but a mere spirituall,
which before he blamed.
            As touching the Son, if Caluin speake like a philosopher
it is no body mixte, and made of the elemēts,
as the natural flesh and bloud of Christ is, but a pure
simple and celestial body: and so we graunte the substaūce
thereof is deriued to the earth by the shining
thereof. For that substaunce is a lightsom and shining
substaunce, and differeth no whit from the light and
clerenes thereof. Now Christ toke very fleshe in all
conditiōs like to our flesh, except the corruptiō that
sinne bringeth. This fleshe of Christ is so endued
with diuinite, that it loseth not his natural substaūce.
Therefore the substaūce of the Sō and the substaūce
of Christ his body, are thinges farre differēt. Againe
if the substaūce of the son quickeneth the earth, that
substaūce is really present with the earthe. By this reason

therefore Christ also should be really present
with vs feding vs with his substaunce. Which we do
confesse, but Caluin denieth. How thē dothe that similitude
make for him? Truly nothing.
            Farder▪ 
               The Son by the meanes of his shining, saieth
Caluin, geueth his substaunce to the earthe, and so Christ by
the meanes of his Spirit geueth vs the communion of his flesh
and bloud. Marke that Caluin saieth the communion
of the fleshe, not the fleshe it selfe to be deriued vnto
vs. For by the communion of the fleshe of Christ,
he meaneth (as vpon S. Paule h
                  •
                writeth) Vim ex Christi
carne viuificā,
               In 1. Cor. Cap. 11. 
               a certain quickening power oute of Christ
his fleshe. Nowe this quickening power of Christ
his flesh, is not the fleshe of Christ it selfe, VVhich
(by Caluins doctrine in his institutions) of it felfe is
not quickening or geuing life.
               Cap. 18. But it is the Spirit onely
of Christ which geueth life and quickeneth,The second contradiction saieth
he. Lo then againe you see notwithstanding all his
faire wordes before, his doctrine is nowe, that we haue
but a spirituall foode onely in this sacrament conuayed
vnto vs by the Spirit, as the son by his shininge
conuaieth his substaunce vnto the earthe. Is not
this ones againe a plaine contradiction to that whiche
he wrote before, blaming those that make vs partakners
of Christ in Spirit onely? is not his doctrine
the very same? is not the communion that he imagineth
to be conuaied vnto vs a spirituall thing? dothe
he not call it a certain quickening vertu oute off
Christ his fleshe? this quickening vertu, is it not by
the doctrine of Caluin a mere spirituall thinge, seing

that he teacheth blasphemousely with the olde heretike
Nestorius that the flesh of Christ (notwithstanding
it is Propria Verbi, one person with the Son of
God) is not of it selfe quickening. I trust you see nowe
euidently, that though Caluin write we receaue
truly and really the flesh and bloud off Christ, yet he
meaneth nothing so.
            But why did he thus dally, and delude the world,The canse of contradictions in Caluin.
a man maye demaunde. Forsothe as I suppose euen
for this cause. Caluin being lerned, and knowing the
truthe wel, if he had listed to vtter it, perceaued right
wel by the expresse wordes of scripture in sundry places
that Christ of his passing mercy and goodnes
woulde be ioyned to man not onely Spiritually, and
by grace, but euē really and truly by the participation
of his body and bloud. Caluin knewe all this, and
acknowledged it: (as you haue heard in his wordes
before) for expresse scripture moued him thereunto.
Notwithstanding being vndoubtedly malitious, and
selfe willed, and in dede a very heretike, desirous to
plāte a newe doctrine, to bringe the churche in cōtēpt
pricked with malice against the clergy, which in his
workes he vttereth many times) though he graunted
that man receaued whole Christ bothe in body and
Spirit, as he writeth in the 18. chapter of his Institutions,
yet he would not graunt the reall presence off
Christ his body, which the church teacheth and all
holy fathers haue acknowledged, as a most necessary
consequent to the reall receauing: but as you see
imagineth a communion of Christ his fleshe to be

deriued vnto vs by the Spirit off Christ as by a pipe.
Bicause therefore truthe and falshood can not possibly
agree, he falleth often in to open contradictions:
sayeng one thinge as truthe and conscience taught
him, and then saieng an other thinge, as pride, malice▪
and enuy moued him, the walking mates of heresy.
Hereof rise the sundry and manifold contradictions
in his writings, not onely aboute this most holy mistery,
but in the doctrine off baptim, and of fre will
especially, as we shall in parte note hereafter vnto
you.2, Reg. 15. And truly it hath so pleased God to confounde
the counsell of these Achitophels rebelling againste
their Liege Souerain the churche of God, that not
onely one against the other teacheth most contrary,
but also eche one with him selfe disagreeth. And
this mercifull prouidēce of God hathe ben allwayes
a souerain meanes for the vtter cōfusiō of heretikes.
            Let vs returne to the wordes of Caluin aboue alleaged
and see why Caluin graunting first a reall and
true receauing of Christ his body and bloud, afterwarde
denieth the reall presence thereof, whiche is
to denie that he saied before. He saieth, that Scripture
speaking of oure partaking with Christ, referreth the whole
power thereof vnto the Spirit. for S. Paule (saieth he)
writing to the Romanes in the eight chapter teacheth that
Christ dwelleth in vs no otherwise then by his Spirit.
               Caluin belieth holy Scripture. Marke
here well good Readers, and see the truthe off
Caluin. S. Paule saieth in that eight chapter, that the
Spirit of god dwelleth in vs, and againe that the Spirit of
him that raised vp Iesus from deathe dwelleth in vs, and

that he whiche raised vp Christ from deathe shall quicken
oure mortall bodies bicause of his Spirit that dwelleth in vs.
In all these wordes S. Paule teacheth the Spirit off
god, god him selfe to dwell in vs, to quicken oure
mortall bodies, that they die no more in sinne, but
liue to god. Other thē this S. Paule in all that chapter
speaketh not, touching the dwelling of the Spirit
of god in vs. Reade the chapter and see. Nowe is
this to saie, that Christ dwelleth in vs no otherwise then
by his Spirit? Marke the saieng of S. Paule, and the
consequence of Caluin. S. Paule saieth, the Spirit off
god dwelleth in vs. and Caluin saieth Christ dwelleth in
vs no otherwise then by his Spirit. is this a good consequence?
The spirit of god dwelleth in vs. Ergo he
dwelleth in vs no otherwise then by his Spirit? Euē
as good, as this. VVe are iustified by faith, ergo by only
faith. These wordes (no otherwise then) are the wordes
of Caluin fathered vpon. S. Paule, not the wordes
of S. Paule, they are the limitation of a prowde
heretike set vpon holy scripture, not the wordes off
holy scripture. He folowed herein his father Luther,
who translating the wordes of S. Paule per legem cognitio
peccati,
               Rom. 3. 
               By the lawe cometh the knowledge of sinne,
turneth it thus, By the lawe cometh naught els but knowledge
of sinne.
               In the lea
                  
                     •
                  e. 67. b which texte to what purpose he so peruerted,
you haue sene in the seconde parte of this Apologye.
            But what, will some scholer of Caluin saie?
though S. Paule saie not expressly so, yet perhaps he
meane so, seing that no scripture beside expresseth

any other dwelling of Christ in vs thē by his Spirit,
I awnswer. All were it true that scripture expressed
no other dwelling of Christ in vs, then by his Spirit,
yet were it not true that S. Paule saied so in that
chapter, as Caluin saieth he doeth. But the Scripture
saieth plaine that we are ioyned to Christe, not
onely in Spirit, but also in body: heard you not before
that S. Paule sayed,Ephes. 14. 1. Cor. 6. that we are membres of
Christ his body, bones of his bones, and fleshe of
his fleshe? And dothe not Caluin saie,The thirde contradiction. that this can
not be perfourmed onles whole Christ bothe in
Spirit and in body cleaue vnto vs? they are his wordes
before alleaged oute of his Institutions in the. 18
chapter. And dothe not Caluin here ones againe
write a plaine contradiction? he tolde vs euen nowe
that Christ dwelleth in vs no otherwise then by
his Spirit, and that S. Paule taught so. Nowe he telleth
vs that whole Christ must cleaue vnto vs bothe
in Spirit and body, and that bicause S. Paule teacheth
so: sayeng that we are membres of Christ his
body, bones of his bones, and fleshe of his fleshe. Lo
you see him in cōtrary tales, nowe truste his euidence
who liste. Thanked be god, Caluin hath turned
the weapon vpon him selfe, minding to strike the
churche of Christe.
            Againe Caluin disputing against the Catholikes,The four the cōtradiction.
that the euill men receaue not Christ in the Sacrament,
maketh his argument of the body of Christ,
whiche if euill men receaued, seing they receaue no
life but damnation, they shoulde saieth Caluin, receaue

a dead body, and the body of Christ without the Spirit of
Christe. If this reason of Caluin be good, thē the good
and worthy receauer muste nedes receaue the body
of Christ, not onely the Spirit of Christ: he muste
nedes haue Christ dwelling in him bodely, not onely
Spiritually as he saied before. His wordes are these
in his commentaries vppon S. Paule to the Corinthians.In 1. Cor. 11.
               Ego hoc axioma teneo neque mihi vnquam excuti
patiar, Christum non posse a Spiritu suo diuelli: vnde constituo
non recipi mortuum eius corpus, neque etiam eum
otiosum, aut disiunctum a Spiritus sui gratia & virtute.
that is. I holde this principle, and will neuer be brought
from it, that Christ can not be diuided from his Spirit. wherefore
I determin that his dead body can not be receaued,
nor he also vnfrutefull, seuered from the grace or vertu off
his Spirit. Here Caluin labouring to confute the Catholike
doctrine confoundeth him selfe. For this is
his reason. The euill mā receaueth not the Spirit of Christ:
therefore he receaueth not the body of Christ, which can not
be without it. A man might here saie to Caluin: why
Sir, no more dothe the good mā nether. for you saied
euen nowe that the Spirit of Christ onely dwelleth
in vs: which if it be so, the body and fleshe off Christe
dwelleth not in vs: thē if we that receaue Christe
as muche, and in as ample sorte, as he may be receaued,
receaue onely the spirit of Christe, what nede
you feare in the euill mans receauing diuiding of
Christ from his spirit, or his dead body to be receaued?
it were enough to saie, the euill man receaueth
not the Spirit of Christ in the sacrament, and therefore

he receaueth not Christ. But nowe you reason
as though the euill man, if he receaued Christe
should receaue his body withoute the Spirit: and
as though he good man receaued bothe body and
Spirit. Whiche were contrary to that you saied before:
That not the fleshe of Christ, but a communion of his flesh
(which is, as you teach a mere spirituall thing, to witt,In commentar. in 2. Cor.
               a quickening vertu out of Christ his fleshe) is deriued vnto
vs by his Spirit. What could Caluin awnswer here,
being pressed of one that would not forsake his aduauntage?
Wel: He is gone and paste all awnswering.
But he hath scholers good store on liue: Let them
awnswer and defend these contradictions, if they
can. Or if they ne can ne list to defend them, let them
put him oute of credit, and beleue such a false felowe
no more. I beseche oure Lorde they maye so
do.
            Caluin in his institutions, as you heard before,The fifte contradiction.
saieth. The Spirit of Christe is as a certaine cundyt pipe by
the which whatsoeuer Christ is, and hath, is deriued vnto
vs. And this spirituall pipe he imagineth to be a meanes
to receaue the communion of Christ his fleshe
by. Now in other places he maketh the flesh of Christe,
to be as a pipe for conuaiaunce of life vnto vs.
In his commentaries vppon the sixte of Ihon thus
he writeth. Sicut aeternus Dei sermo fons vitae est, ita caro
eius veluti canalis, vitam quae intrinsecus in diuinitate residet,
ad nos diffundit, that is, As the aeternall worde off
God, Christe, is the fountaine of life, so his fleshe like as a pipe
deriueth vnto vs life abiding, within the deite. Before he

saied. The Spirit of Christ deriued vnto vs all that Christ is,
or hath and so cōsequently life. Now he saieth, The fleshe of
Christ conuaieth life vnto vs. Before he made the Spirit off
Christ a pipe for conuaiaunce of life. Nowe he maketh the

                     •
                  leshe of Christ to be that pipe. Doth not this doctrine
confounde it selfe? vnlesse to establish his doctrine,
he will confounde the two natures of Christ, God
and man, flesh and Spirit, making eche one instrument
to the other, and appointing to them both like
actions and functions. Which were the heresy of the
Monothelita.
            
            Caluin in his commentaries vpō the sixt of Ihon
and vpon S.The sixte contradiction. In cap. 11. Paules first epistle to the Corinthians,
disputeth earnestly that euil men receaue not Christ
in the Sacrament. His reasons therefore in the fourthe
contradiction we touched. Woulde it not nowe
seme a straunge matter, to heare Caluin saie the
contrary, and confesse that all which come to the
communion receaue the body and bloud of Christ,
but the good and worthy receaue onely to saluation
euen as the Catholike doctrine teacheth? were it not
a wonderous matter to see Caluin agree herein with
vs, and disagree with him selfe? Lo then his wordes.
In his institutions the 18. chapter,Cap. de C
                     •
                  ena Dom. prouing oute of S.
Paule that bicause we must be membres of Christ
his body, bones of his bones, and fleshe of his flesh,
we must cleaue vnto him bothe in spirit and in body,
he inferreth thus. Talem corporis & sanguinis sui
communionem & caete. Such a communion of his body and
bloud Christ in the holy Supper, dothe testifie, offer, and

deliuer to all that sitt downe at that spirituall banquet: although
(cum fructu) profitably he be receaued of the faithful
onely. Lo you heare Caluin saie, that all which sitt
downe at the spirituall banquet of the Supper, receaue
the body and bloud of Christ, offred and deliuered
vnto them. And bicause you might not doubte, but
that the euill receaue also, he putteth a distinction
betwene them and the good, saieng that the faithefull
onely receaue (cum fructu) profitably: geuing vs to vnderstande,
that the other receaue, but vnprofitably. els
had it ben in vaine to saie, the good or faithefull
onely receaued profitably. it had ben inough to saie,
the good onely receaued. But it is a common saieng
oportet mendacem esse memorem. a lyar had nede haue a
good memory. Caluin here remembred not, that he
had in other places defended the contrary: but labouring
here, to sette forthe to the vttermost his doctrine
of the Supper, and to make men wene that he
taught according to scripture, the real receauing of
whole Christ in the Sacramēt,In cōment. in Cap. 6. 1. Cor. 11. pronounceth stoutely,
that Christ in the Supper not onely offreth, but
deliuereth him selfe, and that re ipsa in very dede (as in
an other place he writeth) to all that sitt downe at
that Spirituall banquet. Truly I maye saie here and
in all these other contrarietes of Caluin, as ofte as
the one parte is true (for many times bothe partes are
starke false) that whiche S. Augustin wrote of the
Donatistes: who being in a solemne conference at Carthage,
sometimes vttered the truthe against thē selues
vnwares, as Caluin dothe nowe: that is. O Violentia

veritatis.
               Contra Donat. post collationem cap. 3. 
               Quod semper illa tenuit, inimicorū confessio confirmauit.
O the force of truthe. That which truth alwaies
held, the confession of her enemies hath cōfirmed. Which yet
in his other contradictions more clerely shal appeare.
            
               Caluin in his institutiōs writeth this. Omnino isthaec
pijs tenenda regula est &c.
                  Cap. 18. The seuēth cōtradiction. This is a sure rule to be kepte of all
good mē, that as ought as they see the signes appointed of God
(bread and wine in the supper) they think assuredly and
persuade them selues,Rei signatae veritatem 
                     •
                  erto adesse cogitēt. that the verite of the thinge betokened is
also present. For to what purpose should Christ geue in
to thy hand the signe of his body, but to make the right sure
of partaking thereof? For if it be true that the visible signe
is geuen vs for confirmation of the vnuisible thing to be geuen,
the signe of the body being taken, let vs not doubte but
the body also is geuen vnto vs.Art. 20. 
               Nowe in his resolutions vppon
the sacraments thus he writeth. Oultre plus, L'vtilité
que nous recepuons aux sacramens, ne sedoibt restraindre au
temps de la reception d'iceux, comme si le signe visible si tost
qu'l nous est proposé, nous apportoit auec soy en vng mesme
instant la grace de Dieu. that is. Beside, the profit which we
receaue at the Sacraments, ought not to be restrained to the
time we receaue thē, as if the visible signe as soone as it is presented
vs brought with it forthwith the grace of God. Be
not these two tales cōtrary?
               In the fourthe contradictiō. 
               First he biddeth vs not doubt
but with the signe we receaue the body, which (as you heard
before of Caluin) can not be voide of grace. Now he
saith that the visible signe bringeth not forthwith the grace
of god. First he maketh it a rule that seing the signes, the
verite also (Christ him self) be present. Nowe he saith the
profit of the Sacramēts ought not to be restrained to the time

we receaue thē. Peraduēture he meaneth, we shoulde
receaue the signes and not see thē. els how these two
saiengs maie be reconciled, I see not, and I thinke no
man els dothe see. But it is not ones nor twise, that he
thus contradicteth him selfe, but many times and often:
and that in small space, as oute of his resolutions
vpon the Sacraēnts I will note nowe vnto you.
            
            
               In the thirde article of his resolutions he writeth,
Christ estant fils eternell de Dieu, d'vne mesme essence &c.
that is, Christ being the eternal Son of God of one very substaunce
and glory with the father, hathe taken vpon him oure
fleshe, to the ende that he should communicat vs that whiche
he had properly by nature.The 8. cō
                  tradictiō. 
               In these wordes are two
doctrines cōtrary to his former saiengs. First if Christ
be (as he is in dede) of the very same substaunce and glory
with the father, then he is not a folowing cause of life, as
he teacheth writing vpon the sixte of Ihon. We will
alleage you his wordes herafter when we shall detecte
you his heresies.
               The 9. cō
                  tradictiō. 
               Againe here he confesseth Christ
to communicat vnto vs, that which he had properly by nature,
to witt his fleshe,
               In commentar in 1. Cor. 11. 
               before he graunteth not vs his fleshe,
but a spirituall communion thereof, to wit a quickening power
oute of that fleshe.
            In the. 9. article thus he writeth. Albeit we putte a
difference betwene the signe and the thinges figured thereby,
yet we separat not the verite from the figures.
               The 10. contrad. The figure
or signe which Caluin meaneth, is bread it selfe, the
thinge figured is Christe. Now if he seuer not Christ
from the bread, then is he there present really (as the
bread is) with the bread. Which Caluin writing against

               Westphalus and other Lutherans dothe allwaies
declaime and inueigh against.
            In the nexte article folowing, thus he writeth,
But we muste not haue a regarde to the bare signe but to the
promis which is thereto annexed. Beholde I beseche you
what fonde contradictiō this is.The 1
                     •
                  . contrad. For what is the promis
of the blessed sacrament? Christ saith. Who eateth
my flesh hath life,
               Ioan. 6. 
               and I wil raise him again at the later daie.
Lo life and resurrectiō is the promis. If this, as Caluin
teacheth, be annexed to the signe, how calleth he it a
bare signe? But Christ teacheth vs, as you see, that this
promis is not annexed to the bread, which is impossible,
but to his very flesh: and that full of all diuinite:
which is no bread pardy. It foloweth in the article.
Therefore the simple matter of water, of bread and wine doth
not present vs, nor geue vs Christ. Lo here againe he calleth
the signe a simple matter of bread and wine. Howe
then I praie you is that waighty promis of life and resurrection
annexed vnto it?
               The 21. contrad. Beside, he sayth the signe dothe
not present vs Christ. Yet before in the seuēth article
he wrote that the principall office off the sacraments was,
that god by them dothe testifie vnto vs his grace, representeth
it and sealeth it vnto vs. And in the .8. article he calleth
them true witnesses and seales. and euery where he calleth
the bread the figure of Christ his body. If all this
be true, howe saieth he nowe true, saieng that the signe
dothe not present vs Christ? howe calleth he it a simple
matter of bread and wine? Lo howe many contradictions
are couched in one of his articles. But let vs considre
the reste.
            
               
In the twelueth article thus he writeth. Farder, as
for that which is geuen vnto vs by the Sacraments, that is
not by their owne proper vertu, although that the promis is
comprised in them, whereby they are indued with the qualite
thereof. Here he confesseth againe, in the sacraments is
comprised or contained the promis of the ghospell:
and that this promis remaineth in the sacraments, as
the qualite dothe in a substaunce. First if bare bread
be (as he saied defore) the sacrament (calling it a signe,
such as with Caluin all sacraments are)In art. 10. howe
can it haue any suche promis or any suche qualite
in it?The 13. contrad. Cap. 16. de Sacramen.
                who euer heard that life, and oure resurrection
were promised to a piece of bread? Then if the sacraments
(as in his Institutions he defineth them) be
not onely bare signes, but sure witnesses of gods grace
towardes vs, their vertu being the worke of God,
why denieth he by their vertu any thinge to be geuen?
He woulde deface the sacraments, but he cōtradicteth
him selfe.
            But wil you see a cleane repugnant and direct contrary
doctrine to all that hetherto hathe ben saied?
For hetherto you heare Caluin saieart. 9. 
               that he seuereth
not the verite from the figure,
               art. 10, 
               that the promis is annexed to
the signe, and againe
               art. 12. 
               that the promis is comprised in the
Sacrament. Nowe at the very ende of all his resolutions,
see I praie you how he resolueth him self. In the
laste article thus he concludeth.
                  Art. 26. The 14. contrad▪
                
               Although saieth he,
the bread be geuen vnto vs as a marke or pleadge of the communion,
yet because it is a signe, not the thing it self, nor hath
not the thinge included in it, they which staie their minde

thereupō worshipping therein Christ, they make an idol of it.
Lo now Caluin hath plucked of his visard, and plaieth
his parte kindely, now he saieth the thing of the
sacrament, to witt Christ, is not included, contained,
or comprised in the sacrament, that it is but a signe or
a pleadge. In dede we agre with Caluin that Christ
is not in the bread and much lesse is the bread a pleadge
or marke of oure communion or participation of
Christ.2. Cor. 1. S. Paule saieth the holy ghoste is geuen vnto vs,
as a pleadge, no scripture saieth so of bread. Againe we
confesse that the true flesh of oure Sauiour is geuen
vs in this moste blessed sacrament, in forme and shape
of bread not remaining,In serm. de coena Dn̄
                  
                     •
                  . but by the omnipotency of the
worde, as S. Ciprian speaketh, made flesh.
            
            But why dothe Caluin make the Sacrament nowe
but a bare signe?VVhy C
                     •
                  luin maketh the Sacramēt but a bare signe. Why denieth he now the thinge
or verite of the Sacrament to be therein included,
hauing graunted it before? Forsothe the deuill him
selfe moued Caluin to saie so, enuieng at the glory
of god, and desiring as litle honour to be done to
Christe, as might be. For after that Caluin as the
proctour of the deuill, had for the blessed fleshe and
precious bloud of oure Sauiour (pronounced to be
in this most dreadfull mystery by the mouthe off
Christ him selfe) substituted materiall bread and wine,
and yet to make a coulour of holynes, as the wō
               te
of the deuill is, had tolde vs, that he separated not
the verite from the figure, Christ from the bread, fearing
lest perhaps by this tale some scrupulous sacramentary
would haue worshipped the verite, not

separated from the figure, to witt Christe ioyned
with the bread, he turneth his tale, and telleth them
at the ende of his talke, whiche he thought shoulde
beste sticke by the readers, that the sacrament is but
a signe, and hathe not the thinge or verite of the signe
included in it. Nether dothe he cōceale his wicked
purpose, but boldely vttereth it, euen straight, saieng,
they that worship in the Sacrament Christ, make an
idoll of it. I haue lo discouered vnto you good readers
the wicked deuise of this proctour of the deuill Ihon
Caluin. stoppe your eares at the wi
                  •
               ked enchantmēts
of this flattering Circé, and harken rather to the doctrine
of that holy, and lerned Father of the Church
S. Augustin.
               In commēt. in psal. 98 who speaking of the worshipping off
Christe in this blessed Sacrament, saieth Non solum
non peccatur adorando, sed peccatur non adorando, that is,
VVe do not onely not sinne or offend in adoring it, but we
do sinne if we do not adore it. Lo this lerned Father feareth
no idolatry in adoration of the Sacrament, but
pronoūceth it a sinne, not to adore it. wherein he declareth
the doctrine and belefe of Christ his churche
at that time. and he spake these wordes in pulpit, preaching
to his people, and expounding them the worde
of God. Nowe this cursed caitif Caluin bereueth
oure blessed Sauiour of his due honour, and telleth
vs we make him an idoll. well. the deuill yet hath
gotte small worship at his proctours hande here, making
him to speake suche contradictions, as shal worke
at the length, I truste in god, his vtter confusion,
and all enemies of gods honour. And therefore we

will yet discouer you more of his contradictions, and
sory lessons lerned of his master the deuill the spirit
of dissension and contrariete.
            In the thirtenth article of his resolutions he saieth:The .15. Conared.
               the sacrament is an instrument by the whiche god worketh.
If the sacrament be an instrument whereby
Christ worketh, howe is it a figure of Christ, as these
Sacramentaries will haue it onely to be? who euer
heard that the figure of the workeman as a figure
were his Instrument, or the instrument his figure?
Is not this doctrine a mere confusion and contradiction?
The truthe is: that bread is nether the figure
of Christ nor the instrumēt whereby he worketh.
No scripture saieth so: The churche neuer taught
so. No reason persuadeth so. It is but a dreame off
Caluin.
            In the fiftenth article he saieth the Sacrament doth
warrant vs Christ.
               The 16. Contrad. In the tenth he sayed it was but a bare
signe and that we shoulde not regarde it. Beleue nowe
whether parte ye liste. Truly bothe can not be true.
            In the sixtenth article he sayeth,The 17. Contrad. 
               the sacrament warrāteth
Christ onely in the elected and predestiant. In the .18.
article he saieth, that in the sacrament Christ is offred aequally
vnto all. and that the promis of god is not weakened
by the incredulite of men. If the sacrament warranteth
and confirmeth Christ onely in the elected, is
not the promis or verite of god promised in the sacrament,
weakened by the incredulite of men? for they
by theyr incredulite, saieth Caluin, can not receaue
Christ which is the substaunce of the sacramēt, and

that which Crist promiseth. You see his constancy
and agrement. Is not this a worthy guide for a man
to builde his faith vpon, and forsake his former belefe?
            In the twentith article he saieth, it maye happē that
the vse of the Supper which profited vs nothinge in the acte
or doing of it, bicause of oure negligence or slacknes, maye afterwarde
bringe forthe better frute. This point lo is
contrary to all his doctrine in his institutions and
cōmentaries vpon holy scripture,The 18. Con. where he teacheth
the effect of the SacramentIn institut. cap. 18. 
               that god fedeth vs not with
bare signes,
               In resolut. 
               that he geueth life withall,
               In comment. in 1. Cor. 11. 
               thath oure soules
are fedde with Christ truly and really. For nowe a man
maye receaue the Sacrament and lacke all this. He
maye I saie receaue it well and worthely, and haue
none of all these. For if the vnworthy receauer receaueth
forthewith his damnation (as S. Paule saieth)
Caluin can not meane this of the vnworthy receauer:
especially saying withall, that it may afterwarde
bringe forthe better frute, whiche to the vnworthy
receauer it can not do.
            In the sixe and twentith article he saieth:The .19. contrad. 
               we muste
not tye Christe to the bread and to the wine. and yet in the
ninthe article he him selfe tieth Christ thereto. For
he sayeth. Nous ne separons pas la verite d'auec les figures.
we separat not the verite from the figures. If Caluin do
not separat Christ, whiche is the verite from the figures
of bread and wine, dothe he not couple and
tye Christ thereunto? Truly the Sacramentaries and
Lutherans bothe do it, making the bread and the

wine to remaine. The Catholike churche dothe not,
beleuing that the cōsecrated and blessed bread, is no
more bread, but as Christ saieth, His body. and the
the wine his blode.
            
            Lo you haue good readers a number of contradictions
gathered oute of this small treatise of Caluin:
wherein yet according to the title thereof, he minded
to geue the worlde a full and perfit resolution of the
Sacraments. But whiles he laboureth to vtter his
heresy vnder coulour of some Christianite, and to
persuade his falshood vnder the cloke of some truth,
he is miserably driuē, to tell contrary tales, to saie one
thinge and thinke an other, brefely to confounde
him selfe with his owne wordes. For what better reason
may possibly be founde to discouer false forged
doctrine of an heretike, then to trippe him in his talke,
and take him in contradiction? Nothing can more
discredit the Author of a secte or declare more his
wicked pretence, then to espie diuersite of doctrine
and variaunce of opinions in him. nor neuer, I thinke,
appeared it better in any heretike (except allwaies
that fonde frere Martin Luther) them in Ihon Caluin.
And yet this is he, vpon whose onely warrant and
worde diuers deceaued persons, haue hazarded their
soules and loste their life. I beseche god geue the remnant
grace to see, knowe, and deteste from henceforthe,
suche a teacher as you see nowe Caluin is.
            Diuers other contradictions might be gathered
oute of this mans doctrine touching this blessed Sacrament,
if we listed to scanne eche of his propositions

and saiengs. But bicause I haue ben ouer longe
allready, and yet in so good a purpose me thinketh I
can neuer be longe inough, I wil nowe passe to the
repugnaunce in his doctrine against holy scripture.
            Our Sauiour sayth in the ghospell off S. Ihon.Cap. 18.
               Who eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood hathe life euerlasting.
               Ioan. 6.
Caluin in his institutions and in his cōmentaries
vpon that place teacheth thus. Who eateth the
bread at the communion he receaueth a cundyte pipe by the
whiche life is deriued vnto him.
               Repugnances in Caluin to holy scripture Marke I beseche you
Christen readers, howe he hathe altered the wordes
of oure Sauiour. Where Christ saith, Who eateth
my flesh, Caluin saithe who eateth the bread at the communion.
and where Christ saithe he hathe life euer lasting,
Caluin saithe he hathe a cundyte pipe by the whiche life is
deriued, calling the blessed fleshe of oure Sauiour,
one person with the godhead, a coundyt pype or instrument,
by the whiche life is deriued from god
the Father. For that is his meaning, (as you shall see
more plainely hereafter, when I come to his heresies)
attributing life not to the fleshe of Christ, as
Christ him selfe dothe, but to the Father in whom
he teacheth life to remaine principally, as you shall
anon see. But nowe to an other proposition.
            Christ saithe,Ioan. 11. 
               I am the resurrection and the life. Caluin
saythe in his commentaries vpon the sixte off
Ihon, The Son is as a riuer by the whiche the life abiding in
the father is deriued vnto vs. Here again Christ speaking
as god and man, saith him selfe to be the life.
For as the general councell of Ephesus charely warneth

vs,Cirilus in apologetico in defensione anathematismi 4. 
               the wordes of the ghospell are all waies to be attributed
to Christe as to one person, thoughe consisting of two
natures▪
                Caluin saithe the life to remaine in the father.
Where blasphemousely he excludeth Christ, making
him as a riuer or meanes, by the whiche life is deriued
vnto vs. But of this we shall haue more occasion
to speake hereafter.
            Oure Sauiour after he had sayde in the sixte off
Ihon, my fleshe is meate in dede, and my bloud is drinke in
dede, expounding those his wordes vnto the carnall
Iewes, thinking he had meaned his fleshe and bloud,Cirillus lib. 11 Cap. 22. in Ioan. Cap. 81.
after the bare nature of man, saithe thus. The wordes
which I spake vnto you are Spirit and life, geuing vs to
vnderstande (as the lerned Father Cirillus noteth)
that he spake of his fleshe, and blood, inseparably annexed
to the godhead, and one person with the same.
Nowe Caluin in his institutions affirmeth that
by the Spirit of Christe, his fleshe is deriued vnto vs and made
our foode. In the whiche doctrine he separateth the
Spirit of Christe from his blessed fleshe, geuing vs
the one without the other: whereas Christ him selfe
aboue affirmed that he meaned his fleshe coupled
and vnited to the Spirit, sayeng, the wordes whiche I
spake vnto you (to witt, of my flesh and blood) are Spirit
and life, that is, not bare flesh but endued with my
Spirit, the godhead it selfe: nor to be deriued vnto
vs by the Spirit, as separated from the fleshe, or as a
cundit pype to conducte the fleshe vnto vs (whiche
Caluin in his institutions saythe, as you haue heard
before) but to be geuen vnto vs with the Spirit, and

deite of oure Sauiour iointly and inseparably, as they
are in him one person, and one Christ. Thus you
see howe he correcteth and altereth the wordes off
oure Sauiour at his pleasure.
            Againe whereas Christe saythe in S. Ihon,I
                     •
                  an. 6. 
               He
that eateth my fleshe and drinketh my bloud, hathe life euerlasting,
promising vs by eating to haue life, Caluin
correcting the sayeng of oure Sauiour, in his commentaries
vpon S. Ihon,
               In cap. 6. where Christe promiseth
life and resurrection by the eating of his fleshe and
drinking of his bloud, he saythe, Christ speaketh not here
of the Supper, but of the perpetuall communion of him,
which we haue beside the vse of the Supper. And yet that
ye maye not thinke he meaneth of any other communion
(naming the perpetuall communion) then
the very same whiche we haue in the celebration of
oure lordes Supper, in fewe wordes after he addeth
thus muche. And yet I confesse, that nothinge is here spoken,
whiche is not also figured and truly exhibited vnto vs
in the Supper. Thus he maketh him selfe as sure off
Christe, withoute the receauing of this blessed Sacrament,
as when he receaueth it. whiche by the cō
               ference
of an other place of holy Scripture you shall
see yet ones again.
            S. Paule saieth The bread whiche we breake is the participation
of the body of our Lorde: whereby we lerne in this
blessed Sacramēt to receaue the body of Christ. Caluin
teacheth vs without the blessed sacramēt to receaue
it. For in his resolutiōs vpō the sacramēts he hathe
these wordes.Art. 19. 
               Right as the infidell by the vse of the Sacraments

receaueth no more profit thereby thē if he vsed thē not,
euē so the verite figured in the sacraments is cōmunicated to
the faitheful and beleuers, thoughe not receauing the signes or
sacramēts. By this rule we receaue Christ in the supper, which
before hath b
                     •
                  n geuē vnto vs and dwelleth in vs perpetually.
And in the .9. article of the same worke he saythe. that
such as haue before receaued Christ, receauing the Sacrament
do renewe and continew that which they had before
receaued. By this his doctrine you see, he correcteth
the wordes of Christe teaching vs to receaue him by
eating his fleshe and drinking his blood. And the
wordes of S. Paule, sayeng the bread to be the participation
of our Lordes body: by whiche worde he meaneth
the blessed Sacrament: naming it so of that
which it was before:Exod. 7. as the serpent was called Moyses
rodd,Ioan. 2. and the wine water in Cana Galilea.
            S. Paul sayth. Who so euer eateth the bread and drinketh
the cuppe of the Lord vnworthely, he eateth and drinketh his
owne dānation:
               1. Cor. 11. geuing vs to vnderstāde that at the receauing
of the blessed sacramēt, we receaue other life
by the worthy receauing other dānation by the vnworthy.
Now the doctrine of Caluin directly repugneth.
For thus he writeth in his resolutiōs vpō the sacramēts.
Farder saith he,Art. 20. 
               the profit which we receaue at the
sacramēts, ought not to be restrained to the time we receaue
thē, as if that the visible signe as soone as it is geuē vs, should bringe
vs forthewith the grace of god. It may happen that the receite
of the sacrament which in the acte profited nothing, through
our defaulte or slacknes, maie afterward bring forth better
fruict. Thus farre Caluin. Cōsider nowe, if this doctrine

be not cleane cōtrary to the meaning of S. Paul.
For if, as S. Paul saith, receauing the sacramēt vnworthely
we receaue our own dānation, why also in receauing
it worthely receaue we not withal incontinently
the grace, and vertu thereof? Againe if by our
defaulte it worketh vs dānation, as the Apostle saith,
howe cā it afterwarde auaile vs, as Caluin teacheth?
Thirdly if at the receite of the sacramēt, we receaue
nothing, what shall the bread (that Caluin imagineth
alone) signifie? shall it signifie that by eating it,
we receaue no profit thereby? In good sothe it will
signifie vnto vs, that Caluin mocketh with God,
and the worlde, and that in eating the bread, we eate
nothing els▪ And truly if you remembre his doctrine
before, yow see he meaneth nought ells.
            
               S. Paule speaking of our Lordes body and bloud
geuen vs in the blessed sacrament,1. Cor. 11. saithe thus. He
that eateth and drinketh vnworthely, eateth and drinketh
his owne damnation, not discerning the body of oure Lorde.
Caluin in his cōmentaries vppō this place saithe,
That the wicked person therefore eateth vnworthely bicause
he refuseth the body of our Lorde offred vnto him, eating
thereby the onely signe. to wit bare bared. Marke the
differēce of S. Paules doctrine, and Caluins imagination.
For howe dothe the wicked eate the body and
therewith his dānation, whiche S. Paule teacheth, iff
he eate but bread and refuse the body, which Caluin
imagineth? I will graunte who refuseth Christ, refuseth
life, and thereby worketh his owne damnation.
But this is not to eate his damnation, in such sorte

as S. Paule speaketh there.
            Our Sauiour in the sixte of Ihon saithe, Your fathers
did eate Manna in the desert, and are dead. This is
that bread whiche cometh downe from heauen, that a man
maye eate thereof and not die. Caluin in his commentaries
vpō the first to the Corinthiās, the tenth chapter
teacheth, that the Iewes eating Māna, did eate the
very body of Christ spiritually as we do, and receaued
the same effect by eating the Manna, as we do
by the communion. He laboureth muche in that
place to proue this fonde doctrine, and forgeth a sory
shifte to auoide these wordes of our Sauiour in S.
Ihon. Christ, saythe he, hauing to do with the Iewes preferring
Moyses before him, in his answer to them, expounded
not what Manna signified, but letting all other thinges
passe, framed them an answer mete for their capacite, speaking
not according to the nature of the thinge, but according
to the meaning and s
                     •
                  ns of the hearers. Thus muche
Caluin. But beholde, I beseche you, the sophistry of
this wily heretike. He woulde make vs beleue, that
Christ in S. Ihō plaied the Rhetoriciās part, and withall
is not afeared to make our Sauiour (O blasphemous
Sacramentary) a lyar. For Christe saithe plainely,
That the Iewes eating Manna died (for not by eating
Manna, but by beleuing in the Messias to come,
they were fedde of Christ) But the bread which he would
geue shoulde be life euerlasting to those whiche eate off it. Iff
nowe as Caluin saithe, the eating of Manna serued
their turne, no lesse then the bread of life Christ him
selfe serued oures, to witt, that they receaued also the

bread of life spiritually in eating Manna, as we do in
eating the blessed Sacrament, then were not that sayieng
off Christe true, nor his comparison good, preferring
the bread of life which he would geue vs before
the Manna of the Iewes. For their Manna as
Caluin saithe, was bread of life to them: then was it
not inferiour to that whiche Christe woulde geue,
but all one and the same. But nowe to an other.
            Our Sauiour in S. Ihon hath these wordes.Ioan. 6. 
               Who
eateth my fleshe and drinketh my bloud, dwelleth in me and
I in him.
               Institut. Cap. 18. Caluin correcteth these wordes in his doctrine
of the Supper, and maketh this proposition. Who
beleueth in the death and resurrectiō of Christ, the cōmunion
of his flesh is deriued vnto him, by the vertu of his holy Spirit.
First in this doctrine where Christ biddeth vs eate
his flesh, and so promiseth him selfe to dwel with vs,
and in vs, Caluin biddeth vs beleue in Christ his death,
saieng thereby we eate his flesh: and thē in stede
of Christ God and mā abiding in vs which our Sauiour
in this most holy Sacramēt promiseth, and (no
doubt) perfourmeth vnto vs, Caluin warrāteth vs of
a certain cōmuniō of the flesh remaining only in heauē,
which shal be deriued, he sayeth, by the Spirit off
Christ vnto vs. This is lo not to haue God and man
Christ him selfe abiding in vs (which bicause Christ
promiseth vs, we must vndoubtedly beleue so) but
to haue him onely spiritually abiding in vs: to witt,
coming to vs onely by spirit and abiding onely in
heauen by fleshe. How false and howe farre disagreble

with the wordes of our Sauiour this doctrine of
Caluin is, we haue in his absurdites and contradictions
declared. Presently it suffiseth to knowe, that
he dothe bothe in termes and in sense comptroll
and alter the wordes and meaning of oure Sauiour.
            S. Paule writing to the Corinthians, of the due accesse
and reuerence of this blessed Sacrament,1. Cor. 11. saith.
Let euery mā trie him selfe and so eate of this bread. Caluin
in his Institutions and vpon the sixte of Ihon teacheth,
that by beleuing we eate Christ.
               Cap. 18. Nowe seing that
no man trieth him selfe, but first he beleueth, and in
beleuing we eate Christ, then before we trie oure selues,
we do eate: contrary to the expresse wordes off
the Apostle, bidding vs first to trie our selues, and so
to eate of this bread of life. And truly according to
the doctrine of Caluin (as you haue sene before) beleuing
in Christes deathe and resurrection we eate
and receaue the body and bloud off Christ allwaies,
no lesse then in the vse of the Supper or communion.
Which excludeth all triall of our selues required
by S. Paul.
            For the maintenance of this wicked Sacramentary
doctrine, Caluin abuseth and turneth from their
right vnderstanding, not onely suche places of holy
scripture as directly make against him, as you haue
hetherto partly sene, but also suche as by any consequence
of reason, might seme to hinder the course
of his wicked doctrine. For example I will pnt you in
minde of one or two.Cap. 20. Whereas it is writen in S. Ihon
that Christ entred, where his disciples were, the doores

being shutt, bicause this miracle might importe to
the body of oure Sauiour a possibilite of being in
sundry places at ones, and so destroy the false grounde
of these sacramentaries, tying Christ to the right
hande of his Father,Cap. 18 Caluin in his institutions saithe,
that Christ entred not the dores being shutt, but that the dores
opened of them selues. Otherwhere he writeth, that an erthequake
was made, and so the dores opened. Brefely
he inuenteth what shifte he maie, rather them he
will yelde to the truthe of the churche.
            With like confidence this presumptuous Sacramētary
Ihon Caluin peruerteth by false trāslatiō theSee the lease 158.
wordes of holy scripture in the prouerbes of Salomō
cōtaining a clere prophecy of this blessed sacramēt.
We alleaged you the place before, and after what sort
it was by him corrupted. If we would in other pointes
and articles of the Catholike faith by him denied
and impugned vse the like diligence, we could be as
lōge in the retical and setting forthe of thē, as he is in
the whole corps of his workes, where such doctrine
is taught. But nowe I will procede to the other partes
of oure promis, touching this one article, and after
saie somewhat of some other point of his doctrine.
            Oure Lorde in holy scripture, by the mouthe off
his prophet Ieremy, speaking against the perilous presumption
of those, which forsake him and his holy
worde,Ierem. 2. pronounceth the plage that falleth on thē in
these wordes. They haue forsake me the foūtaine of life, and
haue digged thē selues pittes and pudles al to broken, and suche
               
               as can holde no water, geuing vs to vnderstand, that
who so forsaketh the right waie prescribed vnto vs
by allmighty god in his holy worde, and refuseth the
moste holesom drinke of the fountaine, god him selfe,
is forced forthewith, being as a man berefted of
his right vnderstanding and sence, to lappe in suche
pudle, as the fonde imagination of his owne braine
instructed and supported with the deuill, ready to
thruste forwarde, when god forsaketh, can inuēt. Of
suche it is saied in holy scripture. Who loueth the peril,
shall perish in it, and againe. VVho toucheth the pitche shal be
filed therewith. You haue sene howe Caluin hathe
forsaken the expresse wordes of god in his ghospell,
to furder thereby the plausible doctrine, and pleasaunt
poison of his owne imaginations. You shall nowe
see what pittes and pudles he is faine to lappe in,
forsaking the doctrine of Christ in the ghospell.
Truly they are suche and so filthy, that I feare the recitall
thereof maie be to good Christian hartes more
noysom then profitable. Notwithstanding bicause
this man is of suche credit amonge the deceaued sorte
of oure countre, that his Institutions, the very
fardle of all his beggarly doctrine, and boxe of his venimous
heresies, is commaunded to be read of suche,
as haue charge of soules (a sufficient meanes truly
to drawe all the vnlerned of England, but if god
staie them, to eternall dānation) I will by the grace of
God geue you for a taste, suche instructions touching
the most blessed sacrament of the aultar, and the sacrament
of Baptim, which only for sacramēts he alloweth,

that you maie hereafter litle lust after the
perilous persuasions of his doctrine, in other inferiour
pointes of oure Christen faithe, the dearest and
most precious iewell that we haue on earthe.
            The pittes and pudles that Caluin hathe digged
him selfe, are olde heresies condemned aboue a thousand
yeares, and nowe renewed by him partly in expresse
wordes, partly by most assured and necessary
consequence of his writings.
            Caluin in his commentaries vpon S. Ihon hathe
these wordes.
                  In Cap. 6. Ioan. Olde condemned heresies renevved by Caluin in the doctrine of the blessed Sacrament. 
               It is to be noted there are thre degres of life.
The liuing Father hathe the first place, as the fountaine off
life, but yet farre distant and hidde. The Son foloweth him,
whom we haue sette before vs as a riuer by the which the life
abiding in the father is deriued vnto vs. the thirde life is that
which we drawe of him. Thus farre Caluin: This doctrine,
beside that it is a mere imagination of Caluin,
and a broken pudle of his brickle brain, it conteineth
in it sundry heresies. First if the Son of god Christ
him selfe, be a folowing, that is, a second cause of life,
as Caluin saithe, then is it not equall with the first,
and so is it a creature, not god the Creatour, which is
first and chefest, and secōd to none. Thē he cōpareth
Christ to a riuer and god the father to a fountaine.
Now the foūtaine is before the riuer, and is cause of the
riuer: thē by the doctrine of Caluin, god the father is
before the Son and cause of the life in the Son. For al
this he meaneth of god the Son, not of the flesh off
Christ which he denieth to geue life or to be quickening
of it selfe. This lo is the cursed and detestable

heresy of Arrius condemned in the first general
councell of Nice aboue twelue hundred yeres paste.
If S
                     •
                  ruetus whom Caluin burned at Geneua for an
Arrian, were nowe aliue again, and Caluin to, he
might chalenge M. Caluin for the like, and call him
worthely to the stake.
            Againe this doctrine of Caluin resembleth much
in wordes (but in effect passeth farre)August. l
                     •
                  b. 20. cap. 2. contra Faustū manich. the doctrine
of Faustus Manicheus, who sayde that god the father
occupied the chefest and principall light: but
the Son consisted in a seconde light. Which fonde
opinion of him Saint Augustin confuteth as a detestable
heresy. Muche more maye we so do in this
distinction of degres of life, that Caluin imagineth
to be in the blessed Trinite.
            Thirdly he affirmeth the life whiche we receaue
of Christ, the Son, to abide in the Father: as though
Christ of him selfe gaue not vs life by the participation
of his diuine fleshe. Which to saie is the heresy
of Valentinus whom S. Irene confuteth.
            Caluin in his commentarie vpon the resolution
of the Sacraments, saythe that, Vnto the substaunce of
bread remaining bread, the body of oure lorde whiche is the
verite figured by the bread is so coupled and vnited, as the
godhead was to the fleshe of Christ, it remaining true and
naturall fleshe. And this his doctrine he goeth aboute
to proue by the wordes of Gelasius in his epistle to
kinge Frauncis prefixed before his Institutions. It is
also the doctrine of Caluin that Christ is in the Sacrament
onely by faithe not corporally▪ For so (sayeth

he) he is onely in heauen. Then will it folowe
by the reason of Caluin, that the godhead was ioyned
and vnited to the fleshe of Christ onely by faithe,
and that the fleshe was not deified and one person
with god. This was the heresy of Paulus Samosatenus
condemned all most thirten hundred yeares
paste.
            The doctrine of Caluin in his Institutions is, as
you partly heard before, that in the blessed Sacrament
the maner of receauing Christ, is by the operation
of his Spirit,In institut. Cap. 18 & in. 1. Cor. 11. 
               whiche (saythe he) is as a certain

                     •
                  undyt pipe, whereby what soeuer Christ is, or hathe, is deriued
vnto vs. and by the Spirit of Christe, he sayth, we receaue
in to oure soules his body and bloud, whiche yet departeth
not from the right hande of the father. This doctrine
separateth Christ, making his holy Spirit to serue as
a cundyt pipe for the conuaiaunce of his fleshe in to
oure soules. Beside the absurdite of the doctrine, whiche
we before declared you, it sauoureth of the heresy
of Nestorius. For as he denied the fleshe off
Christ to be inseparably vnited to the godhead, and
therefore taught that we receaued not whole Christe,
but his fleshe onely and not his godhead (for these
were his wordes (as Cirillus recordeth)In oppositione ad anathematis. 11. 
               Qui manducat
carnem meam, non dixit qui manducat diuinitatem.
that is, Christ sayde, he that eateth my fleshe, he sayde not he
that eateth my diuinite &c.) so Caluin denieth we receaue
whole Christ, graunting vs a spirituall foode
onely.In. 1. Cor. 11. For so (in his commentaries vpon S. Paule)
he concludeth, saieng that a certain quickening vertu

is deriued vnto vs out of the flesh of Christ by his Spirit,
thoughe the fl
                     •
                  sh be farre distant from vs and not ioyned
with vs.
            
            The doctrine of Caluin as it containeth variable
and contrary assertions, so it bredeth diuers and sundry
heresies. You heard euen nowe that by making
the Spirit of Christ a pipe for the conuaiaunce off
Christ his flesh in to oure soules (whiche he teacheth
bothe in his Institutions and in his commentaries
vpon S: Paule) he fell in to the heresy of the Maniches
no lesse wicked and auncient heretikes then
Nestorius. Now you shal see that making the flesh off
Christ a pipe for the conuaiaunce of Christ his diuinite
vnto vs, he falleth in to the heresy of Nestorius.
In his commentaries vpon the sixte of S. Ihons
ghospell thus he writeth. As the euerlasting worde off
God is the fountaine of life, so his fleshe conuaieth vnto vs
like a certain pipe that life abiding in the godhead. And in
this sense the fleshe of Christe is saide to geue life, bicause it
communicateth vnto vs the life which it boroweth other
where. These are the very wordes of Caluin. Nowe
let vs considre the doctrine of S. Paule saieng.2. Cor. 15. 
               As in
Adam all do die, so in Christ all shall be quickened or endued
with life. Vppon the grounde of this doctrine whiche
can not be denied, thus I reason. If the fleshe of
Christ dothe not of it selfe geue life, as Caluin saythe,
but serueth vs as a pipe of the life abiding in god,
then the sinnerfull fleshe of Adam was not of it selfe
damnable and the cause of our damnation (VVe all
sinning and dieng in Adam as S. Paule saithe) but a pipe

or instrument of deathe and damnation abiding
in some euill God, from whence the fleshe of Adam
toke deathe and damnation, as the fleshe of Christe
(acording to Caluin) boroweth life of God. For otherwise
the saieng of S. Paule shall not be true, attributing
as properly and as truly life vnto our Sauiour,
as deathe vnto Adam. Nowe to imagin a higher
cause of deathe in Adam, then Adam him selfe, and
an euill God in whom that death before remained,Tom. 6. passim & in lib. de haer.
to be from thence deriued to sinners, is the very doctrine
of the cursed Maniches, making two Goddes or
beginnings of all things one of the good, and an other
of the badde: as in S. Augustin it is easy to finde.
            But here perhaps some scholer of Caluins schole,VVhy Caluin maye vvorthely be charged vvith such heresies.
and zelous professour of the ghospell of Geneua
will steppe in and saie, that Master Caluin neuer
taught, neuer allowed, nor so muche as dreamed off
the approuing of suche hainous heresies as these are.
And therefore we deale not charitably herein, but
rather vtter our malice and stomache to no purpose.
To such bicause I thinke it were harde for me to
frame an awnswer of my owne, that might please
them, I will awnswer with the wordes of M. Caluin
him selfe, which I hope shall not mislike them. Master
Caluin in his Institutions hauing for his pleasure
longe iested at the blessed sacrifice of the Masse,
and with a fewe sory reasons laboured to proue
that such as saide Masse, crucified Christ againe, at
the length moueth the like obiection as this is, against
him selfe, and awnswereth vnto it in these wordes.

               I knowe well, saith he, they haue a ready answer,
whereby they will charge vs as slaunderers. For they will
saie we laye that vnto their charge whiche they neuer
thought, and whiche they were sure they coulde neuer do.
But we knowe well inoughe, it is not in their handes to make
Christ liue or die. Nether care we if they neuer thought
to kill him. Onely this I would showe what absurdite doth
folowe by their wicked and hainous doctrine. Thus awnswered
Caluin, thinking it a sufficient excuse to escape
the note of a slaūderer and false accuser, hauing
well deserued it. We awnswer the same being no false
accusers of Caluin, but true reporters of that we
finde in his writings, and saie, that we passe not whether
Caluin euer thought as Arrius, Faustus Manicheus,
Valentinus, Samosatenus, Nestorius, and the whole
secte of the Maniches taught. Onely we entend
to showe that by his hainous and wicked doctrine,
such heresies do consequently folowe. Whiche the
vnlerned take so muche the sooner, for that they come
vnder the visard of a fauourer of the ghospell.
Whereas being nowe brought to light, and their visard
plucked of, they shall appeare in their liknes, to
witt, olde cursed and cōdēned heresies. This I truste
shall make men take better aduisement whiche waie
they walke in matters of belefe, nor lightely to trust
euery newe Master bringing newe lerning, and not
heard of before. Lest as Caluin hathe done, by listening
after newe doctrine, they fall in to olde heresies.
But nowe to the residew of them.
            That the paschal lambe offred and eatē by Moyses

in the olde lawe, was a clere figure of Christ the true
lambe of god to be eaten and offred in the newe lawe,
for the redēption of mankinde, it is a verite of all
Christen men confessed and vndoubtedly receiued.
The wordes of our Sauiour saieng that it behoued him
to fulfill all wich was writen of him in the lawe,
               Luc. 24. 
               the psalmes
and the prophets geue vs no lesse to vnderstād. S. Paule
also teacheth vs that al thinges happēed to the Iewes in figure,
to witt,1. Cor. 10. of suche thinges as vnder Christ should
be accōplished. Brefely Caluin him selfe in his commentaries
vpon S. Paule to the Hebrewes, confesseth
that all the sacrifices of the olde lawe do leade vs to the sacrifice
of Christe:
               In cap. 9. whiche doctrine he lerned of the holy
fathers, especially S, Augustin,
               De ciuit. dei lib. 17. Cap. 20. & in psal. 39. who repeteth it in sundry
places of his workes. Caluin therefore in his Institutions
treating of oure Lordes supper, accordeth
this figure of the paschall lambe with the supper off
oure Lorde in this sorte. The paschall lambe saithe he,
being bodely eaten did figure the spirituall eating of oure paschall
lambe which is Christ. Vpon this his doctrine it foloweth,
that Christ was but spiritually, not corporally
offred vp for vs. For the paschal lambe of Moyses
figured Christ not onely as it was eaten, but also
as it was offred. If then the figure of the lambe
eaten be accomplished by spirituall eating of Christ,
the figure of the lambe offred shall be also accomplished
by the spirituall oblation of Christe. For bothe
actions were true figures of Christ, and bothe were
to be accomplished by Christ, no lesse the one then
the other. Nowe to make the sacrifice of Christ, but

a spirituall sacrifice,lib. 4. aduersu
                     •
                   Marcionem is the heresy of Marcion whom
Tertullian confuteth. The truthe is that as Christ
was a true sacrifice figured by the paschall lambe to
die for vs, so was he a true sacrifice figured by the same
to be eaten by vs.
            Bicause the heresy of Valentinus renewed by the
hereticall doctrine of Caluin, well espied and tried
oute maketh muche for the verite of the reall presence
in this blessed Sacrament, we will yet farder see
how the doctrine of Caluin destroying the reall presence,
vpholdeth and reneweth the heresy of Valentinus.
The opinion of Valentinus was that the body
of Christ was a celestiall body, descending from heauē
through the wombe of the blessed Virgin, taking
no fleshely substaunce thereof. Caluin calleth rem
signatam the thinge figured in the Sacrament a spirituall
and celestiall thinge.
               In iustitut. Cap. 18. In the same place not many lines
after thus he concludeth his doctrine of the B.
Sacrament. I saye therefore, the holy mistery of the Supper
consisteth of two thinges to witt the earthly signes setting
before oure eyes according to oure caepacite the inuisible
thinges, and the Spirituall verite figured and exhibited by
the signes. The matter also of this spirituall verite he expoundeth
him selfe to be Christ with his deathe and
resurrection. And in an other place of his workes,
writing against the councell of Trent thus he speaketh.In antidoto.
               The bread remaineth bread terrestriall and corruptible:
but the celestiall body of Christe is ioyned thereunto:
and hereof, saithe he by the authorite of Ireneus, this
mystery consisteth of two thinges, the one terrestriall and of

earthe, the other celestial and of heauē, to witt the celestiall body
off Christ, and the materiall bread of earthe. Hetherto
you see Caluin in the blessed Sacramēt to acknowledg
no other body of Christ, then Spirituall and celestiall:
euen as the heretike Valentinus did: and to coulour
his doctrine also by the authorite off Ireneus.
Now you shall vnderstande that Ireneus writing against
the foresaide heresy of Valentinus, for the confutation
thereof amonge other arguments, vseth
the common belefe of the Catholike churche, touching
this blessed Sacrament.Li. 4. Cap. 34. 
               Oure doctrine saith he,
is conformable to the Eucharistie (terming so this blessed
Sacrament) and the Eucharistie confirmeth our doctrine:
for we offer vnto god that whiche are his owne, declaring
accordingly the vnite and coniunction of the fleshe
and of the Spirit: For as the material bread receauing the
inuocation of god, is no more common bread, but the Eucharistie
cōsisting of two thinges the one of earth the other of
heauen, so oure bodies receauing the Eucharistie: are no more
corruptible, but haue certain h
                     •
                  pe of resurrection. Thus
farre Ireneus. In the whiche wordes against Valentinus
he affirmeth, that the Sacrament containeth
Christ him selfe whiche consisteth of two thinges
or natures, being one person, to witt of earthely fleshe
taken of the virgin, and of the celestiall godhead
descending from heauen. Nowe Caluin bicause he
will denie the reall presence of Christes flesh in the
Sacrament, imagineth the celestiall body of Christ
withoute flesh to be ioyned with the material bread,
as Valentinus the heretike dyd, abusing also to that

purpose this very place of Ireneus wherein he showeth
him selfe other very ignorant of Ireneus meaning
and disputation in that place, or very malicious
in deprauing it after his owne brainesicke fantasie.
For S. Irene directly reproueth the opinion of Valentinus
denieng the incarnation of Christ, and his true
fleshe, bicause in the Sacrament we receaue his true
and naturall fleshe. and therefore a fewe lines before
he saythe. Quomodo constabit eis &cae.? Howe wil they be
assured that the same consecrated bread is the body of their
lorde and the cuppe of his bloud, if they denie it to be the Son
of god maker of the worlde? Doth not here that holy
Martyr, and lerned Father proue the very flesh and
naturall body of Christe, against that heretike, vpon
the grounde of oure belefe touching the reall presence
of Christ him selfe in the Sacrament? Doth not
Caluin taking awaie this grounde of oure belefe,
and denieng the reall presence of Christes flesh in
the Sacrament, leauing vs onely a spirituall verite,
consequently allowe the heresy of Valentinus?
            
            Againe Valentinus denied the resurrection of oure
bodies. Ireneus proueth it vnto him, by the doctrine
of the Sacrament, saieng in the same place aboue
alleaged. Howe dare they saie that oure flesh shall come to
corruption and not receaue life which is fedd with the body
and bloud of oure lorde? Nowe Caluin in his Catechisme,
in his Institutions, and euery where teacheth
that oure soule, not the body eateth the body of Christ,
really and truly, but not corporally: and is nourished
there with in hope of life euerlasting. Doth not

this his doctrine graunting that celestiall foode, and
onely warrant of oure resurrection to the soule, destroie
the resurrection of the body, as Valentinus the
heretike dyd? Is he not ones again most manifestly
fallen into brokē pudles of olde condēned heresies?
            Our Sauiour saith, Onles you eate my flesh and drinke
my bloud, you shall haue no life in you, he that eateth my
flesh and drinketh my bloud hath life, and I wil raise him vp
againe in the later daie.
               Ioan. 6. Nowe if the soule onely eateth
this heauenly foode,The doctrine of the Sacramētaries destroieth the resurrection of our bodies. as Caluin teacheth, the soule onely
shall haue life, and be raised vp at the later daye.
For the onely warrant of resurrection is the participation
of the flesh and bloud of Christe. For thoughe
the bodies of infidels, of heretikes, and of euill
Christians, shall arise again, yet they shall not arise to
life, nor in suche maner of resurrection, as oure Sauiour
meaneth,Philip. 3. 
                     •
                  . Cor. 15. whiche is (as his blessed Apostle S.
Paule teacheth vs) to put on immortalite, to be made incorruptible.
and to be glorified. For so shal onely the true
beleuers in Iesus Christ, and partakners of this holy
sacramēt arise. As for infāts baptised, though they receaue
not sacramētally the flesh and bloud of Christ,
yet euen as by the faithe of holy church they beleue
and are accōpted to haue faithe, so by the communion
of Saintes and societe of the Catholike churche
they are incorporated to oure Sauiour and assured of
their resurrection.
            It wil peraduēture seme impossible to the fauourers
of Caluins doctrine, and prisers of his ghospell, that
he should euer meane any such hainous doctrine, as

this is. Verely what he thought in consciēce, we wil
not iudge: but what his writings declare
                  •
                him to be,
you see, I thinke, euidently. In his Cathechisme labouring
to wipe awaie this suspiciō frō him he saieth,
he hathe a witnes and a warrant of the resurrection of his body,
and of the saluatiō thereof, in that he eateth the signe of life.
But I praie you, could he more manifestly denie the
saluation of the body, then to attribut it to that thinge
whiche can not geue it? For what auaileth it for
the assurance of life, to eate (as he saithe) the signe of
life, whiche is nought els, but a morcell of bread?
Where findeth he suche assurāce of life in holy scripture?
What scripture telleth him, that by eating the
signe of life his body shal rise to incoruption? Christ
promiseth vs life and resurrectiō by eating his fleshe
and drinking his bloud. Is the flesh and bloud of Christe
a signe of life? Is he not the true bread of life? Is not
his holy fleshe, vnited to the godhead, and made one
person with god, true quickening fleshe and geuing
life? Surely this doctrine off Caluin vtterly ouerthroweth
the resurrection of oure bodies.
            Peter Richier a frenche ghospeller,Villogaio no
                     •
                   contra Caluinu Cap. 20. Caluins scholer,
denieth this fonde doctrine of his Master, to
witt, that by eating the signe of life the body should
be assured of resurrection, and imagineth an other
shifte, that the soule being raised spiritually by eating the
body of Christe, shall geue life to the body and raise it also.
What wicked dreames and inuentions are these off
proude and presumptuous heretikes? The promis of
life and resurrection is made to the fleshe of Christ,

not to the bread, nor to the soule. Thus lo it fareth
with them, which content not them selues with the
sure knowen doctrine of the Catholike churche, but
by drifte of reason, or pricke off pride, and malice
serch out newe inuētions of their owne.
            It is the doctrine of Caluin and all the sacramentaries,
that in the celebration of oure Lordes supper
be no cōsecration of the misteries. For that, they saie,
the bread there is no other wise blessed thē other creatures
of god are by the vertu of their creatiō. Caluin
in his Institutiōs saith, that Christe in the benedictiō
which he vsed, directed not his wordes to the bread,
and that to blesse the bread is wich crafte and charming.
The like he writeth in his cōmentaries vpon S.
Paul to the Corinthiās. This doctrine lo is the very
heresy of Faustus Manicheus. we (saith that Maniche)In 1. Cor. 10.
               vse the same religion in all creatures of god, as you vse in the
bread and the chalice. Lo this heretike acknowledgeth
noother kinde of religiō, in the holy misteries, then
in other creatures of god. That is, that the one is as
much blessed as the other. But what aunswereth here
S. Augustin?Tom. 6. For he reporteth these wordes of the
heretike in his bookes against him. Doth he acknowledge
no other benediction in the Sacrament
then in other creatures of god? Is he ashamed of the
benediction vsed in the church of Christ? Doth
he call it witchecrafte or charming?Lib. 20. cap. 13. Contra Faustū. Fit misticus non nas
                     ••
                  tur. See therefore
what he awnswereth. Oure bread and chalice (saithe S.
Augustin) is not cōmon: but by certaine cōsecration is made
misticall is not borne so. And therefore that which is not so

made (to witt by certain consecration) thoughe it be bread
and cuppe, it is foode for refection, not the sacramēt of oure
religion, thoughe allwaies we blesse and geue thankes to god
in all his giftes as well corporall as spirituall. Thus farre S.
Augustin, declaring that in the misteries we vse a
certain and propre consecration, whereby the misteries
are made other then they were by nature. For he
saith of the bread it is made misticall, non nascitur. it is
not so by nature. geuing vs vnderstande that by vertu
                  •
               
of consecration the bread is made that,The communion o
                     •
                   the protestants is but foo
                     •
                  e for refection. wiche by
nature it was not: to witt, the body of oure Sauiour.
Againe S. Augustin saith, that whiche lacketh consecration
is foode for refection, not the sacrament of oure religion.
So the Caluinistes in their communion by the
iudgement of S. Augustin haue foode for refection,
not the sacrament of oure religion. Finally S. Augustin
confuting the olde heresy of the Maniches, dothe
also confute the newe heresy of Caluin, yea and the
order of oure communion, where no consecration,
nor benediction is vsed.
            Thus we see, Christian readers, what broken pittes
and pudles Caluin hathe digged him selfe, and all sacramentaries
are forced to lappe in, forsaking the fountaine
of life Christ him selfe in this blessed sacramēt
of the aultar. We see, who liste to be a scholer of
Caluin, a ghospeller of Geneua or a Sacramentary
protestant, he muste also be an Arrian, a Nestorian, a
Sam
                     •
                  satenical, a Marcioniste, a Donatiste, a M
                     •
                  ni
                     •
                  he, and a
Valentinian diuers waies. These heretikes with al their
doctrine were condemned aboue a thousand yeares,

in that state of the churche, whiche onely oure
aduersaries approue for pure and vertuous. If that
state had the right doctrine, those heretikes were by
them worthely condemned. If they were worthely
condemned, these sacramentaries can off no good
Cristen men be allowed, folowed or supported.
            As in our discours vpon Luther, beside a numbre
of olde cursed heresies by him renewed and common
to al protestāts, we declared you one proper heresy
of his owne, for examples sake, euen so after the
ranke of these olde condemned heresies, which Caluin
hath incurred only in mistaking, or rather willfully
departing from the Catholike faith off the
most blessed Sacrament of the aultar, I will recite you
one most horrible and blasphemous heresy of his
owne imagination, for examples sake of many more
which might be brought, if we listed in this short
discours, to saie all that might be saied. In his institutions
vpon the article of our Crede Descendit ad inferos,
He descended in to hell he teacheth,Cap. 7. that Christ there
suffred the paynes of hell: and mocketh at the belefe
of the Catholike Church teaching vs that then
our Sauiour deliuered the soules of the fathers off
the olde law, according as the scripture witnesseth,
speaking by the prophet most euidently of our Sauiour,
Tu quoque in sanguine Testamenti tui emis
                     •
                  sti vinctos
tuos de lacu in quo non est aqua.
               Zachar. 9. that is, Thou also
through the bloud of thy testament hast let thy pr
                     •
                  sonners
out of the pitt, wherein is no water.
               Hieronymus in Zachariam. 9. which 
                  •
               aying of the
prophet the lerned fathers haue allwaies expounded

of the descending of Christ in to hell, and deliuering
there the soules of the fathers of the olde law.
But as touching the heresy of Caluin, which in place
of this receiued doctrine this presumptuous heretike
auoucheth, you shall heare his owne blasphemous
wordes, and lerne of what a master our ghospellers
of Geneua haue lerned their false faith. These
be his wordes first in latin. Nihil actum erat si corporea
tantum morte defunctus fuisset Christus: sed opera
simul praecium erat vt diuinae vltionis seueritatem sentiret,
quo & irae ipsius intercederet, & satisfaceret iusto iudicio, vt
cum inferorum copijs aeternaeq
                     •
                  e mortis horrore quasi consertis
manibus luctaretur: Correctionem pacis nostrae illi impositam
fuisse propheta docet, fuisse propter scelera nostra a
patre percussum, attritū propter nostras infirmitates. Quibus
significat in locum peccatorum sponsorem, vadem, adeoque
instar rei submissum ad dependendas persoluendasque
omnes quae ab illis expetendae erant poenas, vno hoc duntaxat

                     •
                  x
                     •
                   pto quòd doloribus mortis non poterat detineri. Ergo si
ad inf
                     •
                  res descendisse dicitur, nihil mirum est, cum eam mortem
pertulerit, quae sceleratis ab irato deo infligitur. Hetherto
are his wordes as they lye in his institutions
in latin. Now let vs see the english. Nothing had ben
done, saieth Caluin, if Christ had dyed only by bodely deathe.
O hainous blasphemy of these cursed heretikes.
What could be saied more blasphemously?
Hath not now the death of Christ satisfised for our
sinnes? Be these the ghospellers that sette forth and
commend so much the passion of Christ? Is the bodely
death of Christ nothing? Must his soule suffer

also in hell? You shall heare forth the wordes of Caluin.
But it was also requisit, saieth he, that Christ should
fele the rigour of gods vengeaunce, whereby he might appease
his wrath and satisfie his iust iudgment, that he should
fight and combat with the Hostes of hell and horrour off
eternall death. Lo he saieth Christ ought beside
his bodely death, which was on the Chrosse, fele
also the rigour of gods vengeaunce, satisfise also
his most iust iudgment, and abide the horrour of eternall
death. O horrible blasphemy, mete for a sacramentary
ghospeller. For how then saied Christ
in his Crosse, after all the bitter torments suffred for
mankind and accomplished,Matth. 26. 
               Consummatum est, It is finished?
Was he yet to suffer more in hell? And how
cried he in his last most blessed wordes, Father in to
thy handes I commend my Spirit? Was that to be tormented
after of the deuils in hel? Dyd his Father kepe
it no better, but let it be tormēted yet again? Finally
how was that only sacrifice on the Crosse (as S.Hebr, 10.
Paul saieth) a perfit cōsummatiō and sanctification for
euer? Must he yet besides suffer torments in hell?
So saieth Caluin, Master to all the Geneuian protestants
of England, expresly against scripture, blasphemously
against God, and heretically against the Catholike
doctrine. And where writeth he this? In
his Institutions: a booke so precious in the eyes off
some pretended bishops, that it is by them cōmaunded
to be read of such, as haue charge of soules. May
not we worthely crie with that holy father Policarpus,
O Deus in quae nos tempora reseruasti?
               Euseb. lib. 2. histor. 
               O God to what

times hast thou reserued vs? Do we yet looke whether
these protestants tende, that so blasphemously write
of the blessed passion of Christ, and commaunde
such writings to be read of the vnlerned priests,
which shall teache it againe to the simple and vnlerned
people? And yet Caluin will proue his blasphemyes
by scripture: truly euen as he proueth the
rest of his doctrine. For lo these are his wordes folowing.
The prophet teacheth that the chastisement of our
peace was layed on him, he was smitten of the father for our
offences, and brused for our wickednes: by the which wordes
he signifieth that he was sent in to the place of sinners as
a surety, a pleadg, yea and as a gilty person to paie and
abide all such paines, as were to be required of them: only
this excepted that he could not be continually staied with
the sorowes of death. Therefore no maruail if he be sayed to
haue descended in to 
                     •
                  ell seing he suffred such death as God
in his wrath punisheth the wicked withall. Thus farre
you haue the wordes of Caluin, and his hainous heresy
therein contained. As for the saying off the
prophet, which (as he and his felowes do in infinit
other texts of holy scripture) he wresteth from the
true meaning, the Catholike church hath allwaies
taken it to haue ben fulfilled on the Crosse, in the
bodely death of Christ. For there he was smitten off
the Father for our offences, and brused for our wickednes,
there the chastisement of our peace and attonement
was layed vpon him. But Caluin, as if
he were a man priuileged from God to saie and teache
as he listeth, will haue it so ment, that Christ

beside his bodely death on the Crosse, be sent in to
the place of sinners, which is hell (for of Christes descending
in to hell he now disputeth, vnlesse (as some
protestants do) he make no hell at all, and saie
that Christ descended no otherwise in to hell, but
that he was tormented on the Crosse)Reade the preface of Staphilus pag. 18. and the leafe. 106. there to paie
and abide all the torments of sinners, sauing that he
suffreth it not eternally. This is lo the rewarde off
heresy, and of such as forsake their faith: to fall in to
most horrible blasphemies, such as a Turk would abhorre:
and yet to see them not, but persuade them selues
they haue the light of the gospell, and be only
true Christians, and all the worlde beside blind, superstitious
and idolaters, not only that now is, but
that hath ben this thousand yeares. I will no more
exaggerat the matter. I wish them amendment and
knowledg of the truthe: and desire all other to beware
in time, of such perilous heresies, as these vnghostly
ghospellers of Geneua bring to our deceiued
countre. We will now passe to the doctrine of Caluin,
touching the sacrament of baptim and consider
how pure and euangelicall his doctrine thereof is.
            In the sacrament of baptim,
                  Heresies of Caluin about the Sacramēt of Baptim▪
                though the doctrine
of Caluin be allmost of all protestants of our countre,
not onely the sacramentaries, receiued and embraced,
yet it containeth many straunge and horrible
heresies. Which so in that man happened, bicause he
serched all suttle shiftes, and pried out all the preuy
fetches he could deuise, whereby he might defeate
the doctrine of the Catholike church. For hereupon

he vvttereth in his doctrine diuers hainous heresies other
ignorantly or malitiously. First therefore we wil
discouer vnto you, such of his heresies as are taken
off the olde condemned heretikes in the primitiue
Church: Then such as he forged him selfe expresly
against holy scripture, and yet defendeth them no
lesse foolishely then wickedly, as allwaies the proper
of heretikes is to do.
            It was the heresy of Pelagius, as S▪ Augustin recordeth,
that children were not borne in originall sinne.
His wordes of thē are these.Ad quoduultdemn. H
                     •
                  r. 88. 
               Paruulos etiam negant secundum
Adam carnaliter natos contagium mortis antiquoe
prima natiuitate contrahere, sic enim eos sine vllo peccati originalis
vinculo asserunt nasci, vt prorsus non sit quod eis
oporteat secunda natiuitate dimitti, that is. The pelagians
denie that children borne by fleshe after Adā be giltie of deathe
by their first natiuite. For they make them to be borne so
withoute bonde of originall sinne, that they nede no remission
in their seconde natiuite or regeneration. Here the Pelagians
make children to be borne in state off grace
and not giltie of originall sinne. This these heretikes
taught generally of all children. Caluin teacheth the
same in children borne off Christen parents.2. Cor. 15. Heare
his wordes, oute off the 17. chapter off his Institutions
towardes the ende. Infantes nostros antequam
nascātur se adoptare in suos pronunciat Deus, cum se
nobis in deum fore promittit seminique no
                     •
                  tro post nos. Hoc
verbo continetur eorum salus, that is. God promising that he
will be oure God, and oure childrens after vs, pronounceth
that he adopteth and admitteth oure children for his owne,

before they are borne. In this worde their saluation is contained.
And in an other place thus he writeth.In appendice contra Interin. 
               Sancta videlicet
& c
                     •
                  te. The issue of Christen parents is borne holy bicause
of the promis of God: and their children euen yet in the
wombe before they come to open life, are admitted in to the leage
of life euerlastinge. Caluin here and the Pelagians
agree in this, that children are borne withoute original
sinne and in state of grace. The difference maie seme
to be, that Caluin speaketh this of Christen children
onely whereas the Pelagians speake generally of
all children. But you shall see that by the proufe
whiche Caluin bringeth for this abominable doctrine,
it shall stretche to all children. For what is the
proufe he bringeth? Forsothe the promis of God. What
promis is that? that whiche he made to Abrahan, saieng he
woulde be his god and his sede after him. In this worde saieth
Caluin, their saluation is contained. Let vs thē suppose
that by the warrant of Caluins mouthe all the
realme of Englande being nowe Christian, shoulde
leaue their childrē vnbaptised, bicause they are allready
admitted in to the leage of life euerlasting. Those
children coming to the age of mē, and hauing other
children, muste they baptise their children, or must
they not? If they muste baptise their children, then
the promis of God reacheth not vnto them. For if it
reached to them, it should ereache also to their children:
In which case they nede not be baptised, but
maie liue by the baptim of their grandfathers. If they
may not baptise their children, but let them liue withoute
baptim, thē see what detestable enormites and

hainous blasphemies will ensue thereupon.
            First by this rule all the christening of children in
England sens the faithe first planted there, and the realme
thouroughely baptised, wiche pricketh nowe
wel vpon a thousande yeares, hathe ben in vaine and
to no purpose, for that they came of the issue and
bloud of Christen parents.
            Secondarely all baptim nowe maie cease in the realme,
all fontes maie be shutt vp, and of two sacraments
whiche onely remaine, they maie take away
one, to witt baptim, and then talke no more of the
Sacraments in Christ his churche, but of a sacramēt:
whiche also in what pointe Caluin hathe lefte vs, we
haue I truste sufficiently before declared.
            Thirdly Christendome shall be no more a spirituall
matter, geuen by the administration of Sacraments,
but a temporall benefit, entailed to the bloud
of the parēts. And then greate questions might arise
of bastards, being not the 
                  •
               ede of Christen mariage,
but the frute of filthy fornication or sinnefull aduoutry.
            Fourthely we muste put oute of the scripture the
wordes of oure Sauiour,I
                     •
                  an. 3. 
               Nisi quis renatus fuerit ex aqua
& spiritu sancto, non intrabit in regnum caelorum, that
is,an. 1549▪ 1551. 1552. 15
                     •
                  2. 
               Onles a man be borne againe of water and the holy ghoste
he shall not enter into the kingdome of heauen. And truly
they drawe well towarde to do so. For looke in the
Englishe bibles who will, printed of late yeares, and
he shall finde the worde (againe) to be lefte oute. And
euen as nowe they haue lefte oute that one worde

(by the which oure regeneration by baptim is moste
necessarely imported) 
                  •
               o may they within fewe yeares
leaue oute the whole sentence, and thē make a scripture
of their owne. For what other can we looke for
of these impudent presumptuous heretikes, if they
may be suffred to runne their race at will? Oure lorde
staie it, if it be his pleasure.
            Laste of all if Christendome so dependeth of
oure parents, why haue all Christen men euer so
charely baptised their children, as all stories do testify?
Was it as Caluin writeth, bicause they shoulde
not departe withoute the signe or badge of a Christian
man? Truly he writeth so: and in so writing he
holdeth the heresy of the Maniches, as in the other
he dothe of the Pelagians. as ye shal anon see. But nowe
harken what les
                  •
               on S. Augustin geueth vs touching
the baptim of children. These are his wordes.
Quisquis dixreit quód in Christo viuificantur paruuli qui
sine Sacramēti eius participatione de vita exeūt,
               Epist. 
                     •
                   28. 
               hic profecto
& contra Apostolicam praedicationem venit, & totā condemnat
Ecclesiam: vbi propterea cum baptisandis paruulis festinatur
& curritur, quia sine dubio creditur aliter eos in
Christo viuificari omnino non posse. that is. Whosoeuer
shall saie that infants shall haue life in Christe which departe
oute of this life withoute receauing baptim, truly that man
bothe procedeth against the doctrine of the Apostles, and also
condemneth the whole Churche: where men make haste
and runne to baptise their infants for that cause surely, bicause
vndoubtedly they beleue that other wise they can haue no
life in Christ. Lo the testimony of S. Augustin a most

assured witnes of antiquite,In institut. Cap. 18. and beste to be trusted in
reporte of awncient belefe, by the verdit of Caluin
him selfe. Let vs a litle considre the place. Caluin as
you heard before, saieth that children of Christē parents
are borne holy, and are admitted in to the leage of life euerlasting
being yet in the mother wombe. and that by the promis
of god they are all ready saued. S. Austen saieth with
oute baptim they haue no life in Christ: and that who so
saieth contrary (as Caluin dothe teaching them to be
saued afore baptim) he procedeth against the doctrine of
the Apostles,
               VVath the doctrine of Caluin is 
               and condemneth the whole Churche. Lo nowe
you see expresly, what the doctrine of Caluin is. It
fighteth directly against the doctrine of the Apostles.
It condemneth the whole churche. It is the heresy
of the Pelagians. But some scholer of Caluin will saie
that S. Agustin here speaketh of the children of hethē
parents. No truly. For marke his wordes. He saieth.
mē make haste and runne to baptise infants. What men trowe
ye were they? hethen? Would the hethen runne
to baptise their children, being them selues vnchristned,
and detesting all Christendome? Or would
Christen men runne with the children of hethen parents?
No that was against the lawe of the primitiue
churche. For the childe coulde not be baptised or
Christened,Thom. 22. q. 10. ar. 12 against the fathers will, vntel he came to
full age and discretion. And therefore at this houre
the practise is in Italy, where Iewes are cōmon, that
the father remaining a Iewe, the childe vnder age can
not be forced to baptim against the fathers wil. Els
by this time all Iewes, had ben christned in Italy, and

other where. By this testimony therefore of S. Augustin
it is clere that Caluin by this detestable doctrine
defendeth the cursed heresy of Pelagius. Nowe ye
shall see he teacheth also as the Maniches dyd.
            
               S. Augustin reakoning vp the sūdry and hainous he
resies of the Maniches, amonge the rest reakoneth also
their heresy against baptim,Ad Quoduultdemn Haeres. 64▪
                writing of them in
these wordes. Hij baptismum in aqua nihil cuiquam perhibent
salutis afferre: nec quenquam eorum quos decipiunt
baptisandum putant: that is. These men affirme that baptime
done in water bringeth no saluation to any. And thereupon
such as they deceiue, they thinke they nede not be baptised. Let
vs nowe heare whether Caluin saie not euē the same
of baptim.Cap. 17. In his institutions in the treatise of
baptim, defining it to be but a signe and token, or badge
of a Christen man, he concludeth with these wordes.
Quis ergo aqua ista mundari nos dicat, quae certo testatur
Christi sanguinem verū esse atque vnicum nostrum lauacrum?
That is. Who then will saie that we are clensed
with this water, which dothe assuredly testifie, that the bloude
of Christ is oure true and onely cleansing?
               In the leafe. 202. Of these wordes
we haue aboue disputed, and declared you the falshod
and vntruthe of them. Nowe onely marke that
he agreeth with the Maniches. For as they saie, that
baptim done in water bringeth no saluation, so Caluin
saieth that by the water of baptim we are not clensed.
With the other parte of the Maniches saying he agreeth
as iuste as maye be, in the ende of the. 18. chapter
of his Institutious, where he writeth thus. Non
ideo baptisantur infantes 
                     •
                  idelium, vt filij dei tunc fiant

primum &c. that is. The infants of Christen men are not
therefore baptised, that they may become the children of god,
as thoughe they were before oute of the church, but rather
they are with a solemne token receaued into the church, bicause
they appertained before to the body of Christ, by the
benefit of the promis. Therefore if we lette passe this token
withoute contempt or negligence, we are safe from all daunger.
This he writeth blaming the Catholike churche
for suffring the midwiues and laye people in time of
necessite, to baptise children: sayeng, they nede not
so to do: but that withoute baptim the childe may
be saued: euen as the Maniches thought: and therefore
estemed it nedeles, as Caluin dothe, to baptise
those of their secte.
            An other olde heresy Caluin by his doctrine off
baptim consequently defendeth, when he writeth
that after baptim, we nede no other penaūce, all oure
life time, but when we fall, haue a recourse to oure
baptim. His wordes in his Institutions the. 17. chapter
are these: Sic cogitandum est quocunque baptisemur
tempore, nos semel in omnem vitam ablui & purgari. Itaque
quoties lapsi fuerimus, repetenda erit memoria baptismi,
& hac armandus animus, vt de peccatorum remissione semper
certus securusque sit. that is. So we ought to thinke
whensoeuer we are baptised, that we are clensed and purged
for all oure life time. therefore as ofte as we fall we must remembre
oure baptim, and arme oure minde therewith being
sure of forgeuenes of sinnes and carelesse. By this doctrine
Caluin wipeth awaie the sacramēt of penaunce: and
therefore in the wordes folowing, he teacheth that

the absolution geuen by the churche is referred to
baptim. Nowe to take awaie penaunce after baptim
and to denie the second table of repētaunce, after the
shipwracke of oure former renewing in baptim by
deadly sinne (which in the 19. chapter of his institutions
he calleth a wicked doctrine) is an auncient heresy
of the Nouatians, as in S. Ciprian euery where it
appereth, and in S. Ambrose, who wrote a lerned worke
against them. Lo the laudable and sounde doctrine
of Ihon Caluin, a man called of the deuil to raise vp
olde carren heresies, and to infect therewith the well
disposed hartes of good Christians.
            Truly if Hercules was a man muche renouned
and of great fame and reputation, for that he drewe
oute of hell (as poetes do faine) the great helhownde
Cerberus with is thre ougle heads, of what fame
and reputation trowe we, ought Caluin to be, who
hath plucked oute the deuill him selfe oute of hell
with three times three hainous and horrible heresies
(whiche aboue these thousand yeares haue ben tied
to the deape dongell of hell) and hath lette him lose
againe, to walke at his will, and preache at his pleasure
aboute the worlde? In the doctrine of the blessed sacrament
of the aultar he raised vp, as you haue hearde,
the heresies of Arrius, of Samosatenus, of Nestorius,
of Faustus Manicheus, of Valentinus, and of Marcion.
In this sacrament of baptim, he teacheth as the
Pelagians, the Maniches, and the Nouatians, all famous
and notorious heretikes taught aboue a thousand yeares
paste.
            
               
It shall not nede to discusse or examin any farder
his doctrine defending these heresies. It suffiseth for
any Christen man to knowe that they are olde condemned
heresies, and accompted for suche of the
church of Christ. And with this reason concluded
S. Augustin his litle treatise of heresies, hauing reakoned
vp all suche as had ben from Christes time to
his. I wil geue you here his conclusion and doctrine,
for a good holesom triacle, against the poisons off
Caluin aboue recited. His wordes are these. Quid contra
ista sentiat catholica Ecclesia superfluo quaeritur: cum
propter hoc scire sufficiat eam contra ista sentire, nec aliquid
horum in fidem quenquam debere recipere. Sed multum adiuuat
cor fidele nosse quid credendum non sit, etiam si disputandi
facultate id refutare non possit. Omnis itaque Christianus
catholicus ista non debet credere. that is. It is but in
vaine to require what the Catholike church teacheth against
these heresies: it is inoughe to knowe that she dothe teache against
them, and that no man ought to beleue any of all these.
But it auaileth muche to the faithfull and true beleuing
harte to knowe, what oughte not be beleued, though by drifte
of reason it be not able to refute it. Therefore euery Christian
Catholike man ought in no wise beleue these thinges. Lo
we haue a good holesom lesson of this most reuerent
and lerned Father. I beseche god geue vs all grace
to folowe it, and to detest al suche doctrine and
doctours, as forceth vs to embrace suche olde cursed
heresies by their newe deuised fantasies, and to forsake
the Catholike churche of more then fiften hundred
yeares, to folowe the trace of newe and olde heresies

patched together, and blasted abrode scant yet
halfe one hundred yeares.
            His heresies forged of him selfe aboute baptim are
these.In institut. Cap. 17. In commē
                  tar. in. 1. Cor. Cap. 10. First he teacheth that the baptim of S. Ihon and
the baptim of Christ was all one. Then that the Iewes
were no lesse baptised vnder Moyses in the cloude
and in the read sea, then Christen men are nowe
in the fonte. And that equall grace was geuen in
bothe. These are two heresies expressely against holy
scripture.
            As touching the firste S. Ihon in the ghospell putteth
a most manifest distinction betwene his baptim
and the baptim of Christ,Mat. 3. saying thus of him selfe.
I baptise you in water to repentaunce, but he that shall come
after me is of more power, then I am, he shall baptise you in
the holy ghoste and in fire. In these wordes S. Ihon declareth
that he baptised in water onely to repentaunce,
preparing the hartes off men and disposing them to
receaue the Messias Christ him selfe, who should
baptise them, not in water onely as Ihon did for repentaūce,
but in the holy ghoste also and fire, that is,
geuing to those which by Christ were baptised the
holy, ghoste, as a full pleadge and assuraunce of remission
of oure sinnes, and the fire of burning and
feruēt charite, whereby al vanites and pleasures of the
worlde shoulde be quenched and consumed.
            Againe if the baptim of S. Ihon were all one with
the baptim of Christ, thē we must correct holy scripture
saieng of S. Ihon, praeibis ante faciem domini parare
rias eius, thou shalt go before the face of oure Lorde to praepare
               
               his waies, and saie with Caluin that he Christned
mē as well as Christ dyd, and was the Lorde him selfe,
that should weane vs in to the faithe by his baptim.
            Thirdly the baptim of S. Ihon is called in holy
scripture no other, but baptismus penitentiae the baptim
of repentaunce. For repentaunce was the waie that
S. Ihon made to bring men to Christ. Nowe the baptim
of Christ is called lauacrum regenerationis & renouationis
spiritus sancti,
               Tit. 3. 
               the fountaine of regeneration and
renewing of the holy ghoste. Be these all one? Is there
not a farre passing difference betwene them?
            Laste of all we reade in the actes of the Apostles
euidētly, that suche as were baptised before of Ihon,
were after baptised againe by S. Paule.Acto. 19. The wordes of
the scripture are these. Paule coming to Ephesus founde
there certain disciples (that is suche as bore them selues
for Christians) and he saied vnto them, haue ye receiued
the holy ghost and do ye beleue? but they saied vnto him.
We haue not so muche as heard if there be any holy Ghoste.
Then he saied. Wherein then are ye baptised? which awnswered
vnto him, In the baptim of Ihon. Then Paule saied
Ihon baptised the people with the baptim of penaunce, telling
thē they should beleue in him that should come after him, that
is, in Iesus. This being heard, they were baptised in the name
of oure Lorde Iesus. Hetherto the wordes of holy scripture.
Nowe if the baptim of Ihō and Christ were al
one, as Caluin saieth, why dyd S. Paule baptise them
againe as the scripture here declareth? Doth Caluin
allowe rebaptisation? Is he an Anabaptist? Or were

they baptised againe bicause they were not instructed
before in the holy ghoste? This were in dede a good
reason for the furious Anabaptistes to make vs all
come to the fonte again, bicause when we were babes,
we vnderstode nothing of the holy ghoste. What
shift then hath Caluin here to defeate this most expresse
text of holy scripture? Truly he laboureth impudently
to defeate in it his institutions: but with no
lesse foly then impudency. For whereas it is writen
they were baptised in the name of Iesus,
               Caluin denieth scripture. Institu. C
                        •
                     p, 17. that is saieth Caluin,
they receaued visible and sensible graces of the holy ghost
they were not baptised again. Lo the scripture saieth, they
were baptised in the name of Iesus. Caluin saieth they receaued
visible graces of the holy ghoste. Maye not a mā by
this meanes come and denie baptim vtterly and saie
that after the ascension of Christ none were baptised?
For in all the newe testament after the ascension
of Christ we reade of no other baptim, but that men
were baptised in the name of Iesus. So we reade in the
first sermon of S. Peter made after the coming downe
of the holy goste. Baptizetur vnusquisque vestrum in
nomine Iesu Christi.
               Acto. 2. 
               Let euery one of you be baptised in the
name of Iesus Christ. And of the Centurion and all his
house it is writen,Acto. 10. 
               they were baptised in the name of oure
lorde Iesus Christ. Nowe all this by Caluins doctrine
was no baptim, but onely a receauing of visible graces
from the holy ghoste. For why maye it not as
well meane so in other places as here? shall scripture
meane sometime one thinge, sometimes an other as
it pleaseth Caluin?
            
               
Againe many were baptised, that receaued not those
visible graces. Or els Caluin must saie there is no
baptim nowe in the worlde nor hath no ben these
many hundred yeares. Cornelius also and his family
receaued those visible graces before they were baptised.Acto. 10.
Whereby we lerne it is not al one to receaue those
visible graces, and to be baptised.
            But what nede we farder refute this impudent hereticall
shifte of Caluin? It foloweth immediately in
the text aboue recited. Et quum imposuisset manus eis
Paulus, venit Spiritus Sanctus super eos & loquebantur lin
guis & prophetabant. that is. And when Paule had laied
handes ouer them the holy ghoste came down vpon them
and they spake with tongues and prophecied. Lo these visible
giftes were geuen them after they were baptised
by laieng on of handes. For the scripture telleth
vs, that first S. Paule baptised them, and after layed
handes on them, which being done the visible graces
were geuen them.
            What thinke ye now? did Caluin trow ye reade so
farre?In institut. Cap. 17. yes sothely. And yet goeth he forth to defend
impudently that which he had ones wickedly affirmed.
For he saieth, all this was but one action though it be
diuersly tolde, for two seuerall actions. and he saieth so
onely. But by what authorite, by what reason saieth
he so? He telleth vs, it is the maner of the hebrew phrase to
speake first the matter shortely, and after to sette it forthe mere
at large. What if it be the maner of the hebrew phrase?
Is it so allwaies, or sometimes onely? If it be so all
waies, then shoulde he at leste haue brought here one

example. Nowe he bringeth none at al. Beside that he
shooteth very wide of the marke.Quinquarboreus in Operegrā. No tounge auoideth
more idle repetitions of one thinge, no tounge
affecteth more breuite and speaketh more in fewer
wordes, then the hebrew dothe: and therefore it
is called of al other most chaste, frugall, and lesse ryotous
in lāguage. I reporte me herein to the skilful thereof.
If he meane it is the hebrewe phrase sometimes
to speake so, what of that? so is it the greke phrase,
the latin phrase, and the phrase of all tongues sometimes
to do. What then? Bicause it dothe so sometime,
ergo dothe it so in this place?
            But where trowe ye was Caluins witt and remembraunce
when he wrote this?An impudent foly of Caluin. What meaned he
to bleare oure eyes with the authorite of an hebrew
phrase in this place, whiche nother was writen in the
hebrew tongue nor of any hebrician? For whose
wordes are those we alleaged you before? Be they
not writen in the Actes of the Apostles the .19. chapter?
Was the Actes of the Apostles euer writen in the
hebrewe tongue? we neuer heard yet, that any parte
of the new testament was writen in the hebrewe tongue,
except S. Matthewes ghospell onely and the epistle
vnto the hebrewes. Againe who wrote the Actes
of the Apostles? Was it not S. Luke the Euangelist a
greke borne, to witt at Antiochia? To what a miserable
shift trowe ye was this willfull proude heretike
driuen, when to vpholde his heresy against the expresse
wordes of scripture, after all other shiftes, he
was glad at the length to flie to the succour of an hebrewe

phrase, in suche a text as neither was writen in
the hebrewe tongue, neither of any hebrewe borne?
But what will not an heretike do, rather then he will
acknowleadg the truthe? We reade that onely Christ
was able to put the Pharises to silence, and stoppe the
mouthes of the Sadduces: two hereticall sectes of the
Iewes as the Lutherans and the Caluinistes are nowe
of the Christians. We haue peraduēture ben ouer
longe in this one point. But it was necessary that the
suttle shiftes of that wily heretike, shoulde be discouered.
This perilous booke of his Institutions, is (as I
vnderstande) in oure englishe tongue, and commaunded
to be reade of the simple and vnlerned priestes.
Let these fewe pointes, that by occasion in this oure
discours we haue discouered, be a lesson and charitable
aduertismēt vnto them, what to iudge of the rest.
Truly it were better for them, being vnlerned, to nourishe
a serpent at their table, then to reade this perilous
poisonned booke: whereby the olde serpent is
euer at hande to seduce them, in to most hainous:
heresies, and most horible blasphemies, as we haue
before in parte touched.
            The seconde heresy that Caluin vttereth and forgeth
himselfe aboute this doctrine of baptim is, that
the Iewes were baptised in the cloude and in the read sea, as
we are in the fonte. He teacheth this doctrine in his cō
               mentaries
vpon the first to the Corinthiās the tenth
chapter, and concludeth that & in spirituali substantia
& in figura visibili bothe in the spirituall substaunce
and in the visible figure, their baptim in the cloude

and in the read sea, agreeth with oure baptim in the
fonte. And therefore he teacheth the Iewes to haue
had the sacramēt of baptim no lesse then we. And this
he dothe, bicause he woulde bringe oure Christen
faith to mere figures, signes, and shadowes, in the whiche
the Iewes in the olde lawe were traded to a better
perfection vnder Christ, as S. Paule teacheth. But
let vs see howe hereticall and false this doctrine is.
            First it repugneth manifestly against holy scripture.
For S. Paule after he had saied, the Iewes were baptised
in the cloude and in the read sea, he saieth euen immediately
after Hec in figura facta sunt nostri, these thinges
were done in the figure of vs. and againe after a fewe lines,
Haec autem omnia in figura contingebant illis. all these thinges
happened to them in figure. And thus do all holy fathers
expoūde this place.Homil. 23. in 1. r. 10. tract. 11. & 45. in Ioan. Chrisostom saieth. Veritatis
nominibus vsus est in figura. the Apostle vsed the names off
the verite in the figure. S. Augustin sayeth: their passing throughe
the read sea, whereby the escaped the Aegyptians,
               In com. in 1 Cor. 10. 
               figured
the deliuraunce of vs from the deuill throughe baptim.
Theodoret writeth, that the cloud ouer shadowing them from
burning heates figured the grace of the holy ghoste ouershadowing
vs from flame of concupiscence and sinne.
               Ibidem. S. Hierom
likewise writeth that these thinges happened
vnto them in vmbra & typo, non in veritate, in shadowe
and figure, not in verite. Onely Caluin against expresse
scripture, and so many lerned fathers, impudently, as
his maner is, defendeth that the cloude and the read
sea was as true a baptim to the Iewes as the holy fonte
is to vs. But let vs see what absurde inconueniences

depend of this doctrine, thoughe nor scripture, nor
authorite of holy fathers made against it.
            If the children of Israel were baptised bothe in the
read sea and in the cloude, with the like perfection as
we in the fonte, then they were twise baptised: and our
baptim may be double not withstanding the perfection
of it. Which being so, we must chaunge the scripture
in S. Paule, saying there is vna fides, vnum baptisma
but one faithe and but one baptim.
               Ephes. 4. Caluin here awnswereth
that these are two different signes, making but
one baptim, awnswering to oure baptim. But see I praie
you what a sory shifte this is. For first by the doctrine
of Caluin,Iustitut. Cap. 17. (as you haue heard before) baptim
is nought els but a signe of the remission of sinnes, by the which
we are admitted in to the felowship and societe of Christen
men. Nowe if the Iewes had two suche different signes,
had they not two baptims? or els if those two
signes made but one baptim, then in the clowde they
were not baptised, vntell they had passed the read sea,
which was afterwarde. Nowe S. Paule saieth, they were
baptised in the cloude, and in the sea. Iff the worde Baptised,
as Caluin will haue it, be ment of true baptim,
suche as oures is, then were they truly baptised bothe
in the cloude and in the sea: whiche were two diuers
actions, and at two sundry times.
            Againe if the children of Israel were baptised in
the cloude and in the sea, with the like perfection as
we are in the fonte, howe will Caluin auoide the suspicion
of an Anabaptiste, seing they were baptised before
in their circumcision by the doctrine of Caluin?

For Caluin in his Institutions, in his chapter of baptim
teacheth that circuncision was to the Iewes as baptim
was to vs: the onely difference being in the outwarde signe.
to witt, that by circuncision they had remission off
sinnes, life euerlasting, and were admitted in to the
leage of god. And oure baptim (as you haue heard)
Caluin defineth to be naught els, but a sure token or
warrant that we be admitted in to the societe and
number of Christen men ioyned in leage to god.
Nowe if the Iewes by Circumcision had their perfit
baptim, and yet in the cloude and in the sea were baptised
again as perfitly, dothe not this doctour of Geneua
teache vs diuersite of baptims?Caluin furdereth the cause of the Anabaptistes. Dothe he not
muche furder the cause of the Anabaptistes? Seing it is
but a matter of signes by Caluins doctrine, haue not
they greate occasion to crie vpon rebaptisation? It
is not muche to be maruailed, if so many Sacramentaries
be also Anabaptistes, as experience doth showe
in all those countres, where Sacramentaries do swarme.
The doctrine of Caluin dothe minister right
good occasion thereunto, as you shall see yet by one
consequence more, deducted of this his heresie.
            If the Iewes were baptised in their circuncision, in
the cloude, in the sea, and receaued the same baptim
as Christen men do in the fonte, howe saye we to the
baptim of S. Ihon? Why dyd S. Ihon baptise the Iewes
being baptised before with the very same baptim? For
if (as Caluin here saieth) the Iewes were baptised
in the cloude, and in the sea, no lesse then we are in
the baptim of Christ, and againe the baptim of S.

Ihon be, (as you hearde him saie before) the very same
baptim, that Christ his baptim is, why, I saie, dyd
S. Ihon baptise them againe? Dothe he not here teache
plaine rebaptisation? Let vs yet go one steppe
farder.
            The Iewes, saieth Caluin, were baptised in the
cloude, and in the sea, in their circuncision, in the
baptim of S. Ihon, euen as we are in the water of oure
baptim. Why then dyd S. Peter at his first sermon
made to the Iewes exhorte them to baptim againe?
And those of the Iewes whiche beleued in Christe,
why were they baptised, as the text saieth they were?
For it is writen.Acto. 2. 
               Qui receperunt sermonem eius baptisati
sunt, they that receaued the worde of Peter, were baptised.
And why dyd Ananias baptise S. Paule? If the Iewes
were as verely and as truly baptised in the clowde, vnder
Moyses,Acto. 9. (whiche Caluin most impudently affirmeth)
as we are in the fonte vnder Christ, and his
minister, why were they baptised againe of S. Ihon,
or of the Apostles, when they came to the faithe of
Christ? What a numbre of baptims dothe Caluin teache
vs, beside the one onely baptim of Christ, whiche
the Catholike church hathe lerned in holy scripture?
Circuncision, the clowde, the sea, the baptim of
S. Ihon, and al these the very same and of the selfe same
effect, and force, as the baptim of Christ. Is not
Caluin trowe ye a ioyly Anabaptiste? Nay dothe he
not farre passe the Anabaptistes? They go aboute to
repete one twise. Caluin maketh vs fyue for one: off
the which euery Christned Iewe by his doctrine, hathe

foure. and euery vnchristened Iewe hathe three.
            I woulde nowe passe from his heresies to his contradictions.
But I muste nedes put you in minde off
one ioyly tricke of Caluin which he practised in the
planting of this heresy. In his commentaries vpon
S Paule where he teacheth this doctrine, after longe
labour and strife, seing he coulde bringe forthe no
true childe, but that it proued to a mōster, and ougle
vnnatural thinge, and perceauing one foule faute in
it which he thought most of all those of his generatiō
would abhorre, he goeth aboute to cloke it and
colour it, as wel as he maie. The greate faute that he
espied him selfe in this doctrine, is, that it had no expresse
scripture for it. You shall heare him finde the
faute and see howe he will remedy it. These be his
wordes. Sed rursum obijcitur:
               Caluin auoucheth doctrine of his ovvne vvithout scripture. 
               nullum de his verbum extare.
I d ego fateor: sed neque dubium hoc est quin Deus
spiritu suo defectum externae praedicationis suppleuerit. that
is, But they will obiecte againe. That there is no worde extant
hereof. That do I confesse, but it is not to be doubted but
that God by his Spirit hath supplied the lacke of external
preaching. Lo Caluin nowe is glad to runne to the
refuge of the holy ghoste for his doctrine whē scripture
faileth him. But when the Catholike churche,Caluinvvil not allovve the doctrine of the church vvithout scripture
directed allwaies and assisted by the holy ghoste, teacheth
vs any thinge, that is not expressed in holy
scripture, Caluin can not abide it. Hereupon in his
Institutiōs he raileth at the adoratiō of Christ in the
blessed sacrament, bicause in holy scripture, saieth he,
Nulla eius mentio ostendi potest, quae tamen non fuisset
               
               pretermissa si deo accepta foret, that is. No mentiō there of
cā be showed, which notwithstāding had not bē omitted, if it
had liked god. And in the matter of reseruatiō, though
he graūt that the primitiue church vsed it, yet bicause
it is not expressed in scripture, he wil none of it. Thus
whē it pleaseth Caluin, scripture is requisit, and whē
it pleaseth him not, scripture may be lacked and the
spirit of god maie supplie it. In like maner though he
crie vpō scripture alwaies, and (as we noted you before
oute of his Institutitiōs) wil not allow the church
no farder,Cap. 8. de side. thē she bringeth expresse scripture for her,
yet not only in this place he teacheth beside scripture,
and cōfesseth it to, but also in many other places.
            In the matter of the blessed sacrament of the aultar,
you haue sene in howe many and sundry pointes,
his doctrine repugneth to holy scripture, while
he laboureth to persuade men, that to be but bread
and wine, which oure Sauiour pronounced to be his
body and bloud. It cometh nowe to my minde, howe
impudenly he shifteth awaie the authorite of expresse
scripture, where with he sawe him selfe pressed.
You shall heare his wordes. In his Institutions
the 18. chapter thus he writeth. Vtcunque verborū Christi
tangi se religione quiritentur,
               Caluin requireth to be hearde, thou ghe scripture be plaine against him. 
               quo minus figuraté intelligere
ausint, que sunt tam aperté dicta, non est tamen hic satis
iustus praetextus, cur omnes quae contra obijciuntnr rationes
ita respuāt. that is. Howesoeuer they crie and cōplaine
that for the reuerence of Christ his wordes they dare not
take it for a figure which was so plainly spoken, yet this is no
sufficient pretēce why they shuld refuse al such reasons, as we

bringe against thē. This he writeth against the Lutherās,
which will not go frō the real presence of Christ
in the Sacramēt. And see we not here the vncredible
arrogancy of this proude heretike? Doth he not showe
him felfe to be a very Antichriste?
               Caluin is an Antichrist. For what can
Antichriste require more off men, then to haue the
expresse wordes of Christ yelde to suche reasons, as
he will obiect against? And dothe not Caluin require
the very same? Doth he not bidd the Lutherans
beleue his reasons, against the expresse wordes
of Christ? And where as the Lutheran alleageth
that bicause the wordes of Christ are plaine
saieng. This is my body, he can not be brought to make
it a figure, as Caluin dothe, what other shifte hathe
Caluin, then to saie that this is no sufficient pretence,
why they shoulde refuse his reasons for the
contrary? Which is as much to saie. Though Christ
speake plainely, yet you must harken also what we
can saie against it: and ye must geue eare to suche reasons,
as we can laie against him: and then folowe
my reasō, what soeuer Christe or the ghospel telleth
you. Nowe what cā Antichriste require more? Verely
as S. Iohn saied of the heretikes of his time,1. Ioan. 2. 
               Antichristi
multi sunt, there are many Antichristes, so may we most
truly say of our time. there are many Antichristes: but none
a more righter Antichrist, thē this heretike Calui.
            You haue sene good readers, what heresies and
howe diuers Caluin hathe partely renewed, partly
forged of his owne, in his doctrine aboute these
two Sacraments, which onely he acknowleadgeth,

and taketh for Sacraments. If we woulde vse the like
diligence in other points of his doctrine, we coulde
be longe, and should be, I feare, tedious. And truly
it were to be wished, that neither the heresies of this
man, neither any heresie at all were knowen to the
common and vnlerned people. But bicause this suttle
heretike hathe so wined him selfe in to mens hartes,
that he hathe trained them not onely from the
Catholike churche of Christ, but also from the Lutherās,
and Melanchthonistes, which before bore all
the swaie of this new gospell, I thought good to discouer
his heresies, and other abominable doctrine
aboute these two Sacraments, as two of the waightiest
articles nowe in controuersy, and most
of all other touching oure saluation: to the entent
that not onely the Catholikes, and suche as god of
his goodnes hathe hetherto staied in the faithe of
the churche, may (as they do) vtterly abhorre his doctrine,
neither yelde by the wickednes of the time, to
any one point thereof, but also oure dere deceiued
countremen, that so gladly reade his workes, and so
gredely deuoure his diue lish doctrine, maye lerne of
these fewe, what to iudge of the rest, and by the soure
taste of these mislike the remnant of his vnpleasant
and most poisonned doctrine. For if in these two
blessed Sacraments, the one being the gate and entry
of saluation, the other being a most heauenly foode
to preserue vs therein, he sticketh not to vtter so harnous
heresies, and setteth him selfe so wickedly against
the church of god, what conscience trowe ye is

he like to take in other pointes of oure Christen religion,
lesse necessary, and of lesse importance? well:
Though he were in al the rest sounde and withoute
blot, yet these his heresies of vs recited, of him vttered
and taught, maye be sufficient to discredit him in the
cōscience of any Christien harte. For I thinke, and
trust verely, there is no Christen man in all the realme
of England, be he neuer so farre waded in heresy,
but that he dothe reuerence the primitiue church of
Christ, of the first fyue or six hundred yeares, and
will be ready to condemne all suche heresies, as were
in that time and age cōdemned. Nowe the Maniches,
the Ariās, the Valētinians, the Marcionistes, the Nestorians,
the Nouatians, the Pelagians, the Samosatencall,
and other, whose heresies Caluin hath renewed were
in the compas of those fiue hundred yeares condē
               ned.
If we woulde come downe lower, we coulde recite
a number more of heretikes, condemned also in
Christ his church, with whose heresies the doctrine
of Caluin dothe agree. But in consideration of
the impudent bragges made nowe in euery pulpit,
that all is reduced to the state of the primitiue churche,
I haue chosen oute suche heresies in Caluins
doctrine, as were in that time condemned: geuing
you to vnderstand that all is not the gospell which
is there spoken: vnlesse perhaps by reducing all to the
state of the primitiue church, they meane renewing
of olde heresies condemned in the primitiue church.
And truly so must they meane if they saie truly. But
let vs returne to Caluin.
            
               
In the doctrine of free will,Contradictions of Caluin aboute the doctrine of free vv. l. I will make no especiall
recitall of his heresies: But note you his contradictions,
of the which euer one part is an heresy.
In his Institutions the .14. chapter, he writeth, that
God did not only foresee the fall of the first man Adam, and
in it the fall of all his posterite, but also it was his will, it
should be so.
               Pag. 57. pag. 132 & 136. Againe in his booke of predestination
against Pighius he hath the same doctrine, saying that
God would not haue suffred Adam to fall, but that he
would haue it so to be. Also that God so determined it
and ordained it. Now in his booke of free will against
Pighius also, he saith in two places these wordes.
I confesse with Origen that those which take away free
will from Adā before he sinned, be heretikes.
               Pag. 67. 68. How agree
these sayings of him? If it were not only the will of
God that Adam should fall, but also that he determined
and ordained it so to be, then he fell of necessite.
For the determined will of God can not be
frustrated. Adā therefore could not, if he had would
continewed in his innocency. And yet had he free
will? If hotte and colde be all one, then is this doctrine
vniforme.
            
               Againe in his booke of predestination he saith.
All wsuchickednes as man committeth by malice of his owne,pag. 243.
procedethae so of God, and that not without good reason,
although we knowe it not. And to make his opinion
herein most clere, in the same booke he saieth. It is
a fonde solution of S. Paules saying, Esadu odio habui, I hated
Esau, to saie that the reprobats do worke their owne destruction
by their owne malice. And yet see what he

saith in his institutions the .2. chapter. Man, saith he,
can not impute the hardnes of his hart to any other cause,
then to him selfe. This lo is most true. But why then
saied he before, the wickednes of man procedeth of God?
Why reprouueth he that solution, which he now
maketh him selfe?
            
            Farder Caluin in his booke of predestination,
going aboute to mitigat his former doctrine, where
he taught that the reprobats could not chose, but do euill,
               Pag. 156.
saieth afterwarde, he meaneth not of euery particular
worke. for a litle before he confesseth Saul had done
certain thinges well. But directly contrary to
this shift is an other expresse doctrine of his in the
very same booke,Pag. 154. where he saieth. Men can not possibly
haue any affection to do well, vnlesse they be of the chosen
and elected. such as reprobats neuer be. For of Iudas
a sure reprobat Caluin him selfe pronoūceth:
Certum est Iudam nunquam fuisse membrum Christi:
               In eom. in 6. Cap. I
                     ••
                  n. 
               Certain
it is that Iudas was neuer any membre of Christ.
            
            Caluin yet for the better auauncement of his
wicked doctrine against free will, pretendeth to folow
S. Augustin in all pointes. And therefore in his
booke of predestination, he saieth, he varieth not from
S. Augustin so much as one sillable in this question of predestination.
               Pag. 18.
Notwithstanding in his Institutions he
saieth,Cap. 2. that S. Augustin was sometime scrupulous, and
would not tell the truthe of predestination roundely. as
when in his booke De praedestinatione & gratia he saieth,
that the induration and blinding of the reprobats is
not to be referred to the worke and operation of God,
               Cap. 6. 
               but

only to his foreknowleadg. Here in this most gracious
doctrine of that good Father, Caluin chargeth him
with scrupulosite. And yet he will beare vs in hand
forsothe, that he agreeth euen in euery sillable with
S. Augustin. Where in the one he declareth him selfe
a praesumptuous heretike: in the other a false contradictour
of his owne sayings.
            Finally Caluin as in wordes and doctrine, so in
doings and behauiour contrarieth his owne self.Cap. 8. In
his Institutions he wrireth: It was neuer permitted to
preachers of Gods worde to adde any one sillable to holy scriptare,
or diminish from thence, but to preache the only bare
worde, as it lieth. Now as in all his doctrine he talketh
more then halfe beside holy scripture, so in this matter
of predestination he is not afeard to adde to the
very text of S. Paule, wordes of his owne, for the maintenaunce
of his wicked doctrine. For in his Institutions
labouring to refer the induration of the reprobats
to the proper and eternall will of God, as a
superiour cause, then their owne deserts and malice,
thus he talketh.Cap. de predestinat. 
               Restat nunc vt videamus curid Dominus
faciat, quod eum facere palam est. Si respondeatur sic fieri,
quia sic impietate, nequitia, ingratitudine sua meriti sunt
homines, bene id quidem & vere dicetur. Sed quia nondum
patet istius varietatis ratio, cur alijs in obedientiam flexis
isti obdurati persistant, in ea excutienda necessario ad illud,
quod ex Moyse adnotauit Paulus, transeundum erit. Nēpe
quod ab initio eos excitarit Dominus, vt ostenderet nomen
suum in vniuersa terra.
               Rom. 9. That is. It remaineth nowe to see
why God doth that, which it is nowe clere he doth. If ye answer

that so it is done, bicause men by their owne wickednes,
malice, and vngratefulnesse haue so deserued (to be forsaken
of God) that shall be well and truly answered. But bicause
yet we see not the reason of this variete, why some being
brought to obedience, other continewe indurated, in the discussion
of this doubte, we must nedes haue recourse to that whiche
S. Paule noted oute of Moyses, to witt that from the
beginning the Lorde had stirred them vp to showe his name
through out all the worlde.
               Caluin addeth to the text of holy Scripture. Now these wordes, from the
beginning, are not in S. Paule, nor Moyses in any text,
latin, greke, or hebrewe, but are the wordes of Iohn
Caluin added to the text of Gods worde for a vauntage,
to witt, to make vs beleue, that from the beginning
euen before the fall of Adam, God was the cause off
induration aud harde hart of reprobats. For he is not
you see, cōtēted to attribut it only to their owne deserts
and malice, but seketh a superiour cause in God,
and that by the wordes of S. Paule from the beginning,
which he nor none of all his scholers are euer able to
showe vs in any text of S. Paule, that is. This is lo the
plaine dealing of these ghospellers and refourmers of
Christes Church: These be the chalengers of Gods
worde. This is the pure text they vaunte and boaste
of. They pretend to couet after the pure text and bare
letter. But as the poet saied, ex vno disce omnes. By
Caluin lerne what the rest are. And Time Danaos &
dona ferentes. trust not an heretike though he bringe
you scripture it selfe.
            What false tricke is there,The demeanour of Caluin, touvard holy scripture. that Caluin hath not
plaied? He hath corrupted the text with false translation,

as we showed you in the 9. chapter, of Salomons
prouerbes. He belieth holy Scripture, as yow
heard in the S. chapter of S. Paull to the Romans. He
denieth expresse scripture, as we declared you in the
19. chapter of the Actes of the Apostles. He requireth
to be heard against expresse scripture, as we recited
you oute of his Institutions. And nowe you see he
addeth to holy Scripture. If this archeprotestant and
greate ghospelling doctour, behaueth him selfe so in
his printed workes, which remaine to be vewed of all
lerned men, what will the nouices of his religion,
and young prinking preachers sticke to do in pulpits,
where they knowe their audience to be not allwaies
lerned: and of the lerned, some of a presumed preiudice
to take all for good, other to winke at all & vti
foro?
            
            Albeit the doctrine of Caluin (as you haue partly
sene) be stuffed with abhominable heresies and most
absurde contradictions, yet in all his doctrine he talketh
peremptorely. He matcheth him selfe with the
Apostles. He condemneth and reprouueth at his pleasure
all holy fathers. Whereby his pride and presumptuousnes
sure mates of heresy vttereth it selfe. I will
for example note you a fewe of his sayinges, where
you shall see howe proudely he demeaneth him selfe
and howe courteousely he ordereth the holy, auncient,
and lerned fathers.
            First as touching his contradictions about free
will, witting and feeling him selfe very well, that he
might wottly be charged therewith, in one place of

his booke of predestination he vtereth his feare, and
with a worde of his mouthe thinketh to make all
the matter smothe.pag. 61. These are his wordes. I saie again
I am not ignorant what apparent absurdite and contradiction
this doctrine hath with prophane men, and dispisors of
God. But whatsoeuer they bable or barke, our conscience
ought to serue vs for a thousand witnesses.
               A solution of Caluin to defend his coutradictions. Is not this a
gaie solution trow ye? hath he not geuen vs a substā
               tiall
warrant of the vniformite of his doctrine? For
what saieth he? Forsothe whatsoeuer contradictions
we see and beholde with our eyes, yet we must trust
Caluins cōscience, that he is so honest a man, that he
would neuer saie or vtter any such thing. Now reade
againe those fewe of his contradictions that we haue
recited, who list, and let him iudge in his owne
conscience, what the consciēce of Caluin is, and howe
farre it is to be trusted.
            Againe as touching the singularite off his doctrine,
which he knoweth and confesseth to be contrary
to the olde fathers, what reason, thinke ye, bringeth
he for the defence off it? In his treatise of baptim,
the 17. chapter of his Institutions, he expoūdeth
the wordes of Christ to Nicodemus, Vnlesse a mā be borne
again by water and the holy Ghost, he shall not enter in
to the knigdō of heauen,
               Ioan. 2. to be but an allegoricall speache
against the whole practise off Christes church, and
consent of all holy fathers, and lerned writers expounding
the wordes off Christ literally as the text
hath, for necessite of baptim. This Caluin knewe
and confessed. But how then thinke you doeth he

excuse the matter? what cl
                  •
               ke hath he for his singularite?
Ye shall heare. After longe talke thus he
concludeth. Scio alios aliter interpretari, sed hunc esse
germanum sensum non dubito. that is. I knowe that other
men haue otherwise expounded this, but I doubt not but this
is the right sence. Lo Caluin doubteth not, and therefore
we must beleue him more thē all the church beside.
What is arrogancy, if this be not?
            Likewise in his doctrine and booke of predestination,Pag. 164. & 165.
such as finde fault with his doctrine, he saieth
they blaspheme God: and crieth vnto them, as
S. Paul did to such as Caluin is.Rom. 9. 
               VVhat arte thou man
which disputest with God? Now what the doctrine off
Caluin is, you haue sene partly by this our simple
discourse, and more especially it appeareth in the
third parte of this Apologie. Yet he matcheth him
selfe with God,In the leafe 112. and vaunteth the cōptrollers of his
hereticall doctrine with the check of S. Paul, as curious
serchers of Gods depe secrets. And therefore no
maruail iff he sett light by the holy Fathers off
Christes church and reuerence them no deale at
all.
            In his treatise of baptim,Institut. Cap. 27 labouring to promote
his heresy, touching the baptim off S. Ihon, that it
should be equall with the baptim of Christ, remembring
that the Fathers of the church laie in his waie
and withstode him,Caluin disprouueth the lerned fathers. to make the restafeared, he geueth
the venter vpon S. Augustin, and saieth. Nec
recipienda est illa Augustini argutia in spe dimissa fuisse
peccata Ioannis baptismo, Christi baptismo reipsa dimitti,
               
that is. Neither is that sutteltly off Augustin to be admitted,
that by the baptim of Ihon sinnes were forgeuen but in
hope, by the baptim off Christ they are forgeuen in dede. In
other places he calleth S. Augustin,Cap. 18. de cena domini. 
               in dogmatibus ecclesiae
fidelissimū vetustatis interpretē
                a most trusty reporter
of antiquite in doctrines of the church. But when
it pleaseth M. Caluin, S. Augustins doctrine is but a suttelty.
Likewise reprouuing the doctrine of penaunce,
where it is compared to the borde after a shipwracke,
which is a vsuall similitude off all lerned writers,Cap. 19. de peniten.
he writeth thus. They saie it is the similitude of Hierom,
whose so euer it be, no doubt but it is a wicked similitude.
Againe in his treatise of predestination, where as S.
Gregory (as all other Catholike writers) teacheth
that no man can be assured off his election,Cap. 14. de predest. & prouidentia. he vaunteth
proudly that lerned Father with these wordes.
Pessimé & perniciose Gregorius &c. that is? worst of al and
wickedly taught Gregory &c. In his commentaries vppon
the sixt of Iohn disprouing the interpretation of
Chrisostom, whom Theophilact, Euthymius and diuers
haue coueted alwaies to folowe, Fallitur saieth he, meo
iudicio Chrisostomus, Chrisostom in my iudgement is
deceiued. What thinke you would Caluin feare to
vtter, that setteth so light by these lerned fathers,
whom the church so many hundred yeares hath reuerenced
and folowed? May not we saie to Caluin
and al such presumptuous preachers of new doctrine,
we knowe S. Augustin, we reuerence S. Hierom, we
credit Gregory and Chrisostom: but you M. Caluin
what are you, as it was saied to the vnbeleuing Iewes

attempting to worke miracles vnder the name of
Iesus and Paul,Acto. 19. 
               Iesum noui, Paulū scio, vos autē qui estis?
that is, Iesus I knowe and Paule also, but who are you?
            
            Caluin yet staieth not here, he is not contented to
reiect certaī of the Fathers the most lerned and most
approued, in certain pointes. He goeth farder. He cō
               dēneth
the whole primitiue church in the whole maner
of the worshipping of God. For disputing against
the blessed sacrifice of the Masse, he chargeth it with
Iuish superstition: and thus he pronounceth off the
whole order of the speciall and most principall seruice
of the primitiue church.Cap. 18. de cena domini. 
               They folowed rather the
Iuish maner of sacrificing, then as Christ had ordained, or
the order of the ghospel required. Thus saieth Caluin, not
speaking of these late yeares, but euen of the primitiue
church,Caluin condemneth the primitiue church, of the first six hundred yeares, vnto the
which time our Caluinistes at home dissenting in
this point from their Master (at lest as they pretend)
do referr all their doings and make the people beleue
that the primitiue Church vsed that order of Cō
               munion
as they do now, telling them withall that
the blessed sacrifice of the Masse and the maner thereof
hath ben vsed onely sence these later hundred
yeares. Notwithstanding Caluin their master
acknowledgeth that maner off sacrifising in
the primitiue Church, longe before that time,
which bicause off the ceremonies thereof he calleth
Iuish.
            
            I wote not herein what more to maruail at and lament,
other the vntolerable pride of this presumptuous

heretike condemning the very primitiue church
and therefore leauing vs no church sense the departure
hence of our Sauiour, or the wicked guile of our
newe preachers, which doing no lesse then Caluin
doth, sett yet a better coulour thereon, to entrappe
thereby the readier the vnlerned and well meaning
people in to their schismatical communion. For they
condemne not openly the primitiue church of Iuish
sacrifising, as Caluin doth, but denie stoutely that any
such sacrifice or cerimonies was then vsed,Iuell. and offer
to yelde if we can proue it. Let them now lerne off
their Masters owne confession, that such there was,
and let them lerne off their Crede, where they saie
they beleue the Catholike church, not to condemne
the primitiue church therein, which if they denie to
be the Catholike and true church of Christ, they
may as wel denie Christ him selfe head thereof, and
frustrat the whole, mistery of his blessed Incarnation,
as you heard before Dauid George did, and many
Lutherās and Caluinistes do now in diuers partes of
Germany to the great grief of al good Christē hartes
            But to returne to Caluin, what may not he
or any other heretike do, condemning and setting
light by the fathers of the primitiue Church?
For by them we haue not onely the true and
right interpretation of holy scripture, but the scripture
also it selfe: which without their testimouy we
could not be assured of. Wherefore S. Augustin after
he had left the Manichees, and cleaued to the Catholike
church of Christ, writing against thē, and commending

vnto them the authorite thereof, he saieth.
Euangelio non crederem nisi me Ecclesiae commoueret authoritas.
I would not beleue the ghospell, vnlesse the
authorite of the church moued me thereto. Now
Caluin is nothing moued therewith, but leaneth more
to his owne iudgement then to al the lerned writers,
and holy Fathers of Christes church beside.
Whereof he was worthely ones checked of Bucer,
telling him quod iudicaret prout amaret, amaret autem
prout libet. that he iudged as he loued, and loued what him
pleased.
               In Epist. a familiari. And truly the only cause whereby Caluin in
his Institutiōs, in his commētaries vpō holy scripture,
and in other his workes abuseth the reader and deceiueth
the vnlerned is, that he feareth not expounding
scriptures boldely to preferr his owne iudgemēt
eloquently sett forth before the iudgement of S.
Augustin, Hierom, Chrisostom, Ciprian, Gregory, Bernard
and all the other holy lerned men that euer
wrote. Now what arrogancy is this? If euery lerned
man may sette forthe his iudgement to the worlde
as the true meaning of Gods worde, and condemne
the allowed doctours of so great antiquite, lerning,
and vertu, as the holy Fathers are, who seeth not that
euery countre in Christendom, euery vniuersite
of the countre, yea and euery lerned man of eche
colledg in the vniuersite may plante from time to time
new doctrine, make new expositions off holy
scripture contrary to all other, and teache daily a new
faith? especially in this our time, whē lerned mē such
as Caluin was, lacke not in al coūtres. Howe bitterly

wrote Luther against Zwinglius, Melanchthō
                against
Illyricus, VVestphalus against Caluin, Brentius against
Peeter Martyr, and all the other against these? Eche
of them by lerning laboureth to drawe the worlde
to their owne iudgement, while they all condemne
all other mens iudgements. You will saie. We must
cleaue to scripture, and leaue al partes aside. Truly al
do so. And that is not the controuersy betwene these
men, nor betwene thē and the Catholikes, which of
them cleaue to scripture (For al do so as fast as is possible)
but whether of them all do rightly expounde,
and truly vnderstande holy scripture. For the Caluinistes
do otherwise vnderstand holy scripture, then
the Melanchthonistes: The Melanchthonistes otherwise
then the Saxon Lutherans: The Saxons otherwise thē
the Osiandrins: The Osiandrins otherwise then the
Suenckfeldiās and they otherwise then all these. Those
whiche haue read their writings, can not be ignorant
thereof. I will make you here a brief note of the
speciall matters now in controuersy betwene them,Caluinus in postrema admo nit. ad Ioach vvest. phalum. Melanchtion in literis ad Electorem Rheni.
and so make an ende with Caluin.
            The Zuinglians and Caluinistes agree with the Ciuill
Lutherans, the Melancthonistes, in the article of
good workes, that they are necessary to saluation:
and in the Supper of the Lorde, that the figure only,
not the true body of Christ is there geuē. Againe
these two sectes in diuers other articles vary out off
measure: As in originall sinne, in free will, in baptim,
and in Penaunce. For Caluin denieth all these as
the Church teacheth: whereas the Melanchthonistes
               
acknowleadg them.Nicol. Gallus in thes. & hypothes. Illyricus in informat. De quibusdā articulis.
            
            The Lutherans of Saxony, to witt, the zelous Lutheraus
agree with the Caluinistes denying free will:
and braule with the Melanchthonistes for allowing
free will against the doctrine of their Father Luther.
Yet againe these zelous Lutherans in the article of originall
sinne, agree with the Ciuill Lutherans, and defie
the Caluinistes.
               Callus contra acta Adiaphoristarum. But in the articles of Iustification,
of good workes, of the Supper of our Lorde, and
how the lawe and the ghospel ought to be distinguished,
in these the zelous Lutherans dissent bothe
from the Ciuill Lutherans and from the Caluinistes.
For they teache good workes to be pernicious to
saluation, they acknowleadg the reall presence,
which bothe the other sectes denie.
            The Osiandrins agree with the zelous Lutherans of
Saxony in the article of the Supper of our Lorde,
with the Ciuill Lutherans in the article of free will,Vide Osiandri confessionem fidei suc & libellum de imagine Dei.
with the Caluinistes in the article of good workes.
But these againe dissent from all those three sectes
in the article of Iustification, and diuers other speciall
pointes of doctrine.
            The Suenckfeldians agree with the Osiandrins in
the article of Iustification,Swenckfel dius in lib. de vsu euā
                  gelij: & in excusatione sua contra VVittenberg. mā
                  datum. with the Melanchthonistes
in the article of free will, with the Caluinistes, that
euill men receiue not Christ in the Sacrament.
But with all other sectes they disagree in the doctrine
of baptim, and of al the Sacraments, of preaching
the worde, of faith, of the church, of the humanite
of Christ, and of diuers other.
            
               
Thus you see brefely sett before you the vnite,
consent, and agreement of this late ghospel. You see
what man Luther was, what Melanchthon, what Caluin,
the three cursed springs of three most wicked
sectes swarming now in Christendom, where this
new ghospel hath spred his branches: to witt, of the
zelous and vpright Lutherans, of the Ciuill and conformable
Lutherans, and of the Caluinistes or Sacramentaries.
You may iudge by the heads, what the ofspring
is: by their frutes, what their sprits be: by these particulars
of their doctrine (which for a taste only we
haue discoursed vpon) what their whole ghospell
is.
            These are the blinde guides, and lying Masters,
whom in place of all approued writers in Christes
church, a numbre of deceiued persons haue folowed.
In stede of holy Hierom, lewde Luther, of lerned
Augustin, inconstant Melanchthon, of blessed Ambrose,
proude Caluin. In place of sounde religion, olde
condemned heresies: of constant faith, contrary
opinions: of vniuersall belefe, priuat imaginations:
of Gods holy worde, mens deuises. A great shame to
forsake auncient belefe. A hainous offence to make
partes in Christes church. A wicked impiete to departe
from Christ and his dere spouse,Ephes. 4. 
               the grounde
and piller of all truthe. But a farre greater shame to embrace
the lewde liberte of Luther, to folow the variable
brayne of Melanchthon, to cleaue to the cursed
heresies, fonde absurdites, and clere contradictiōs of
Caluin. The heresies of Marcion, Valentinus, Arrius

Nestorius, and other had coulour of lerning. The
Montanistes, the Tatiani, the Manichees, the Nouatians
had pretence of holynes and vertu. These
two conditions were vehement persuasions to drawe
the worlde vnto them. But the heresies of our time
be grosse, blasphemous, and dissolut. The denial
of the blessed Sacraments and right vse thereof procede
of ignoraunce in true diuinite: The deniall off
free will, and wicked assertion of fatall destine vnder
the name of Gods forekuowleadge is a horrible blasphemy.
The breach of ecclesiasticall authorite, doctrine
of only faith, contempt of all good order, and
constitutions, is a mere licentious liberte and wantō
dissolutnesse. How then happenteh it that men are
so abused? that the lerned are drawen, the vnlerned
deceiued? Wil you haue the truthe tolde? Peccata nostra
diuiserunt inter nos & Deum. Our sinnes haue diuided
betwene God and vs. The gate of his grace is
shutt from vs. And why? We loue the worlde, we
let slippe our faith: we be nailed to our tēporal trash:
we make it our God. We will rather become hethen
then suffer for our conscience. Otherwise if we feared
God, we would mistrust this dissolut religion: if
we were not blinded with selfewill and hardnesse
of hart (the plage of former sinnes) we should espie
the absurdite and fondnesse off this vpstert ghospell.
            Howe were it to be wished that at the entry of
these newe preachers and planters of straunge doctrines,
we had had a Pacuuius amonge vs? I will recite

you the story of him. It is writen first of Liuy,
               Lib. 1. cap. 47. and repeted
of Macchiauell in his discourses. After the greate
bartaill lost by the Romains at Canne, al Italy allmost
forsaking their allegeaūce to the cyte of Rome, and
trēbling at the power of Hanniball, the cyte of Capua
misliking the gouuernement of their Senatours and
Counsellers (as it fareth in time of calamite and distresse,
that the faulte is layed to the Rulers) conceiued
a great hatred against them, and deliberated to
murher them euery one, and to place other in their
rowmes, which they thought should better direct
their cōmon welthe, and more to their cōtentation.
This Pacuuius being then the chefest Ruler of the
cyte, perceauing well the peoples furious intention,
and the daunger the whole Senat stode in, deuised
with him selfe a witty policie, both to appease the people,
and to saue the Senat. He calleth the Senat together:
Declareth them the intent of the people: openeth
them his meaning, and saieth. My aduise is you
suffer your selfe to be shut vp in the palace, in my custody.
I will assemble the people, and showe them
what case you stande in. For the rest if you dare trust
me, I will take such order that no harme shall befall
you. They trusted him. He calleth the people, and saieth
vnto them. People: the time is now come that
you may order the Senatours, as you desire without
any farder tumult. But yet bicause I know well, you
wil not leaue the cyte withoult a Senat, and counsel,
you must nedes, if you will destroye the old, make a
new. And therefore lo here the names of all the Senatours.

As I name you one to deliuer vp in to your
handes, so you must name me an other to succede
him. This being saied, he opened the scrolle, and named
an auncient and graue Senatour. The people
hearing his name cried straight, he was a proude and
cruell man, and not worthy to beare rule. Well then,
quod Pacuuius, Who shall succede him? Here the people
was at a staie: and looking one vpon an other
knewe not a longe time whom to name. At the
length one being named, some began to smile, some
to laugh, other to disdaine. All perceiued well (as
Macchiauell wittely noteth) that the fault appearing
in the Senat vniuersally, when it came to particular
examination, was no faute in dede, but a misseconstruing
and wronge iudgemēt of the people. By this
meanes the people knew thē selues: the Senatours remained
in authorite. Particular fautes were redressed,
the whole order and estat remained. Sucha Pacuuius I
say, was at the entry of these heresies to be wished: and
presētly may also be heard. For although that which
is past, cā not be reuoked, yet it may be amended. Let
vs then with Pacuuius demaunde of such, as lothe
their auncient and receiued belefe, what newe faith
will they embrace? For without some faith, I thinke
none yet that beare the name of Christians, will line.
Will they be right and zelous Lutherans, taking
Luther for the very man of God, and vndoubted
prophet to reuele his holy worde in these our later
dayes? Will they reiect all Fathers, all Councells, all
that Christendom hath hetherto beleued, as you haue

heard before Luther doth? Then beside all that
we haue saied of his doctrine and behauiour, sufficiēt
I trust to proue him a right heretike, if an heretike
may be knowen by his frutes, let them satisfie the
ciuill and disordrely or repining Lutherans: let them
accrode with the Sacramentaries, the Anabaptistes,
the Osiandrins, the Swenkcfeldians and all the remnant
of Luthers branches: as you may see and vew in
the petigrew of his ofspring drawen out by Staphylus.
If they set light by that fonde frier, as the more part
of protestants do, to the great grief and bitter complaining
of all zelous Lutherans, what secte wil they
be of? Will they ciuilly beleue at pleasure, as Melāchthon
did, and be euerlerning (as S. Paule of heretikes
pronounceth) but neuer attaining to the truthe?
Who laugheth not at so fonde a chaunge, if in so
waighty a cause any Christen hart can laugh, and
not rather lament such willfull blindnesse or blind
willfulnesse, as in these ciuil Lutherans appeareth?
Will they forsake Luther vtterly, and become Sacramentaries?
Yet then we may demaunde of what secte
of Sacramentaries they will be: For Caluin and
Bullinger, Geneua and Zurich agre not. But if they
will be Caluinistes as most parte of Sacramentaries
are, who yet will not disdayne there at, knowing
the pride of Caluin setting light by the holy Fathers,
his corrupting of holy Scripture, wicked renewing
of olde condemned heresies, fonde auouching off
most clere contradictions, rashe teaching of moste
absurd doctrine in that article where he we was thought

moste to haue excelled? All which (and much more)
we haue in this simple discourse discouered vnto
you, gentle Readers, to the entent that you may see
what an euill chaunge you make, to leaue the auncient
fathers, the Catholike and vniuersall belefe, the
faith you were baptised in, and in the which all our
forefathers these thousand fiue hundred yeares and
vpwarde haue serued allmighty God, and liued as
Christen men, and true membres of Christes church,
to leaue, I saie all this, and to become protestants or
new ghospellers, that is, men of a new faith and religion,
which you must lerne of some one of these
three, Luther, Melanchthon or Caluin, or of such
as haue lerned it of them. By this consideration I
trust, you shall pereiue that though the vniuersall
name of refourmed ghospellers and chalengers off
gods worde haue pleased you, though the generall
name of papistry haue displeased and misliked you,
yet the particular being now discouered, as well off
the persons, as of the doctrine, you will either incontinently
returne from whence you departed, or at
lest deliberat thereof, and of these fewe lerne to mistrust
the rest.
            
               Fridericus Staphylus, whose Apologie we haue here
translated you, being a Lutheran many yeares, and
so farre in credit, with the protestants, that he might
haue ben a doctour of diuinite amonge them, also a
Superintendent at Augspurg, at Brunsuick, Lubeck
and Hamburg, by this very consideration became a
Catholike. For hauing many years ben a Lutheran

and a familiar frend of Melanchthon,Vide Ioan nem Lyre sium Cleuensem in vita Staphili. aduised with
him selfe to write also in defence of the Lutheran
doctrine. He had not yet at that time read the auncient
fathers: but had heard them much alleaged of
Luther and Melanchthon, and trusting to their
allegations, thought vndoubtedly that the doctrine
of Luther was agreable with the lerned fathers and
the primitiue church. Hereupon he diuised, after the
imitation of the Master of the sentence and other
schole men, to set forthe in one volume the whole
effect and summe of Luthers doctrine. This booke
he intituled. Corpus doctrinae Lutheranae: the body or summe
of Luthers doctrine. For this purpose he began to

                  •
               eke the doctours, and serche the original of Luthers
and Melāchthons allegatiōs. But here lo in this particular
serche and examinatiōhe found the doctours
and auncient writers to condemne directly the doctrine
of Luther. At this he was maruailousely astonned,
brake of his enterprise, began with priuat study
to peruse him selfe the aunciēt and approued writers
in Christes church, as well the grekes as the latins,
and to conferre with them these new writers of our
time.See in the leafe 56. In the leafe, 28. About this study he bestowed (as he writeth in
this very Apologie) two and twēty yeares, not medling
with any other ciuil or worldly matters in al that
time. By this meanes though slowly and slackely
(as in the preface of this Apologie he complaineth
him selfe) he shifted at length him selfe out of the captious
cōtrouersies of this time, and became not only
a right good Catholike, priuately and in cōscience,

but opēly also to al the worlde he declared it, and discouered
more thē any of our time hath done, bothe
the false grounde of all their pretended doctrine (that
is, the bare title of gods worde without the right vnderstanding
of the same) and also their variaunces, sectes and
dissensions amonge them selues. Whereby in diuers
partes of Germany especially in the territory of Bauaria,
many haue returned from the dissolut heresy
of Luther, to the holesom discipline of the Catholike
church. This he did to his dere countre of Germany
in this Apologie, writen of him in his mother
tongue. This I haue made now common to my dere
countre also, hauing no lesse nede thereof, then that
miserable countre of Germany hath. I trust herein
I shall offende none, but suche perhaps as firste
muste be offended, before they can be amended.
Heresy is compared to a cācre.2. Tim. 2. Vnlesse it be launced,
it festereth, and groweth to the corruption not only
of it self, but of other. To make an ende, I desire the
protestant to make the example of this lerned and
vertuous mā 
               Fridericus Staphylus, to reade this his labour,
to consider the groūde of false doctrine taught
by Luther and his successours, to vewe the diuersite
and contrariete of his scholers, the numbre of sectes,
the blasphemies of eche one, to waigh the issue off
this doctrine, the dissolut life and contempt of order,
the countres of Hungary, Lifland and Prussia lost
by Luthers heresy, finally to beholde the olde heresies
renewed by Luther, and other his behauiour resembling
heretikes, the incōstancy, variete, and wilfulnesse

of Melanchthon, the fonde absurdites, clere
contradictitions, and most hainous heresies of Ihon
Caluin. I besech the Catholike that nedeth not this
eure, and instructions, to thanke allmighty God therefore,
to praie for the protestant, and all deceiued
persons in matters of conscience and soule helth.1. Cor. 
                     •
                  . 
               Vt
idipsum dicamus omnes, & nō sint in nobis schismata, simus
autem perfecti in eodem sensu & in eadem scientia, that
is, that we may say all one thing, and that there be
no schismes amonge vs, but that we be perfit in one
self vnderstanding and in one self knowleadg. Such
perfectnes of vnite and agrement, with amendment
of life and true repentaunce, our Lorde for his tendre
mercy graunt our countre and all Christēdom,
through the merites of his dere Sō, our Sauiour and
Redemer Christ Iesus. To whom with the Father
and the holy Ghoste, be all honour and glory now
and euer. AMEN.
            FINIS.
         
         
            Quoniam viri doctissimi (Angli) & sacrarū literarū peritissimi, apud me fide dignissimi, Apologiā hanc Friderici Staphylia Thoma Stapletono fideliter traductam attestati
sunt, itemque disceptationem ab ipso scriptam, aduersus doctrinam Lutheri, Melanchthonis & Caluini, vtilem & per omnia Catholicam iudicarunt, merito vtramque typis excudendam iudico. 
            
               Ita attestor, Cunnerus Petri, pastor S. Petri Louanij,
sacrae Theologiae professor 
               
                  .16. Nouembris. an. 1564.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A TABLE OF THE
SPECIALL MATTERS CONTAINED
IN THE APOLOGIE
OF STAPHYLVS: IN THE DIScourse
of the Translatour, and in the
prefaces off bothe. Gathered by
the order off the A B C. The
figure fignifieth the leafe:
B the second
side.
            
               A short description of the Author of the Apologie. fol. 9. b.
& seq.
               Abhominable heresics of the Lutherans touching Christ. fol:
17
               Heresies of Caluin about the Sacrament of baptim. fol. 231. and
in the leaues folowing.
               The opinion of Caluin touching baptim refuted. fol. 202.
               A contradiction of Caluin about baptim. fol. 203.
               Certain protestants call baptim a bathe for swine. fol. 109.
               Certain false translations of the english Bible. fol. 5. b. Item fol. 152. & seq.
               The duty of a conuerted Catholike. fol. 56. b.
               VVhat is Catholike. 49. b.
               The church ought to be obeyed. 62. b &. 63.
               VVhy Caluin may worthely be charged with the heresies off
the Arrians, the Maniches, and other. fol. 224.
               Detestable doctrines off Caluin. fol. 112.
               Absurdites in the doctrine off Caluin. fol. 190. & seq.
               The confession off Ausgpurg resemble the Synods off the Arrians.
fol. 186.
               The ciuill Lutherans resemble olde beretikes. fol. 185. b.
               
                  
Vniuersalite, Antiquite and Consent sure notes off the Catholike
doctrine. fol. 144
               Conferring off Scribture is no certain rule to interpret scripture.
fol. 159. b. 160.
               VVhat the communion off England is. fol. 205.
               That we receaue not a communion of Christes body poored
downe vpon vs in the sacrament. fol. 190.
               The communion off Caluin destroieth the necessite off communicants.
fol. 191. b.
               People nede not resorte to the communion by the doctrine off
Caluin. fol. 198. b. 204. b.
               Caluins doctrine about the blessed Sacrament condemneth the
practise of, the primitiue church. fol. 198. excludeth the Apostles
from receauing Christ in the laste Supper. fol. 199. excludeth
the triall that S. Paul requireth. fol. 201.
               Caluin denieth scripture. fol. 237. An impudent foly off him.
fol. 238. he furdereth the cause off the Anabaptistes. fol. 240
he auoucheth doctrine off his owne without scripture, and wil
not allow the doctrine off the church without the same. fol.
241. he requireth to be heard against expresse scripture. ibidem.
b.
               The principles off the Catholike religion. fol. 15
               The difference of the present communion from the first. fol. 8.
               Olde condemned heresies renewed by Caluin in the doctrine off
the blessed Sacrament. fol. 222.
               Contradictions in the doctrine off Caluin. fol. 206. and in the
leaues folowing, Caluin belieth holy Scripture. fol. 209.
               The cause off contradictions in caluin. fol. 208. b.
               The Lutherans haue corrupted the Crede. fol. 97. b.
               They denie an article off the Crede. fol. 106.
               The communion off the protestants is but foode for refection. fol. 228. b.
               VVhat the iudge off praesent controuersies ought to be. fol. 20.
b. A clere example off debating a controuersy. fol. 21.
               VVhat is all the controuersy betwene the Catholikes and the
protestants. fol. 35.
               
                  
Caluin teacheth Christ to haue suffred in hell. fol. 229.
               VVhat his doctrine is. fol. 233. b.
               Off the Ciuill Lutherans. fol. 182. b.
               The difference betwene Catholikes and heretikes. fol. 24.
               The Catholikes haue the worde off God no lesse then the protestants.
fol. 33.
               The late death off many great princes in a short time. fol. 26. b.
               Such death a token off Gods wrath. fol. 27.
               Difference betwene life and doctrine. fol. 35. b.
               Doctrine how it is to be tried by the frutes. fol. 38. b.
               How to discerne true doctrine from false. fol. 41.
               A brief recapitulation off the schismes and dissensions amonge
the protestants. fol. 93. Item fol. 249.
               Testimonies off Lutheran Superintendents and Ministres witnessing
the disagreement in doctrine amonge them selues. fol.
78. and in many leaues folowing.
               Dissension destroieth heresies. fol. 98. b. It is a sure token off heresy.
fol. 99.
               Praier for the dead defended again M. Grindall. fol. 163. and in
the leaues folowing. commaundement in Scripture to praie
for the dead beside the place off the Machabees. fol. 163.
               The meaning off the Fathers praying for the dead. fol. 171.
               English corrupted translations lerned of Luther. fol. 68. 71. b.
72. b. off Munster. fol. 155. b. 156. off Caluin. fol. 158.
               Excommunication off the protestants embarreth not from the
communion by the doctrine off Caluin. fol. 196. b.
               A good lesson for England. fol. 126. 138. b.
               A corrupted text off Luthers in the english transl. fol. 68. 71. b.
& .72. b.
               Brauling amonge the Archeprotestants for ecclesiasticall gouuernement
fol. 45. & 46.
               Holy Fathers despised by olde hertikes, as by our protestants
now. fol. 32. b. &. 178.
               A very good faith off a coolyar. fol. 53.
               Faith is one in all: but trade off life diuers. fol. 122.
               Lutherans do thaunge hope in to faith and cosidence. fol. 124.
               
                  
The frute off only faith. fol. 128.
               That we eate not the body off Christ only by faith. fol. 196. b.
               A question to the Geneuians off England. fol. 204. b.
               A straunge order off seruing the church in Germany. fol. 43. b.
               A notable example off the sundry sectes in Germany. fol. 56. b.
& 57.
               The ghospell off Luther decaieth daily. fol. 121.
               The first Apostles off the Germans. fol. 126. b.
               The ghospellers doubt and vary what the ghospell preacheth.
fol. 91. The mariages off new ghospellers. fol. 96. b.
               The miracles off the new ghospell. fol. 35.
               The markes off the heretikes off the primitiue church. 24.
               The same marke in our heretikes. fol. 25.
               A readie waie to trie out an heretike. fol. 53.
               An answer to stoppe the mouth off an heretike: fol. 54.
               A lesson off S. Antony to auoide 
                     •
                  eretikes. fol. 62.
               The maner off heretikes. fol. 67.
               Heretikes off great vertu in apparence. fol. 38.
               Off the Canonicall howres off praier. fol. 69.
               Heresies suffred in the church for our triall. fol. 2. &.3.
               The duty off a Christen man in time off heresy. fol. 3. b.
               Hungary loste by Luthers heresy. fol. 128. b.
               The destruction off Grece through heresy. fol. 129.
               Hierusalem destroied by schismes. fol. 129. b.
               The miserable estat off Lislande through heresy. fol. 130.
               Countres lost in Germany by heresy. fol. 127. b:
               The meanes whereby many haue fallen in to heresy. fol. 146.
               The heretike more dangerous then the Turke. fol. 150. b.
               Grece and Afrike loste the faith by heresy. fol. 182.
               The ende of present heresies fol. 19.
               Good counsell of Sisinnius to defeat heretikes fol. 21. b.
               It behoueth not to dispute with heretikes fol. 22. b.
               Inconstancy of Lutherans fol. 97. b.
               Inconstancy of Lutherans. fol. 44. b.
               A lowde lie of the Lutherans against the Catholike church. 33. b
               
                  
A prety story of wronge interpretation fo. 51.
               The liberty of Luthers ghospell. fo. 75.
               VVhat partes of scripture may be read of the laite. fol. 78. b
               Liflande loste by Luthers heresy f. 128,
               The pride and presumption of Luther f. 132.
               Luthers penaunce fol. 133. He becometh a papist for a vauntage
fol. 134. b. He is a false prophet. fo. 139. A murderer and strō
                  ge
thefe in the church. ibi.
               The Lutherans vary at their metings and conferences like the
Arrians. fo. 186. b.
               The labells of the Lutherans principles fol. 18. b
               Sacramentary sectes amonge the Lutherans fol. 87. b
               The outward behauiour off Lutherans in Germany fol. 59.
               VVhy protestants barke at the euill life of the clergy. fo. 61. b.
               The church ought not to be forsaken for the euill life off men in
the church fo. 62.
               Laye men are not commaunded to read scripture f. 64.
               The hebrew text could not be read off the laye Iewes. folio 64. b.
               The dangers proceding off the laites reading scripture fo. 65.
               Luther will proue by Scripture, there ought to be no Magistrats
amonge Christen men f. 140. b.
               The marriage off Luther fol. 141. b. Contrariete in his doctrine
fol. 142.
               The cause of Luthers breache from the church, and the maner of
the first entry thereof fo. 149. a. & b.
               Luther proued an heretike fo. 179. His proper heresy touching
the Sacrament hath wrought his owne confusion fo. 181. b.
               Lutherans in Bohem teache the soule to die with the body fol. 17. b.
               Luther at the first planting of his heresy writeth against obedience
to princes. fol. 16. He maketh chastite a thing impossible
ibid.
               Luther clippeth the coyne of Gods worde. fol. 66. He addeth
to the text fol. 
                     •
                  8. Enemy to virginite and wedlock bothe.
Ibidem. b. He teacheth pluralite of wiues. fol. 69. reneweth

the heresy of the Pelagians, and off the Manichees. fol. 68.
Item of Vigilantius. fol 69. Chaungeth opinion in doctrine
fol. 72. & 74. con demneth good lerning. fol. 73. writeth against
obedience to Magistrats fol. 75.
               A notable testimony of the Caluinistes against Luther fol. 25.
               All new sectes haue begonne of Luther ibidem. b.
               The frute off liberty preached by Luther fo. 44.
               The pride of Luther fol. 36.
               A notable testimony of Luther of the life of his scholers. lbi. b.
               The frutes of the Lutherans doctrine fol. 39.
               The euill life of the Catholikes and of the Lutherans procede
of diuers causes fo. 40. b. & 41.
               Melāchthon teacheth pluralite of wiues. fol. 69. chaungeth opinion
in doctrine. fo. 72. becometh a Suinglian. fo. 88. is a dissembling
ghospeller fol. 90. he becometh a baker. fo. 107. b.
               Horrible blasphemies of a ghospelling Minister f. 112. b
               VVicked doctrine of Luther touching Matrimony fol. 96.
               Melanchthon inconstant in doctrine. fol. 183. A corrupter off
Luthers bookes ibidem. b. A breder of sedition and rebellion. f.
185. a. & b malitious and cruell fo. 187. b.
               The Mach
                     •
                  bees proued to be of the Canon, fol. 166.
               The writings of men in the churche to be folowed. fol. 168.
               The fathers off the protestants fo. 161. 162. Item fol. 165. b. and
in the leaues folowing.
               The doctrine of our protestants consisteth of olde heresies, folio
161. 162. Item fol. 175. and in the leaues folowing.
               The principle off the only written text how it is ment of protestants.
fol. 7.
               Protestants refusing the Councell show them selues to lacke
Charite fol. 20.
               Luther proueth cōtempte of Princes by scripture. fol. 139. b. his
counsell to 
                     •
                  rinces fol. 140.
               Protestants are proued to be heretikes fol. 98.
               The protestants are Manich
                     •
                  es fol. 111. b.
               Protestants confounde vniformite and diuersite fol. 122. b.
               The frutes of protestants confusion in do
                     ••
                  rine fol. 123.
               
                  
Prussia loste by Luthers heresy fol. 127. b
               A necessary lesson for deceiued protestants fol. 58.
               A vaine crake of protestants fol. 59.
               No certainte of Faith in protestants fol. 18.
               Disagreement in doctrine amonge our protestants fol. 7.
               Outward pretence off agreement in the same ibidem. b.
               Speciall articles off contradictions amonge the protestants. fol.
80. b. Thirten heresies amonge the protestants touching the
blessed sacrament fol. 90. b. Fiue amonge the Lutherans fol.
90. and eight amonge the Zwinglians. 86. b.
               The grounde off all protestants doctrine false and deceitfull fol. 42.
               An other decitfull ground off protestants fol. 43.
               A persit rule to discern false preachers. fol. 37.
               A charitable shift of the protestants. fol. 29. b.
               Reall receauing can not stand without reall presence. fol. 194.
               The cause of diuers professions of religion in the Catholike
church. fol. 125.
               Hereticall rebellion neuer proueth. fol. 125. b.
               Scripture nedeth exposition. 47.
               VVhy the protestants crie vpon only Scripture. fol. 48.
               VVhat the vnlerned shall do in variete off interpretations off
scripture. fol. 48. b.
               A token to know false interpretation off scripture from true. fol. 49. b.
               Euery heretike alleageth scripture. fol. 59. b.
               How interpretation off Scripture is tried true. fol. 60.
               The body of Christe vnder one kinde of the Sacramēt perfit and
whole. 60.
               A similitude. fol. 3. b. fol. 65. b. fol. 124. b. & .189. b.
               Scripture corrupted by Luther fol. 66. and many leaues folowing.
               The doctrine of Sacramentaries destroieth the resurrection of
our bodies. fol. 227.
               Caluin maketh the blessed Sacraments bare signes tokens and
badges. fol. 203.
               
                  
Of the Sacrament of the aultar, see in the worde, Caluin.
               That the soule only is not fedd of Christ in the Sacrament. f. 193
               Chalenging of only Scripture cause of heresies. fol. 114.
               The ground of the Leage at Smalcaldium, brickle and variable.
fol. 110.
               The Sacramentaries desire to be vnder the winge of the Lutherans.
fol. 81. b. they condemne Luther. fol. 84. b. Luther
condemneth them. fol. 84. and fol. 86. b.
               Foure Sacraments acknowledged of Melanchthon. fol. 45.
               Scripture alone suffiseth not. fol. 41. b. 42.
               Great confusion in the church by small alteration of the Scripture.
fol. 70. b.
               Scripture hard to be vnderstanded. fol. 4.
               The custome of heretikes to denie partes of scripture. fol. 165.
doctrine defended without expresse cōmaundement in scripture.
fol. 169.
               Staphylus refuseth to be doctour of diuinite, bicause of the othe
of wittenberg. fol. 10. b. VVhy he forsoke the Lutherans. fol 11. 56. & .252.
               VVhy Caluin maketh the Sacramēt of the aultar but a bare signe.
fol. 214. b.
               The Sacramentaries tye Christ to the bread. fol. 216.
               Repugnances in Caluin to holy Scripture. fol. 217.
               The lawe of the Turkes compiled by heretikes. fol. 19.
               A refuge for false translations of Scripture confuted. fol. 154.
               Detestable heresies concerning the Blessed Trinite. fol. 17.
               To cleaue to the writen text only is an olde heresie. fol. 47.
               In the worde of God two thinges are to be considered. fol. 34.
               A wicked persuasion of worldly carelesse men. fol. 51. b.
               A buckler for the vulerned against new preachers. fol. 52. b.
               Zuinglius is a pelagian. fol. 111.
            
         
         
            
               
                  Faultes escaped in Printing.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        l.
                     Pag.
                     Lin.
                  
                  
                     3.
                     1.
                     2. Reade for good, goods.
                  
                  
                     99.
                     2.
                     27. for wrath in, wrath, as i
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     157.
                     1.
                     28. for the righteous, the workes of the righteous.
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
   